TAHAFUT AL-TAHAFUT
(The Incoherence of the
Incoherence)

AVERROES
(IBN RUSHD)

E-text conversion
Muhammad Hozien

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface
INTRODUCTION
THE FIRST DISCUSSION: Concerning the Eternity of the World
THE FIRST PROOF
THE SECOND PROOF
THE THIRD PROOF
THE FOURTH PROOF
THE SECOND DISCUSSION: The Refutation of their Theory of the Incorruptibility of
the World and of Time and Motion
THE THIRD DISCUSSION: The demonstration of their confusion in saying that God
is the agent and the maker of the world and that the world in His product and act, and
the demonstration that these expressions are in their system only metaphors without
any real sense
THE FOURTH DISCUSSION: Showing that they are unable to prone the existence of
a creator of the world
THE FIFTH DISCUSSION: To show their incapacity to prove God’s unity and the
impossibility of two necessary existents both without a cause
THE SIXTH DISCUSSION: To refute their denial of attributes
THE SEVENTH DISCUSSION: To refute their claim that nothing cars share with the
First its genus and be differentiated from it through a specific difference, and that with
respect to its intellect the division into genus and specific difference cannot be
applied to it
THE EIGHTH DISCUSSION: To refute their theory that the existence of the First is
simple, namely that it is pure existence and that its existence stands in relation to no
quiddity and to no essence, but stands to necessary existence as do other beings to
their quiddity
THE NINTH DISCUSSION: To refute their proof that the First is incorporeal
THE TENTH DISCUSSION: To prove their incapacity to demonstrate that the world
has a creator and a cause, and that in fact they are forced to admit atheism
THE ELEVENTH DISCUSSION: To show the incapacity of those philosophers who
believe that the First knows other things besides its own self and that it knows the
genera and the species in a universal way, to prone that this is so
THE TWELFTH DISCUSSION: About the impotence of the philosophers to prone
that Cod knows Himself
THE THIRTEENTH DISCUSSION: To refute those who arm that Gad is ignorant of
the individual things which are divided in time into present, past, and future

2

THE FOURTEENTH DISCUSSION: To refute their proof that heaven is an animal
mowing in a circle in obedience to God
THE FIFTEENTH DISCUSSION: To refute the theory of the philosophers about the
aim which moves heaven
THE SIXTEENTH DISCUSSION: To refute the philosophical theory that the souls of
the heavens observe all the particular events of this world
ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES
THE FIRST DISCUSSION: The denial of a logical necessity between cause and
effect
THE SECOND DISCUSSION: The impotence of the philosophers to show by
demonstrative proof that the soul is a spiritual substance
THE THIRD DISCUSSION: Refutation of the philosophers’ proof for the immortality of
the soul
THE FOURTH DISCUSSION: Concerning the philosophers’ denial of bodily
resurrection
The End

PREFACE
I wish to express my warmest thanks to the Trustees of the Gibb Memorial
Fund for making the publication of this work possible, and especially to
Professor Sir Hamilton Gibb, who asked me to undertake the work and
who has not only read the proofs but has continually given me his interest
and encouragement. I am also deeply indebted to Dr. R. Walzer, who has
read the proofs, carefully checked the references in my notes, and
composed the indexes and the Greek-Arabic and Arabic-Greek
vocabularies. I have also to thank Dr. S. M. Stern for his help in
completing the subject-index. Finally, I wish to pay a tribute to one who is
no longer amongst us, Father Maurice Bouyges, without whose admirable
text the work could never have been undertaken.
The marginal numbers in Vol. I refer to the text of Father Bouyges’s
edition of the Tahafut al Tahafut in his Bibliotheca Arabica Scholasticorum,
vol. iii, Beyrouth, 1930.
The asterisks indicate different readings from those to be found in
Bouyges’s text: cf. the Appendix, Vol. I, pp, 364 ff.

3

INTRODUCTION
If it may be said that Santa Maria sopra Minerva is a symbol of our
European culture, it should not be forgotten that the mosque also was built
on the Greek temple. But whereas in Christian Western theology there
was a gradual and indirect infiltration of Greek, and especially Aristotelian
ideas, so that it may be said that finally Thomas Aquinas baptized
Aristotle, the impact on Islam was sudden, violent, and short. The great
conquests by the Arabs took place in the seventh century when the Arabs
first came into contact with the Hellenistic world. At that time Hellenistic
culture was still alive; Alexandria in Egypt, certain towns in Syria-Edessa
for instance-were centres of Hellenistic learning, and in the cloisters of
Syria and Mesopotamia not only Theology was studied but Science and
Philosophy also were cultivated. In Philosophy Aristotle was still ‘the
master of those who know’, and especially his logical works as interpreted
by the Neoplatonic commentators were studied intensively. But also many
Neoplatonic and Neopythagorean writings were still known, and also, very
probably, some of the old Stoic concepts and problems were still alive and
discussed.
The great period of translation of Greek into Arabic, mostly through the
intermediary of Christian Syrians, was between the years 750 and 850,
but already before that time there was an impact of Greek ideas on
Muslim theology. The first speculative theologians in Islam are called
Mu‘tazilites (from about A. D. 723), an exact translation of the Greek word
(the general name for speculative theologians is Mutakallimun,
dialecticians, a name often given in later Greek philosophy to the Stoics).
Although they form rather a heterogeneous group of thinkers whose
theories are syncretistic, that is taken from different Greek sources with a
preponderance of Stoic ideas, they have certain points in common,
principally their theory, taken from the Stoics, of the rationality of religion
(which is for them identical with Islam), of a lumen naturale which burns in
the heart of every man, and the optimistic view of a rational God who has
created the best of all possible worlds for the greatest good of man who

4

occupies the central place in the universe. They touch upon certain
difficult problems that were perceived by the Greeks. The paradoxes of
Zeno concerning movement and the infinite divisibility of space and time
hold their attention, and the subtle problem of the status of the
nonexistent, a problem long neglected in modern philosophy, but revived
by the school of Brentano, especially by Meinong, which caused an
endless controversy amongst the Stoics, is also much debated by them.
A later generation of theologians, the Ash‘arites, named after Al Ash‘ari,
born A. D. 873, are forced by the weight of evidence to admit a certain
irrationality in theological concepts, and their philosophical speculations,
largely based on Stoicism, are strongly mixed with Sceptical theories.
They hold the middle way between the traditionalists who want to forbid all
reasoning on religious matters and those who affirm that reason unaided
by revelation is capable of attaining religious truths. Since Ghazali founds
his attack against the philosophers on Ash‘arite principles, we may
consider for a moment some of their theories. The difference between the
Ash‘arite and Mu‘tazilite conceptions of God cannot be better expressed
than by the following passage which is found twice in Ghazali (in his
Golden Means of Dogmatics and his Vivification of Theology) and to which
by tradition is ascribed the breach between Al Ash‘ari and the Mu‘tazilites.
‘Let us imagine a child and a grown-up in Heaven who both died in
the True Faith, but the grown-up has a higher place than the child.
And the child will ask God, “Why did you give that man a higher
place?” And God will answer, “He has done many good works.” Then
the child will say, “Why did you let me die so soon so that I was
prevented from doing good?” God will answer, “I knew that you would
grow up a sinner, therefore it was better that you should die a child.”
Then a cry goes up from the damned in the depths of Hell, “Why, O
Lord, did you not let us die before we became sinners?” ’

Ghazali adds to this: ‘the imponderable decisions of God cannot be
weighed by the scales of reason and Mu‘tazilism’.
According to the Ash‘arites, therefore, right and wrong are human
concepts and cannot be applied to God. ‘Cui mali nihil est nec esse potest
quid huic opus est dilectu bonorum et malorum?’ is the argument of the
Sceptic Carneades expressed by Cicero (De natura deorum, iii. 15. 38). It
is a dangerous theory for the theologians, because it severs the moral

5

relationship between God and man and therefore it cannot be and is not
consistently applied by the Ash‘arites and Ghazali.
The Ash‘arites have taken over from the Stoics their epistemology, their
sensationalism, their nominalism, their materialism. Some details of this
epistemology are given by Ghazali in his autobiography: the clearness of
representations is the criterion for their truth; the soul at birth is a blank on
which the sensations are imprinted; at the seventh year of a man’s life he
acquires the rational knowledge of right and wrong. Stoic influence on
Islamic theology is overwhelming. Of Stoic origin, for instance, are the
division of the acts of man into five classes; the importance placed on the
motive of an act when judging its moral character; the theory of the two
categories of substance and accident (the two other categories, condition
and relation, are not considered by the Muslim theologians to pertain to
reality, since they are subjective); above all, the fatalism and determinism
in Islam which is often regarded as a feature of the Oriental soul. In the
Qur’an, however, there is no definite theory about free will. Muhammad
was not a philosopher. The definition of will in man given by the Ash‘arites,
as the instrument of unalterable fate and the unalterable law of God, is
Stoic both in idea and expression. (I have discussed several other theories
in my notes.)
Sometimes, however, the theologians prefer to the Stoic view the view of
their adversaries. For instance, concerning the discussion between
Neoplatonism and Stoicism whether there is a moral obligation resting on
God and man relative to animals, Islam answers with the Neoplatonists in
the affirmative (Spinoza, that Stoic Cartesian, will give, in his Ethica, the
negative Stoic answer).
The culmination of the philosophy of Islam was in the tenth and eleventh
centuries. This was the age also of the great theologians. It was with
Greek ideas, taken in part from Stoics and Sceptics, that the theologians
tried to refute the ideas of the philosophers. The philosophers themselves
were followers of Aristotle as seen through the eyes of his Neoplatonic
commentators. This Neoplatonic interpretation of Aristotle, although it
gives a mystical character to his philosophy which is alien to it, has a
certain justification in the fact that there are in his philosophy many
elements of the theory of his master Plato, which lend themselves to a
Neoplatonic conception. Plotinus regarded himself as nothing but the

6

commentator of Plato and Aristotle, and in his school the identity of view of
these two great masters was affirmed. In the struggle in Islam between
Philosophy and Theology, Philosophy was defeated, and the final blow to
the philosophers was given in Ghazali’s attack on Philosophy which in
substance is incorporated in Averroës’ book and which he tries to refute.
Ghazali, who was born in the middle of the eleventh century, is one of
the most remarkable and at the same time most enigmatic figures in
Islam. Like St. Augustine, with whom he is often compared, he has told us
in his autobiography how he had to pass through a period of despair and
scepticism until God, not through demonstration but by the light of His
grace, had given him peace and certitude. This divine light, says Ghazali,
is the basis of most of our knowledge and, he adds, profoundly, one
cannot find proofs for the premisses of knowledge; the premisses are
there and one looks for the reasons, but they cannot be found. Certitude is
reached, he says, not through scholastic reasoning, not through
philosophy, but through mystical illumination and the mystical way of life.
Still Ghazali is not only a mystic, he is a great dogmatist and moralist. He
is regarded as Islam’s greatest theologian and, through some of his
books, as a defender of Orthodoxy. It is generally believed that the
Tahafut, the book in which he criticizes Philosophy, was written in the
period of his doubts. The book, however, is a Defence of Faith, and
though it is more negative than positive, for it aims to destroy and not to
construct, it is based on the theories of his immediate predecessors, many
of whose arguments he reproduces. Besides, he promises in this book to
give in another book the correct dogmatic answers. The treatise to which
he seems to refer does not contain anything but the old theological articles
of faith and the Ash‘arite arguments and solutions. But we should not look
for consistency in Ghazali; necessarily his mysticism comes into conflict
with his dogmatism and he himself has been strongly influenced by the
philosophers, especially by Avicenna, and in many works he comes very
near to the Neoplatonic theories which he criticizes. On the whole it would
seem to me that Ghazali in his attack on the philosophers has taken from
the vast arsenal of Ash‘arite dialectical arguments those appropriate to the
special point under discussion, regardless of whether they are destructive
also of some of the views he holds.

7

Averroës was the last great philosopher in Islam in the twelfth century,
and is the most scholarly and scrupulous commentator of Aristotle. He is
far better known in Europe than in the Orient, where few of his works are
still in existence and where he had no influence, he being the last great
philosopher of his culture. Renan, who wrote a big book about him,
Averroes et l’Averro’asme, had never seen a line of Arabic by him. Lately
some of his works have been edited in Arabic, for instance his Tahafut al
Tahafut, in a most exemplary manner. Averroës’ influence on European
thought during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance has been immense.
The name of Ghazali’s book in which he attacks the philosophers is
Tahafut al Falasifa, which has been translated by the medieval Latin
translator as Destructio Philosophorum. The name of Averroës’ book is
Tahafut al Tahafut, which is rendered as Destructio Destructionis (or
destructionum). This rendering is surely not exact. The word ‘Tahafut’ has
been translated by modern scholars in different ways, and the title of
Ghazali’s book has been given as the breakdown, the disintegration, or
the incoherence, of the philosophers. The exact title of Averroës’ book
would be The Incoherence of the Incoherence.
In the Revue des Deux Mondes there was an article published in 1895
by Ferdinand Brunetiere, ‘La Banqueroute de la Science’, in which he tried
to show that the solutions by science, and especially by biology, of
fundamental problems, solutions which were in opposition to the dogmas
taught by the Church, were primitive and unreasonable. Science had
promised us to eliminate mystery, but, Brunetiere said, not only had it not
removed it but we saw clearly that it would never do so. Science had been
able neither to solve, nor even to pose, the questions that mattered: those
that touched the origin of man, the laws of his conduct, his future destiny.
What Brunetiere tried to do, to defend Faith by showing up the audacity of
Science in its attempt to solve ultimate problems, is exactly the same as
Ghazali tried to do in relation to the pretensions of the philosophers of his
time who, having based themselves on reason alone, tried to solve all the
problems concerning God and the world. Therefore a suitable title for his
book might perhaps be ‘The Bankruptcy of Philosophy’.
In the introduction to his book Ghazali says that a group of people
hearing the famous names Socrates, Hippocrates, Plato, and Aristotle,
and knowing what they had attained in such sciences as Geometry, Logic,

8

and Physics, have left the religion of their fathers in which they were
brought up to follow the philosophers. The theories of the philosophers are
many, but Ghazali will attack only one, the greatest, Aristotle; Aristotle, of
whom it is said that he refuted all his predecessors, even Plato, excusing
himself by saying ‘amicus Plato, amica veritas, sed magis amica veritas’. I
may add that this well-known saying, which is a variant of a passage in
Plato’s Phaedo and in Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, is found in this form
first in Arabic. One of the first European authors who has it in this form is
Cervantes (Don Quijote, ii, c. 52). I quote this saying-Ghazali adds-to
show that there is no surety and evidence in Philosophy. According to
Ghazali, the philosophers claim for their metaphysical proofs the same
evidence as is found in Mathematics and Logic. But all Philosophy is
based on supposition and opinion. If Metaphysics had the same evidence
as Mathematics all philosophers would agree just as well in Philosophy as
in Mathematics. According to him the translators of Aristotle have often
misunderstood or changed the meaning and the different texts have
caused different controversies. Ghazali considers Farabi and Avicenna to
be the best commentators on Aristotle in Islam, and it is their theories that
he will attack.
Before entering into the heart of the matter I will say a few words about
Ghazali’s remark that Metaphysics, although it claims to follow the same
method as Mathematics, does not attain the same degree of evidence.
Neither Aristotle nor his commentators ever asked the question whether
there is any difference between the methods of Mathematics and
Metaphysics (it is a significant fact that most examples of proof in the
Posterior Analytics are taken from Mathematics) and why the conclusions
reached by Metaphysics seem so much less convincing than those
reached by Mathematics. It would seem that Metaphysics, being the basis
of all knowledge and having as its subject the ultimate principles of things,
should possess, according to Aristotle, the highest evidence and that God,
as being the highest principle, should stand at the beginning of the
system, as in Spinoza. In fact, Aristotle could not have sought God if he
had not found Him. For Aristotle all necessary reasoning is deductive and
exclusively based on syllogism. Reasoning-he says-and I think this is a
profound and true remark-cannot go on indefinitely. You cannot go on
asking for reasons infinitely, nor can you reason about a subject which is
not known to you. Reason must come to a stop. There must be first

9

principles which are immediately evident. And indeed Aristotle
acknowledges their existence. When we ask, however, what these first
principles are, he does not give us any answer but only points out the
Laws of Thought as such. But from the Laws of Thought nothing can be
deduced, as Aristotle acknowledges himself. As a matter of fact Aristotle is
quite unaware of the assumption on which his system is based. He is what
philosophers are wont to call nowadays a naive realist. He believes that
the world which we perceive and think about with all it contains has a
reality independent of our perceptions or our thoughts. But this view
seems so natural to him that he is not aware that it could be doubted or
that any reason might be asked for it. Now I, for my part, believe that the
objectivity of a common world in which we all live and die is the necessary
assumption of all reasoning and thought. I believe indeed, with Aristotle,
that there are primary assumptions which cannot be deduced from other
principles. All reasoning assumes the existence of an objective truth which
is sought and therefore is assumed to have an independent reality of its
own. Every thinking person is conscious of his own identity and the
identity of his fellow beings from whom he accepts language and thoughts
and to whom he can communicate his own ideas and emotions. Besides,
all conceptual thought implies universality, i.e. belief in law and in
objective necessity. I can only infer from Socrates being a man that he is
mortal when I have assumed that the same thing (in this case man in so
far as he is man) in the same conditions will always necessarily behave in
the same way.
In his book Ghazali attacks the philosophers on twenty points. Except for
the last two points which are only slightly touched by Averroës, Averroës
follows point for point the arguments Ghazali uses and tries to refute them.
Ghazali’s book is badly constructed, it is unsystematic and repetitive. If
Ghazali had proceeded systematically he would have attacked first the
philosophical basis of the system of the philosophers-namely their proof
for the existence of God, since from God, the Highest Principle, everything
else is deduced. But the first problem Ghazali mentions is the philosphers’
proof for the eternity of the world. This is the problem which Ghazali
considers to be the most important and to which he allots the greatest
space, almost a quarter of his book. He starts by saying rather arbitrarily
that the philosophers have four arguments, but, in discussing them, he
mixes them up and the whole discussion is complicated by the fact that he

10

gives the philosophical arguments and theological counter arguments in
such an involved way that the trend is sometimes hard to follow. He says,
for instance, page 3, that to the first arguments of the philosophers there
are two objections. The first objection he gives on this page, but the
second, after long controversy between the philosophers and theologians,
on page 32. I will not follow here Ghazali and Averroës point for point in
their discussions but will give rather the substance of their principal
arguments (for a detailed discussion I refer to my notes).
The theory of the eternity of the world is an Aristotelian one. Aristotle
was, as he says himself, the first thinker who affirmed that the world in
which we live, the universe as an orderly whole, a cosmos, is eternal. All
the philosophers before him believed that the world had come into being
either from some primitive matter or after a number of other worlds. At the
same time Aristotle believes in the finitude of causes. For him it is
impossible that movement should have started or can continue by itself.
There must be a principle from which all movement derives. Movement,
however, by itself is eternal. It seems to me that this whole conception is
untenable. If the world is eternal there will be an infinite series of causes
and an infinite series of movers; there will be an infinite series, for
instance, of fathers and sons, of birds and eggs (the example of the bird
and egg is first mentioned in ‘Censorinus, De die natali, where he
discusses the Peripatetic theory of the eternity of the world), and we will
never reach a first mover or cause, a first father or a first bird. Aristotle, in
fact, defends the two opposite theses of Kant’s first antinomy. He holds at
the same time that time and movement are infinite and that every causal
series must be finite. The contradiction in Aristotle is still further
accentuated in the Muslim philosophers by the fact that they see in God,
not only as Aristotle did, the First Mover of the movement of the universe,
but that they regard Him, under the influence of the Plotinian theory of
emanation, as the Creator of the universe from whom the world emanates
eternally. However, can the relation between two existing entities qua
existents be regarded as a causal one? Can there be a causal relation
between an eternally unchangeable God and an eternally revolving and
changing world, and is it sense to speak of a creation of that which exists
eternally? Besides, if the relation between the eternal God and the eternal
movement of the world could be regarded as a causal relation, no prior
movement could be considered the cause of a posterior movement, and

11

sequences such as the eternal sequence of fathers and sons would not
form a causal series. God would not be a first cause but the Only Cause of
everything. It is the contradiction in the idea of an eternal creation which
forms the chief argument of Ghazali in this book. In a later chapter, for
instance, when he refutes Avicenna’s proof for God based on the
Aristotelian concepts ‘necessary by itself’, i.e. logical necessity, and
‘necessary through another’, i.e. ontological necessity, in which there is
the usual Aristotelian confusion of the logical with the ontological,
Ghazali’s long argument can be reduced to the assertion that once the
possibility of an infinite series of causes is admitted, there is no sense in
positing a first cause.
The first argument is as follows. If the world had been created, there
must have been something determining its existence at the moment it was
created, for otherwise it would have remained in the state of pure
possibility it was in before. But if there was something determining its
existence, this determinant must have been determined by another
determinant and so on ad infinitum, or we must accept an eternal God in
whom eternally new determinations may arise. But there cannot be any
new determinations in an eternal God.
The argument in this form is found in Avicenna, but its elements are
Aristotelian. In Cicero’s Academics we have a fragment of one of
Aristotle’s earlier and more popular writings, the lost dialogue De
philosophia, in which he says that it is impossible that the world could ever
have been generated. For how could there have been a new decision, that
is a new decision in the mind of God, for such a magnificent work? St.
Augustine knows this argument from Cicero and he too denies that God
could have a novum consilium. St. Augustine is well aware of the difficulty,
and he says in his De civilate dei that God has always existed, that after a
certain time, without having changed His will, He created man, whom He
had not wanted to create before, this is indeed a fact too profound for us.
It also belongs to Aristotle’s philosophy that in all change there is a
potentiality and all potentiality needs an actualizer which exists already. In
the form this argument has in Avicenna it is, however, taken from a book
by a late Greek Christian commentator of Aristotle, John Philoponus, De
aeternitate mundi, which was directed against a book by the great
Neoplatonist Proclus who had given eighteen arguments to prove the

12

eternity of the world. Plato himself believed in the temporal creation of the
world not by God Himself but by a demiurge. But later followers of Plato
differed from him on this point. Amongst the post-Aristotelian schools only
the Stoics assumed a periodical generation and destruction of the world.
Theophrastus had already tried to refute some of the Stoic arguments for
this view, and it may well be that John Philoponus made use of some
Stoic sources for his defence of the temporality of the world.
The book by Proclus is lost, but John Philoponus, who as a Christian
believes in the creation of the world, gives, before refuting them, the
arguments given by Proclus. The book by Philoponus was translated into
Arabic and many of its arguments are reproduced in the Muslim
controversies about the problem (arguments for the temporal creation of
the world were also given by Philoponus in a work against Aristotle’s
theory of the eternity of the world, arguments which are known to us
through their quotation and refutation by Simplicius in his commentary on
Physics viii; one of these arguments by Philoponus was well known to the
Arabs and is also reproduced by Ghazali, see note 3. 3). The argument I
have mentioned is the third as given by Proclus. Philoponus’ book is
extremely important for all medieval philosophy, but it has never been
translated into a modern language and has never been properly studied.
On the whole the importance of the commentators of Aristotle for Arabic
and medieval philosophy in general has not yet been sufficiently
acknowledged.
To this argument Ghazali gives the following answer, which has become
the classic reply for this difficulty and which has been taken from
Philoponus. One must distinguish, says Philoponus, between God’s
eternally willing something and the eternity of the object of His Will, or, as
St. Thomas will say later, ‘Deus voluit ab aeterno mundus esset sed non
ut ab aeterno esset’. God willed, for instance, that Socrates should be
born before Plato and He willed this from eternity, so that when it was time
for Plato to be born it happened. It is not difficult for Averroës to refute this
argument. In willing and doing something there is more than just the
decision that you will do it. You can take the decision to get up tomorrow,
but the actual willing to get up can be done only at the moment you do it,
and there can be no delay between the cause and the effect. There must
be added to the decision to get up the impulse of the will to get up. So in

13

God there would have to be a new impulse, and it is just this newness that
has to be denied. But, says Averroës, the whole basis of this argument is
wrong for it assumes in God a will like a human will. Desire and will can be
understood only in a being that has a need; for the Perfect Being there
can be no need, there can be no choice, for when He acts He will
necessarily do the best. Will in God must have another meaning than
human will.
Averroës therefore does not explicitly deny that God has a will, but will
should not be taken in its human sense. He has much the same
conception as Plotinus, who denies that God has the power to do one of
two contraries (for God will necessarily always choose the best, which
implies that God necessarily will always do the best, but this in fact annuls
the ideas of choice and will), and who regards the world as produced by
natural necessity. Aristotle also held that for the Perfect Being no
voluntary action is possible, and he regards God as in an eternal blissful
state of self-contemplation. This would be a consequence of His
Perfection which, for Averroës at least, involves His Omniscience. For the
Perfect the drama of life is ended: nothing can be done any more, no
decision can be taken any more, for decisions belong to the condition of
man to whom both knowledge and ignorance are given and who can have
an hypothetical knowledge of the future, knowing that on his decisions the
future may depend and to whom a sure knowledge of the future is denied.
But an Omniscient Being can neither act nor decide; for Him the future is
irremediable like the past and cannot be changed any more by His
decisions or actions. Paradoxically the Omnipotent is impotent. This
notion of God as a Self-contemplating Being, however, constitutes one of
the many profound contradictions in Aristotle’s system. And this profound
contradiction is also found in all the works of Aristotle’s commentators.
One of Aristotle’s proofs for the existence of God-and according to a
recent pronouncement of the Pope, the most stringent -is the one based
on movement. There cannot be an infinite series of movers; there must be
a Prime Agent, a Prime Mover, God, the originator of all change and
action in the universe. According to the conception of God as a SelfContemplating Being, however, the love for God is the motive for the
circular motion of Heaven. God is not the ultimate Agent, God is the
ultimate Aim of desire which inspires the Heavens to action. It is Heaven
which moves itself and circles round out of love for God. And in this case

14

it is God who is passive; the impelling force, the efficient cause, the spring
of all action lies in the world, lies in the souls of the stars.
Let us now return to Ghazali. We have seen that his first argument is not
very convincing, but he now gives us another argument which the Muslim
theologians have taken from John Philoponus and which has more
strength. It runs: if you assume the world to have no beginning in time, at
any moment which we can imagine an infinite series must have been
ended. To give an example, every one of us is the effect of an infinite
series of causes; indeed, man is the finite junction of an infinite past and
an infinite future, the effect of an infinite series of causes, the cause of an
infinite series of effects. But an infinite series cannot be traversed. If you
stand near the bed of a river waiting for the water to arrive from an
infinitely distant source you will never see it arriving, for an infinite distance
cannot be passed. This is the argument given by Kant in the thesis of his
first antimony. The curious fact is that the wording in Kant is almost
identical with that of John Philoponus.
The answers Averroës gives are certainly not convincing. He repeats the
Aristotelian dictum that what has no beginning has no end and that
therefore there is never an end of time, and one can never say that at any
moment an infinite time is ended: an infinite time is never ended. But this
is begging the question and is surely not true, for there are certainly finite
times. He denies that an infinite time involves an infinite causal series and
the negation of a First Cause. The series involved is but a temporal
sequence, causal by accident, since it is God who is its essential cause.
Averroës also bases his answer on the Aristotelian theory that in time
there is only a succession. A simultaneous infinite whole is denied by
Aristotle and therefore, according to Aristotle, the world must be limited in
space; but in time, according to him, there is never a whole, since the past
is no longer existent and the future not yet.
But the philosophers have a convincing argument for the eternity of the
world. Suppose the world had a beginning, then before the world existed
there was empty time; but in an empty time, in pure emptiness, there
cannot be a motive for a beginning and there could be nothing that could
decide God to start His creation. This is Kant’s antithesis of his first
antinomy. It is very old and is given by Aristotle, but it is already found in
the pre-Socratic philosopher Parmenides. Ghazali’s answer is that God’s

15

will is completely undetermined. His will does not depend on distinctions in
outside things, but He creates the distinctions Himself. The idea of God’s
creative will is of Stoic origin. According to the Neoplatonic conception
God’s knowledge is creative. We know because things are; things are
because God knows them. This idea of the creative knowledge of God has
a very great diffusion in philosophy (just as our bodies live by the eternal
spark of life transmitted to us by our ancestors, so we rekindle in our
minds the thoughts of those who are no more); it is found, for instance, in
St. Augustine, Thomas Aquinas, Spinoza, and Kant-who calls it
intellektuelle Anschauung, intellectual intuition, and it is also used by the
Muslim philosophers when it suits them. Against Ghazali’s conception,
however, Averroës has the following argument: If God creates the world
arbitrarily, if His Will establishes the distinctions without being determined
by any reason, neither wisdom nor goodness can be attributed to Him. We
have here a difficulty the Greeks had seen already. Either God is beyond
the laws of thought and of morals and then He is neither good nor wise, or
He Himself stands under their dominion and then He is not omnipotent.
Another argument for the eternity of the world is based on the eternity of
time: God cannot have a priority to time, as the theologians affirm,
because priority implies time and time implies movement. For the
philosophers God’s priority to the world consists solely in His being its
simultaneous cause. Both parties, however, seem to hold that God’s
existence does not imply time, since He exists in timeless eternity. But in
this case, what neither of the parties has seen, no causal relation between
God and the world can exist at all, since all causation implies a
simultaneous time.
We come now to the most important argument which shows the basic
difference between the philosophical and theological systems. For
Aristotle the world cannot have come to be because there is no absolute
becoming. Everything that becomes comes from something. And, as a
matter of fact, we all believe this. We all believe more or less
unconsciously (we are not fully aware of our basic principles: a basement
is always obscure) in the dictum rien ne se crée, rien ne se perd. We
believe that everything that comes to be is but a development, an
evolution, without being too clear about the meaning of these words
(evolution means literally ‘unrolling’, and Cicero says that the procession

16

of events out of time is like the uncoiling of a rope-quasi rudentis
explicatio), and we believe that the plant lies in the seed, the future in the
present. For example: when a child is born we believe it to have certain
dispositions; it may have a disposition to become a musician, and when all
the conditions are favourable it will become a musician. Now, according to
Aristotle, becoming is nothing but the actualization of a potentiality, that is
the becoming actual of a disposition. However, there is a difficulty here. It
belongs to one of the little ironies of the history of philosophy that
Aristotle’s philosophy is based on a concept, i.e. potentiality, that has been
excluded by a law that he was the first to express consciously. For
Aristotle is the first to have stated as the supreme law of thought (or is it a
law of reality?) that there is no intermediary between being and non-being.
But the potential, i.e. the objective possible, is such an intermediary; it is
namely something which is, still is not yet. Already the Eleatics had
declared that there is no becoming, either a thing is or it is not. If it is, it
need not become. If it is not-out of nothing nothing becomes. Besides,
there is another difficulty which the Megarians have shown.
You say that your child has a disposition to become a musician, that he
can become a musician, but if he dies as a child, or when conditions are
unfavourable, he cannot become a musician. He can only become one
when all the conditions for his being a musician are fulfilled. But in that
case it is not possibly that he will be a musician, necessarily he will be
one. There is in fact no possibility of his being a musician before he
actually is one. There is therefore no potentiality in nature and no
becoming of things out of potencies. Things are or are not. This Megarian
denial of potentiality has been taken over by the Ash‘arites, and Ghazali in
this book is on the whole, although not consistently, in agreement with
them. I myself regard this problem as one of the cruces of philosophy. The
Ash‘arites and Ghazali believed, as the Megarians did, that things do not
become and that the future does not lie in the present; every event that
occurs is new and unconnected with its predecessor. The theologians
believed that the world is not an independent universe, a self-subsistent
system, that develops by itself, has its own laws, and can be understood
by itself. They transferred the mystery of becoming to the mystery of God,
who is the cause of all change in the world, and who at every moment
creates the world anew. Things are or are not. God creates them and
annihilates them, but they do not become out of each other, there is no

17

passage between being and non-being. Nor is there movement, since a
thing that moves is neither here nor there, since it moves-what we call
movement is being at rest at different space-atoms at different time-atoms.
It is the denial of potentiality, possibility in rerum natura, that Ghazali uses
to refute the Aristotelian idea of an eternal matter in which the
potentialities are found of everything that can or will happen. For,
according to Aristotle, matter must be eternal and cannot have become,
since it is, itself, the condition for all becoming.
It maybe mentioned here that the modern static theory of movement is
akin to the Megarian-Ash‘arite doctrine of the denial of movement and
becoming. Bertrand Russell, for instance, although he does not accept the
Megarian atomic conception, but holds with Aristotle that movement and
rest take place in time, not in the instant, defines movement as being at
different places at different times. At the same time, although he rejects
the Megarian conception of ‘jumps’, he affirms that the moving body
always passes from one position to another by gradual transition. But
‘passing’ implies, just as much as ‘jumping’, something more than mere
being, namely, the movement which both theories deny and the identity of
the moving body.
On the idea of possibility another argument for the eternity of the world is
based. It is affirmed that if the world had been created an infinite number
of possibilities of its creation, that is, an eternal duration of its possibility,
would have preceded it. But nothing possible can be eternal, since
everything possible must be realized. The idea that everything possible
has to be realized is found in Aristotle himself, who says that if there could
be an eternal possible that were not realized, it would be impossible, not
possible, since the impossible is that which will never be realized. Aristotle
does not see that this definition is contrary to the basic idea of his own
philosophy-the reality of a possibility which may or may not become realand that by declaring that the possible will have to happen he reduces it to
a necessity, and by admitting that everything that happens had to happen
he denies that the possibility of its not happening could precede it, i.e. he
accepts, in fact, the Megarian conception of possibility which he himself
had tried to refute. Averroës, who agrees with his master on this point, is
not aware either of the implication of the definition. On the other hand, the
Ash‘arites, notwithstanding their denial of potentiality, maintain that for

18

God everything is possible, a theory which implies objective possibility (the
same inconsistency was committed by the Stoics). Both philosophers and
theologians, indeed, hold about this difficult problem contradictory
theories, and it is therefore not astonishing that Ghazali’s and Averroës’
discussion about it is full of confusion (for the details I refer to my notes).
In the second chapter Ghazali treats the problem of the incorruptibility of
the world. As Ghazali says himself; the problem of the incorruptibility of
the world is essentially the same as that of its being uncreated and the
same arguments can be brought forward. Still, there is less opposition
amongst the theologians about its incorruptibility than about its being
uncreated. Some of the Mu‘tazilites argued, just as Thomas Aquinas was
to do later, that we can only know through the Divine Law that this world of
ours will end and there is no rational proof for its annihilation. Just as a
series of numbers needs a first term but no final term, the beginning of the
world does not imply its end. However, the orthodox view is that the
annihilation of the world, including Heaven and Hell, is in God’s power,
although this will not happen. Still, in the corruptibility of the world there is
a new difficulty for the theologians. If God destroys the world He causes
‘nothingness’, that is, His act is related to ‘nothing’. But can an act be
related to ‘nothing’? The question as it is posed seems to rest on a
confusion between action and effect but its deeper sense would be to
establish the nature of God’s action and the process by which His creative
and annihilating power exercises itself. As there cannot be any analogy
with the physical process through which our human will performs its
function, the mystery of His creative and annihilating action cannot be
solved and the naive answers the theologians give satisfy neither
Averroës nor Ghazali himself. Averroës argues that there is no essential
difference between production and destruction and, in agreement with
Aristotle, he affirms that there are three principles for them: form, matter,
and privation. When a thing becomes, its form arises and its privation
disappears; when it is destroyed its privation arises and its form
disappears, but the substratum of this process, matter, remains eternally. I
have criticized this theory in my notes and will only mention here that for
Aristotle and Averroës this process of production and destruction is
eternal, circular, and reversible. Things, however, do not revolve in an
eternal cycle, nor is there an eternal return as the Stoics and Nietzsche
held. Inexorably the past is gone. Every ‘now’ is new. Every flower in the

19

field has never been, the up-torn trees are not rooted again. ‘Thou’ll come
no more, Never, never, never, never, never!’ Besides, Averroës, holding
as he does that the world is eternally produced out of nothing, is
inconsistent in regarding with Aristotle production and destruction as
correlatives.
In the third chapter Ghazali maintains that the terms acting and agent
are falsely applied to God by the philosophers. Acting, according to him,
can be said only of a person having will and choice. When you say that
fire burns, there is here a causal relation, if you like, but this implies
nothing but a sequence in time, just as Hume will affirm later. So when the
philosophers say that God’s acting is like the fire’s burning or the sun’s
heating, since God acts by natural necessity, they deny, according to
Ghazali, His action altogether. Real causation can only be affirmed of a
willing conscious being. The interesting point in this discussion is that,
according to the Ash‘arites and Ghazali, there is no causation in this world
at all, there is only one extra-mundane cause which is God. Even our acts
which depend on our will and choice are not, according to the Ash‘arites,
truly performed by ourselves. We are only the instruments, and the real
agent is God. But if this is true, how can we say that action and causation
depend on will and choice? How can we come to the idea of any causal
action in God depending on His Will if we deny generally that there is a
causal relation between will and action? The same contradiction is found
in modern philosophy in Mach. Mach holds that to speak of causation or
action in material things-so to say that fire burns-is a kind of fetishism or
animism, i.e. that we project our will and our actions into physical lifeless
things. However, at the same time he, as a follower of Hume, says that
causation, even in acts caused by will, is nothing but a temporal sequence
of events. He denies causation even in voluntary actions. Therefore it
would follow that the relation of willing and acting is not different from the
relation of fire and burning and that there cannot be any question of
fetishism or animism. According to such a theory there is no action at all in
the universe but only a sequence of events.
Then, after a second argument by which Ghazali sets out to show that
an eternal production and creation are contradictions in terms, since
production and creation imply the generation of something after its nonexistence, he directs a third argument against the Neoplatonic theory, held

20

by the philosophers, of the emanation of the world from God’s absolute
Oneness.
Plotinus’ conception of God is prompted by the problem of plurality and
relation. All duality implies a relation, and every relation establishes a new
unity which is not the simple addition of its terms (since every whole is
more than its parts) and violates therefore the supreme law of thought that
a thing is what it is and nothing else. Just as the line is more than its
points, the stone more than its elements, the organism transcending its
members, man, notwithstanding the plurality of his faculties, an identical
personality, so the world is an organized well-ordered system surpassing
the multitude of the unities it encloses. According to Plotinus the Force
binding the plurality into unity and the plurality of unities into the allcontaining unit of the Universe is the Archetype of unity, the ultimate,
primordial Monad, God, unattainable in His supreme Simplicity even for
thought. For all thought is relational, knitting together in the undefinable
unity of a judgement a subject and a predicate. But in God’s absolute and
highest Unity there is no plurality that can be joined, since all joining needs
a superior joining unit. Thus God must be the One and the Lone, having
no attribute, no genus, no species, no universal that He can share with
any creatures of the world. Even existence can be only referred to Him
when it expresses not an attribute, but His very Essence. But then there is
no bridge leading from the stable stillness of His Unity to the changing and
varied multiplicity of the world; all relation between Him and the world is
severed. If the One is the truly rational, God’s rationality can be obtained
only by regarding His relation to the world as irrational, and all statements
about Him will be inconsistent with the initial thesis. And if God is
unattainable for thought, the very affirmation of this will be selfcontradictory.
Now, the philosophers in Islam hold with Plotinus that although
absolutely positive statements are not admissible about God, the positive
statements made by them can be all reduced to negative affirmations (with
the sole exception, according to Averroës, of His possessing intellect) and
to certain relative statements, for neither negations nor external relations
add anything to His essence.
In this and several following chapters Ghazali attacks the philosophers
from two sides: by showing up the inanity of the Plotinian conception of

21

God as pure unity, and by exposing their inconsistency in attributing to
Him definite qualities and regarding Him as the source of the world of
variety and plurality.
The infinite variety and plurality of the world does not derive directly from
God according to the philosophers in Islam, who combine Aristotle’s
astronomical view of animate planets circling round in their spheres with
the Neoplatonic theory of emanation, and introduce into the Aristotelian
framework Proclus’ conception of a triadic process, but through a series of
immaterial mediators. From God’s single act-for they with Aristotle regard
God as the First Agent-only a single effect follows, but this single effect,
the supramundane Intellect, develops in itself a threefoldness through
which it can exercise a threefold action. Ghazali objects in a long
discussion that if God’s eternal action is unique and constant, only one
single effect in which no plurality can be admitted will follow (a similar
objection can be directed against Aristotle, who cannot explain how the
plurality and variety of transitory movements can follow from one single
constant movement). The plurality of the world according to Ghazali
cannot be explained through a series of mediators. Averroës, who
sometimes does not seem very sure of the validity of mediate emanation,
is rather evasive in his answer on this point.
In a series of rather intricate discussions which I have tried to elucidate
in my notes, Ghazali endeavours to show that the proofs of the
philosophers for God’s uniqueness, for their denial of His attributes, for
their claims that nothing can share with Him His genus and species, that
He is pure existence which stands in no relation to an essence, and that
He is incorporeal, are all vain. The leading idea of the philosophers that
all plurality needs a prior joining principle, Ghazali rejects, while Averroës
defends it. Why-so Ghazali asks, for instance-since the essence in
temporal things is not the cause of their existence, should this not be the
case in the Eternal? Or why should body, although it is composite
according to the philosophers, not be the First Cause, especially as they
assume an eternal body, since it is not impossible to suppose a
compound without a composing principle? From the incorporeality of God,
the First Principle, Avicenna had tried to infer, through the disjunction that
everything is either matter or intellect, that He is intellect (since the
philosophers in Islam hold with Aristotle and in opposition to Plotinus that

22

God possesses self-consciousness). Ghazali does not admit this
disjunction and, besides, argues with Plotinus that self-consciousness
implies a subject and an object, and therefore would impede the
philosophers’ thesis of God’s absolute unity.
The
Muslim
philosophers,
following
Aristotle’s
Neoplatonic
commentators, affirm that God’s self-knowledge implies His knowledge of
all universals (a line of thought followed, for instance, by Thomas Aquinas
and some moderns like Brentano). In man this knowledge forms a
plurality, in God it is unified. Avicenna subscribes to the Qur’anic words
that no particle in Heaven or Earth escapes God’s knowledge, but he
holds, as Porphyry had done before, that God can know the particular
things only in a universal way, whatever this means. Ghazali takes it to
mean that God, according to Avicenna, must be ignorant of individuals, a
most heretical theory. For Averroës God’s knowledge is neither universal
nor particular, but transcending both, in a way unintelligible to the human
mind.
One thing, however, God cannot know according to Avicenna (and he
agrees here with Plato’s Parmenides) and that is the passing of time, for in
the Eternal no relation is possible to the fleeting ‘now’. There are two
aspects of time: the sequence of anteriority and posteriority which remains
fixed for ever, and the eternal flow of the future through the present into
the past. It will be eternally true that I was healthy before I sickened and
God can know its eternal truth. But in God’s timeless eternity there can be
no ‘now’ simultaneous with the trembling present in which we humans live
and change and die, there is no ‘now’ in God’s eternity in which He can
know that I am sickening now. In God’s eternal stillness the fleeting facts
and truths of human experience can find no rest. Ghazali objects,
erroneously, I think, that a change in the object of thought need not imply
a change in the subject of consciousness.
In another chapter Ghazali refutes the philosophers’ proof that Heaven is
animated. He does not deny its possibility, but declares that the
arguments given are insufficient. He discusses also the view that the
heavens move out of love for God and out of desire to assimilate
themselves to Him, and he asks the pertinent question-already posed by
Theophrastus in his Metaphysics, but which scandalizes Averroës by its
prosaicness-why it is meritorious for them to circle round eternally and

23

whether eternal rest would not be more appropriate for them in their desire
to assimilate themselves to God’s eternal stability.
In the last chapter of this part Ghazali examines the philosophers’
symbolical interpretation of the Qur’anic entities ‘The Pen’ and ‘The Tablet’
and their theories about dreams and prophecy. It is interesting to note
that, although he refutes them here, he largely adopts them in his own
Vivification of Theology. [?]
In the last part of his book Ghazali treats the natural sciences. He
enumerates them and declares that there is no objection to them
according to religion except on four points. The first is that there exists a
logical nexus between cause and effect; the second, the selfsubsistent
spirituality of the soul; the third, the immortality of this subsistent soul; the
fourth, the denial of bodily resurrection. The first, that there exists between
cause and effect a logical necessity, has to be contested according to
Ghazali, because by denying it the possibility of miracles can be
maintained. The philosophers do not deny absolutely the possibility of
miracles. Muhammad himself did not claim to perform any miracles and
Hugo Grotius tried to prove the superiority of Christianity over Islam by
saying ‘Mahumetis se missum ait non cum miraculis sed cum armis’. In
later times, however, Muhammad’s followers ascribed to him the most
fantastic miracles, for instance the cleavage of the moon and his
ascension to Heaven. These extravagant miracles are not accepted by the
philosophers. Their theory of the possibility of miracles is based on the
Stoic-Neoplatonic theory of ‘Sympathia’, which is that all parts of the world
are in intimate contact and related. In a little treatise of Plutarch it is shown
how bodily phenomena are influenced by suggestion, by emotion and
emotional states, and it is claimed by him, and later also by Plotinus, that
the emotions one experiences cannot only influence one’s own body but
also other bodies, and that one’s soul can exercise an influence on other
bodies without the intermediary of any bodily action. The phenomena of
telepathy, for instance the fascination which a snake has on other animals,
they explained in this way. Amulets and talismans can receive through
psychological influences certain powers which can be realized later. This
explanation of occult phenomena, which is found in Avicenna’s
Psychology, a book translated in the Middle Ages, has been widely
accepted (for instance, by Ghazali himself in his Vivification of Theology),

24

and is found in Thomas Aquinas and most of the writers about the occult
in the Renaissance, for instance Heinricus Cornelius Agrippa, Paracelsus,
and Cardanus. It may be mentioned here that Avicenna gives as an
example of the power of suggestion that a man will go calmly over a .plank
when it is on the ground, whereas he will hesitate if the plank be across an
abyss. This famous example is found in Pascal’s Pensées, and the wellknown modern healer, Coué, takes it as his chief proof for the power of
suggestion. Pascal has taken it from Montaigne, Montaigne has borrowed
it from his contemporary the great doctor Pietro Bairo, who himself has a
lengthy quotation from the Psychology of Avicenna. Robert Burton in his
Anatomy of Melancholy also mentions it. In the Middle Ages this example
is found in Thomas Aquinas. Now the philosophers limit the possibility of
miracles only to those that can be explained by the power of the mind over
physical objects; for instance, they would regard it as possible that a
prophet might cause rain to fall or an earthquake to take place, but they
refuse to accept the more extravagant miracles I have mentioned as
authentic.
The theologians, however, base their theory of miracles on a denial of
natural law. The Megarian-Ash‘arite denial of potentiality already implies
the denial of natural law. According to this conception there is neither
necessity nor possibility in rerum natura, they are or they are not, there is
no nexus between the phenomena. But the Greek Sceptics also deny the
rational relation between cause and effect, and it is this Greek Sceptical
theory which the Ash‘arites have copied, as we can see by their examples.
The theory that there is no necessary relation between cause and effect is
found, for instance, in Galen. Fire burns but there is, according to the
Greek Sceptics, no necessary relation between fire and burning. Through
seeing this happen many times we assume that it will happen also in the
future, but there is no necessity, no absolute certainty. This Sceptical
theory is quasi-identical with the theory of Hume and is based on the
same assumptions, that all knowledge is given through sense-impression;
and since the idea of causation cannot be derived from sense experience
it is denied altogether. According to the theory of the theologians, God
who creates and re-creates the universe continually follows a certain habit
in His creation. But He can do anything He desires, everything is possible
for Him except the logically impossible; therefore all logically possible
miracles are allowed. One might say that, for the theologians, all nature is

25

miraculous and all miracles are natural. Averroës asks a good question:
What is really meant by habit, is it a habit in man or in nature? I do not
know how Hume would answer this question. For if causation is a habit in
man, what makes it possible that such a habit can be formed? What is the
objective counterpart of these habits? There is another question which has
been asked by the Greek opponents of this theory, but which is not
mentioned by Averroës: How many times must such a sequence be
observed before such a habit can be formed? There is yet another
question that might be asked: Since we cannot act before such a habit is
formed-for action implies causation-what are we doing until then? What,
even, is the meaning of ‘I act’ and ‘I do’? If there is nothing in the world but
a sequence of events, the very word ‘activity’ will have no sense, and it
would seem that we would be doomed to an eternal passivity. Averroës’
answer to this denial of natural law is that universals themselves imply
already the idea of necessity and law. I think this answer is correct. When
we speak, for instance, of wood or stone, we express by those words an
hypothetical necessity, that is, we mean a certain object, which in suchand-such circumstances will necessarily behave in a certain way that the
behaviour of wood, for example, is based on its nature, that is, on the
potentialities it has.
I may remark here that it seems to me probable that Nicholas of
Autrecourt, ‘the medieval Hume’, was influenced by Ghazali’s Ash‘arite
theories. He denies in the same way as Ghazali the logical connexion
between cause and effect: ‘ex eo quod aliqua res est cognita esse, non
potest evidenter evidentia reducta in primum principium vel in certitudinem
primi principii inferri, quod alia res sit’ (cf. Lappe, ‘Nicolaus von
Autrecourt’, Beitr. z. Gesch. d. Phil. d. M. B.vi, H.2, p. 11); he gives the
same example of ignis and stupa, he seems to hold also the Ash‘arite
thesis of God as the sole cause of all action (cf. op. cit., p. 24), and he
quotes in one place Ghazali’s Metaphysics (cf. N. of Autrecourt, ‘Exigit
ordo executionis’, in Mediaeval Studies, vol. i, ed. by J. Reginald
O’Donnell, Toronto, 1931, p. 2o8). Now Nicholas’s works were burnt
during his lifetime in Paris in 1347, whereas the Latin translation of the
Tahafut al Tahafut by Calo Calonymus was terminated in Arles in 1328.
The second point Ghazali wants to refute are the proofs for the
substantiality and the spirituality of the soul as given by the philosophers.

26

He himself does not affirm that the soul is material, and as a matter of fact
he holds, in other books, the contrary opinion, but the Ash‘arites largely
adopted the Stoic materialism. The ten arguments of the philosophers for
the spirituality of the soul derive all from arguments given by the Greeks. It
would seem to me that Ghazali’s arguments for the soul’s materiality may
be based on the Stoic answers (which have not come down to us) against
the proofs of Aristotle and the later Platonists for the immateriality of the
soul. There is in the whole discussion a certain confusion, partly based on
the ambiguity of the word ‘soul’. The term ‘soul’ both in Greek and Arabic
can also mean ‘life’. Plants and animals have a ‘soul’. However, it is not
affirmed by Aristotle that life in plants and animals is a spiritual principle.
‘Soul’ is also used for the rational part, the thinking part, of our
consciousness. It is only this thinking part, according to Aristotle, that is
not related to or bound up with matter; sensation and imagination are
localized in the body, and it is only part of our thinking soul that seems to
possess eternity or to be immortal. Now, most of the ten arguments derive
from Aristotle and mean only to prove that the thinking part of our soul is
incorporeal. Still the Muslim philosophers affirm with Plato and Plotinus
that the whole soul is spiritual and incorruptible, and that the soul is a
substance independent of the body, although at the same time they adopt
Aristotle’s physiological explanations of all the non-rational functions of the
soul and accept Aristotle’s definition of the ‘soul’ as the first entelechy of
an organic body. On the other hand, the Muslim philosophers do not admit
the Platonic theory of the pre-existence of the soul. Aristotle’s conception
of a material and transitory element in the soul and an immaterial and
immortal element destroys all possibility of considering human personality
as a unity. Although he reproaches Plato with regarding the human soul
as a plurality, the same reproach can be applied to himself. Neither the
Greek nor the Muslim philosophers have ever been able to uphold a
theory that does justice to the individuality of the human personality. That
it is my undefinable ego that perceives, represents, wills, and thinks, the
mysterious fact of the uniqueness of my personality, has never been
apprehended by them. It is true that there is in Aristotle’s psychology a
faint conception of a functional theory of our conscious life, but he is
unable to harmonize this with his psycho-physiological notions.
I have discussed in my notes the ten arguments and will mention here
only two because of their importance. Ghazali gives one of these

27

arguments in the following form: How can man’s identity be attributed to
body with all its accidents? For bodies are continually in dissolution and
nutrition replaces what is dissolved, so that when we see a child, after
separation from its mother’s womb, fall ill a few times, become thin and
then fat again, and grow up, we may safely say that after forty years no
particle remains of what there was when its mother was delivered of it.
Indeed, the child began its existence out of parts of the sperm alone, but
nothing of the particles of the sperm remains in it; no, all this is dissolved
and has changed into something else and then this body has become
another. Still we say that the identical man remains and his notions remain
with him from the beginning of his youth although all bodily parts have
changed, and this shows that the soul has an existence outside the body
and that the body is its organ. Now the first part of this argument, that all
things are in a state of flux and that of the bodily life of man no part
remains identical, is textually found in Montaigne’s Apologv of Raymond
de Sebond. Montaigne has taken it from Plutarch, and the Arabic
philosophers may have borrowed it from the same source from which
Plutarch has taken it. The argument of the philosophers that matter is
evanescent, but the soul a stable identity, which is also given by the
Christian philosopher Nemesius in his De natura hominis (a book
translated into Arabic), who ascribes it to Ammonius Saccas and
Numenius, is basically Platonic and Neoplatonic, and strangely enough,
although he refutes it here, it is adduced by Ghazali himself in his
Vivification of Theology. Socrates says in the Platonic dialogue Cratylus:
‘Can we truly say that there is knowledge, Cratylus, if all things are
continually changing and nothing remains? For knowledge cannot
continue unless it remains and keeps its identity. But if knowledge
changes its very essence, it will lose at once its identity and there will be
no knowledge.’ Plotinus (Enn. iv. 7. 3) argues that matter, in its continual
changing, cannot explain the identity of the soul. And he says in a
beautiful passage (Enn. iv. 7. 10) the idea of which Avicenna has copied:

‘One should contemplate the nature of everything in its purity, since
what is added is ever an obstacle to its knowledge. Contemplate
therefore the soul in its abstraction or rather let him who makes this
abstraction contemplate himself in this state and he will know that he

28

is immortal when he will see in himself the purity of the intellect, for he
will see his intellect contemplate nothing sensible, nothing mortal, but
apprehending the eternal through the eternal.’

This passage bears some relation to Descartes’s dictum cogito ergo
sum, but whereas Plotinus affirms the self-consciousness of a stable
identity, Descartes states only that every thought has a subject, an ego.
Neither the one, nor the other shows that this subject is my ego in the
sense of my undefinable unique personality, my awareness who I am: that
I am, for instance, John and not Peter, my consciousness of the continuity
of my identity from birth to death, my knowledge that at the same time I
am master and slave of an identical body, whatever the changes may be
in that body, and that as long as I live I am a unique and an identical
whole of body and soul. Plautus’ Sosia, who was not a philosopher,
expresses himself (Amphitruo, line 447) in almost the same way as
Descartes-‘sed quom cogito, equidem certo idem sum qui fui semper’-but
the introduction of the words semper and idem renders the statement
fallacious; from mere consciousness the lasting identity of my personality
cannot be inferred.
Ghazali answers this point by saying that animals and plants also,
notwithstanding that their matter is continually changing, preserve their
identity, although nobody believes that this identity is based on a spiritual
principle. Averroës regards this objection as justified.
The second argument is based on the theory of universals. Since
thought apprehends universals which are not in a particular place and
have no individuality, they cannot be material, since everything material is
individual and is in space. Against this theory of universals Ghazali
develops, under Stoic influence, his nominalistic theory which is probably
the theory held by the Ash‘arites in general. This theory is quasi-identical
with Berkeley’s nominalistic conception and springs from the same
assumption that thinking is nothing but the having of images. By a strange
coincidence both Ghazali and Berkeley give the example of a hand: when
we have an idea of a hand as a universal, what really happens is that we
have a representation of a particular hand, since there are no universals.
But this particular hand is capable of representing for us any possible

29

hand, just as much a big black hand as a small white one. The fallacy of
the theory lies, of course, in the word ‘representing’, which as a matter of
fact assumes what it tended to deny, namely, that we can think of a hand
in general which has neither a particular shape, nor a particular colour, nor
is localized in space.
The next point Ghazali tries to refute is the argument of the philosophers
for the immortality of the soul. According to the philosophers, the fact that
it is a substance independent of a body and is immaterial shows that a
corruption of the body cannot affect it. This, as a matter of fact, is a truism,
since the meaning of substantiality and immateriality for the philosophers
implies already the idea of eternity. On the other hand, if the soul is the
form of the body, as is also affirmed by them, it can only exist with its
matter and the mortality of its body would imply its own mortality, as
Ghazali rightly points out. The Arabic philosophers through their
combination of Platonism and Aristotelianism hold, indeed, at the same
time three theories inconsistent with each other, about the relation of body
and soul: that the soul is the form of the body, that the soul is a substance,
subsistent by itself and immortal, and that the soul after death takes a
pneumatic body (a theory already found in Porphyry). Besides, their denial
of the Platonic idea of pre-existence of the soul vitiates their statement
that the soul is a substance, subsistent by itself, that is, eternal,
ungenerated, and incorruptible. Although Averroës in his whole book tries
to come as near to the Aristotelian conception of the soul as possible, in
this chapter he seems to adopt the eschatology of the late Greek authors.
He allows to the souls of the dead a pneumatic body and believes that
they exist somewhere in the sphere of the moon. He also accepts the
theory of the Djinn, the equivalent of the Greek Daimones. What he
rejects, and what the philosophers generally reject, is the resurrection of
the flesh.
In his last chapter Averroës summarizes his views about religion. There
are three possible views. A Sceptical view that religion is opium for the
people, held by certain Greek rationalists; the view that religion expresses
Absolute Truth; and the intermediate view, held by Averroës, that the
religious conceptions are the symbols of a higher philosophical truth,
symbols which have to be taken for reality itself by the non-philosophers.

30

For the unphilosophical, however, they are binding, since the sanctity of
the State depends on them.
When we have read the long discussions between the philosophers and
theologians we may come to the conclusion that it is sometimes more the
formula than the essence of things which divides them. Both philosophers
and theologians Arm that God creates or has created the world. For the
philosophers, since the world is eternal, this creation is eternal. Is there,
however, any sense in calling created what has been eternally? For the
theologians God is the creator of everything including time, but does not
the term ‘creation’ assume already the concept of time? Both the
philosophers and theologians apply to God the theory that His will and
knowledge differ from human will and knowledge in that they are creative
principles and essentially beyond understanding; both admit that the
Divine cannot be measured by the standards of man. But this, in fact,
implies an avowal of our complete ignorance in face of the Mystery of
God. Still, for both parties God is the supreme Artifex who in His wisdom
has chosen the best of all possible worlds; for although the philosophers
affirm also that God acts only by natural necessity, their system, like that
of their predecessors, the Platonists, Peripatetics, and Stoics, is
essentially teleological. As to the problem of possibility, both parties
commit the same inconsistencies and hold sometimes that the world
could, sometimes that it could not, have been different from what it is.
Finally, both parties believe in God’s ultimate Unity.
And if one studies the other works of Ghazali the resemblance between
him and the philosophers becomes still greater. For instance, he too
believes in the spirituality of the soul, notwithstanding the arguments he
gives against it in this book; he too sometimes regards religious concepts
as the symbols of a higher philosophical or mystical truth, although he
admits here only a literal interpretation. He too sometimes teaches the
fundamental theory of the philosophers which he tries to refute so
insistently in our book, the theory that from the one supreme Agent as the
ultimate source through intermediaries all things derive; and he himself
expresses this idea (in his Alchemy of Happiness and slightly differently in
his Vivification of Theology) by the charming simile of an ant which seeing
black tracings on a sheet of paper thinks that their cause is the pen, while
it is the hand that moves the pen by the power of the will which derives

31

from the heart, itself inspired by the spiritual agent, the cause of causes.
The resemblances between Ghazali and Averroës, men belonging to the
same culture, indeed, the greatest men in this culture, seem sometimes
greater than their differences.
Emotionally the difference goes deep. Averroës is a philosopher and a
proud believer in the possibility of reason to achieve a knowledge of ‘was
das Innere der Welt zusammenhält’. He was not always too sure, he knew
too much, and there is much wavering and hesitation in his ideas. Still, his
faith in reason remains unshaken. Although he does not subscribe to the
lofty words of his master that man because of the power of his intellect is a
mortal God, he reproaches the theologians for having made God an
immortal man. God, for him, is a dehumanized principle. But if God has to
respond to the needs of man’s heart, can He be exempt from humanity?
Ghazali is a mu’min, that is a believer, he is a Muslim, that is he accepts
his heart submits to a truth his reason cannot establish, for his heart has
reasons his reason does not know. His theology is the philosophy of the
heart in which there is expressed man’s fear and loneliness and his feeling
of dependence on an understanding and loving Being to whom he can cry
out from the depths of his despair, and whose mercy is infinite. It is not so
much after abstract truth that Ghazali strives; his search is for God, for the
Pity behind the clouds.

SIMON VAN DEN BERGH
IN THE NAME OF THE MERCIFUL AND COMPASSIONATE
GOD: AND AFTER PRAISE TO GOD AND BENEDICTION UPON ALL
HIS MESSENGERS AND PROPHETS:
The aim of this book is to show the different degrees of assent and
conviction attained by the assertions in The Incoherence of the
Philosophers, and to prove that the greater part has not reached the
degree of evidence and of truth.

THE FIRST DISCUSSION

32

Concerning the Eternity of the World
Ghazali, speaking of the philosophers’ proofs for the eternity of the world,
says:

Let us restrict ourselves in this chapter to those proofs
that make an impression on the mind.
This chapter contains four proofs.

THE FIRST PROOF
The philosophers say: It is impossible that the temporal
should proceed from the absolutely Eternal. For it is clear if
we assume the Eternal existing without, for instance, the
world proceeding from Him, then, at a certain moment, the
world beginning to proceed from Him-that it did not proceed
before, because there was no determining principle for its
existence, but its existence was pure possibility. When the
world begins in time, a new determinant either does or does
not arise. If it does not, the world will stay in the same state
of pure possibility as before; if a new determinant does arise,
the same question can be asked about this new determinant,
why it determines now, and not before, and either we shall
have an infinite regress or we shall arrive at a principle
determining eternally.

I say: This argument is in the highest degree dialectical and does not
reach the pitch of demonstrative proof. For its premisses are common
notions, and common notions approach the equivocal, whereas
demonstrative premisses are concerned with things proper to the same
genus.
For the term ‘possible’ is used in an equivocal way of the possible that
happens more often than not, of the possible that happens less often than

33

not, and of the possible with equal chances of happening, and these three
types of the possible do not seem to have the same need for a new
determining principle. For the possible that happens more often than not is
frequently believed to have its determining principle in itself, not outside,
as is the case with the possible which has equal chances of happening
and not happening. Further, the possible resides sometimes in the agent,
i.e. the possibility of acting, and sometimes in the patient, i.e. the
possibility of receiving, and it does not seem that the necessity for a
determining principle is the same in both cases. For it is well known that
the possible in the patient needs a new determinant from the outside; this
can be perceived by the senses in artificial things and in many natural
things too, although in regard to natural things there is a doubt, for in most
natural things the principle of their change forms part of them. Therefore it
is believed of many natural things that they move themselves, and it is by
no means self-evident that everything that is moved has a mover and that
there is nothing that moves itself.; But all this needs to be examined, and
the old philosophers have therefore done so. As concerns the possible in
the agent, however, in many cases it is believed that it can be actualized
without an external principle, for the transition in the agent from inactivity
to activity is often regarded as not being a change which requires a
principle; e.g. the transition in the geometer from non-geometrizing to
geometrizing, or in the teacher from non-teaching to teaching.
Further, those changes which are regarded as needing a principle of
change can sometimes be changes in substance, sometimes in quality, or
in quantity, or in place.
In addition, ‘eternal’ is predicated by many of the eternal-by-itself and
the eternal-through-another. According to some, it is permissible to admit
certain changes in the Eternal, for instance a new volition in the Eternal,
according to the Karramites, and the possibility of generation and
corruption which the ancients attribute to primary matter, although it is
eternal. Equally, new concepts are admitted in the possible intellect
although, according to most authors, it is eternal. But there are also
changes which are inadmissible, especially according to certain ancients,
though not according to others.
Then there is the agent who acts of his will and the agent which acts by
nature, and the manner of actualization of the possible act is not the same

34

for both agents, i.e. so far as the need for a new determinant is
concerned. Further, is this division into two agents complete, or does
demonstration lead to an agent which resembles neither the natural agent
nor the voluntary agent of human experience?
All these are multifarious and difficult questions which need, each of
them, a special examination, both in themselves and in regard to the
opinions the ancients held about them. To treat what is in reality a plurality
of questions as one problem is one of the well known seven sophisms,
and a mistake in one of these principles becomes a great error by the end
of the examination of reality.
Ghazali says:
There are two objections to this. The first objection is to
say: why do you deny the theory of those who say that the
world has been created by an eternal will which has decreed
its existence in the time in which it exists; that its nonexistence lasts until the moment it ceases and that its
existence begins from the moment it begins; that its
existence was not willed before and therefore did not
happen, and that at the exact moment it began it was willed
by an eternal will and therefore began? What is the objection
to this theory and what is absurd in it?
I say:
This argument is sophistical: although it is not allowable for him to admit
the possibility of the actual effect being delayed after the actual cause,
and in a voluntary agent, after the decision to act, he regards it as possible
that the effect should be delayed after the will of the agent. It is possible
that the effect should be delayed after the will of the agent, but its being
delayed after the actual cause is impossible, and equally impossible is its
being delayed after a voluntary agent’s decision to act. The difficulty is
thus unchanged, for he must of necessity draw one of these two
conclusions: either that the act of the agent does not imply in him a
change which itself would need an external principle of change, or that
there are changes which arise by themselves, without the necessity of an
agent in whom they occur and who causes them, and that therefore there
are changes possible in the Eternal without an agent who causes them.

35

And his adversaries insist on these two very points: ( 1 ) that the act of the
agent necessarily implies a change and that each change has a principle
which causes it; (2) that the Eternal cannot change in any way. But all this
is difficult to prove.
The Ash’arites are forced to assume either a first agent or a first act of
this agent, for they cannot admit that the disposition of the agent, relative
to the effect, when he acts is the same as his disposition, when he does
not act. This implies therefore a new disposition or a new relation, and this
necessarily either in the agent, or in the effect, or in both? But in this case,
if we posit as a principle that for each new disposition there is an agent,
this new disposition in the first agent will either need another agent, and
then this first agent was not the first and was not on his own account
sufficient for the act but needed another, or the agent of the disposition
which is the condition of the agent’s act will be identical with the agent of
the act. Then this act which we regarded as being the first act arising out
of him will not be the first, but his act producing the disposition which is the
condition of the effect will be anterior to the act producing the effect. This,
you see, is a necessary consequence, unless one allows that new
dispositions may arise in the agents without a cause. But this is absurd,
unless one believes that there are things which happen at haphazard and
by themselves, a theory of the old philosophers who denied the agent,; the
falsehood of which is self-evident.
In Ghazali’s objection there is a confusion. For our expressions ‘eternal
will’ and ‘temporal will’ are equivocal, indeed contrary. For the empirical
will is a faculty which possesses the possibility of doing equally one of two
contraries and then of receiving equally one of the two contraries willed.
For the will is the desire of the agent towards action. When the agent acts,
the desire ceases and the thing willed happens, and this desire and this
act are equally related to both the contraries. But when one says: ‘There is
a Wilier who wills eternally one of two contraries in Himself’, the definition
of the will is abandoned, for we have transferred its nature from the
possible to the necessary. If it is objected that in an eternal will the will
does not cease through the presence of the object willed, for as an eternal
will has no beginning there is no moment in it which is specially
determined for the realization of the object willed, we answer: this is not
obvious, unless we say that demonstrative proof leads to the existence of

36

an agent endowed with a power which is neither voluntary nor natural,
which, however, the Divine Law calls ‘will’, in the same way as
demonstrative proof leads to middle terms between things which seemed
at first sight to be contrary, without being really so, as when we speak of
an existence which is neither inside nor outside the world.
Ghazali answers, on behalf of the philosophers:
The philosophers say: This is clearly impossible, for
everything that happens is necessitated and has its cause,
and as it is impossible that there should be an effect without
a necessitating principle and a cause, so it is impossible that
there should exist a cause of which the effect is delayed,
when all the conditions of its necessitating, its causes and
elements are completely fulfilled. On the contrary, the
existence of the effect, when the cause is realized with all its
conditions, is necessary, and its delay is just as impossible
as an effect without cause. Before the existence of the world
there existed a Wilier, a will, and its relation to the thing
willed. No new wilier arose, nor a new will, nor a new relation
to the will-for all this is change; how then could a new object
of will arise, and what prevented its arising before? The
condition of the new production did not distinguish itself from
the condition of the non-production in any way, in any mode,
in any relation-on the contrary, everything remained as it
was before. At one moment the object of will did not exist,
everything remained as it was before, and then the object of
will existed. Is not this a perfectly absurd theory?
I say:
This is perfectly clear, except for one who denies one of the premisses
we have laid down previously. But Ghazali passes from this proof to an
example based upon convention,’ and through this he confuses this
defence of the philosophers.
Ghazali says:
This kind of impossibility is found not only in the
necessary and essential cause and effect but also in the

37

accidental and conventional. If a man pronounces the
formula of divorce against his wife without the divorce
becoming irrevocable immediately, one does not imagine
that it will become so later. For he made the formula through
convention and usage a cause of the judgement, and we do
not believe that the effect can be delayed, except when the
divorce depends on an ulterior event, e.g. on the arrival of
tomorrow or on someone’s entering the house, for then the
divorce does not take place at once, but only when tomorrow
arrives or someone enters the house; in this case the man
made the formula a cause only in conjunction with an ulterior
event. But as this event, the coming of tomorrow and
someone’s entering the house, is not yet actual, the effect is
delayed until this future event is realized. The effect only
takes place when a new event, i.e. entering the house or the
arrival of tomorrow, has actually happened. Even if a man
wanted to delay the effect after the formula, without making it
dependent on an ulterior event, this would be regarded as
impossible, although it is he himself who lays down the
convention and fixes its modalities. If thus in conventional
matters such a delay is incomprehensible and inadmissible,
how can we admit it in essential, rational, and necessary
causal relations? In respect of our conduct and our voluntary
actions, there is a delay in actual volition only when there is
some obstacle. When there is actual volition and actual
power and the obstacles are eliminated, a delay in the object
willed is inadmissible.; A delay in the object willed is
imaginable only in decision, for decision is not sufficient for
the existence of the act; the decision to write does not
produce the writing, if it is not, as a new fact, accompanied
by an act of volition, i.e. an impulse in the man which
presents itself at the moment of the act. If there is thus an
analogy between the eternal Will and our will to act, a delay
of the object willed is inadmissible, unless through an
obstacle, and an antecedent existence of the volition is
equally inadmissible, for I cannot will to get up tomorrow
except by way of decision. If, however, the eternal Will is

38

analogous to our decision, it does not suffice to produce the
thing decided upon, but the act of creation must be
accompanied by a new act of volition, and this brings us
again to the idea of a change. But then we have the same
difficulty all over again. Why does this impulse or volition or
will or whatever you choose to call it happen just now and
not before? There remain, then, only these alternatives:
either something happening without a cause, or an infinite
regress. This is the upshot of the discussion: There is a
cause the conditions of which are all completely fulfilled, but
notwithstanding this the effect is delayed and is not realized
during a period to the beginning of which imagination cannot
attain and for which thousands of years would mean no
diminution; then suddenly, without the addition of any new
fact, and without the realization of any new condition, this
effect comes into existence and is produced. And this is
absurd.
I say:
This example of divorce based on convention seems to strengthen the
argument of the philosophers, but in reality it weakens it. For it enables the
Ash’arites to say: In the same way as the actual divorce is delayed after
the formula of divorce till the moment when the condition of someone’s
entering the house, or any other, is fulfilled, so the realization of the world
can be delayed after God’s act of creation until the condition is fulfilled on
which this realization depends, i.e. the moment when God willed it. But
conventional things do not behave like rational. The Literalists, comparing
these conventional things to rational, say: This divorce is not binding and
does not become effective through the realization of the condition which is
posterior to the pronouncement of the divorce by the divorcer, since it
would be a divorce which became effective without connexion with the act
of the divorcer. But in this matter there is no relation between the concept
drawn from the nature of things and that which is artificial and
conventional.
Then Ghazali says, on behalf of the Ash’arites:

39

The answer is: Do you recognize the impossibility of
connecting the eternal Will with the temporal production of
anything, through the necessity of intuitive thought or
through a logical deduction, or-to use your own logical
terminology-do you recognize the clash between these two
concepts through a middle term or without a middle term? If
you claim a middle term-and this is the deductive methodyou will have to produce it, and if you assert that you know
this through the necessity of thought, why do your
adversaries not share this intuition with you? For the party
which believes in the creation of the world in time through an
eternal Will includes so many persons that no country can
contain them and no number enumerate them, and they
certainly do not contradict the logically minded out of
obstinacy, while knowing better in their hearts. A proof
according to the rules of logic must be produced to show this
impossibility, as in all your arguments up till now there is only
a presumption of impossibility and a comparison with our
decision and our will; and this is false, for the eternal Will
does not resemble temporal volitions, and a pure
presumption of impossibility will not suffice without proof.
I say:
This argument is one of those which have only a very feeble persuasive
power. It amounts to saying that one who claims the impossibility of delay
in an effect, when its cause with all its conditions is realized, must assert
that he knows this either by a syllogism or from first principles; if through a
syllogism, he must produce it-but there is none; if from first principles, it
must be known to all, adversaries and others alike. But this argument is
mistaken, for it is not a condition of objective truth that it should be known
to all. That anything should be held by all does not imply anything more
than its being a common notion, just as the existence of a common notion
does not imply objective truth.
Ghazali answers on behalf of the Ash’arites:
If it is said, ‘We know by the necessity of thought that,
when all its conditions are fulfilled, a cause without effect is

40

inadmissible and that to admit it is an affront to the necessity
of thought,’ we answer: what is the difference between you
and your adversaries, when they say to you, ‘We know by
the necessity of thought the impossibility of a theory which
affirms that one single being knows all the universals,
without this knowledge forming a plurality in its essence or
adding anything to it, and without this plurality of things
known implying a plurality in the knowledge’? For this is your
theory of God, which according to us and our science is
quite absurd. You, however, say there is no analogy
between eternal and temporal knowledge. Some of you
acknowledge the impossibility involved, and say that God
knows only Himself and that He is the knower, the
knowledge and the known, and that the three are one. One
might object: The unity of the knowledge, the knower, and
the known is clearly an impossibility, for to suppose the
Creator of the world ignorant of His own work is necessarily
absurd, and the Eternal-who is far too high to be reached by
your words and the words of any heretics-could, if He knows
only Himself, never know His work.
I say
This amounts to saying that the theologians do not gratuitously and
without proof deny the admitted impossibility of a delay between the effect
and its cause, but base themselves on an argument which leads them to
believe in the temporal creation of the world, and that they therefore act in
the same way as the philosophers, who only deny the well-known
necessary plurality of knowledge and known, so far as it concerns their
unity in God, because of a demonstration which, according to them, leads
them to their theory about Him. And that this is still more true of those
philosophers who deny it to
be necessary that God should know His
own work, affirming that He knows only Himself. This assertion belongs to
the class of assertions whose contrary is equally false., For there exists no
proof which refutes anything that is evidently true, and universally
acknowledged. Anything that can be refuted by a demonstrative proof is
only supposed to be true, not really true.] Therefore, if it is absolutely and
evidently true that knowledge and known form a plurality, both in the

41

visible and in the invisible world, we can be sure that the philosophers
cannot have a proof of this unity in God; but if the theory of the plurality of
knowledge and known is only a supposition, then it is possible for the
philosophers to have a proof. Equally, if it is absolutely true that the effect
of a cause cannot be delayed after the causation and the Ash’arites claim
that they can advance a proof to deny it, then we can be absolutely sure
that they cannot have such a proof. If there is a controversy about
questions like this, the final criterion rests with the sound understanding’
which does not base itself on prejudice and passion, when it probes
according to the signs and rules by which truth and mere opinion are
logically distinguished. Likewise, if two people dispute about a sentence
and one says that it is poetry, the other that it is prose, the final judgment
rests with the ‘sound understanding’ which can distinguish poetry from
prose, and with the science of prosody. And as, in the case of metre, the
denial of him who denies it does not interfere with its perception by him
who perceives it, so the denial of a truth by a contradictor does not trouble
the conviction of the men to whom it is evident.
This whole argument is extremely inept and weak, and Ghazali ought not
to have filled his book with such talk if he intended to convince the
learned.
And drawing consequences which are irrelevant and beside the point,
Ghazali goes on to say:
But the consequences of this argument cannot be
overcome. And we say to them: How will you refute your
adversaries, when they say the eternity of the world is
impossible, for it implies an infinite number and an infinity of
unifies for the spherical revolutions, although they can be
divided by six, by four, and by two.’ For the sphere of the sun
revolves in one year, the sphere of Saturn in thirty years,
and so Saturn’s revolution is a thirtieth and Jupiter’s
revolution-for Jupiter revolves in twelve years-a twelfth of the
sun’s revolution. But the number of revolutions of Saturn has
the same infinity as the revolutions of the sun, although they
are in a proportion of one to thirty and even the infinity of the
sphere of the fixed stars which turns round once in thirty-six
thousand years is the same as the daily revolution which the

42

sun performs in twenty-four hours. If now your adversary
says that this is plainly impossible, in what does your
argument differ from his? And suppose it is asked: Are the
numbers of these revolutions even or uneven or both even
and uneven or neither even nor uneven? If you answer, both
even and uneven, or neither even nor uneven, you say what
is evidently absurd. If, however, you say ‘even’ or ‘uneven’,
even and uneven become uneven and even by the addition
of one unit and how could infinity be one unit short? You
must, therefore, draw the conclusion that they are neither
even nor uneven.
I say:
This too is a sophistical argument. It amounts to saying: In the same way
as you are unable to refute our argument for the creation of the world in
time, that if it were eternal, its revolutions would be neither even nor
uneven, so we cannot refute your theory that the effect of an agent whose
conditions to act are always fulfilled cannot be delayed. This argument
aims only at creating and establishing a ; doubt, which is one of the
sophist’s objectives.
But you, reader of this book, you have already heard the arguments of
the philosophers to establish the eternity of the world and the refutation of
the Ash’arites. Now hear the proofs of the Ash’arites for their refutation
and hear the arguments of the philosophers to refute those proofs in the
wording of Ghazali!
[Here, in the Arabic text, the last passage of Ghazali, which previously was given only in an
abbreviated form, is repeated in full.]

I say:
This is in brief that, if you imagine two circular movements in one and the
same finite time and imagine then a limited part of these movements in
one and the same finite time, the proportion between the parts of these
two circular movements and between their wholes will be the same. For
instance, if the circular movement of Saturn in t the period which we call a
year is a thirtieth of the circular movement of the sun in this period, and
you imagine the whole of the circular movements of the sun in proportion
to the whole of the circular movements of Saturn in one and the same

43

period, necessarily the proportion between their wholes and between their
parts will be the same. If, however, there is no proportion between two
movements in their totality, because they are both potential, i.e. they have
neither beginning nor end but there exists a proportion between the parts,
because they are both actual, then the proportion between the wholes is
not necessarily the same as the proportion between the parts-although
many think so, basing their proof on this prejudice -for there is no
proportion between two magnitudes or quantities which are both taken to
be infinite. When, therefore, the ancients believed that, for instance, the
totality of the movements of the sun and of Saturn had neither beginning
nor end, there could be no proportion between them, for this would have
implied the finitude of both these totalities, just as this is implied for the
parts of both. This is self-evident. Our adversaries believe that, when a
proportion of more and less exists between parts, this proportion holds
good also for the totalities, but this is only binding when the totalities are
finite. For where there is no end there is neither ‘more’ nor ‘less’. The
admission in such a case of the proportion of more and less brings with it
another absurd consequence, namely that one infinite could be greater
than another. This is only absurd when one supposes two things actually
infinite, for then a proportion does exist between them. When, however,
one imagines things potentially infinite, there exists no proportion at all.
This is the right answer to this question, not what Ghazali says in the
name of the philosophers.
And through this are solved all the difficulties which beset our
adversaries on this question, of which the greatest is that which they
habitually formulate in this way: If the movements in the past are infinite,
then no movement in the actual present can take place, unless an infinite
number of preceding movements is terminated., This is true, and
acknowledged by the philosophers, once granted that the anterior
movement is the condition for the posterior movement’s taking place, i.e.
once granted that the existence of one single movement implies an infinite
number of causes. But no philosopher allows the existence of an infinite
number of causes, as accepted by the materialists, for this would imply the
existence of an effect without cause and a motion without mover. But
when the existence of an eternal prime mover had been proved, whose
act cannot be posterior to his being, it followed that there could as little be
a beginning for his act as for his being; otherwise his act would be

44

possible, not necessary, and he would not be a first principle.’ The acts of
an agent who has no beginning have a beginning as little as his existence,
and therefore it follows necessarily that no preceding act of his is the
condition for the existence of a later, for neither of them is an agent by
itself and their sequence is accidental. An accidental infinite, not an
essential infinite, is admitted by the philosophers; nay, this type of infinite
is in fact a necessary consequence of the existence of an eternal first
principle., And this is not only true for successive or continuous
movements and the like, but even where the earlier is regarded as the
cause of the later, for instance the man who engenders a man like himself.
For it is necessary that the series of temporal productions of one individual
man by another should lead upwards to an eternal agent, for whom there
is no beginning either of his existence or of his production of man out of
man. The production of one man by another ad infinitum is accidental,
whereas the relation of before and after in it is essential. The agent who
has no beginning either for his existence or for those acts of his which he
performs without an instrument, has no first instrument either to perform
those acts of his without beginning which by their nature need an
instrument .
But since the theologians mistook the accidental for the essential, they
denied this eternal agent; the solution of their problem was difficult and
they believed this proof to be stringent. But this theory of the philosophers
is clear, and their first master Aristotle has explained that, if motion were
produced by motion, or element by element, motion and element could not
exists For this type of infinite the philosophers admit neither a beginning
nor an end, and therefore one can never say of anything in this series that
it has ended or has begun, not even in the past, for everything that has an
end must have begun and what does not begin does not end. This can
also be understood from the fact that beginning and end are correlatives.
Therefore one who affirms that there is no end of the celestial revolutions
in the future cannot logically ascribe a beginning to them, for what has a
beginning has an end and what has no end has no beginning, and the
same relation exists between first and last; i.e. what has a first term has
also a last term, and what has no first term has no last term, and there is
in reality neither end nor beginning for any part of a series that has no last
term, and what has no beginning for any of its parts has no end for any of
them either. When, therefore, the theologians ask the philosophers if the

45

movements which precede the present one are ended, their answer is
negative, for their assumption that they have no beginning implies their
endlessness. The opinion of the theologians that the philosophers admit
their end is erroneous, for they do not admit an end for what has no
beginning.’ It will be clear to you that neither the arguments of the
theologians for the temporal creation of the world of which Ghazali
speaks, nor the arguments of the philosophers which he includes and
describes in his book, suffice to reach absolute evidence or afford
stringent proof. And this is what we have tried to show in this book. The
best answer one can give to him who asks where in the past is the
starting-point of His acts, is: The starting-point of His acts is at the startingpoint of His existence; for neither of them has a beginning.
And here is the passage of Ghazali in which he sets forth the defence of
the philosophers against the argument built on the difference in speed of
the celestial spheres, and his refutation of their argument.
Ghazali says:
If one says, ‘The error in your argument consists in your
considering those circular movements as an aggregate of
units, but those movements have no real existence, for the
past is no more and the future not yet; “aggregate” means
units existing in the present, but in this case there is no
existence.’
Then he says to refute this:
We answer: Number can be divided into even and
uneven; there is no third possibility, whether for the
numbered permanent reality, or for the numbered passing
event. Therefore whatever number we imagine, we must
believe it to be even or uneven, whether we regard it as
existent or non-existent; and if the thing numbered vanishes
from existence, our judgement of its being even or uneven
does not vanish or change.
I say:
This is the end of his argument. But this argument-that the numbered
thing must be judged as even or uneven, whether it exists or not-is only

46

valid so far as it concerns external things or things in the soul that have a
beginning and an end. For of the number which exists only potentially, i.e.
which has neither beginning nor end, it cannot truly be said that it is even
or uneven, or that it begins or ends; it happens neither in the past nor in
the future, for what exists potentially falls under the law of non-existence.
This is what the philosophers meant when they said that the circular
movements of the past and the future are non-existent. The upshot of this
question is: Everything that is called a limited aggregate with a beginning
and an end is so called either because it has a beginning and end in the
world exterior to the soul, or because it is inside, not outside, the soul.
Every totality, actual and limited in the past, whether inside or outside the
soul, is necessarily either even or uneven. But an unlimited aggregate
existing outside the soul cannot be other than limited so far as it is
represented in the soul, for the soul cannot represent unlimited existence.
Therefore also this unlimited aggregate, as being limited in the soul, can
be called even or uneven; in so far, however, as it exists outside the soul,
it can be called neither even nor uneven. Equally, past aggregates which
are considered to exist potentially outside the soul, i.e. which have no
beginning, cannot be called even or uneven unless they are looked upon
as actual, i.e. as having beginning and end. No motion possesses totality
or forms an aggregate, i.e. is provided with a beginning or an end, except
in so far as it is in the soul, as is the case with time.’ And it follows from
the nature of circular movement that it is neither even nor uneven except
as represented in the soul. The cause of this mistake is that it was
believed that, when something possesses a certain quality in the soul, it
must possess this quality also outside the soul, and, since anything that
has happened in the past can only be represented in the soul as finite, it
was thought that everything that has happened in the past must also be
finite outside the soul. And as the circular movements of the future are
regarded by the imagination as infinite, for it represents them as a
sequence of part after part, Plato and the Ash’arites believed that they
might be infinite, but this is simply a judgement based on imagination, not
on proof. Therefore those who believe-as many theologians have donethat, if the world is supposed to have begun, it must have an end, are truer
to their principles and show more consistency.
Ghazali says after this:

47

And we say moreover to the philosophers: According to
your principles it is not absurd that there should be actual
units, qualitatively differentiated, which are infinite in number;
I am thinking of human souls, separated through death from
their bodies. These are therefore realities that can neither be
called even nor uneven. How will you refute the man who
affirms that this is necessarily absurd in the same way as
you claim the connexion between an eternal will and a
temporal creation to be necessarily absurd? This theory
about souls is that which Avicenna accented. and it is
perhaps Aristotle’s.
I say:
This argument is extremely weak. It says, in brief, ‘You philosophers
need not refute our assertion that what is a logical necessity for you is not
necessary, as you consider things possible which your adversaries
consider impossible by the necessity of thought. That is to say, just as you
consider things possible which your adversaries consider impossible, so
you consider things necessary which your adversaries do not consider so.
And you cannot bring a criterion for judging the two claims.’ It has already
been shown in the science of logic that this is a weak rhetorical or
sophistical kind of argument., The answer is that what we claim to be
necessarily true is objectively true, whereas what you claim as necessarily
absurd is not as you claim it to be. For this there is no other criterion than
immediate intuitive apprehension, just as, when one man claims that a line
is rhythmical and another denies it, the criterion is the intuition of the
sound understanding.
As for the thesis of a numerical plurality of immaterial souls, this is not a
theory acknowledged by the philosophers, for they regard matter as the
cause of numerical plurality and form as the cause of congruity in
numerical plurality. And that there should be a numerical plurality without
matter, having one unique form, is impossible. For in its description one
individual can only be distinguished from another accidentally, as there is
often another individual who participates in this descriptions but only
through their matter do individuals differ in reality. And also this: the
impossibility of an actual infinite is an acknowledged axiom in
philosophical theory, equally valid for material and immaterial things. We

48

do not know of any one who makes a distinction here between the spatial
and the non-spatial, with the single exception of Avicenna. I do not know
of any other philosopher who affirms this, it does not correspond with any
of their principles and it makes no sense, for the philosophers deny the
existence of an actual infinite equally for material and for immaterial
things, as it would imply that one infinite could be greater than another.
Perhaps Avicenna wanted only to satisfy the masses, telling them what
they were accustomed to hear about the soul. But this theory is far from
satisfactory. For if there were an actual infinite and it were divided in two,
the part would equal the whole; e.g. if there were a line or a number
actually infinite in both directions and it were divided in two, both the parts
and the whole would be actually infinite; and this is absurd. All this is
simply the consequence of the admission of an actual and not potential
infinite.
Ghazali says:
If it is said, ‘The truth lies with Plato’s theory of one
eternal soul which is only divided in bodies and returns after
its separation from them to its original unity’, we answer:
This theory is still worse, more objectionable and more apt to
be regarded as contrary to the necessity of thought. For we
say that the soul of Zaid is either identical with the soul of
Amr or different from it; but their identity would mean
something absurd, for everyone is conscious of his own
identity and knows that he is not another, and, were they
identical, their knowledge, which is an essential quality of
their souls and enters into all the relations into which their
souls enter, would be identical too. If you say their soul is
unique and only divided through its association with bodies,
we answer that the division of a unity which has no
measurable volume is absurd by the necessity of thought.
And how could the one become two, and indeed a thousand,
and then return to its unity? This can be understood of things
which have volume and quantity, like the water of the sea
which is distributed into brooks and rivers and flows then
back again into the sea, but how can that which has no
quantity be divided? We seek to show by all this that the

49

philosophers cannot shake the conviction of their
adversaries that the eternal Will is connected with temporal
creation, except by claiming its absurdity by the necessity of
thought, and that therefore they are in no way different from
the theologians who make the same claim against the
philosophical doctrines opposed to theirs. And out of this
there is no issue.
I say:
Zaid and Amr are numerically different, but identical in form. If, for
example, the soul of Zaid were numerically different from the soul of Amr
in the way Zaid is numerically different from Amr, the soul of Zaid and the
soul of Amr would be numerically two, but one in their form, and the soul
would possess another soul. The necessary conclusion is therefore that
the soul of Zaid and the soul of Amr are identical in their form. An identical
form inheres in a numerical, i.e. a divisible, multiplicity, only through the
multiplicity of matter. If then the soul does not die when the body dies, or if
it possesses an immortal element, it must, when it has left the bodies,
form a numerical unity. But this is not the place to go deeper into this
subject.
His argument against Plato is sophistical. It says in short that the soul
of Zaid is either identical with the soul of Amr or different from it; but that
the soul of Zaid is not identical with the soul of Amr and that therefore it is
different from it. But ‘different’ is an equivocal term, and ‘identity’ too is
predicated of a number of things which are also called ‘different’. The
souls of Zaid and Amr are one in one sense and many in another; we
might say, one in relation to their form, many in relation to their
substratum. His remark that division can only be imagined of the
quantitative is partially false; it is true of essential division, but not of
accidental division, i.e. of those things which can be divided, because they
exist in the essentially divisible. The essentially divisible is, for example,
body; accidental division is, for instance, the division of whiteness, when
the bodies in which it is present are divided, and in this way the forms and
the soul are accidentally divisible, i.e. through the division of the substrate.
The soul is closely similar to light: light is divided by the division of
illuminated bodies, and is unified when the bodies are annihilated, and this
same relation holds between soul and bodies. To advance such

50

sophistical arguments is dishonest, for it may be supposed that he is not a
man to have overlooked the points mentioned. What he said, he said only
to flatter the masses of his times, but how far removed is such an attitude
from the character of those who seek to set forth the truth! But perhaps
the man may be forgiven on account of the time and place in which he
lived; and indeed he only proceeded in his books in a tentative way.
And as these arguments carry no evidence whatsoever, Ghazali says:
We want to show by all this that the philosophers cannot
shake the conviction of their adversaries that the eternal Will
is connected with temporal creation, by claiming its absurdity
by the necessity of thought, and that therefore they do not
distinguish themselves from the theologians, who make the
same claim against the philosophical doctrines opposed to
theirs. And out of this there is no issue.
I say:
When someone denies a truth of which it is absolutely certain that it is
such-and-such, there exists no argument by which we can come to an
understanding with him; for every argument is based on known premisses
about which both adversaries agree. When each point advanced is denied
by the adversary, discussion with him becomes impossible, but such
people stand outside the pale of humanity and have to be educated. But
for him who denies an evident truth, t because of a difficulty which
presents itself to him there is a remedy, i.e. the solution of this difficulty.
He who does not understand evident truth, because he is lacking in
intelligence, cannot be taught anything, nor can he be educated. It is like
trying to make the blind imagine colours or know their existence.
Ghazali says:
The philosophers may object: This argument (that the
present has been preceded by an infinite past) can be turned
against you, for God before the creation of the world was
able to create it, say, one year or two years before He did,
and there is no limit to His power; but He seemed to have
patience and did not create. Then He created. Now, the
duration of His inactivity is either finite or infinite. If you say

51

finite, the existence of the Creator becomes finite; if you say
infinite, a duration in which there is an infinite number of
possibilities receives its termination. We answer: Duration
and time are, according to us, created, but we shall explain
the real answer to this question when we reply to the second
proof of the philosophers.
I say:
Most people who accept a temporal creation of the world believe time
to have been created with it. Therefore his assertion that the duration of
His inactivity was either limited or unlimited is untrue. For what has no
beginning does not finish or end. And the opponent does not admit that
the inactivity has any duration at all. What one has to ask them about the
consequences of their theory is: Is it possible, when the creation of time is
admitted, that the term of its beginning may lie beyond the real time in
which we live? If they answer that it is not possible, they posit a limited
extension beyond which the Creator cannot pass, and this is, in their view,
shocking and absurd. If, however, they concede that its possible beginning
may lie beyond the moment of its created term, it may further be asked if
there may not lie another term beyond this second. If they answer in the
affirmative-and they cannot do otherwise-it will be said: Then we shall
have here a possible creation of an infinite number of durations, and you
will be forced to admit-according to your argument about the spherical
revolutions-that their termination is a condition for the real age which
exists since them. If you say what is infinite does not finish, the arguments
you use about the spherical revolutions against your opponents your
opponents will use against you on the subject of the possibility of created
durations. If it is objected that the difference between those two cases is
that these infinite possibilities belong to extensions which do not become
actual, whereas the spherical revolutions do become actual, the answer is
that the possibilities of things belong to their necessary accidents and that
it does not make any difference, according to the philosophers, if they
precede these things or are simultaneous with them, for of necessity they
are the dispositions of things. If, then, it is impossible that before the
existence of the present spherical revolution there should have been
infinite spherical revolutions, the existence of infinite possible revolutions
is equally impossible. If one wants to avoid these consequences, one can

52

say that the age of the world is a definite quantity and cannot be longer or
shorter than it is, in conformity with the philosophical doctrine about the
size of the world. Therefore these arguments are not stringent, and the
safest way for him who accepts the temporal creation of the world is to
regard time as of a definite extension and not to admit a possibility which
precedes the possible; and to regard also the spatial extension of the
world as finite. Only, spatial extension forms a simultaneous whole; not so
time.
Ghazali expounds a certain kind of argument attributed to the
philosophers on this subject against the theologians when they denied that
the impossibility of delay in the Creator’s act after His existence is known
by primitive intuition:
How will you defend yourselves, theologians, against the
philosophers, when they drop this argument, based on the
necessity of thought, and prove the eternity of the world in
this way, saying that times are equivalent so far as the
possibility that the Divine Will should attach itself to them is
concerned, for what differentiates a given time from an
earlier or a later time? And it is not absurd to believe that the
earlier or the later might be chosen when on the contrary you
theologians say about white, black, movement, and rest that
the white is realized through the eternal Will although its
substrate accepts equally black and white. Why, then, does
the eternal Will attach itself to the white rather than to the
black, and what differentiates one of the two possibles from
the other for connexion with the eternal Will? But we
philosophers know by the necessity of thought that one thing
does not distinguish itself from a similar except by a
differentiating principle, for if not, it would be possible that
the world should come into existence, having the possibility
both of existing and of not existing, and that the side of
existence, although it has the same possibility as the side of
non-existence, should be differentiated without a
differentiating principle. If you answer that the Will of God is
the differentiating principle, then one has to inquire what
differentiates the Will, i.e. the reason why it has been

53

differentiated in such or such way. And if you answer: One
does not inquire after the motives of the Eternal, well, let the
world then be eternal, and let us not inquire after its Creator
and its cause, since one does not inquire after the motives of
the Eternal! If it is regarded as possible that the Eternal
should differentiate one of the two possibles by chance, it
will be an extreme absurdity to say that the world is
differentiated in differentiated forms which might just as well
be otherwise, and one might then say that this has
happened by chance in the same way as you say that the
Divine Will has differentiated one time rather than another or
one form rather than another by chance. If you say that such
a question is irrelevant, because it refers to anything God
can will or decide, we answer that this question is quite
relevant, for it concerns any time and is pertinent for our
opponents to any decision God takes.
We answer: The world exists, in the way it exists, in its
time, with its qualities, and in its space, by the Divine Will
and will is a quality which has the faculty of differentiating
one thing from another,’ and if it had not this faculty, power
in itself would suffice But, since power is equally related to
two contraries’ and a differentiating principle is needed to
differentiate one thing from a similar, it is said that the
Eternal possesses besides His power a quality which can
differentiate between two similars. And to ask why will
differentiates one of two similars is like asking why
knowledge must comprehend the knowable, and the answer
is that ‘knowledge’ is the term for a quality which has just this
nature. And in the same way, ‘will’ is the term for a quality
the nature or rather the essence of which is to differentiate
one thing from another.
The philosophers may object: The assumption of a
quality the nature of which is to differentiate one thing from a
similar one is something incomprehensible, nay even
contradictory, for ‘similar’ means not to be differentiated, and
‘differentiated’ means not similar. And it must not be believed

54

that two blacks in two substrates are similar in every way,
since the one is in one place and the other in another, and
this causes a distinction; nor are two blacks at two times in
one substrate absolutely similar, since they are separated in
time, and how could they therefore be similar in every way?
When we say of two blacks that they are similar, we mean
that they are similar in blackness, in their special relation to
it-not absolutely. Certainly, if the substrate and the time were
one without any distinction, one could not speak any more of
two blacks or of any duality at all. This proves that the term
‘Divine Will’ is derived from our will, and one does not
imagine that through our will two similar things can be
differentiated.’ On the contrary, if someone who is thirsty has
before him two cups of water, similar in everything in respect
to his aim, it will not be possible for him to take either of
them. No, he can only take the one he thinks more beautiful
or lighter or nearer to his right hand, if he is right-handed, or
act from some such reason, hidden or known. Without this
the differentiation of the one from the other cannot be
imagined.
I say:
The summary of what Ghazali relates in this section of the proofs of the
philosophers for the impossibility of a temporal proceeding from an eternal
agent is that in God there cannot be a will. The philosophers could only
arrive at this argument after granting to their opponents that all oppositesopposites in time,b like anterior and posterior, as well as those in quality,
like white and black-are equivalent in relation to the eternal Will. And also
non-existence and existence are, according to the theologians, equivalent
in relation to the Divine Will. And having granted their opponents this
premiss, although they did not acknowledge its truth, they said to them: It
is of the nature of will that it cannot give preponderance to one thing rather
than to a similar one, except through a differentiating principle and a
cause which only exist in one of these two similar things; if not, one of the
two would happen by chance-and the philosophers argued for the sake of
discussion, as if they had conceded that, if the Eternal had a will, a
temporal could proceed from an eternal. As the theologians were unable

55

to give a satisfactory answer, they took refuge in the theory that the
eternal Will is a quality the nature of which is to differentiate between two
similar things, without there being for God a differentiating principle which
inclines Him to one of two similar acts; that the eternal Will is thus a quality
like warmth which gives heat or like knowledge which comprehends the
knowable. But their opponents, the philosophers, answered: It is
impossible that this should happen, for two similar things are equivalent
for the wilier, and his action can only attach itself to the one rather than to
the other through their being dissimilar, i.e. through one’s having a quality
the other has not. When, however, they are similar in every way and when
for God there is no differentiating principle at all, His will will attach itself to
both of them indifferently and, when this is the case-His will being the
cause of His act-the act will not attach itself to the one rather than to the
other, it will attach itself either to the two contrary actions simultaneously
or to neither of them at all, and both cases are absurd. The philosophers,
therefore, began their argument, as if they had it granted to them that all
things were equivalent in relation to the First Agent, and they forced them
to admit that there must be for God a differentiating principle which
precedes Him, which is absurd. When the theologians answered that will
is a quality the nature of which is to differentiate the similar from the
similar, in so far as it is similar, the philosophers objected that this is not
understood or meant by the idea of will. They therefore appear to reject
the principle which they granted them in the beginning.’ This is in short the
content of this section. It waves the argument from the original question to
the problem of the will; to shift one’s ground, however, is an act of
sophistry.
Ghazali answers in defence of the theological doctrine of the Divine Will:
There are two objections: First, as to your affirmation that
you cannot imagine this, do you know it by the necessity of
thought or through deduction? You can claim neither the one
nor the other. Your comparison with our will is a bad
analogy, which resembles that employed on the question of
God’s knowledge. Now God’s knowledge is different from
ours in several ways which we acknowledge. Therefore it is
not absurd to admit a difference in the will. Your affirmation
is like saying that an essence existing neither outside nor

56

inside the world, neither continuous with the world nor
separated from it, cannot be understood, because we cannot
understand this according to our human measure; the right
answer is that it is the fault of your imagination, for rational
proof has led the learned to accept its truth. How, then, will
you refute those who say that rational proof has led to
establishing in God a quality the nature of which is to
differentiate between two similar things? And, if the word
‘will’ does not apply, call it by another name, for let us not
quibble about words! We only use the term ‘will’ by
permission of the Divine Law. It may be objected that by its
conventional meaning ‘will’ designates that which has desire,
and God has no desire, but we are concerned here with a
question not of words but of fact. Besides, we do not even
with respect to our human will concede that this cannot be
imagined. Suppose two similar dates in front of a man who
has a strong desire for them, but who is unable to take them
both. Surely he will take one of them through a quality in him
the nature of which is to differentiate between two similar
things. All the distinguishing qualities you have mentioned,
like beauty or nearness or facility in taking, we can assume
to be absent, but still the possibility of the taking remains.
You can choose between two answers: either you merely
say that an equivalence in respect to his desire cannot be
imagined-but this is a silly answer, for to assume it is indeed
possible or you say that if an equivalence is assumed, the
man will remain for ever hungry and perplexed, looking at
the dates without taking one of them, and without a power to
choose or to will, distinct from his desire. And this again is
one of those absurdities which are recognized by the
necessity of thought. Everyone, therefore, who studies, in
the human and the divine, the real working of the act of
choice, must necessarily admit a quality the nature of which
is to differentiate between two similar things.
I say:

57

This objection can be summarized in two parts: In the first Ghazali
concedes that the human will is such that it is unable to differentiate one
thing from a similar one, in so far as it is similar, but that a rational proof
forces us to accept the existence of such a quality in the First Agent. To
believe that such a quality cannot exist would be like believing that there
cannot exist a being who is neither inside nor outside the world. According
to this reasoning, will, which is attributed to the First Agent and to man, is
predicated in an equivocal way, like knowledge and other qualities which
exist in the Eternal in a different way from that in which they exist in the
temporal, and it is only through the prescription of the Divine Law that we
speak of the Divine Will. It is clear that this objection cannot have anything
more than a dialectical value. For a proof that could demonstrate the
existence of such a quality, i.e. a principle determining the existence of
one thing rather than that of a similar, would have to assume things willed
that are similar; things willed are, however, not similar, but on the contrary
opposite, for all opposites can be reduced to the opposition of being and
not being, which is the extreme form of opposition; and opposition is the
contrary of similarity. The assumption of the theologians that the things to
which the will attaches itself are similar is a false one, and we shall speak
of it later. If they say: we affirm only that they are similar in relation to the
First Wilier, who in His holiness is too exalted to possess desires, and it is
through desires that two similar things are actually differentiated, we
answer: as to the desires whose realization contributes to the perfection of
the essence of the wilier, as happens with our desires, through which our
will attaches itself to the things willed-those desires are impossible in God,
for the will which acts in this way is a longing for perfection when there is
an imperfection in the essence of the wilier; but as to the desires which
belong to the essence of the things willed, nothing new comes to the wilier
from their realization. It comes exclusively to the thing willed, for instance,
when a thing passes into existence from non-existence, for it cannot be
doubted that existence is better for it than non-existence. It is in this
second way that the Primal Will is related to the existing things, for it
chooses for them eternally the better of two opposites, and this essentially
and primally. This is the first part of the objection contained in this
argument.
In the second part he no longer concedes that this quality cannot exist in
the human will, but tries to prove that there is also in us, in the face of

58

similar things, a will which distinguishes one from the other; of this he
gives examples. For instance, it is assumed that in front of a man there
are two dates, similar in every way, and it is supposed that he cannot take
them both at the same time. It is supposed that no special attraction need
be imagined for him in either of them, and that nevertheless he will of
necessity distinguish one of them by taking it. But this is an error. For,
when one supposes such a thing, and a wilier whom necessity prompts to
eat or to take the date, then it is by no means a matter of distinguishing
between two similar things when, in this condition, he takes one of the two
dates. It is nothing but the admission of an equivalence of two similar
things; for whichever of the two dates he may take, his aim will be attained
and his desire satisfied. His will attaches itself therefore merely to the
distinction between the fact of taking one of them and the fact of leaving
them altogether; it attaches itself by no means to the act of taking one
definite date and distinguishing this act from the act of leaving the other
(that is to say, when it is assumed that the desires for the two are equal);
he does not prefer the act of taking the one to the act of taking the other,
but he prefers the act of taking one of the two, whichever it may be, and
he gives a preference to the act of taking over the act of leaving.’ This is
self-evident. For distinguishing one from the other means giving a
preference to the one over the other, and one cannot give a
preponderance to one of two similar things in so far as it is similar to the
other-although in their existence as individuals they are not similar since
each of two individuals is different from the other by reason of a quality
exclusive to it. If, therefore, we assume that the will attaches itself to that
special character of one of them, then it can be imagined that the will
attaches to the.-one rather than the other because of the element of
difference existing in both. But then the will does not attach itself to two
similar objects, in so far as they are similar. This is, in short, the meaning
of Ghazali’s first objection. Then he gives his second objection against
those who deny the existence of a quality, distinguishing two similar
objects from one another.
Ghazali says:
The second objection is that we say: You in your system
also are unable to do without a principle differentiating
between two equals, for the world exists in virtue of a cause

59

which has produced it in its peculiar shape out of a number
of possible distinct shapes which are equivalent; why, then,
has this cause differentiated some of them? If to distinguish
two similar things is impossible, it is irrelevant whether this
concerns the act of God, natural causality, or the logical
necessity of ideas. Perhaps you will say: the universal order
of the world could not be different from what it is; if the world
were smaller or bigger than it actually is, this order would not
be perfect, and the same may be asserted of the number of
spheres and of stars. And perhaps you will say: The big
differs from the small and the many from the few, in so far as
they are the object of the will, and therefore they are not
similar but different; but human power is too feeble to
perceive the modes of Divine Wisdom in its determination of
the measures and qualities of things; only in some of them
can His wisdom be perceived, as in the obliquity of the
ecliptic in relation to the equator, and in the wise contrivance
of the apogee and the eccentric sphere.’ In most cases,
however, the secret is not revealed, but the differences are
known, and it is not impossible that a thing should be
distinguished from another, because the order of the world
depends on it; but certainly the times are absolutely
indifferent in relation to the world’s possibility and its order,
and it cannot be claimed that, if the world were created one
moment later or earlier, this order could not be imagined;
and this indifference is known by the necessity of thought.But then we answer: Although we can employ the same
reasoning against your argument in the matter of different
times, for it might be said that God created the world at the
time most propitious for its creation, we shall not limit
ourselves to this refutation, but shall assume, according to
your own principle, a differentiation in two points about which
there can be no disagreement: (1) the difference in the
direction of spherical movement; (2) the definite place of the
poles in relation to the ecliptic in spherical movement. The
proof of the statement relating to the poles is that heaven is
a globe, moving on two poles, as on two immovable points,

60

whereas the globe of heaven is homogeneous and simple,
especially the highest sphere, the ninth, which possesses no
stars at all, and these two spheres move on two poles, the
north and the south. We now say: of all the opposite points,
which are infinite, according to you philosophers, there is no
pair one could not imagine as poles. Why then have the two
points of the north and south pole been fixed upon as poles
and as immovable; and why does the ecliptic not pass
through these two poles, so that the poles would become the
opposite points of the ecliptic? And if wisdom is shown in the
size and shape of heaven, what then distinguishes the place
of the poles from others, so that they are fixed upon to serve
as poles, to the exclusion of all the other parts and points?
And yet all the points are similar, and all parts of the globe
are equivalent. And to this there is no answer.
One might say: Perhaps the spot in which the point of the
poles is, is distinguished from other points by a special
quality, in relation to its being the place of the poles and to
its being at rest, for it does not seem to change its place or
space or position or whatever one wishes to call it; and all
the other spots of the sphere by turning change their position
in relation to the earth and the other spheres and only the
poles are at rest; perhaps this spot was more apt to be at
rest than the others. We answer: If you say so, you explain
the fact through a natural differentiation of the parts of the
first sphere; the sphere, then, ceases to be homogeneous,
and this is in contradiction with your principle, for one of the
proofs by which you prove the necessity of the globular
shape of heaven, is that its nature is simple, homogeneous,
and without differentiation, and the simplest shape is the
globe; for the quadrangle and the hexagon and other figures
demand a salience and a differentiation of the angles,’ and
this happens only when its simple nature is added to. But
although this supposition of yours is in contradiction with
your own theory, it does not break the strength of your
opponents’ argument; the question about this special quality
still holds good, namely, can those other parts accept this

61

quality or not? If the answer is in the affirmative, why then is
this quality limited to a few only of those homogeneous
parts? If the answer is negative, we reply: the other parts, in
so far as they constitute bodies, receiving the form of bodies,
are homogeneous of necessity, and there is no justification
for attributing this special quality to this spot exclusively on
account of its being a part of a body and a part of heaven,
for the other parts of heaven participate in this qualification.
Therefore its differentiation must rest on a decision by God,
or on a quality whose nature consists in differentiating
between two similars. Therefore, just as among philosophers
the theory is upheld that all times are equivalent in regard to
the creation of the world, their opponents are justified in
claiming that the parts of heaven are equivalent for the
reception of the quality through which stability in position
becomes more appropriate than a change of position. And
out of this there is no issue.
I say:
This means in brief that the philosophers must acknowledge that there is
a quality in the Creator of the world which differentiates between two
similars, for it seems that the world might have had another shape and
another quantity than it actually has, for it might have been bigger or
smaller. Those different possibilities are, therefore, equivalent in regard to
the determination of the existence of the world. On the other hand, if the
philosophers say that the world can have only one special shape, the
special quantity of its bodies and the special number of them it actually
has, and that this equivalence of possibilities can only be imagined in
relation to the times of temporal creation-since for God no moment is more
suitable than another for its creation-they may be told that it is possible to
answer this by saying that the creation of the world happened at its most
propitious moment. But we, the theologians say, want to show the
philosophers two equivalent things of which they cannot affirm that there
exists any difference between them; the first is the particular direction of
the spherical movement and the second the particular position of the
poles, relative to the spheres; for any pair whatever of opposite points,
united by a line which passes through the centre of the sphere, might

62

constitute the poles. But the differentiation of these two points, exclusive
of all other points which might just as well be the poles of this identical
sphere cannot happen except by a quality differentiating between two
similar objects. If the philosophers assert that it is not true that any other
place on the sphere might be the seat for these poles, they will be told:
such an assertion implies that the parts of the spheres are not
homogeneous and yet you have often said that the sphere is of a simple
nature and therefore has a simple form, viz. the spherical. And again, if
the philosophers affirm that there are spots on the sphere which are not
homogeneous, it will be asked how these spots came to be of a
heterogeneous nature; is it because they are a body or because they are
a celestial body? But the absence of homogeneity cannot be explained in
this way. Therefore-Ghazali says just as among philosophers the theory is
upheld that all times are equivalent in regard to the creation of the world,
the theologians are justified in claiming that the parts of heaven are
equivalent in regard to their serving as poles, and that the poles do not
seem differentiated from the other points through a special position or
through their being in an immovable place, exclusive of all other places.
This then in short is the objection; it is, however, a rhetorical one, for
many things which by demonstration can be found to be necessary seem
at first sight merely possible.’ The philosophers’ answer is that they assert
that they have proved that the world is composed of five bodies: a body
neither heavy nor light, i.e. the revolving spherical body of heaven and
four other bodies, two of which are earth, absolutely heavy, which is the
centre of the revolving spherical body, and fire, absolutely light, which is
seated in the extremity of the revolving sphere; nearest to earth is water,
which is heavy relatively to air, light relatively to earth; next to water
comes air, which is light relatively to water, heavy relatively to fire. The
reason why earth is absolutely heavy is that it is farthest away from the
circular movement, and therefore it is the fixed centre of the revolving
body; the reason why fire is absolutely light is that it is nearest to the
revolving sphere; the intermediate bodies are both heavy and light,
because they are in the middle between the two extremes, i.e. the farthest
point and the nearest. If there were not a revolving body, surely there
would be neither heavy nor light by nature, and neither high nor low by
nature, and this whether absolutely or relatively; and the bodies would not
differ by nature in the way in which, for instance, earth moves by nature to

63

its specific place and fire moves by nature to another place, and equally
so the intermediary bodies. And the world is only finite, because of the
spherical body, and this because of the essential and natural finiteness of
the spherical body, as one single plane circumscribes it.’ Rectilinear
bodies are not essentially finite, as they allow of an increase and
decrease; they are only finite because they are in the middle of a body
that admits neither increase nor decrease, and is therefore essentially
finite. And, therefore, the body circumscribing the world cannot but be
spherical, as otherwise the bodies would either have to end in other
bodies, and we should have an infinite regress, or they would end in
empty space, and the impossibility of both suppositions has been
demonstrated. He who understands this knows that every possible world
imaginable can only consist of these bodies, and that bodies have to be
either circular-and then they are neither heavy nor light-or rectilinear-and
then they are either heavy or light, i.e. either fire or earth or the
intermediate bodies; that these bodies have to be either revolving, or
surrounded by a revolving periphery, for each body either moves from,
towards, or round the centre; that by the movements of the heavenly
bodies to the right and to the left all bodies are constituted and all that is
produced from opposites is generated; and that through these movements
the individuals of these four bodies never cease being in a continual
production and corruption. Indeed, if a single one of these movements
should cease, the order and proportion of this universe would disappear,
for it is clear that this order must necessarily depend on the actual number
of these movements-for if this were smaller or greater, either the order
would be disturbed, or there would be another order-and that the number
of these movements is as it is, either through its necessity for the
existence of this sublunary world, or because it is the best .
Do not ask here for a proof for all this, but if you are interested in
science, look for its proof, where you can find it. Here, however, listen to
theories which are more convincing than those of the theologians and
which, even if they do not bring you complete proof, will give your mind an
inclination to lead you to proof through scientific speculation. You should
imagine that each heavenly sphere is a living being, in so far as it
possesses a body of a definite measure and shape and moves itself in
definite directions, not at random. Anything of this nature is necessarily a
living being; i.e. when we see a body of a definite quality and quantity

64

move itself in space, in a definite direction, not at random, through its own
power, not through an exterior cause, and move in opposite directions at
the same time, we are absolutely sure that it is a living being, and we said
only ‘not through an exterior cause’ because iron moves towards a
magnet when the magnet is brought to it from the outside-and besides,
iron moves to a magnet from any direction whatever., The heavenly
bodies, therefore, possess places which are poles by nature, and these
bodies cannot have their poles in other places, just as earthly animals
have particular organs in particular parts of their bodies for particular
actions, and cannot have them in other places, e.g. the organs of
locomotion, which are located in definite parts. The poles represent the
organs of locomotion in animals of spherical form, and the only difference
in this respect between spherical and non-spherical animals is that in the
latter these organs differ in both shape and power, whereas in the former
they only differ in power. For this reason it has been thought on first sight
that they do not differ at all, and that the poles could be in any two points
on the sphere. And just as it would be ridiculous to say that a certain
movement in a certain species of earthly animal could be in any part
whatever of its body, or in that part where it is in another species, because
this movement has been localized in each species in the place where it
conforms most to its nature, or in the only place where this animal can
perform the movement, so it stands with the differentiation in the heavenly
bodies for the place of their poles. For the heavenly bodies are not one
species and numerically many, but they form a plurality in species, like the
plurality of different individuals of animals where there is only one
individual in the species.
Exactly the same answer can be given to the question why the heavens
move in different directions: that, because they are animals, they must
move in definite directions, like right and left, before and behind, which are
directions determined by the movements of animals, and the only
difference between the movements of earthly animals and those of
heavenly bodies is that in the different animals these movements are
different in shape and in power, whereas in the heavenly animals they
only differ in power. And it is for this reason that Aristotle thinks that
heaven possesses the directions of right and left, before and behind, high
and low. The diversity of the heavenly bodies in the direction of their
movements rests on their diversity of species, and the fact that this

65

difference in the directions of their movements forms the specific
differentia of their species is something proper to them. Imagine the first
heaven as one identical animal whose nature obliges it-either by necessity
or because it is for the best-to move with all its parts in one movement
from east to west. The other spheres are obliged by their nature to have
the opposite movement. The direction which the body of the universe is
compelled to follow through its nature is the best one, because its body is
the best of bodies and the best among the moving bodies must also have
the best direction. All this is explained here in this tentative way, but is
proved apodictically in its proper place. This is also the manifest sense of
the Divine Words, ‘There is no changing the words of God’, and ‘There is
no altering the creation of God’. If you want to be an educated man,
proceeding by proof, you should look for the proof of this in its proper
place.
Now if you have understood all this, it will not be difficult for you to see
the faults in Ghazali’s arguments here about the equivalence of the two
opposite movements in relation to each heavenly body and to the
sublunary world. On first thoughts it might be imagined that the movement
from east to west might also belong to other spheres besides the first, and
that the first sphere might equally well move from west to east. You might
as well say that the crab could be imagined as having the same direction
of movement as man. But, as a matter of fact, such a thought will not
occur to you about men and crabs, because of their difference in shape,
whereas it might occur to you about the heavenly spheres, since they
agree in shape. He who contemplates a product of art does not perceive
its wisdom if he does not perceive the wisdom of the intention embodied in
it, and the effect intended. And if he does not understand its wisdom, he
may well imagine that this object might have any form, any quantity, any
configuration of its parts, and any composition whatever. This is the case
with the theologians in regard to the body of the heavens, but all such
opinions are superficial. He who has such beliefs about products of art
understands neither the work nor the artist, and this holds also in respect
of the works of God’s creation. Understand this principle, and do not judge
the works of God’s creation hastily and superficially-so that you may not
become one of those about whom the Qur’an says: ‘Say, shall we inform
you of those who lose most by their works, those who erred in their
endeavour after the life of this world and who think they are doing good

66

deeds?’ May God make us perspicacious and lift from us the veils of
ignorance; indeed He is the bounteous, the generous! To contemplate the
various actions of the heavenly bodies is like contemplating the kingdom
of heaven, which Abraham contemplated, according to the words of the
Qur’an: ‘Thus did we show Abraham the kingdom of heaven and of the
earth, that he should be of those who are sure.’ And let us now relate
Ghazali’s argument about the movements.
Ghazali says:
The second point in this argument concerns the special
direction of the movement of the spheres which move
partially from east to west, partially in the opposite direction,
whereas the equivalence of the directions in relation to their
cause is exactly the same as the equivalence of the times. If
it is said: If the universe revolved in only one direction, there
would never be a difference in the configuration of the stars,
and such relations of the stars as their being in trine, in
sextile, and in conjunction would, never arise, but the
universe would remain in one unique position without any
change; the difference of these relations, however, is the
principle of all production in the world-we answer: Our
argument does not concern the difference in direction of
movement; no, we concede that the highest sphere moves
from east to west and the spheres beneath it in the opposite
direction, but everything that happens in this way would
happen equally if the reverse took place, i.e. if the highest
sphere moved from west to east and the lower spheres in
the opposite direction. For all the same differences in
configuration would arise just as well. Granted that these
movements are circular and in opposite directions, both
directions are equivalent; why then is the one distinguished
from the other, which is similar to it?’ If it is said: as the two
directions are opposed and contrary, how can they be
similar?-we answer: this is like saying ‘since before and after
are opposed in the existing world, how could it be claimed
that they are equivalent?’ Still, it is asserted by you
philosophers that the equivalence of times, so far as the

67

possibility of their realization and any purpose one might
imagine in their realization is concerned, is an evident fact.
Now, we regard it as equally evident that spaces, positions,
situations, and directions are equivalent so far as concerns
their receiving movement and any purpose that might be
connected with it. If therefore the philosophers are allowed to
claim that notwithstanding this equivalence they are
different, their opponents are fully justified in claiming the
same in regard to the times.
I say:
From what I have said previously, the speciousness of this argument and
the way in which it has to be answered will not be obscure to you. All this
is the work of one who does not understand the exalted natures of the
heavenly bodies and their acts of wisdom for the sake of which they have
been created, and who compares God’s knowledge with the knowledge of
ignorant man.
Ghazali says:
If it is said: as the two directions are opposed and
contrary, how can they be similar?-we answer: this is like
saying ‘since before and after in the existing world are
opposed, how could it be claimed that they are equivalent?’
Still, it is asserted by you philosophers that the equivalence
of times so far as the possibility of their realization, and any
purpose one might imagine in their realization is concerned,
is an evident fact. Now, we regard it as equally evident that
spaces, positions, situations, and directions are equivalent
so far as concerns their receiving the movement and any
purpose that might be connected with it.
I say:
The falsehood of this is self-evident. Even if one should admit that the
possibilities of man’s existence and non-existence are equivalent in the
matter out of which he has been created, and that this is a proof for the
existence of a determining principle which prefers his existence to his nonexistence, still it cannot be imagined that the possibilities of seeing and not

68

seeing are equivalent in the eye. Thus no one can claim that the opposite
directions are equivalent, although he may claim that the substratum for
both is indifferent, and that therefore out of both directions similar actions
result. And the same holds good for before and after: they are not
equivalent, in so far as this event is earlier and that event later; they can
only be claimed to be equivalent so far as their possibility of existence is
concerned. But the whole assumption is wrong: for essential opposites
also need essentially opposite substrata and a unique substratum giving
rise to opposite acts at one and the same time is an impossibility. The
philosophers do not believe that the possibilities of a thing’s existence and
of its non-existence are equivalent at one and the same time; no, the time
of the possibility of its existence is different from the time of the possibility
of its non-existence, time for them is the condition for the production of
what is produced, and for the corruption of what perishes. If the time for
the possibility of the existence of a thing and the time for the possibility of
its non-existence were the same, that is to say in its proximate matter, its
existence would be vitiated, because of the possibility of its non-existence,
and the possibility of its existence and of its non-existence would be
dependent only on the agent, not on the substratum.
Thus he who tries to prove the existence of an agent in this way gives
only persuasive, dialectical arguments, not apodictic proof. It is believed
that Farabi and Avicenna followed this line to establish that every act must
have an agent, but it is not a proof of the ancient philosophers, and both of
them merely took it over from the theologians of our religion. In relation,
however, to the temporal creation of the world-for him who believes in itbefore and after cannot even be imagined, for before and after in time can
only be imagined in relation to the present moment, and as, according to
the theologians, there was before the creation of the world no time, how
could there be imagined something preceding the moment when the world
was created? A definite moment cannot be assigned for the creation of the
world, for either time did not exist before it, or there was an infinite time,
and in neither case could a definite time be fixed to which the Divine could
attach itself. Therefore it would be more suitable to call this book
‘Incoherence’ without qualification rather than ‘The Incoherence of the
Philosophers’, for the only profit it gives the reader is to make him
incoherent.

69

Ghazali says:
If, therefore, the philosophers are allowed to claim that,
notwithstanding this equivalence, they are different, their
opponents are fully justified in claiming the same in regard to
times.
I say:
He wants to say: If the philosophers are justified in claiming a difference
in the direction of movement, the theologians have the right to assert a
difference in times, notwithstanding their belief in their equivalence. This is
only a verbal argument, and does not refer to the facts themselves, even if
one admits an analogy between the opposite directions and the different
times, but this is often objected to, because there is no analogy between
this difference in times and directions. Our adversary, however, is forced
to admit that there is an analogy between them, because they are both
claimed to be different, and both to be equivalent! These, therefore, are
one and all only dialectical arguments.
Ghazali says:
The second objection against the basis of their argument
is that the philosophers are told: ‘You regard the creation of
a temporal being by an eternal as impossible, but you have
to acknowledge it too, for there are new events happening in
the world and they have causes. It is absurd to think that
these events lead to other events ad infinitum, and no
intelligent person can believe such a thing. If such a thing
were possible, you need not acknowledge a creator and
establish a necessary being on whom possible existences
depend. If, however, there is a limit for those events in which
their sequence ends, this limit will be the eternal and then
indubitably you too acknowledge the principle that a
temporal can proceed from an eternal being.’
I say:
If the philosophers had introduced the eternal being into reality from the
side of the temporal by this kind of argument, i.e. if they had admitted that
the temporal, in so far as temporal, proceeds from an eternal being, there

70

would be no possibility of their avoiding the difficulty in this problem. But
you must understand that the philosophers permit the existence of a
temporal which comes out of a temporal being ad infinitum in an
accidental way, when this is repeated in a limited and finite matter-when,
for instance, the corruption of one of two things becomes the necessary
condition for the existence of the other. For instance, according to the
philosophers it is necessary that man should be produced from man on
condition that the anterior man perishes so as to become the matter for
the production of a third. For instance, we must imagine two men of whom
the first produces the second from the matter of a man who perishes;
when the second becomes a man himself, the first perishes, then the
second man produces a third man out of the matter of the first, and then
the second perishes and the third produces out of his matter a fourth, and
so we can imagine in two matters an activity continuing ad infinitum,
without any impossibility arising. And this happens as long as the agent
lasts, for if this agent has neither beginning nor end for his existence, the
activity has neither beginning nor end for its existence, as it has been
explained before. And in the same way you may imagine this happening in
them in the past: When a man exists, there must before him have been a
man who produced him and a man who perished, and before this second
man a man who produced him and a man who perished, for everything
that is produced in this way is, when it depends on an eternal agent, of a
circular nature in which no actual totality can be reached. If, on the other
hand, a man were produced from another man out of infinite matters, or
there were an infinite addition of them, there would be an impossibility, for
then there could arise an infinite matter and there could be an infinite
whole. For if a finite whole existed to which things were added ad infinitum
without any corruption taking place in it, an infinite whole could come into
existence, as Aristotle proved in his Physics. For this reason the ancients
introduce an eternal absolutely unchanging being, having in mind not
temporal beings, proceeding from him in so far as they are temporal, but
beings proceeding from him as being eternal generically, and they hold
that this infinite series is the necessary consequence of an eternal agent,
for the temporal needs for its own existence only a temporal cause. Now
there are two reasons why the ancients introduce the existence of an
eternal numerically unique being which does not suffer any change. The
first is that they discovered that this revolving being is eternal, for they

71

discovered that the present individual is produced through the corruption
of its predecessor and that the corruption of this previous individual
implies the production of the one that follows it, and that it is necessary
that this everlasting change should proceed from an eternal mover and an
eternal moved body, which does not change in its substance, but which
changes only in place so far as concerns its parts, and approaches certain
of the transitory things and recedes from certain of them, and this is the
cause of the corruption of one half of them and the production of the other
half. And this heavenly body is the being that changes in place only, not in
any of the other kinds of change, and is through its temporal activities the
cause of all things temporal; and because of the continuity of its activities
which have neither beginning nor end, it proceeds from a cause which has
neither beginning nor end. The second reason why they introduce an
eternal being absolutely without body and matter is that they found that all
the kinds of movement depend on spatial movement, and that spatial
movement depends on a being moved essentially by a prime mover,
absolutely unmoved, both essentially and accidentally, for otherwise there
would exist at the same time an infinite number of moved movers, and this
is impossible. And it is necessary that this first mover should be eternal, or
else it would not be the first. Every movement, therefore, depends on this
mover and its setting in motion essentially, not accidentally. And this
mover exists simultaneously with each thing moved, at the time of its
motion, for a mover existing before the thing moved-such as a man
producing a man-sets only in motion accidentally, not essentially; but the
mover who is the condition of man’s existence from the beginning of his
production till its end, or rather from the beginning of his existence till its
end, is the prime mover. And likewise his existence is the condition for the
existence of all beings and the preservation- of heaven and earth and all
that is between them. All this is not proved here apodictically, but only in
the way we follow here and which is in any case more plausible for an
impartial reader than the arguments of our opponents.
If this is clear to you, you certainly are in no need of the subterfuge by
which Ghazali in his argument against the philosophers tries to conciliate
them with their adversaries in this matter; indeed these artifices will not do,
for if you have not understood how the philosophers introduce an eternal
being into reality, you have not understood how they settle the difficulty of
the rise of the temporal out of the eternal; they do that, as we said, either

72

through the medium of a being eternal in its essence but generable and
corruptible in its particular movements, not, however, in its universal
circular movement, or through the medium of what is generically eternali.e. has neither beginning nor end-in its acts.
Ghazali answers in the name of the philosophers:
The philosophers may say, ‘we do not consider it
impossible that any temporal being, whatever it may be,
should proceed from an eternal being, but we regard it as
impossible that the first temporal should proceed from the
eternal, as the mode of its procession does not differ from
that which precedes it, either in a greater inclination towards
existence or through the presence of some particular time, or
through an instrument, condition, nature, accident, or any
cause whatever which might produce a new mode. If this
therefore is not the first temporal, it will be possible that it
should proceed from the eternal, when another thing
proceeds from it, because of the disposition of the receiving
substratum, or because the time was propitious or for any
other reason.
Having given this reply on the part of the philosophers, Ghazali answers
it:
This question about the actualization of the disposition,
whether of the time and of any new condition which arises in
it, still holds good, and we must either come to an infinite
regress or arrive at an eternal being out of which a first
temporal being proceeds.
I say:
This question is the same question all over again as he asked the
philosophers first,’ and this is the same kind of conclusion as he made
them draw then, namely that a temporal proceeds from an eternal, and
having given as their answer something which does not correspond with
the question, i.e. that it is possible that a temporal being should proceed
from the Eternal without there being a first temporal being, he turns the
same question against them again. The correct answer to this question

73

was given above: the temporal proceeds from the First Eternal, not in so
far as it is temporal but in so far as it is eternal, i.e. through being eternal
generically, though temporal in its parts. For according to the philosophers
an eternal being out of which a temporal being proceeds essentially’ is not
the First Eternal, but its acts, according to them, depend on the First
Eternal; i.e. the actualization of the condition for activity of the eternal,
which is not the First Eternal, depends on the First Eternal in the same
way as the temporal products depend on the First Eternal and this is a
dependence based on the universal, not on individuals.
After this Ghazali introduces an answer of the philosophers, in one of the
forms in which this theory can be represented, which amounts to this: A
temporal being proceeding from an eternal can only be represented by
means of a circular movement which resembles the eternal by not having
beginning or end and which resembles the temporal in so far as each part
of it is transient, so that this movement through the generation of its parts
is the principle of temporal things, and through the eternity of its totality the
activity of the eternal.
Then Ghazali argues against this view, according to which in the opinion
of the philosophers the temporal proceeds from the First Eternal, and says
to them:
Is this circular movement temporal or eternal? If it is
eternal, how does it become the principle for temporal
things? And if it is temporal, it will need another temporal
being and we shall have an infinite regress. And when you
say that it partially resembles the eternal, partially the
temporal, for it resembles the eternal in so far as it is
permanent and the temporal in so far as it arises anew, we
answer: Is it the principle of temporal things, because of its
permanence, or because of its arising anew? In the former
case, how can a temporal proceed from something because
of its permanence? And in the latter case, what arises anew
will need a cause for its arising anew, and we have an
infinite regress.
I say:

74

This argument is sophistical. The temporal does not proceed from it in
so far as it is eternal, but in so far as it is temporal; it does not need,
however, for its arising anew a cause arising anew, for its arising anew is
not a new fact, but is an eternal act, i.e. an act without
o beginning or end. Therefore its agent must be an eternal agent, for an
eternal act has an eternal agent, and a temporal act a temporal agent.
Only through the eternal element in it can it be understood that
movement has neither beginning nor end, and this is meant by its
permanence, for movement itself is not permanent, but changing.
And since Ghazali knew this, he said:
In order to elude this consequence the philosophers have
a kind of artifice which we will expose briefly.

Ghazali says:

THE SECOND PROOF OF THE PHILOSOPHERS
CONCERNING THIS PROBLEM
They assert that he who affirms that the world is posterior
to God and God prior to the world cannot mean anything but
that He is prior not temporally but essentially like the natural
priority of one to two, although they can exist together in
temporal existence, or like the priority of cause to effect, for
instance the priority of the movement of a man to the
movement of his shadow which follows him, or the
movement of the hand to the movement of the ring, or the
movement of the hand in the water to the movement of the
water, for all these things are simultaneous, but the one is
cause, the other effect, for it is said that the shadow moves
through the movement of the man and the water through the
hand in the water, and the reverse is not said although they
are simultaneous. If this is what you mean by saying that
God is prior to the world, then it follows that they must both
either be temporal or eternal, for it is absurd that the one

75

should be temporal and the other eternal. If it is meant that
God is prior to the world and to time, not essentially, but
temporally, then there was, before the existence of the world
and of time, a time in which the world was non-existent,
since non-existence preceded the world and God preceded it
during a long duration which had a final term but no initial
one, and then there was before time an infinite time, which is
self-contradictory. Therefore the assertion that time had a
beginning is absurd. And if time-which is the expression of
the measure of movement -is eternal, movement must be
eternal. And the necessity of the eternity of movement
implies the necessity of the eternity of the thing in motion,
through the duration of which time endures.

I say:
The mode of their reasoning which he reproduces does not constitute a
proof. It amounts to saying that the Creator, if He is prior to the world,
must either be prior not in time, but in causation, like the priority of a man
to his shadow, or prior in time, like a builder to a wall. If He is prior in the
same way as the man is prior to his shadow, and if the Creator is eternal,
then the world too is eternal. But if He is prior in time, then He must
precede the world by a time which has no beginning, and time will be
eternal, for if there is a time before the actual, its starting-point cannot be
imagined. And if time is eternal, movement too is eternal, for time cannot
be understood without motion. And if motion is eternal, the thing in motion
will be eternal, and its mover will necessarily be eternal too. But this proof
is unsound, for it is not of the nature of the Creator to be in time, whereas
it belongs to the nature of the world to be so; and for this very reason it is
not true that He is either simultaneous with it or prior to it in time or in
causation.
Ghazali says
The objection to this is: Time is generated and created,
and before it there was no time at all. The meaning of our
words that God is prior to the world and to time is: He
existed without the world and without time, then He existed

76

and with Him there was the world and there was time. And
the meaning of our words that He existed without the world
is: the existence of the essence of the Creator and the nonexistence of the essence of the world, and nothing else. And
the meaning of our words that He existed and with Him there
was the world is: the existence of the two essences, and
nothing else. And the meaning of priority: the uniqueness of
His existence, and nothing else. And the world is like a
singular person; if we should say, for instance: God existed
without Jesus, then He existed with Jesus-these words
contain nothing but, first, the existence of an essence and
the non-existence of an essence, then, the existence of two
essences, and there is no need to assume here a third
essence, namely time, although imagination cannot desist
from assuming it. But we should not heed the errors of the
imagination.

I say:
These words are erroneous and mistaken, for we have already proved
that there are two kinds of existence: one in the nature of which there is
motion and which cannot be separated from time; the other in the nature
of which there is no motion and which is eternal and cannot be described
in terms of time. The first is known by the senses and by reason; the
existence of the second-in the nature of which there is neither motion nor
change-is known by proof to everyone who acknowledges that each
motion needs a mover and each effect a cause, and that the causes which
move each other do not regress infinitely, but end in a first cause which is
absolutely unmoved. And it has also been established that the entity in the
nature of which there is no movement is the cause of the entity in the
nature of which there is movement. And it has been proved also that the
entity in the nature of which there is motion cannot be separated from
time, and that the entity in the nature of which there is no movement is
entirely free from time. Therefore the priority of the one entity over the
other is based neither on a priority in time, nor on the priority of that kind of
cause and effect, which belongs to the nature of things in motion, like the
priority of a man to his shadow. For this reason anyone who compares the

77

priority of the unmoved being to the thing in motion to the priority existing
between two things in motion is in error; since it is only true of each one in
pairs of moving things that, when it is brought in relation to the other, it is
either simultaneous with it or prior or posterior in time to it. It is the later
philosophers of Islam who made this mistake, since they enjoyed but
slight comprehension of the doctrine of the ancients. So the priority of this
one being to the other is the priority of the unchanging timeless existence
to the changing existence which is in time, and this is an altogether
different type of priority. It is therefore not true of these existences that
they are simultaneous, or that the one precedes the other, and Ghazali’s
observation that the priority of the Creator to the world is not a temporal
priority is true. But the posteriority of the world to the Creator, since He
does not precede the world in time, can only be understood as the
posteriority of effect to cause,’ for posteriority and priority are opposites
which are necessarily in one genus, as has been shown in the sciences.’
Since therefore this priority is not in time, the posteriority also cannot be in
time, and we have the same difficulty all over again: how can the effect be
delayed after the cause when the conditions of acting are fulfilled? The
philosophers, however, since they do not recognize a beginning in the
totality of this existence in moti/n, are not touched by this difficulty, and it is
possible for them to indicate in what way the temporal beings proceed
from the eternal. One of their proofs that existence in motion has no
beginning, and that in its totality it does not start, is that, when it is
assumed to start, it is assumed to exist before its existence, for to start is
a movement, and movement is of necessity in the thing in motion, equally
whether the movement is regarded as taking place in time or at an
instants Another proof is that everything that becomes has the potentiality
of becoming before it actually becomes, although the theologians deny
this (a discussion with them on this point will follow); now potentiality is a
necessary attribute of being in motion, and it follows necessarily that, if it
were assumed to become, it would exist before its existence. What we
have here are only dialectical arguments; they have, however, a much
greater plausibility than what the theologians advance.
As for Ghazali’s words:

78

If we should say, for instance, that God existed without
Jesus, and then He existed with Jesus, these words contain
nothing but, first, the existence of an essence and the nonexistence of an essence, then, the existence of two
essences, and there is no need to assume here a third
essence, namely time.
I say:
This is true, provided that Jesus’ posteriority is not regarded as an
essential temporal posteriority, but, if there is a posteriority, it is an
accidental posteriority, for time precedes this posterior entity, i.e. it is a
necessity of Jesus’ existence that time should precede Him and that His
existence should have begun, but the world is not subject to such a
necessity, except in so far as it is a part of a moving existence beyond
which time extends in two directions,’ as happens to Jesus and other
transitory individuals.z Nothing of this is proved here; here it is simply
explained that the objection is not valid. In addition, what he says
afterwards of the proofs of the philosophers is untrue.
Answering in the name of the philosophers, Ghazali says:
One might say that our expression ‘God existed without
the world’ means a third thing, besides the existence of one
being and the non-existence of another, because, if we
should suppose that in the future God should exist without
the world, there would be in the future the existence of one
being and the non-existence of another, still it would not be
right to say ‘God existed without the world’, but we should
say ‘God will exist without the world’, for only of the past do
we say ‘God existed without the world’; and between the
words ‘existed’ and ‘will exist’ there is a difference, for they
cannot replace each other. And if we try to find out where the
difference between the two sentences lies, it certainly does
not lie in the words ‘existence of one being’ and ‘nonexistence of another being’, but in a third entity, for if we say
of the non-existence of the world in the future ‘God was
without the world’, it will be objected: this is wrong, for ‘was’
refers only to the past. This shows therefore that the word

79

‘was’ comprises a third entity, namely the past, and the past
by itself is time, and through another existent it is movement,
for movement passes only through the passing of time. And
so it follows necessarily that, before the world, a time
finished which terminated in the existence of the world.
I say:
In this in brief he shows that when it is said ‘such-and-such was without
such-and-such’ and then ‘such-and-such was with such-and-such’ a third
entity is understood, namely time. The word ‘was’ shows this, because of
the difference in the meaning of this concept in the past and in the future,
for if we assume the existence of one thing with the non-existence of
another in the past, we say ‘such a thing existed without such a thing’, but
when we assume the non-existence of the one with the existence of the
other in the future, we say ‘such a thing will exist without such a thing’, and
the change in meaning implies that there is here a third entity. If in our
expression ‘such-and-such existed without such-and-such’ the word
‘existed’ did not signify an entity, the word ‘existed’ would not differ from
‘will exist’. All this is self-evident, but it is only unquestionable in relation to
the priority and posteriority of things which are by nature in time.
Concerning the timeless the word ‘was’ and the like indicate in such a
proposition nothing but the copula between predicate and subject, when
we say, for example, ‘God was indulgent and compassionate’;’ and the
same holds when either predicate or subject is timeless, e.g. when we say
‘God was without the world, then God was with the world’. Therefore for
such existents the time-relation to which he refers does not hold. This
relation is, however, unquestionably real when we compare the nonexistence of the world with its existence, for if the world is in time, the nonexistence of the world as to be in time too. And since the non-existence
and the existence of the world cannot be in one and the same time, the
non-existence must precede; the non-existence must be prior and the
world posterior to it, for priority and posteriority in the moving can only be
understood in this relation to time. The only flaw in this argument is to
assume this relation between God and the world. Only in this point is the
argument which Ghazali relates faulty and does it fail to constitute a proof.
Then Ghazali gives the theologians’ objection to this argument of the
philosophers:’

80

The primitive meaning of the two words is the existence
of one thing and the non-existence of another. The third
element which is the connexion between the two words is a
necessary relation to us. The proof is that, if we should
suppose a destruction of the world in the future and
afterwards a second existence for us, we should then say
‘God was without the world’, and this would be true, whether
we meant its original non-existence or the second nonexistence, its destruction after its existence. And a sign that
this is a subjective relation is that the future can become
past and can be indicated by the word ‘past’.’ All this is the
consequence of the inability of our imagination to imagine
the beginning of a thing without something preceding it, and
this ‘before’ of which the imagination cannot rid itself is
regarded as a really existing thing, namely time. This
resembles the inability of the imagination to admit a limited
body, e.g. overhead, without anything beyond its surface, so
that it is imagined that behind the world there is a space
either occupied or empty; and when it is said there is above
the surface of the world no beyond and no farther extension,
this is beyond the grasp of the imagination. Likewise, when it
is said that there is no real anterior to the existence of the
world, the imagination refuses to believe it. But the
imagination may be called false in allowing above the world
an empty space which is an infinite extension by our saying
to it: empty space cannot be understood by itself, for
extension is the necessary attribute of a body whose sides
comprise space;’ a finite body implies the finiteness of
extension, which is its attribute and the limitation of occupied
space; empty space is unintelligible, therefore there is
neither empty nor occupied space behind the world,
although the imagination cannot admit this. And in the same
way as it is said that spatial extension is an attribute of body,
temporal extension is an attribute of motion, for time is the
extension of movement just as the space between the sides
of a body is the extension of space. And just as the proof
that the sides of a body are finite prevents the admission of a

81

spatial extension behind the world, so the proof of the finite
character of movement in both directions prevents the
supposition of a temporal extension behind the world,
although the imagination, subject to its illusion and
supposition, admits it and does not hold back from it. There
is no difference between temporal extension, which is
apprehended as divided through the relation of before and
after, and spatial extension, which is apprehended as
divided through the relation of high and low. If it is therefore
permissible to admit a highest point above which there is
nothing, it is equally permissible to admit a beginning, not
preceded by anything real, except through an illusion similar
to that which permits a beyond for the highest space. This is
a legitimate consequence; notice it carefully, as the
philosophers themselves agreed that behind the world there
is neither empty nor occupied space.
I say:
There are two parts to this objection; the first is that, when we imagine
the past and the future, i.e. the prior and the posterior, they are two things
existing in relation to our imagination, because we can imagine a future
event as becoming past and a past event as having been future. But if this
is so, past and future are not real things in themselves and do not possess
existence outside the soul; they are only constructs of the soul. And when
movement is annihilated, the relation and measure of time will not have
sense any more.
The answer is that the necessary connexion of movement and time is
real and time is something the soul constructs in movement, but neither
movement nor time is annihilated: they are only abolished in those things
which are not subject to motion, but in the existence of moving things or in
their possible existence time inheres necessarily. For there are only two
kinds of being, those that are subject to motion and those that are not, and
the one kind cannot be converted into the other, for otherwise a
conversion of the necessary into the possible would become possible. For
if movement were impossible and then afterwards occurred, the nature of
things which arc not subject to motion would have changed into the nature
of things subject to motion, and this is impossible. This is a consequence

82

of the fact that motion inheres necessarily in a substratum. If movement
were possible before the existence of the world, the things which are
subject to movement would be necessarily in time, for movement is only
possible in what is subject to rest,’ not in absolute non-existence, for in
absolute non-existence there is no possibility whatever, or one would have
to admit that absolute non-existence could be converted into existence.
Therefore, the non-existence or privation which necessarily precedes the
occurrence of a thing has to be connected with a substratum, and will be
disconnected from it when the substratum actually receives this
occurrence, as happens with all contraries. For instance, when a warm
thing becomes cold, the essence of warmth does not change into
coldness; it is only the receptacle and the substratum of warmth that
exchange their warmth for coldness.
The second part of this objection-and it is the most important of these
objections-is sophistical and malicious. It amounts to saying that to
imagine something before the beginning of this first movement (which is
not preceded by any moving body) is like the illusion that the end of the
world, for example, its highest part, ends necessarily either in another
body or in empty space, for extension is a necessary attribute of body, as
time is a necessary attribute of movement. And if it is impossible that there
should be an infinite body, it is impossible that there should be an infinite
extension, and, if it is impossible that there should be infinite extension, it
is impossible that every body should end in another body or in something
which has the potentiality of extension, i.e. for instance, emptiness, and
that this should continue without end. And the same applies to movement
which has time as a necessary attribute, for if it is impossible that there
should be infinite past movements and there exists therefore a first
movement with a finite initial term, it is impossible that there should exist a
‘before’ before it, for, if so, there would be another movement before the
first.
This objection is, as we said, malicious, and belongs to the class of
sophistical substitutions-you will recognize what I mean if you have read
the book On sophistic refutations. In other words, Ghazali treats the
quantity which has no position and does not form a totality, i.e. time and
motion, as the quantity which possesses position and totality, i.e. body. He
makes the impossibility of endlessness in the latter a proof of its

83

impossibility in the former, and he deals with the act of the soul when it
imagines an increase in the one quantity which is assumed to be actual,
i.e. body, as if it concerned both quantities. This is a manifest error. For to
imagine an increase in actual spatial magnitude, so that it must end in
another actual spatial magnitude, is to imagine something which does not
exist in the essence and definition of spatial magnitude, but to imagine
priority and posteriority in a movement that occurs is to imagine something
that belongs to its essence. For a movement can only occur in time, i.e.
time has to pass beyond its beginning. For this reason one cannot
represent a time the initial term of which is not the final term of another
time, for the definition of ‘the instant’ is that it is the end of the past and the
beginning of the future,’ for the instant is the present which necessarily is
the middle between the past and the future, and to represent a present
which is not preceded by a past is absurd. This, however, does not apply
to the point, for the point is the end of the line and exists at the same time
as the line, for the line is at rest. Therefore one can imagine a point which
is the beginning of a line without its being the end of another line, but the
instant cannot exist without the past and tile future, and exists necessarily
after the past and before the future, and what cannot subsist in itself
cannot exist before the existence of the future without being the end of tile
past. The cause of this error is the comparison of the instant with the
point. The proof that each movement which occurs is preceded by time is
this: everything must come to exist out of a privation, and nothing can
become in the instant-of which it can be truly said that its becoming is a
vanishing-and so it must be true that its privation must be in another
moment than that in which it itself exists, and there is time between each
pair of instants, because instant is not continuous with instant, nor point
continuous with point. This has been proved in the sciences. Therefore
before the instant in which the movement occurs there must necessarily
be a time, because, when we represent two instants in reality, there must
necessarily be time between them.
And what is said in this objection that ‘higher’ resembles ‘before’ is not
true, nor does the instant resemble the point, nor the quantity which
possesses position the quantity which does not possess position.’ He who
allows the existence of an instant which is not a present, or of a present
which is not preceded by a past, denies time and the instant, for he
assumes an instant as having the description which we have mentioned,

84

and then assumes a time which has no beginning-which is a selfcontradictory assumption. It is, therefore, wrong to ascribe to an act of
imagination the fact that there is a prior event for every occurrence, for he
who denies priority denies the event in time. The contrary is the case with
the man who denies the real character of the high, for he denies the
absolutely high and, when he denies the absolutely high, he denies also
the absolutely low,’ and when these two are denied, also the heavy and
the light are denied’, and the act of the imagination that a body with
straight dimensions must end in another body is not false; no, this is a
necessary truth, for the body with straight dimensions has the possibility of
increasing, and what has this possibility is not limited by nature. Therefore
the body with straight surfaces must end in the circumscribing circular
body, since this is the perfect body which is liable neither to increase nor
to decrease. Therefore when the mind seeks to imagine that the circular
body must end in another body, it imagines the impossible. These are all
matters of which the theologians and those who do not start their inquiry in
the proper scientific order are unaware.
Further, the relation between time and motion is not the same as that
between spatial limit and spatial magnitude, for the spatial limit is an
attribute of spatial magnitude, in so far as it inheres in it, in the way that
the accident inheres in its substratum and is individualized by the
individuality of its substratum and is indicated by pointing at its substratum
and by its being in the place in which its substratum is. But this is not the
case with the necessary relation between time and motion. For the
dependence of time on motion is much like the dependence of number on
the thing numbered: just as number does not become individualized
through tire individuation of the thing numbered, nor pluralized through its
plurality, so it stands with the relation between time and movement. Time,
therefore, is unique for all movement and for each thing moving, and
exists everywhere, so that if we should suppose people confined from
youth in a cave in the earth, still we should be sure that they would
perceive time, even if they did not perceive any of the movements which
are perceived in the world. Aristotle therefore thought that the existence of
movements in time is much like the existence of the things numbered in
numbers for number is not pluralized through the plurality of the things
numbered, nor is it localized through the individuation of the places
numbered. He thought, therefore, that its specific quality was to mesaure

85

the movements and to measure the existence of moving things, in so far
as they are moving, as number counts the individual moving things, and
therefore Aristotle says in his definition of time that it is the number of
movement according to the relations of anterior and posterior.’ Therefore,
just as the supposition that a thing numbered occurs does not imply that
number comes into existence, but it is a necessary condition for the
occurrence of a thing numbered that number should exist before it, so the
occurrence of movement implies that there was time before it. If time
occurred with the occurrence of any individual movement whatever, time
would only be perceived with that individual movement. This will make you
understand how different the nature of time is from the nature of spatial
magnitude.
Ghazali answers on behalf of the philosophers:
It may be said: This comparisons is lame, for there is
neither above nor below in the world; for the world is
spherical, and in the sphere there is neither above nor
below; if the one direction is called above, because it is
overhead, and the other below, because it is under foot, this
name is always determined in relation to you, and the
direction which is below in relation to you is above in relation
to another, if you imagine him standing on the other side of
the terrestrial globe with the sole of his foot opposite the sole
of your foot. Yes, these parts of heaven which you reckon
above during the day are identical with what is below during
the night, and what is below the earth comes again above
the earth through the daily revolution. But it cannot be
imagined that the beginning of the world becomes its end. If
we imagined a stick with one thick and one thin end and we
agreed to call the part nearest the thin end ‘above’ and the
other ‘below’, there would not arise from this an essential
differentiation in the parts of the world; it would simply be
that different names would have been applied to the shape
of the stick, so that if we substituted the one name for the
other, there would be an exchange of names, but the world
itself would remain unchanged. So ‘above’ and ‘below’ are a
mere relation to you without any differentiation in the parts

86

and places of the world. The non-existence, however,
preceding the world and the initial term of its existence are
essential realities, a substitution or a change of which cannot
be imagined. Nor can it be imagined that the non-existence
which is supposed to occur at the disappearance of the
world and which follows the world can become the nonexistence preceding it. The initial and final terms of the
world’s existence are permanent essential terms, in which no
change can be imagined through the change of the
subjective relation to them, in contrast with ‘above’ and
‘below’. Therefore we philosophers, indeed, are justified in
saying that in the world there is neither ‘above’ nor ‘below’,
but you theologians have not the right to assert that the
existence of the world has neither a ‘before’ nor an ‘after’.
And when the existence of ‘before’ and ‘after’ is proved,
time cannot mean anything but what is apprehended through
the anterior and the posterior.
I say:
This answer given in the name of the philosophers is extremely
unsound. It amounts to saying that ‘above’ and ‘below’ are relative to us
and that therefore imagination can treat them as an infinite sequence, but
that the sequence of ‘before’ and ‘after’ does not rest on imagination-for
there is here no subjective relation-but is a ~ purely rational concept. This
means that the order of above and below in a thing may be reversed in
imagination, but that the privation before an event and the privation after
an event, its before and its after, are not interchangeable for imagination.
But by giving this answer the problem is not solved, for the philosophers
think that i there exists a natural above; to which light things move and a
natural below to which heavy things move, or else the heavy and the light
would be relative and exist by convention, and they hold that in
imagination the limit of a body, having by nature its place above, may end
either in occupied or in empty space. And this argument is in- valid as a
justification of the philosophers for two reasons. First, that the
philosophers assume an absolute above and an absolute below, but no
absolute beginning and no absolute end; secondly that their opponents
may object that it is not the fact of their being relative that causes the

87

imagination to regard the sequence of low and high as an infinite series,
but that this happens to the imagination because it observes that every
spatial magnitude is continuous with another spatial magnitude, just as
any event is preceded by another event. n Therefore Ghazali transfers the
question from the words ‘above’ and ‘below’ to ‘inside’ and ‘outside’s and
he says in his answer to the philosophers:
There is no real difference in the words ‘above’ and
‘below’, and therefore there is no sense in defining them, but
we will apply ourselves rather to the words ‘inside’ and
‘outside’. We say: The world has an inside and an outside;
and we ask: Is there outside the world an occupied or empty
space? The philosophers will answer: There is outside the
world neither occupied nor empty space, and if you mean by
‘outside’ its extreme surface, then there is an outside, but if
you mean anything else, there is no outside. Therefore if
they ask us theologians if there is anything before the
existence of the world, we say: If you mean by it the
beginning, i.e. its initial term, then there is a before, just as
there is an outside to the world according to your explanation
that that is its ultimate limit and its final plane, but if you
mean anything else, then there is not, in analogy with your
answer.
If you say: A beginning of existence, without anything
preceding it, cannot be understood, we say: A limit of a body
existing without anything outside it cannot be understood.’ If
you say: Its exterior is its furthest plane and nothing else, we
say: Its before is the beginning of its existence, nothing else.
The conclusion is that we say: We affirm that God has an
existence without the world’s existing, and this assumption
again does not force us to accept anything else. That to
assume more rests on the act of imagination is proved by
the fact that imagination acts in the same way in regard to
time as in regard to place, for although our opponents
believe in the eternity of the world, their imagination is willing
to suppose it created; whereas we, who believe in its
creation, are often allowed by our imagination to regard it as

88

eternal. So much as far as body is concerned; but to revert
to time, our opponents do not regard a time without a
beginning as possible, and yet in opposition to this belief
their imagination can represent it as a possible assumption,
although time cannot be represented by the imagination in
the way that body is represented, for neither the champion
nor the opponent of the finitude of body can imagine a body
not surrounded by empty or occupied space; the imagination
simply refuses to accept it. Therefore one should say: a clear
thinker pays no attention to the imagination when he cannot
deny the finitude of body by proof, nor does he give attention
to the imagination when he cannot deny the beginning of an
existence without anything preceding it, which the
imagination cannot grasp. For the imagination, as it is only
accustomed to a body limited by another body or by air,
represents emptiness in this way, although emptiness, being
imperceptible, cannot be occupied by anything. Likewise the
imagination, being only accustomed to an event occurring
after another event, fears to suppose an event not preceded
by another event which is terminated. And this is the reason
of the error.
I say:
Through this transference, by his comparing the time-limit with the
spatial limit in his argument against the philosophers, this argument
becomes invalid and we have already shown the error through which it is
specious and the sophistical character of the argument, and we need not
repeat ourselves.
Ghazali says:
The philosophers have a second way of forcing their
opponents to admit the eternity of time. They say: You do
not doubt that God was able to create the world one year, a
hundred years, a thousand years, and so ad infinitum, before
He created it and that those possibilities are different in
magnitude and number. Therefore it is necessary to admit
before the existence of the world a measurable extension,

89

one part of which can be longer than another part, and
therefore it is necessary that something should have existed
before the existence of the world. If you say the word ‘years’
cannot be applied before the creation and revolution of
heaven, let us drop the word ‘years’ and let us give another
turn to our argument and say: If we suppose that from the
beginning of the world till now the sphere of the world has
performed, for instance, a thousand revolutions, was God
able to create a second world before it, which, for example,
would have performed eleven hundred revolutions up to
now? If you deny it, it would mean that the Eternal had
passed from impotence to power or the world from
impossibility to possibility, but if you accept it, and you
cannot but accept it, it may be asked if God was able to
create a third world which would have performed twelve
hundred revolutions up to now and you will have to admit
this. We philosophers say: Then, could the world which we
called by the order of our supposition the third, although as a
matter of fact it is the first, have been created at the same
time as the world we called the second, so that the former
would have performed twelve hundred revolutions and the
latter eleven hundred revolutions, it being understood that
both, in revolving, complete the same distance at the same
speed? If you were to admit this, you would be admitting
something absurd, for it would be absurd that in that case
the number of the two revolutions, having the same speed
and finishing at the same moment, should be different. But, if
you answer that it is impossible that the third world which
has up to now performed twelve hundred revolutions could
have been created at the same time as the second world
which has up to now performed eleven hundred revolutions,
and that on the contrary it must have been created the same
number of years earlier than the second, as the second has
been created before the first-we call it first, as it comes first
in order, when in imagination we proceed from our time to itthen there exists a quantity of possibility double that of
another possibility, and there is doubtless another possibility

90

which doubles the whole of the others. These measurable
quantitative possibilities, of which some are longer than
others by a definite measure, have no other reality than time,
and those measurable quantities are not an attribute of the
essence of God, who is too exalted to possess measure,’
nor an attribute of the non-existence of the world, for nonexistence is nothing and therefore cannot be measured with
different measures. Still, quantity is an attribute which
demands a substratum, and this is nothing other than
movement, and quantity is nothing but the time which
measures movement. Therefore also for you theologians
there existed before the world a substratum of differentiated
quantity, namely time, and according to you time existed
before the world.’
I say:
The summary of this argument is that, when we imagine a movement,
we find with it an extension which measures it, as if it were its
measurement, while reciprocally the movement measures the extension,
and we find that we can assume in this measure and this extension a
movement longer than the first supposed movement, and we affirm
through the corresponding and congruous units of this extension that the
one movement is longer than the other.’ If therefore for you theologians
the world has a certain extension from its beginning till now-let us
suppose, for instance, a thousand years and since God according to you
is able to create before this world another world, we may suppose that the
extension He can give it will be longer than the extension of the first world
by a certain definite quantity, and that He can likewise create a third world
before this second and that the existence of each of them must be
preceded by an extension through which its existence can be measured. If
this is true, and there is an infinite regress of this possibility of anterior
worlds, there is an extension which precedes all these worlds. And this
extension which measures all of them cannot be absolute nonexistence,
for non-existence cannot measure; it has, therefore, to be a quantity, for
what measures a quantity has to be quantity itself, and the measuring
quantity is that which we call time. And it is clear that this must precede in
existence anything we imagine to occur, just as the measure must

91

precede the measured in existence. If this extension which is time were to
occur at the occurrence of the first movement, then it would have to be
preceded by an extension which could measure it, in which it could occur,
and which could be like its measurement. And in the same way any world
which could be imagined would have to be preceded by an extension
which measures it. Therefore this extension has no beginning, for if it had
a beginning it would have to have an extension which measured it, for
each event which begins has an extension which measures it and which
we call time.
This is the most suitable exposition of this argument, and this is the
method by which Avicenna proves infinite time, but there is a difficulty in
understanding it, because of the problem that each possible has one
extension and each extension is connected with its own possible and this
forms a point of discussion;’ or one must concede that the possibilities
prior to the world are of the same nature as the possible inside the world,
i.e. as it is of the nature of this possible inside the world that time inheres
in it, so also with the possible which is prior to the world. This is clear
concerning the possible inside the world, and therefore the existence of
time may be imagined from it.
Ghazali says:
The objection is that all this is the work of imagination,
and the most convenient way of refuting it is to compare time
with place; therefore we say: Was it not in God’s power to
create the highest sphere in its heaven a cubit higher than
He has created it? If the answer is negative, this is to deny
God’s power, and if the answer is affirmative, we ask: And
by two cubits and by three cubits and so on ad infinitum?
Now we affirm that this amounts to admitting behind the
world a spatial extension which has measure and quantity,
as a thing which is bigger by two or three cubits than another
occupies a space bigger by two or three cubits, and by
reason of this there is behind the world a quantity which
demands a substratum and this is a body or empty space.
Therefore, there is behind the world empty or occupied
space. And how can you answer this? And likewise we may
ask, whether God was not able to create the sphere of the

92

world smaller than He has created it by a cubit or two cubits?
And is there no difference between those two magnitudes in
regard to the occupied space taken away from them and the
space they still occupy, for the occupied space withdrawn is
bigger when two cubits are taken away than when one cubit
is taken away? And therefore empty space has measure.
But emptiness is nothing; how can it have measure? And our
answer is: ‘It belongs to the illusion of imagination to
suppose possibilities in time before the existence of the
world’, just as your answer is: ‘It belongs to the illusion of
imagination to suppose possibilities in space behind the
existence of the world.’ There is no difference between those
two points of view.’
I say:
This consequence is true against the theory which regards an infinite
increase in the size of the world as possible, for it follows from this theory
that a finite thing proceeds from God which is preceded by infinite
quantitative possibilities. And if this is allowed for possibility in space, it
must also be allowed in regard to the possibility in time, and we should
have a time limited in both directions, although it would be preceded by
infinite temporal possibilities. The answer is, however, that to imagine the
world to be bigger or smaller does not conform to truth but is impossible.
But the impossibility of this does not imply that to imagine the possibility of
a world before this world is to imagine an impossibility, except in case the
nature of the possible were already realized and there existed before the
existence of the world only two natures, the nature of the necessary and
the nature of the impossible? But it is evident that the judgement of reason
concerning the being of these three natures is eternal, like its judgement
concerning the necessary and the impossible.
This objection, however, does not touch the philosophers, because they
hold that the world could not be smaller or bigger than it is,
If it were possible that a spatial magnitude could infinitely increase, then
the existence of a spatial magnitude without end would be possible and a
spatial magnitude, actually infinite, would exist, and this is impossible and
Aristotle has already shown the impossibility of this.’ But against the man

93

who believes in this possibility, because the contrary would imply a denial
of God’s power, this argument is valid, for this spatial possibility is just as
much a purely rational concept as the possibility of temporal anteriority
according to the philosophers. Therefore, he who believes in the temporal
creation of the world and affirms that all body is in space, is bound to
admit that before the creation of the world there was space, either
occupied by body, in which the production of the world could occur, or
empty, for it is necessary that space should precede what is produced.’
The man who denies empty space and affirms the finiteness of body-like
certain later Ash’arites who, however, separated themselves from the
principles of the theologians; but I have not read it in their books and it
was told to me by some who studied their doctrines-cannot admit the
temporal production of the world. If the fact of this extension which
measures movement and which stands in relation to it as its measurement
were indeed the work of an illusion-like the representation of a world
bigger or smaller than it really is-time would not exist, for time is nothing
but what the mind perceives of this extension which measures movement.
And if it is self-evident that time exists, then the act of the mind must
necessarily be a veracious one, embodying reason, not one embodying
illusion.
Ghazali says:
It has been objected: we declare that what is not possible
is what cannot be done and increase or decrease in the size
of the world is impossible, and therefore could not be
brought about .
I say
This is the answer to the objection of the Ash’arites that to admit that
God could not have made the world bigger or smaller is to charge Him
with impotence, but they have thereby compromised themselves, for
impotence is not inability to do the impossible, but inability to do what can
be done.
Ghazali, opposing this, says:
This excuse is invalid for three reasons: The first is that it
is an affront to reason, for when reason regards it as

94

possible that the world might be bigger or smaller than it is
by a cubit, this is not the same as regarding it as possible to
identify black with white and existence with non-existence;
impossibility lies in affirming the negative and the positive at
the same time, and all impossibilities amount to this. This is
indeed a silly and faulty assertion.’
I say:
This statement is, as he says, an affront to reason, but only to the
reason of him who judges superficially; it is not an affront to true reason,
for a statement about its being possible or not’ requires a proof. And
therefore he is right when he declares that this is not impossible in the way
in which the assumption that black might be white is impossible, for the
impossibility of the latter is self-evident. The statement, however, that the
world could not be smaller or larger than it is is not self-evident. And
although all impossibilities can be reduced to self-evident impossibilities,
this reduction can take place in two ways. The first is that the impossibility
is self-evident; the second is that there follows sooner or later from its
supposition an impossibility of the same character as that of self-evident
impossibilities.’ For instance, if it is assumed that the world might be larger
or smaller than it is, it follows that outside it there would be occupied or
empty space. And from the supposition that there is outside it occupied or
empty space, some of the greatest impossibilities follow: from empty
space the existence of mere extension existing by itself; from occupied
space a body moving either upward or downward or in a circle which
therefore must be part of another world. Now it has been proved in the
science of physics that the existence of another world at the same time as
this is an impossibility and the most unlikely consequence would be that
the world should have empty space: for any world must needs have four
elements and a spherical body revolving round them. He who wants to
ascertain this should look up the places where its exposition is demandedthis, of course, after having fulfilled the preliminary conditions necessary
for the student to understand strict proof .
Then Ghazali mentions the second reason:
If the world is in the state it is, without the possibility of
being larger or smaller than it is, then its existence, as it is, is

95

necessary, not possible. But the necessary needs no cause.
So say, then, as the materialists do that you deny the creator
and that you deny the cause of causes! But this is not your
doctrine.
I say:
To this the answer which, Avicenna gives in accordance with his
doctrine is quite appropriate.’ According to him necessity of existence is of
two kinds: the necessary, existent by itself, and the necessary, existent
through another. But my answer on this question is still more to the point:
things necessary in this sense need not have an agent or a maker; take,
for example, a saw which is used to saw wood-it is a tool having a certain
determined quantity, quality, and matter, that is, it is not possible for it to
be of another material than iron and it could not have any other shape
than that of a saw or any other measure than the measure of a saw. Still
nobody would say that the saw has a necessity of being= See, therefore,
how crude this mistake is! If one were to take away the necessity from the
quantities, qualities, and matters of things produced by art, in the way the
Ash’arites imagine this to happen concerning the created in relation to the
creator, the wisdom which lies in the creator and the created would have
been withdrawn, any agent could be an artificer and any cause in
existence a creator. But all this is a denial of reason and wisdom.
Ghazali says:
The third reason is that this faulty argument authorizes its
opponent to oppose it by a similar one, and we may say: The
existence of the world was not possible before its existence,
for indeed possibility-according to your theory-is coextensive
with existence, neither more nor less. If you say: ‘But then
the eternal has passed from impotence to power’, we
answer:
‘No, for the existence was not possible and therefore
could not be brought about and the impossibility of a thing’s
happening that could not happen does not indicate
impotence.’ If you say: ‘How can a thing which is impossible
become possible?’ We answer: ‘But why should it be
impossible that a thing should be impossible at one moment

96

and possible at another?’ If you say: ‘The times are similar,’
the answer is: ‘But so are the measures, and why should
one measure be possible and another, bigger or smaller by
the width of a nail, impossible?’ And if the latter assumption
is not impossible, the former is not impossible either.’ And
this is the way to oppose them.
But the true answer is that their supposition of
possibilities makes no sense whatever. We concede only
that God is eternal and powerful, and that His action never
fails, even if He should wish it. And there is nothing in this
power that demands the assumption of a temporal
extension, unless imagination, confusing God’s power with
other things, connects it with time.
I say:
The summary of this is that the Ash’arites say to the philosophers: this
question whether the world could be larger or smaller is impossible
according to us; it has sense only for the man who believes in a priority of
possibility in relation to the actualization of a thing, i.e. the realization of
the possible. We, the Ash’arites, however, say: ‘Possibility occurs together
with the actuality as it is, without adding or subtracting anything.’
Now my answer is that he who denies the possibility of the possible
before its existence denies the necessary, for the possible is the contrary
of the impossible without there existing a middle term, and, if a thing is not
possible before its existence, then it is necessarily impossible.’ Now to
posit the impossible as existing is an impossible falsehood, but to posit the
possible as existing is a possible, not an impossible, falsehood.’ Their
assertion that possibility and actuality exist together is a falsehood, for
possibility and actuality are contradictory, and do not exist together in one
and the same moment. The necessary consequence for them is that
possibility exists neither at the same time as the actuality nor before it.
The true consequence for the Ash’arites in this discussion is not that the
eternal passes from impotence to power, for he who cannot do an
impossible act is not called impotent, but that a thing can pass from the
nature of the i impossible to the nature of existence, and this is like the
changing of the necessary into the possible. To posit a thing, however, as

97

impossible at one time and possible at another does not cut it off from the
nature of the possible, for this is the general character of the possible; the
existence of anything possible, for instance, is impossible at the moment
when its contrary exists in its substratum. If the opponent concedes that a
thing impossible at one time is possible at another, then he has conceded
that this thing is of the nature of the absolutely possible’ and that it has not
the nature of the impossible. If it is assumed that the world was impossible
for an infinite time before its production, the consequence is that, when it
was produced, it changed over from impossibility to possibility. This
question is not the problem with which we are concerned here, but as we
have said before, the transference from one problem to another is an act
of sophistry.
And as to his words:
But the true answer is that their supposition of
possibilities makes no sense whatever. We concede only
that God is eternal and powerful and that His action never
fails, even if He should wish it. And there is nothing in this
power that demands the assumption of a temporal
extension, unless imagination confusing God’s power with
other things connects with it time.
I say:
Even if there were nothing in this supposition-as he says-that implies
the eternity of time, there is something in it that demands that the
possibility of the occurrence of the world and equally of time should be
eternal. And this is that God never ceases to have power for action, and
that it is impossible that anything should prevent His act from being
eternally connected with His existence; and perhaps the opposite of this
statement indicates the impossibility better still, namely, that He should
have no power at one time but power at another, and that He could be
called powerful only at definite limited times, although He is ark eternal
and perpetual being. And then we have the old question again whether the
world may be either eternal or temporal, or whether the world cannot be
eternal, or whether the world cannot be temporal, or whether the world
may be temporal but certainly cannot be eternal, and whether, if the world
is temporal, it can be a first act or not. And if reason has no power to

98

pronounce for one of these opposite propositions, let us go back to
tradition, but do not then regard this question as a rational one! We say
that the First Cause cannot omit the best act and perform an inferior,
because this would be an imperfection; but can there be a greater
imperfection than to assume the act of the Eternal as finite and limited, like
the act of a temporal product, although a limited act can only be imagined
of a limited agent, not of the eternal agent whose existence and action are
unlimited? .All this, as you see, cannot be unknown to the man who has
even the slightest understanding of the rational. And how can it be thought
that the present act proceeding from the Eternal cannot be preceded by
another act, and again by another, and so in our thinking infinitely, like the
infinite continuation of His existence? For it is a necessary consequence
that the act of Him whose existence time cannot measure nor comprehend
in either direction cannot be comprehended in time nor measured by a
limited duration. For there is no being whose act is delayed after its
existence, except when there is an impediment which prevents its
existence from attaining its perfection,’ or, in voluntary beings, when there
is an obstruction in the execution of their choice. He, therefore, who
assumes that from the Eternal there proceeds only a temporal act
presumes that His act is constrained in a certain way and in this way
therefore does not depend on His choice.

THE THIRD PROOF FOR THE ETERNITY OF
THE WORLD
Ghazali says:
They insist on saying: The existence of the world is
possible before its existence, as it is absurd that it should be
impossible and then become possible; this possibility has no
beginning, it is eternally unchangeable and the existence of
the world remains eternally possible, for at no time whatever
can the existence of the world be described as impossible;
and if the possibility never ceases, the possible, in
conformity with the possibility, never ceases either; and the
meaning of the sentence, that the existence of the world is
possible, is that the existence of the world is not impossible;
and since its existence is eternally possible, it is never

99

impossible, for if it were ever impossible, it would not be true
that the existence of the world is eternally possible; and if it
were not true that the existence of the world is eternally
possible, it would not be true that its possibility never
ceases; and if it were not true that its possibility never
ceases, it would be true that its possibility had begun; and if
it were true that its possibility had begun, its existence before
this beginning would not be possible and that would lead to
the assumption of a time when the world was not possible
and God had no power over it.
I say:
He who concedes that the world before its existence was of a neverceasing possibility must admit that the world is eternal, for the assumption
that what is eternally possible is eternally existent implies no absurdity.
What can possibly exist eternally must necessarily exist eternally, for what
can receive eternity cannot become corruptible, except if it were possible
that the corruptible could become eternal. Therefore Aristotle has said that
the possibility in the eternal beings is necessary.’
Ghazali says:
The objection is that it is said that the temporal becoming
of the world never ceased to be possible, and certainly there
is no time at which its becoming could not be imagined. But
although it could be at any time, it did not become at any
time whatever, for reality does not conform to possibility, but
differs from it. You yourself hold, for instance, in the matter
of place, that the world could be bigger than it is or that the
creation of an infinite series of bodies above the world is
possible, and that there is no limit to the possibilities of
increase in the size of the world, but still the actual existence
of absolutely infinite occupied space and of any infinite and
limitless being is impossible. What is said to be possible is
an actual body of a limited surface, but the exact size of this
body, whether it is larger or smaller, is not specified. In the
same way, what is possible is the coming into existence of
the world in time, but the exact time of its coming into

100

existence whether earlier or later, is not specified. The
principle of its having come into being is specified and this is
the possible, nothing else.’
I say:
The man who assumes that before the existence of the world there was
one unique, never-ceasing possibility must concede that the world is
eternal. The man who affirms, like Ghazali in his answer, that before the
world there was an infinite number of possibilities of worlds, has certainly
to admit that before this world there was another world and before this
second world a third, and so on ad infinitum, as is the case with human
beings, and especially when it is assumed that the perishing of the earlier
is the necessary condition for the existence of the later. For instance, if
God had the power to create another world before this, and before this
second world yet another, the series must continue infinitely, or else we
should arrive at a world before which no other world could have been
created (however, the theologians do not affirm this nor use it as a proof
for the temporal production of the world). Although the assumption that
before this world there might be an infinite number of others does not
seem an impossible one, it appears after closer examination to be absurd,
for it would follow from it that the universe had the nature of an individual
person in this transitory world, so that its procession from the First
Principle would be like the procession of the individual person from Himthat is to say, through an eternal moving body and an eternal motion. But
then this world would be part of another world, like the transient beings in
this world, and then necessarily either we end finally in a world individually
eternal or we have an infinite series. And if we have to bring this series to
a standstill, it is more appropriate to arrest it at this world, by regarding it
as eternally unique.

THE FOURTH PROOF
Ghazali says:
The fourth proof is that they say everything that becomes
is preceded by the matter which is in it, for what becomes
cannot be free from matter.’ For this reason matter never

101

becomes; what becomes is only the form, the accidents and
the qualities which add themselves to matters The proof is
that the existence of each thing that becomes must, before
its becoming, either be possible, impossible, or necessary: it
cannot be impossible, for the essentially impossible will
never exist; it cannot be necessary, for the essentially
necessary will never be in a state of non-existence, and
therefore it is the essentially possible.’ Therefore, the thing
which becomes has before its becoming the possibility of
becoming, but the possibility of becoming is an attribute
which needs a relation and has no subsistence in itself.’ It
needs, therefore, a substratum with which it can be
connected, and there is no substratum except matter, and it
becomes connected with it in the way in which we say this
matter receives warmth and coldness, or black and white, or
movement and rest, i.e. it is possible that these qualities and
these changes occur in it and therefore possibility is an
attribute of matter. Matter does not possess other matter,
and cannot become; for, if it did, the possibility of its
existence would precede its existence, and possibility would
subsist by itself without being related to anything else,
whereas it is a relative attribute which cannot be understood
as subsisting by itself. And it cannot be said that the
meaning of possibility amounts to what can be done and
what the Eternal had the power to do, because we know only
that a thing can be done, because it is possible, and we say
‘this can be done because it is possible and cannot be done
because it is not possible’; and if ‘this is possible’ meant ‘this
can be done’, to say ‘this can be done because it is possible’
would mean ‘this is possible because it is possible’, and this
is a circular definition; and this shows that ‘this is possible’ is
a first judgement in the mind, evident in itself, which makes
the second judgement ‘that it can be done’ intelligible. It
cannot be said, either, that to be possible refers to the
knowledge of the Eternal, for knowledge depends on a thing
known, whereas possibility is undoubtedly an object of
knowledge, not knowledge; further, it is a relative attribute,

102

and needs something to which it can be related, and this can
only be matter, and everything that becomes is preceded by
matter.
I say:
The summary of this is that everything that becomes is possible before
it becomes, and that possibility needs something for its subsistence,
namely, the substratum which receives that which is possible. For it must
not be believed that the possibility of the recipient is the same as the
possibility of the agent. It is a different thing to say about Zaid, the agent,
that he can do something and to say about the patient that it can have
something done to it. Thus the possibility of the patient is a necessary
condition for the possibility of the agent, for the agent which cannot act is
not possible but impossible. Since it is impossible that the possibility prior
to the thing’s becoming should be absolutely without substratum, or that
the agent should be its substratum or the thing possible-for the thing
possible loses its possibility, when it becomes actual-there only remains
as a vehicle for possibility the recipient of the possible, i.e. matter. Matter,
in so far as it is matter, does not become; for if it did it would need other
matter and we should have an infinite regress. Matter only becomes in so
far as it is combined with form. Everything that comes into being comes
into being from something else, and this must either give rise to an infinite
regress and lead directly to infinite matter which is impossible, even if we
assume an eternal mover, for there is no actual infinite; or the forms must
be interchangeable in the ingenerable and incorruptible substratum,
eternally and in rotation.’ There must, therefore, be an eternal movement
which produces this interchange in the eternally transitory things. And
therefore it is clear that the generation of the one in each pair of generated
beings is the corruption of the other; otherwise a thing could come into
being from nothing, for the meaning of ‘becoming’ is the alteration of a
thing and its change, from what it has potentially, into actuality. It is not
possible that the privation itself should change into the existent, and it is
not the privation of which it is said that it has become. There exists,
therefore, a substratum for the contrary forms, and it is in this substratum
that the forms interchange.
Ghazali says:

103

The objection is that the possibility of which they speak is
a judgement of the intellect, and anything whose existence
the intellect supposes, provided no obstacle presents itself to
the supposition, we call possible and, if there is such an
obstacle, we call it impossible and, if we suppose that it
cannot be supposed not to be, we call it necessary. These
are rational judgements which need no real existent which
they might qualify. There are three proofs of this. The first is:
If possibility needed an existent to which it could be related,
and of which it could be said that it is its possibility,
impossibility also would need an existent of which it might be
said that it is its impossibility; but impossibility has no real
existence, and there is no matter in which it occurs and to
which it could be related.
I say:
That possibility demands an existing matter is clear, for all true
intellectual concepts need a thing outside the soul, for truth, as it has been
defined, is the agreement of what is in the soul with what is outside the
soul.’ And when we say that something is possible, we cannot but
understand that it needs something in which this possibility can be. As
regards his proof that the possible is not dependent on an existent,
because the impossible is not dependent on an existent, this is sophistical.
Indeed the impossible demands a substratum just as much as the
possible does, and this is clear from the fact that the impossible is the
opposite of the possible and opposite contraries undoubtedly require a
substratum. For impossibility is the negation of possibility, and, if
possibility needs a substratum, impossibility which is the negation of this
possibility requires a substratum too, e.g. we say that the existence of
empty space is impossible, because the existence of independent
dimensions outside or inside natural bodies is impossible, or that the
presence of opposites at the same time in the same substratum is
impossible, or that the equivalence of one to two is impossible, i.e. in
reality. All this is self-evident, and it is not necessary to consider the errors
here committed.
Ghazali says:

104

The second proof is that the intellect decides that black
and white are possible before they exist.’ If this possibility
were related to the body in which they inhere, so that it might
be said that the meaning is that this body can be black and
white, then white would not be possible by itself and
possibility would be related only to the body. But we affirm,
as concerns the judgement about black in itself, as to
whether it is possible, necessary, or impossible, that we,
without doubt, will say that it is possible. And this shows that
the intellect in order to decide whether something is possible
need not admit an existing thing to which the possibility can
be related.
I say
This is a sophism. For the possible is predicated of the recipient and of
the inherent quality. In so far as it is predicated of the substratum, its
opposite is the impossible, and in so far as it is predicated of the inherent,
its opposite is the necessary.’ Thus the possible which is described as
being the opposite of the impossible is not that which abandons its
possibility so far as it is actualized, when it becomes actual, because this
latter loses its possibility in the actualizing process.’ This latter possible is
only described by possibility in so far as it is in potency, and the vehicle of
this potency is the substratum which changes from existence in potency
into existence in actuality.’ This is evident from the definition of the
possible that it is the nonexistence which is in readiness to exist or not to
exists This possible non-existent is possible neither in so far as it is nonexistent nor in so far as it is actually existent. It is only possible in so far as
it is in potency, and for this reason the Mu’tazilites affirm that the
nonexistent is a kind of entity. For non-existence is the opposite of
existence, and each of the two is succeeded by the other, and when the
non-existence of a thing disappears it is followed by its existence, and
when its existence disappears it is succeeded by its non-existence. As
non-existence by itself cannot change into existence, and existence
by itself cannot change into non-existence, there must be a third entity
which is the recipient for both of them, and that is what is described by
‘possibility’ and ‘becoming’ and ‘change from the quality of non-existence
to the quality of existence’. For non-existence itself is not described by

105

‘becoming’ or ‘change’; nor is the thing that has become actual described
in this way, for what becomes loses the quality of becoming, change, and
possibility when it has become actual. Therefore there must necessarily
be something that can be described by ‘becoming’ and ‘change’ and
‘transition from nonexistence to existence’, as happens in the passage of
opposites into opposites; that is to say, there must be a substratum for
them in which they can interchange-with this one difference, however, that
this substratum exists in the interchange of all the accidents in actuality,
whereas in the substance it exists in potency.’
And we cannot think of regarding what is described by ‘possibility’ and
‘change’ as identical with the actual, i.e. which belongs to the becoming in
so far as it is actual, for the former again vanishes and the latter must
necessarily be a part of the product. Therefore there must necessarily be
a substratum which is the recipient for the possibility and which is the
vehicle of the change and the becoming, and it is this of which it is said
that it becomes, and alters, and changes from non-existence into
existence. Nor can we think of making this substratum of the nature of the
actualized, for if this were the case the existent would not become, for
what becomes comes into being from the non-existent not from the
existent.’ Both philosophers and Mu’tazilites agree about the existence of
this entity; only the philosophers are of the opinion that it cannot be
exempt from a form actually existent, i.e. that it cannot be free from
existence, like the transition, for example, from sperma to blood and the
transition from blood to the members of the embryo. The reason is that if it
were exempt from existence it would have an existence of its own, and if it
had an existence of its own, becoming could not come from it. This entity
is called by the philosophers ‘lyle’, and it is the cause of generation and
corruption. And according to the philosophers an existent which is free
from Kyle is neither generable nor corruptible.
Ghazali says:
The third proof is that the souls of men, according to the
philosophers, are substances which subsist by themselves’
without being in a body or in matter or impressed on matters
they had a beginning in time, according to the theory of
Avicenna and the acknowledged philosophers, they had
possibility before their beginning, but they have neither

106

essence nor matter’ and their possibility is a relative
attribute, dependent neither on God’s power nor on the
Agent;’ but on what then is it dependent? The difficulties are
therefore turned against them themselves.
I say:
I do not know any philosopher who said that the soul has a beginning in
the true sense of the word and is thereafter everlasting except -as Ghazali
relates-Avicenna. All other philosophers agree that in their temporal
existence they are related to and connected with the bodily possibilities,
which receive this connexion like the possibilities which subsist in mirrors
for their connexion with the rays of the suns According to the philosophers
this possibility is not of the nature of the generable and corruptible forms,
but of a kind to which, according to them, demonstrative proof leads, and
the vehicle of this possibility is of another nature than the nature of the
Kyle. He alone can grasp their theories in these matters who has read
their books and fulfilled the conditions there laid down by them, and has
besides a sound understanding and a learned master. That Ghazali
should touch on such questions in this way is not worthy of such a man,
but there are only these alternatives: either he knew these matters in their
true nature, and sets them out here wrongly, which is wicked; or he did not
understand their real nature and touched on problems he had not
grasped, which is the act of an ignoramus. However, he stands too high in
our eyes for either of these qualifications. But even the best horse will
stumble’ and it was a stumble of Ghazali’s that he brought out this book.
But perhaps he was forced to do so by the conditions of his time and his
situation.
Ghazali says, speaking on behalf of the philosophers:
It may be said: To reduce possibility to a judgement of
the intellect is absurd, for the meaning of ‘judgement of the
intellect’ is nothing but the knowledge of possibility, and
possibility is an object of knowledge, not knowledge itself;
knowledge, on the contrary, comprises possibility and
follows it and depends on it as it is, and if knowledge
vanished the object of knowledge would not, but the
disappearance of the object of knowledge would imply the

107

disappearance of knowledge. For knowledge and the objectknown are two things, the former dependent on the latter,
and if we supposed rational beings to turn away from
possibility and neglect it, we should say: ‘It is not possibility
that is annulled, for the possibilities subsist by themselves,
but it is simply that minds neglect them or that minds and
rational beings have disappeared; but possibility remains,
without any doubt.’ And the three proofs are not valid, for
impossibility requires an existent to which it can be related,
and impossibility means identifying two opposites, and if the
substratum were white it could not become black as long as
the white existed, and therefore we need a substratum,
qualified by the quality during the inherence of which its
opposite is spoken of as impossible in this substratum, and
therefore impossibility is a relative attribute subsistent in a
substratum and related to it. And where the necessary is
concerned it is evident that it is related to necessary
existence.
As concerns the second proof, that black is in itself
possible, this is a mistake, for if it is taken, abstracted from
the substratum in which it inheres, it is impossible, not
possible; it only becomes possible when it can become a
form in a body; the body is then in readiness for the
interchange, and the interchange is possible for the body;
but in itself black has no individuality, so as to be
characterizable by possibility.
As concerns the third proof about the soul, it is eternal for
one school of philosophers, and is only possible in the
attaching of itself to bodies, and therefore against those
philosophers the argument does not apply= But for those
who admit that the soul comes into existence-and one
school of philosophers has believed that it is impressed on
matter and follows its temperament, as is indicated by Galen
in certain passages-it comes into existence in matter and its
possibility is related to its matter.’ And according to the
theory of those who admit that it comes into existence,

108

although it is not impressed on matter-which means that it is
possible for the rational soul to direct matter-the possibility
prior to the becoming is relative to matter , and although the
soul is not impressed on matter, it is attached to it, for it is its
directing principle and uses it as an instrument, and in this
way its possibility is relative to matters
I say
What he says in this section is true, as will be clear to you from our
explanation of the nature of the possible.
Then Ghazali, objecting to the philosophers, says:
And the answer is: To reduce possibility, necessity, and
impossibility to rational concepts is correct, and as for the
assertion that the concepts of reason form its knowledge,
and knowledge implies a thing known, let them be answered:
it cannot be said that receptivity of colour and animality and
the other concepts, which are fixed in the mind according to
the philosophers-and this is what constitutes the scienceshave no objects ; still these objects have no real existence in
the external world, and the philosophers arc certainly right in
saying that universals exist only in the mind, not in the
external world, and that in the external world there arc only
particular individuals, which arc apprehended by the senses,
not by reason; and yet these individuals arc the reason why
the mind abstracts from them a concept separated from its
rational matter; therefore receptivity of colour is a concept,
separate in the mind from blackness and whiteness,
although in reality a colour which is neither black nor white
nor of another colour cannot be imagined,’ and receptivity of
colour is fixed in the mind without any specification-now, in
the same way, it can be said that possibility is a form which
exists in minds, not in the exterior world, and if this is not
impossible for other concepts,, there is no impossibility in
what we have said.
I say:

109

This argument is sophistical because possibility is a universal which
has individuals outside the mind like all the other universals, and
knowledge is not knowledge of the universal concept, but it is a knowledge
of individuals in a universal way which the mind attains in the case of the
individuals, when it abstracts from them one common nature which is
distributed among the different matters. The nature, therefore, of the
universal is not identical with the nature of the things of which it is a
universal. Ghazali is here in error, for he assumes that the nature of
possibility is the nature of the universal, without there being individuals on
which this universal, i.e. the universal concept of possibility, depends. The
universal, however, is not the object of knowledge; on the contrary through
it the things become known, although it exists potentially in the nature of
the things known;’ otherwise its apprehension of the individuals, in so far
as they are universals, would be false. This apprehension would indeed
be false if the nature of the object known were essentially individual, not
accidentally individual, whereas the opposite is the case: it is accidentally
individual, essentially universal. Therefore if the mind did not apprehend
the individuals in so far as they are universal, it would be in error and
make false judgements about them. But if it abstracts those natures which
subsist in the individual things from their matter, and makes them
universal, then it is possible that it judges them rightly; otherwise it would
confuse those natures, of which the possible is one.
The theory of the philosophers that universals exist only in the mind, not
in the external world, only means that the universals exist actually only in
the mind, and not in the external world, not that they do not exist at all in
the external world, for the meaning is that they exist potentially, not
actually in the external world; indeed, if they did not exist at all in the
outside world they would be false. Since universals exist outside the mind
in potency and possibilities exist outside the soul in potency, the nature of
universals in regard
to this resembles that of possibilities. And for this reason Ghazali tried
to deceive people by a sophism, for he compared possibility to the
universals because of their both being potentially in reality, and then he
assumed that the philosophers assert that universals do not exist at all
outside the soul; from which he deduced that possibility does not exist
outside the soul. What an ugly and crude sophism!

110

Ghazali says:
As regards their assertion that, if it were assumed that
rational beings had vanished or had neglected possibility,
possibility itself would not have disappeared, we answer: ‘If it
were assumed that they had vanished, would not the
universal concepts, i.e. the genera and species, have
disappeared too?’ and if they agree to this, this can only
mean that universals are only concepts in the mind; but this
is exactly what we say about possibility, and there is no
difference between the two cases; if they, however, affirm
that they are permanent in the knowledge of God,’ the same
may be said about possibility, and the argument is valid, and
our aim of showing the contradiction in this theory has been
attained.
I say:
This argument shows his foolishness and proneness to contradiction.
The most plausible form in which it might be expressed would be to base it
on two premisses: the first, that the evident proposition that possibility is
partially individual, namely, outside the soul, partially universal, namely,
the universal concept of the individual possibles, is not true; and the
second, that it was said that the nature of the individual possibles outside
the soul is identical with the nature of the universal of possibility in the
mind; and in this case the possible would have neither a universal nor an
individual nature, or else the nature of the individual would have to be
identical with that of the universal. All this is presumptuous, and how
should it be else, for in a way the universal has an existence outside the
soul.
Ghazali says:
And as regards their subterfuge where the impossible is
concerned, that it is related to the matter qualified by its
opposite, as it cannot take the place of its opposite this
cannot be the case with every impossible, for that God
should have a rival is impossible, but there is no matter to
which this impossibility could be related. If they say the
impossibility of God’s having a rival, means that the solitude

111

of God in His essence and His uniqueness are necessary
and that this solitude is proper to Him, we answer: This is not
necessary, for the world exists with Him, and He is therefore
not solitary. And if they say that His solitude so far as a rival
is concerned is necessary, and that the opposite of the
necessary is the impossible, and that the impossible is
related to Him, we answer: In this case the solitude of God in
regard to the world is different from His solitude in regard to
His equal and in this case His solitude in regard to His rival
is necessary, and in regard to the created world not
necessary.’
I say:
All this is vain talk, for it cannot be doubted that the judgments of the
mind have value only in regard to the nature of things outside the soul. If
there were outside the soul nothing possible or impossible, the judgment
of the mind that things are possible or impossible would be of as much
value as no judgment at all, and there would be no difference between
reason and illusion. And that there should be a rival to God is just as
impossible in reality as God’s existence is i necessary in reality. But there
is no sense in wasting more words on this question.
Ghazali says:
The subterfuge concerning the becoming of the souls is
worthless too, for they have individual essences and a
possibility prior to their becoming, and at that time there is
nothing with which they could be brought into relation. Their
argument contends that it is possible for matter that the
souls direct it is a remote relation and, if this satisfies you,
you might as well say that the possibility of the souls
becoming lies in the power of Him who can on His own
authority produce them, for the souls are then related to the
Agent-although they are not impressed on Him-in the same
way as to the body, on which they are not impressed either.
And since the imprint is made neither on the one substrate
nor on the other, there is no difference between the relation
to the agent and that to the patient.

112

I say:
He wants to force those who assume the possibility of the soul’s
becoming without there being an imprint in matter to concede that the
possibility in the recipient is like the possibility in the agent, because the
act proceeds from the agent and therefore these two possibilities are
similar. But this is a shocking supposition, for, according to it, the soul
would come to the body as if it directed it from the outside, as the artisan
directs his product, and the soul would not be a form in the body, just as
the artisan is not a form in his product. The answer is that it is not
impossible that there should be amongst i the entelechies which conduct
themselves like formsb something that is separate from its substratum as
the steersman is from his ships and the artisan from his tool, and if the
body is like the instrument of the
soul, the soul is a separate form, and then the possibility which is in the
instrument is not like the possibility which is in the agent; no, the
instrument is in both conditions, the possibility which is in the patient and
the possibility which is in the agent, and therefore the instruments are the
mover and the moved, and in so far as they are the mover, there is in
them the possibility which is in the agent, and in so far as they are moved,
the possibility which is in the recipient.’ But the supposition that the soul is
a separate entity does not force them into the admission that the
possibility which is in the recipient is identical= with the possibility which is
in the agent. Besides, the possibility which according to the philosophers
is in the agent is not only a rational judgement, but refers to something
outside the soul. Therefore his argument does not gain by assimilating
one of these two possibilities to the other. And since Ghazali knew that all
these arguments have no other effect than to bring doubts and perplexity
to those who cannot solve them-which is an act of wicked sophists, he
says:
And if it is said you have taken good care in all your
objections to oppose the difficulties by other difficulties, but
nothing of what you yourself have adduced is free from
difficulty, we answer: the objections do show the falsity of an
argument, no doubt, and certain aspects of the problem are
solved in stating the opposite view and its foundation. We
have not committed ourselves to anything more than to

113

upsetting their theories, and to showing the faults in the
consequence of their proofs so as to demonstrate their
incoherence. We do not seek to attack from any definite
point of view, and we shall not transgress the aim of this
book, nor give full proofs for the temporal production of the
world, for our intention is merely to refute their alleged
knowledge of its eternity. But after finishing this book we
shall, if it pleases God, devote a work to establishing the
doctrine of truth, and we call it ‘The Golden Mean in
Dogmatic Beliefs’,’ in which we shall be engaged in building
up, as in this book we have been in destroying.
I say:
To oppose difficulty with difficulty does not bring about destruction, but
only perplexity and doubts in him who acts in this way, for why should he
think one of the two conflicting theories reasonable and the opposite one
vain? Most of the arguments with which this man Ghazali opposes the
philosophers are doubts which arise when certain parts of the doctrine of
the philosophers come into conflict with others, and when those
differences are compared with each other; but this is an imperfect
refutation. A perfect refutation would be one that succeeded in showing
the futility of their system according to the facts themselves, not such a
one as, for instance, his assumption that it is permissible for the
opponents of the philosophers to claim that possibility is a mental concept
in the same way as the philosophers claim this for the universal. For if the
truth of this comparison between the two were conceded, it would not
follow that it was untrue that possibility was a concept dependent on
reality, but only either that the universal existed in the mind only was not
true, or that possibility existed in the mind only was not true. Indeed, it
would have been necessary for him to begin by establishing the truth,
before starting to perplex and confuse his readers, for they might die
before they could get hold of that book, or he might have died himself
before writing it. But this book has not yet come into my hands’ and
perhaps he never composed it, and he only says that he does not base
this present book on any doctrine, in order that it should not be thought
that he based it on that of the Ash’arites. It appears from the books
ascribed to him that in metaphysics he recurs to the philosophers. And of

114

all his books this is most clearly shown and most truly proved in his book
called The Niche for Lights.

THE SECOND DISCUSSION
THE REFUTATION OF THEIR THEORY OF THE
INCORRUPTIBILITY OF THE WORLD AND OF TIME AND
MOTION

Ghazali says:
Know that this is part of the first question, for according to
the philosophers the existence of the world, having no
beginning, does not end either; it is eternal, without a final
term. Its disappearance and its corruption cannot be
imagined; it never began to exist in the condition in which it
exists’ and it will never cease to exist in the condition in
which it exists.
Their four arguments which we have mentioned in our
discussion of its eternity in the past refer also to its eternity in
the future, and the objection is the same without any
difference. They say that the world is caused, and that its
cause is without beginning or end, and that this applies both
to the effect and to the cause, and that, if the cause does not
change, the effect cannot change either; upon this they build
their proof of the impossibility of its beginning, and the same
applies to its ending. This is their first proof.
The second proof is that an eventual annihilation of the
world must occur alter its existence, but ‘after’ implies an
affirmation of time.

115

The third proof is that the possibility of its existence does
not end, and that therefore its possible existence may
conform to the possibility.’ But this argument has no force,
for we regard it as impossible that the world should not have
begun, but we do not regard it as impossible that it should
last eternally, if God should make it last eternally, for it is not
necessary that what begins has also an end, although it is
necessary for an act to have a beginning and an initial term.
Only Abu Hudhail al-Allaf thought that the world must needs
have an end, and he said that, as in the past infinite circular
movements are impossible, so they are in the future s but
this is wrong, for the whole of the future never enters into
existence either simultaneously or successively, whereas the
whole of the past is there simultaneously but not
successively.’ And since it is clear that we do not regard the
incorruptibility of the world as impossible from a rational
point of view-we regard indeed its incorruptibility and
corruptibility as equally possible-we know only through the
Divine Law which of the two possibilities will be realized.
Therefore let us not try to solve this problem by mere
reason!
I say:
His assertion that the argument of the philosophers for the eternity of
the world in the past applies also to its eternity in the future is true, and
equally the second argument applies to both cases. But his assertion that
the third argument is not equally valid for the future and for the past, that
indeed we regard the becoming of the world in the past as impossible, but
that with the exception of Abu Hudhail al-Allaf, who thought that the
eternity of the world was impossible in either direction, we do not regard
its eternity in the future as absolutely impossible, is not true. For when it
was conceded to the philosophers that the possibility of the world had no
beginning and that with this possibility a condition of extension, which
could measure this possibility, was connected in the same way as this
condition of extension is connected with the possible existent, when it is
actualized, and it was also evident that this extension had no initial term,
the philosophers were convinced that time had no initial term, for this

116

extension is nothing but time, and to call it timeless eternitys is senseless.
And since time is connected with possibility and possibility with existence
in motion, existence in motion has no first term either. And the assertion of
the theologians that everything which existed in the past had a first term is
futile, for the First exists in the past eternally, as it exists eternally in the
future. And their distinction here between the first term and its acts
requires a proof, for the existence of the temporal which occurs in the past
is different from the existence of the eternal which occurs in the past. For
the temporal which has occurred in the past is finite in both directions, i.e.
it has a beginning and an end, but the eternal which has occurred in the
past has neither beginning nor end.’ And therefore, since the philosophers
have not admitted that the circular movement has a beginning, they
cannot be forced to admit that it has an end, for they do not regard its
existence in the past as transitory, and, if some philosopher does regard it
as such, he contradicts himself and therefore the statement is true that
everything that has a beginning has an end. That anything could have a
beginning and no end is not true, unless the possible could be changed
into the eternal, for everything that has a beginning is possible. And that
anything could be liable to corruption and at the same time could be
capable of eternity is something incomprehensible’ and stands in need of
examination. The ancient philosophers indeed examined this problem, and
Abu Hudhail agrees with the philosophers in saying that whatever can be
generated is corruptible, and he kept strictly to the consequence which
follows from the acceptance of the principle of becoming. As to those who
make a distinction between the past and the future, because what is in the
past is there in its totality, whereas the future never enters into existence
in its totality (for the future enters reality only successively), this is
deceptive, for what is in reality past is that which has entered time and that
which has entered time has time beyond it in both directions and
possesses totality. But that which has never entered the past in the way
the temporal enters the past can only be said in an equivocal way to be in
the past; it is infinitely extended, with the past rather than in the past, and
possesses no totality in itself, although its parts are totalities. And this, if it
has no initial term beginning in the past, is in fact time itself. For each
temporal beginning is a present, and each present is preceded by a past,
and both that which exists commensurable with time, and time
commensurable with it, must necessarily be infinite. Only the parts of time

117

which are limited by time in both directions can enter the past, in the same
way as only the instant which is everchanging and only the instantaneous
motion of a thing in movement in the spatial magnitude in which it moves
can really enter the existence of the moved.’ And just as we do not say
that the past of what never ceased to exist in the past ever entered
existence at an instant-for this would mean that its existence had a
beginning and that time limited it in both directions-so it stands with that
which is simultaneous with time, not in time. For of the circular movements
only those that time limits enter into represented existence,’ but those that
are simultaneous with time do not afterwards enter past existence, just as
the eternally existent does not enter past existence, since no time limits it.
And when one imagines an eternal entity whose acts are not delayed after
its existence-as indeed must be the case with any entity whose existence
is perfect-then, if it is eternal and does not enter past time, it follows
necessarily that its acts also cannot enter past time, for if they did they
would be finite and this eternal existent would be eternally inactive and
what is eternally inactive is necessarily impossible. And it is most
appropriate for an entity, whose existence does not enter time and which
is not limited by time, that its acts should not enter existence either,
because there is no difference between the entity and its acts. If the
movements of the celestial bodies and what follows from them are acts of
an eternal entity, the existence of which does not enter the past, then its
acts do not enter past time either. For it is not permissible to say of
anything that is eternal that it has entered past time, nor that it has ended,
for that which has an end has a beginning. For indeed, our statement that
it is eternal means the denial of its entering past time and of its having had
a beginning. He who, assuming that it entered past time, assumes that it
must have a beginning begs the question. It is, therefore, untrue that what
is coexistent with eternal existence, has entered existence, unless the
eternal existence has entered existence by entering past time. Therefore
our statement `everything past must have entered existence’ must be
understood in two ways: first, that which has entered past existence must
have entered existence, and this is a true statement; secondly, that which
is past and is inseparably connected with eternal existence cannot be truly
said to have entered existence, for our expression `entered existence’ is
incompatible with our expression `connected with eternal existence’. And
there is here no difference between act and existence. For he who

118

concedes the existence of an entity which has an eternal past must
concede that there exist acts, too, which have no beginning in the past.
And it by no means follows from the existence of His acts that they must
have entered existence, just as it by no means follows from the past
permanency of His essence that He has ever entered existence. And all
this is perfectly clear, as you see.
Through this First Existent acts can exist which never began and will
never cease, and if this were impossible for the act, it would be
impossible, too, for existence, for every act is connected with its existent in
existence. The theologians, however, regarded it as impossible that God’s
act should be eternal, although they regarded His existence as eternal,
and that is the gravest error. To apply the expression `production’ for the
world’s creation as the Divine Law does is more appropriate than to use it
of temporal production, as the Ash’arites did,’ for the act, in so far as it is
an act, is a product, and eternity is only represented in this act because
this production and the act produced have neither beginning nor end. And
I say that it was therefore difficult for Muslims to call God eternal and the
world eternal, because they understood by `eternal’ that which has no
cause. Still I have seen some of the theologians tending rather to our
opinion.
Ghazali says:
Their fourth proof is similar to the third, for they say that if
the world were annihilated the possibility of its existence
would remain, as the possible cannot become impossible.
This possibility is a relative attribute and according to them
everything that becomes needs matter which precedes it and
everything that vanishes needs matter from which it can
vanish, but the matter and the elements do not vanish, only
the forms and accidents vanish which were in them.
I say:
If it is assumed that the forms succeed each other in one substratum in
a circular way and that the agent of this succession is an eternal one,
nothing impossible follows from this assumption. But if this succession is
assumed to take place in an infinite number of matters or through an
infinite number of specifically different forms, it is impossible, and equally

119

the assumption is impassible that such a succession could occur without
an eternal agent or through a temporal agent. For if there were an infinite
number of matters, an actual infinite would exist, and this is impossible. It
is still more absurd to suppose that this succession could occur through
temporal agents, and therefore from this point of view it is only true that a
man must become from another man, on condition that the successive
series happens in one and the same matter and the perishing of the curlier
men can become the matter of the later. Besides, the existence of the
earlier men is also in some respect the efficient cause and the instrument
for the later-all this, however, in an accidental way, for those men are
nothing but the instrument for the Agent, who does not cease to produce a
man by means of a man and through the matter of a man. The student
who does not distinguish all these points will not be able to free himself
from insoluble doubts. Perhaps God will place you and us among those
who have reached the utmost truth concerning what may and must be
taught about God’s infinite acts. What I have said about all these things is
not proved here, but must be examined by the application of the
conditions which the ancients have explained and the rules which they
have established for scientific research. Besides, he who would like to be
one of those who possess the truth should in any question he examines
consult those who hold divergent opinions.’
Ghazali says:
The answer to all this has been given above. I only single
out this question because they have two proofs for it.
The first proof is that given by Galen, who says: If the
sun, for instance, were liable to annihilation, decay would
appear in it over a long period. But observation for
thousands of years shows no change in its size and the fact
that it has shown no loss of power through such a long time
shows that it does not suffer corruption.’ There are two
objections to this: The first is that the mode of this proof-that
if the sun suffers corruption, it must suffer loss of power, and
as the consequence is impossible the antecedent must be
impossible too-is what the philosophers call a conjunctive
hypothetical proposition,’ and this inference is not
conclusive, because its antecedent is not true, unless it is

120

connected with another condition. In other words the
falsehood of the consequence of the proposition `if the sun
suffers corruption, it must become weaker’ does not imply
the falsehood of the antecedent, unless either (z) the
antecedent is bound up with the additional condition that, if it
suffers corruption through decay, it must do so during a long
period, or () it is seriously proved that there is no corruption
except through decay. For only then does the falsehood of
the consequence imply the falsehood of the antecedent.
Now, we do not concede that a thing can only become
corrupt through decay; decay is only one form of corruption,
for it is not impossible that what is in a state of perfection
should suddenly suffer corruption.
I say:
He says in his objection here to this argument that there is no
necessary relation between antecedent and consequent, because that
which suffers corruption need not become weaker, since it can suffer
corruption before it has become weaker. The conclusion, however, is quite
sound, when it is assumed that the corruption takes place in a natural
way, not by violence, and it is assumed besides that the celestial body is
an animal, for all animals super corruption only in a natural way-they
necessarily decay before their corruption. However, our opponents do not
accept these premisses, so far as they concern heaven, without proof.
And therefore Galen’s statement is only of dialectical value. The safest
way to use this argument is to say that, if heaven should suffer corruption,
it would either disintegrate into the elements of which it is composed or,
losing the form it possesses, receive another, as happens with the four
elements when they change into one another. If, however, heaven passed
away into the elements, those elements would have to be part of another
world, for it could not have come into being from the elements contained in
this world, since these elements are infinitely small, compared with its
size, something like a point in relation to a circle.’ Should heaven,
however, lose its form and receive another there would exist a sixth
element opposed to all the others, being neither heaven, nor earth, nor
water, nor air, nor fire. And all this is impossible. And his statement that
heaven does not decay ; is only a common opinion, lacking the force of

121

the immediately evident axioms; and it is explained in the Posterior
Analytics of what kind these premisses area
Ghazali says:
The second objection is that, if it were conceded to Galen
that there is no corruption except through decay, how can it
be known that decay does not affect the sun? His reliance
on observation is impossible, for observations determine the
size only by approximation, and if the sun, whose size is said
to be approximately a hundred and seventy times that of the
earth, decreased, for instance, by the size of mountains the
difference would not be perceptible to the senses. Indeed, it
is perhaps already in decay, and has decreased up to the
present by the size of mountains or more; but perception
cannot ascertain this, for its knowledge in the science of
optics works only by supposition and approximation. The
same takes place with sapphire and gold, which, according
to them, are composed out of elements and which are liable
to corruption. Still, if you left a sapphire for a hundred years,
its decrease would be imperceptible, and perhaps the
decrease in the sun during the period in which it has been
observed stands in proportion to its size as the decrease of
the sapphire to its size in a hundred years. This is
imperceptible, and this fact shows that his proof is utterly
futile.
We have abstained from bringing many proofs of the
same kind as the wise disdain. We have given only this one
to serve as an example of what we have omitted, and the
have restricted ourselves to the four proofs which demand
that their solution should be attempted in the way indicated
above.
I say:
If the sun had decayed and the parts of it which had disintegrated
during the period of its observation were imperceptible because of the size
of its body, still the effect of its decay on bodies in the sublunary world
would be perceptible in a definite degree, for everything that decays does

122

so only through the corruption and disintegration of its parts, and those
parts which disconnect themselves from the decaying mass must
necessarily remain in the world in their totality or change into other parts,
and in either case an appreciable change must occur in the world, either in
the number or in the character of its parts. And if the size of the bodies
could change, their actions and affections would change too, and if their
actions and affections, and especially those of the heavenly bodies, could
change, changes would arise in the sublunary world. To imagine,
therefore, a dissipation of the heavenly bodies is to admit a
disarrangement in the divine order which, according to the philosopher,
prevails in this world. This proof is not absolutely strict.
Ghazali says:
The philosophers have a second proof of the impossibility
of the annihilation of the world. They say: The substance of
the world could not be annihilated, because no cause could
be imagined for this and the passage from existence to nonexistence cannot take place without a cause. This cause
must be either the Will of the Eternal, and this is impossible,
for if He willed the annihilation of the world after not having
willed it, He would have changed; or it must be assumed that
God and His Will are in all conditions absolutely the same,
although the object of His Will changes from non-existence
to existence and then again from existence to non-existence.
And the impossibility of which we have spoken in the matter
of a temporal existence through an eternal will, holds also for
the problem of annihilation. But we shall add here a still
greater difficulty, namely, that the object willed is without
doubt an act of the wiper, for the act of him who acts after
not having acted-even if he does not alter in his own naturemust necessarily exist after having not existed: if he
remained absolutely in the state he was in before, his act
would not be there. But when the world is annihilated, there
is no object for God’s act, and if He does not perform
anything (for annihilation is nothing), how could there be an
action? Suppose the annihilation of the world needed a new
act in God which did not exist before, what could such an act

123

be? Could it be the existence of the world? But this is
impossible, since what happens is on the contrary the
termination of its existence. Could this act then be the
annihilation of the world? But annihilation is nothing at all,
and it could therefore not be an act. For even in its slightest
intensity an act must be existent, but the annihilation of the
world is nothing existent at all; how could it then be said that
he who caused it was an agent, or he who effected it its
cause?`
The philosophers say that to escape this difficulty the
theologians are divided into four sects and that each sect
falls into an absurdity.
I say:
He says here that the philosophers compel the theologians who admit
the annihilation of the world to draw the consequence that from the
Eternal, who produced the world, there proceeds a new act, i.e. the act of
annihilation, just as they compelled them to draw this consequence in
regard to His temporal production. About this problem everything has
been said already in our discussion of temporal production, for the same
difficulties as befall the problem of production apply to annihilation, and
there is no sense in repeating ourselves. But the special difficulty he
mentions here is that from the assumption of the world’s temporal
production it follows that the act of the agent attaches itself to nonexistence, so that in fact the agent performs a non-existing act and this
seemed to all the parties too shocking to be accepted,’ and therefore they
took refuge in theories he mentions later. But this consequence follows
necessarily from any theory which affirms that the act of the agent is
connected with absolute creation-that is, the production of something that
did not exist before in potency and was not a possibility which its agent
converted from potency into actuality, a theory which affirms in fact that
the agent created it out of nothing. But for the philosophers the act of the
agent is nothing but the actualizing of what is in potency, and this act is,
according to them, attached to an existent in two ways, either in
production, by converting the thing from its potential existence into
actuality so that its non-existence is terminated, or in destruction, by
converting the thing from its actual existence into potential existence, so

124

that it passes into a relative non-existence. But he who does not conceive
the act of the agent in this way has to draw the consequence that the
agent’s act is attached to non-existence in both ways, in production as in
destruction; only as this seems clearer in the case of destruction, the
theologians could not defend themselves against their opponents. For it is
clear that for the man who holds the theory of absolute annihilation the
agent must perform something non-existent, for when the agent converts
the thing from existence into absolute non-existence, he directs his first
intention to something non-existent, by contrast with what happens when
he converts it from actual existence into potential existence; for in this
conversion the passage into non-existence is only a secondary fact. The
same consequence applies to production, only here it is not so obvious,
for the existence of the thing implies the annulment of its non-existence,
and therefore production is nothing but the changing of the non-existence
of a thing into its existence; but since this movement is directed towards
production, the theologians could say that the act of the agent is attached
solely to production. They could not, however, say this in regard to
destruction, since this movement is directed towards non-existence. They
have, therefore, no right to say that in production the act of the agent
attaches itself only to production, and not to the annulment of nonexistence, for in production the annulment of non-existence is necessary,
and therefore the act of the agent must necessarily be attached to nonexistence. For according to the doctrine of the theologians, the existent
possesses only two conditions: a condition in which it is absolutely nonexistent and a condition in which it is actually existent., The act of the
agent, therefore, attaches itself to it, neither when it is actually existent,
nor when it is non-existent . Thus only the following alternatives remain:
either the act of the agent does not attach itself to it at all, or it attaches
itself to non-existence,’ and non-existence changes itself into existence.
He who conceives the agent in this way must regard the change of
nonexistence itself into existence, and of existence itself into nonexistence, as possible, and must hold that the act of the agent can attach
itself to the conversion of either of these opposites into the other. This is
absolutely impossible in respect to the other opposites, not to speak of
non-existence and existence.
The theologians perceived the agent in the way the weaksighted
perceive the shadow of a thing instead of the thing itself and then mistake

125

the shadow for it. But, as you see, all these difficulties arise for the man
who has not understood that production is the conversion of a thing from
potential into actual existence, and that destruction is the reverse, i.e. the
change from the actual into the potentials It appears from this that
possibility and matter are necessarily connected with anything becoming,
and that what is subsistent in itself can be neither destroyed nor produced.
The theory of the Ash’arites mentioned here by Ghazali, which regards
the production of a substance, subsistent in itself, as possible, but not so
its destruction, is an extremely weak one, for the consequences which
apply to destruction apply also to production, only, it was thought, because
in the former case it is more obvious that there was here a real difference.
He then mentions the answers of the different sects to the difficulty which
faces them on the question of annihilation.
Ghazali says:
The Mu’tazilites say: the act proceeding from Him is an
existent, i.e. extinction, which He does not create in a
substratum; at one and the same moment it annihilates the
whole world and disappears by itself, so that it does not
stand in need of another extinction and thus of an infinite
regress.
And mentioning this answer to the difficulty, he says:
This is wrong for different reasons. First, extinction is not
an intelligible existent, the creation of which can be
supposed. Moreover, why, if it is supposed to exist, does it
disappear by itself without a cause for its disappearance?
Further, why does it annihilate the world? For its creation
and inherence in the essence of the world are impossible,
since the inherent meets its substratum and exists together
with it if only in an instant; if the extinction and existence of
the world could meet, extinction would not be in opposition to
existence and would not annihilate it’ and, if extinction is
created neither in the world nor in a substratum, where could
its existence be in order to be opposed to the existence of
the world? Another shocking feature in this doctrine is that
God cannot annihilate part of the world without annihilating

126

the remainder; indeed He can only create an extinction
which annihilates the world in its totality, for if extinction is
not in a substratum, it stands in one and the same relation to
the totality of the world.
I say:
The answer is too foolish to merit refutation. Extinction and annihilation
are synonymous, and if God cannot create annihilation,
He cannot create extinction either. And even if we suppose extinction to
be an existent, it could at most be an accident, but an accident without a
substratum is absurd. And how can one imagine that the non-existent
causes non-existence? All this resembles the talk of the delirious.
Ghazali says:
The second sect, the Karramites, say that the act of God
is annihilation, and annihilation signifies an existent which
He produces in His essence and through which the world
becomes non-existent. In the same way, according to them,
existence arises out of the act of creation which He produces
in His essence and through which the world becomes
existent. Once again, this theory is wrong as it makes the
Eternal a substratum for temporal production . Further it is
incomprehensible, for creation and likewise annihilation
cannot be understood except as an existence, related to will
and power, and to establish another entity besides the will
and the power and their object, the world, is inconceivable.
I say:
The Karramites believe that there are here three factors: the agent, the
act-which they call creation-and an object, i.e. that to which the act
attaches itself, and likewise they believe that in the process of annihilation
there are three factors: the annihilator, the act-which they call annihilationand a non-existent. They believe that the act inheres in the essence of the
agent and according to them the rise of such a new condition’ in the agent
does not imply that the agent is determined by a temporal cause, for such
a condition is of a relative and proportional type, and a new relation and
proportion does not involve newness in the substratum; only those new

127

events involve a change in the substratum which change the essence of
the substratum, e.g. the changing of a thing from whiteness to blackness.
Their statement, however, that the act inheres in the essence of the agent
is a mistake; it is only a relation which exists between the agent and the
object of the act which, when assigned to the agent, is called `act’ and
when assigned to the object is called `passivity’ Through this assumption
the Karramites are not obliged to admit that, as the Ash’arites believed,
the Eternal produces temporal reality’ or that the Eternal is not eternal, but
the consequence which is forced upon them is that there must be a cause
anterior to the Eternal, for, when an agent acts after not having acted, all
the conditions for the existence of his object being fulfilled at the time he
did not act, there must have arisen a new quality in the agent at the time
when he acts, and each new event demands a new causes So there must
be another cause before the first, and so on ad infinitum.
Ghazali says:
The third sect is that of the Ash’arites, who say that
accidents pass away by themselves and cannot be imagined
to persist, for if they persisted they could not, for this very
reason, be imagined ever to pass away.b Substances do not
persist by themselves either, but persist by a persistence
added to their existence. And if God had not created
persistence, substances would have become non-existent
through the nonexistence of persistence. This too is wrong,
in so far as it denies the evidence of the senses by saying
that black and white do not persist and that their existence is
continually renewed; reason shrinks from this, as it does,
too, from the statement that the body renews its existence at
each moment, for reason judges that the hair which is on a
man’s head today is identical with, not similar to, the hair that
was there yesterday, and judges the same about the black
and the white.’ There is yet another difficulty, namely, that
when things persist through persistence, God’s attributes
must persist through persistence and this persistence
persists through persistence and so on ad in finitum.
I say:

128

This theory of the flux of all existing things is a useless one, although
many ancients held it, and there is no end to the impossibilities it implies.
How could an existent come into existence, when it passes away by itself
and existence passes away through its passing away? If it passed away
by itself, it would have to come into existence by itself, and in this case
that by which it becomes existent would be identical with that by which it
passes away and this is impossible. For existence is the opposite of
passing away, and it is not possible that two opposites should occur in the
same thing in one and the same connexion. Therefore in a pure existent
no passing away can be imagined, for if its existence determined its
passing away, it would be non-existent and existent at one and the same
moment, and this is impossible. Further, if the existents persist through the
persistence of an attribute by itself, will this absence of change in them
occur through their existence or through their non-existence? The latter is
impossible, so it follows that they persist because of their existence. If,
then, all existents must persist because they are existent, and nonexistence is something that can supervene upon them, why in Heaven’s
name do we need this attribute of persistence to make them persist? All
this resembles a case of mental disorder. But let us leave this sect, for the
absurdity of their theory is too clear to need refutation.
Ghazali says:
The fourth sect are a group of Ash’arites who say that
accidents pass away by themselves, but that substances
pass away when God does not create motion or rest or
aggregation and disintegration in them, for it is impossible
that a body should persist which is neither in motion nor at
rest, since in that case it becomes non-existent. The two
parties of the Ash’arites incline to the view that annihilation is
not an act, but rather a refraining from acting, since they do
not understand how non-existence can be an act. All these
different theories being false---say the philosophers -it
cannot any longer be asserted that the annihilation of the
world is possible, even if one were to admit that the world
had been produced in time; for although the philosophers
concede that the human soul has been produced, they claim
the impossibility of its annihilation by means of arguments

129

which are very close to those we have mentioned. For,
according to the philosophers, nothing that is self-subsistent
and does not inhere in a substratum’ can be imagined as
becoming non-existent after its existence, whether it is
produced or eternal.’ If one objects against them, that when
water is boiled it disappears, they answer that it does not
disappear, but is only changed into steam and the steam
becomes water again, and its primary matter, i.e. its hyle, the
matter in which the form of water inhered, persists when the
water has become air, for the hyle only loses the form of
water and takes up that of air; the air, having become cold
again, condenses into water, but does not receive a new
matter, for the matter is common to the elements and only
the forms are changed in it.
I say:
He who affirms that accidents do not persist for two moments, and that
their existence in substances is a condition of the persistence of those
substances, does not know how he contradicts himself, for if the
substances are a condition of the existence of the accidents-since the
accidents cannot exist without the substances in which they inhere-and
the accidents are assumed to be a condition for the existence of the
substances, the substances must be necessarily a condition for their own
existence; and it is absurd to say that something is a condition for its own
existence. Further, how could the accidents be such a condition, since
they themselves do not persist for two moments? For, as the instant is at
the same time the end of their privation and the beginning of their period
of existence, the substance mint be destroyed in this instant, for in this
instant there is neither anything of the privative period nor anything of the
existent. If there were in the instant anything of the privative period or of
the existent, it could not be the end of the former and the beginning of the
latter.’ And on the whole, that something which does not persist two
moments should be made a condition for the persistence of something for
two moments is absurd. Indeed, a thing that persists for two moments is
more capable of persisting than one which does not persist for two
moments, for the existence of what does not persist for two moments is at
an instant, which is in flux, but the existence of what persists for two

130

moments is constant, and how can what is in flux be a condition for the
existence of the constant, or how can what is only specifically persistent
be a condition for the persistence of the individually persistent? This is all
senseless talk. One should know that he who does not admit a Kyle for
the corruptible must regard the existent as simple and as not liable to
corruption, for the simple does not alter and does not exchange its
substance for another substance. Therefore Hippocrates says `if man
were made out of one thing alone, he could not suffer by himself’ ,’ i.e. he
could not suffer corruption or change. And therefore he could not have
become either, but would have to be an eternal existent. What he says
here about Avicenna of the difference between the production and the
destruction of the soul is without sense.
Ghazali says, answering the philosophers:
The answer is: So far as concerns the different sects you
have mentioned, although we could defend each of them
and could show that your refutation on the basis of your
principle is not valid, because your own principles are liable
to the same kind of objection, we will not insist on this point,
but we will restrict ourselves to one sect and ask: How will
you refute the man who claims that creation and annihilation
take place through the will of God: if God wills, He creates,
and if He wills, He annihilates, and this is the meaning of His
being absolutely powerful, and notwithstanding this He does
not alter in Himself, but it is only His act that alters? And
concerning your objection that, inasmuch as an act must
proceed from the agent, it cannot be understood which act
can proceed from Him, when He annihilates, we answer:
What proceeds from Him is a new fact, and the new fact is
non-existence, for there was no non-existence; then it
happened as something new, and this is what proceeds from
Him. And if you say: Non-existence is nothing, how could it
then proceed from Him? we reply: If non-existence is
nothing, how could it happen? Indeed, `proceeding from
Him’ does not mean anything but that its happening is
related to His power. If its happening has an intelligible

131

meaning, why should its relation to His power not be
reasonable?
I say:
All this is sophistical and wrong. The philosophers do not deny that a
thing becomes non-existent when a destroying agent destroys it; they only
say that the destroying act does not attach itself to it, in so far as the thing
becomes non-existent, but in so far as it changes from actual being to
potential being, and non-existence results from this change, and it is in
this way that non-existence is related to the agent. But it does not follow
from the fact that its non-existence occurs after the act of the agent that
the agent performs it primarily and essentially. For when it was conceded
to Ghazali during the discussion of this problem that the non-existence of
the corrupting thing will necessarily occur after the act of the corrupting
agent, he drew the conclusion that its non-existence would follow
essentially and primarily from the act, but this is impossible. For the
agent’s act does not attach itself to its non-existence in so far as it is nonexistent, i.e. primarily and essentially. And therefore , if the perceptible
existences were simple, they could neither be generated nor destroyed
except through the act of the agent being attached to their nonexistence
essentially and primarily. But the act of the agent is only attached to nonexistence accidentally and secondarily through its changing the object
from actual existence into another form of existence in an act followed by
non-existence, as from the change of a fire into air there follows the nonexistence of the fire. This is the philosophical theory of existence and nonexistence.
Ghazali says:
And what is the difference between you and the man who
denies absolutely that non-existence can occur to accidents
and forms, and who says that non-existence is nothing at all
and asks how then it could occur and be called an
occurrence and a new event? But no doubt non-existence
can be represented as occurring to the accidents, and to
speak of it as occurring has a sense whether you call it
something real or not. And the relation of this occurrence,

132

which has a reasonable sense, to the power of the
Omnipotent, also has an intelligible meaning.’
I say:
That non-existence of this kind occurs is true, and the philosophers
admit it, because it proceeds from the agent according to a second
intention and accidentally; but it does not follow from its proceeding or
from its having a reasonable meaning that it happens essentially or
primarily, and the difference between the philosophers and those who
deny the occurrence of non-existence is that the philosophers do not
absolutely deny the occurrence of non-existence, but only its occurring
primarily and essentially through the agent. For the act of the agent does
not attach itself necessarily, primarily, and essentially to non-existence,
and according to the philosophers non-existence happens only
subsequently to the agent’s act in reality. The difficulties ensue only for
those who affirm that the world can be annihilated in an absolute
annihilation.
Ghazali says:
Perhaps the philosophers will answer: This difficulty is
only acute for those who allow the non-existence of a thing
after its existence, for those may be asked what the reality is
that occurs. But according to us philosophers the existing
thing does not become non-existent, for we understand by
the fact that the accidents become non-existent the
occurrence of their opposites, which are existing realities,
and not the occurrence of mere non-existence which is
nothing at all, and how could what is nothing at all be said to
occur? For if hair becomes white, it is simply whiteness that
occurs, for whiteness is something real; but one cannot say
that what occurs is the privation of blackness.’
I say:
This answer on behalf of the philosophers is mistaken, for the
philosophers do not deny that non-existence occurs and happens through
the agent, not, however, according to a primary intention as would be the
consequence for one who assumes that a thing can change into pure

133

nothingness; no, non-existence, according to them, occurs when the form
of the thing that becomes non-existent disappears, and the opposite form
appears. Therefore the following objection which Ghazali makes is valid.
Ghazali says:
This is wrong for two reasons. The first is: Does the
occurrence of whiteness imply the absence of blackness? If
they deny it, this is an affront to reason, and if they admit it, it
may be asked: Is what is implied identical with that which
implies? To admit this is a contradiction, for a thing does not
imply itself, and if they deny it, it may be asked: Has that
which is implied an intelligible meaning? If they deny it, we
ask, `How do you know, then, that it is implied, for the
judgement that it is implied presupposes that it has a
sensible meaning?’ If they admit this, we ask; `Is this thing
which is implied and has a sensible meaning, i.e. the
absence of blackness, eternal or temporal?’ The answer
`eternal’ is impossible; if they answer `temporal’, how should
what is described as occurring temporally not be clearly
understood? And if they answer `neither eternal nor
temporal, this is absurd, for if it were said before the
occurrence of whiteness that blackness was non-existent, it
would be false, whereas afterwards it would be true.’ It
occurred, therefore, without any doubt, and this occurrence
is perfectly intelligible and must be related to the
Omnipotent.
I say:
This is an occurrence which is perfectly intelligible and must be related
to the Omnipotent, but only accidentally and not essentially, for the act of
the agent does not attach itself to absolute non-existence, nor to the nonexistence of anything, for even the Omnipotent cannot bring it about that
existence should become identical with nonexistence. The man who does
not assume matter cannot be freed from this difficulty, and he will have to
admit that the act of the agent is attached to non-existence primarily and
essentially. All this is clear, and there is no need to say more about it. The
philosophers, therefore, say that the essential principles of transitory

134

things are two: matter and form, and that there is a third accidental
principle, privation, which is a condition of the occurrence of what
becomes, namely as preceding it: if a thing becomes, its privation
disappears, and if it suffers corruption, its privation arises.’
Ghazali says:
The second objection is that according to the
philosophers there are accidents which can become nonexistent otherwise than through their contrary, for instance,
motion has no contrary, and the opposition between motion
and rest is, according to the philosophers, only the
opposition of possession and non-possession, i.e. the
opposition of being and not-being, not the opposition of one
being to another being,’ and the meaning of rest is the
absence of motion, and, when motion ceases, rest does not
supervene as its contrary, but is a pure non-existence.’ The
same is the case with those qualities which belong to the
class of entelechies, like the impression of the sensible
species on the vitreous humour of the eyes and still more the
impression of the forms of the intelligibles on the soul; they
become existent without the cessation of a contrary, and
their non-existence only means the cessation of their
existence without the subsequent occurrence of their
opposites, and their disappearance is an example of pure
nonexistence which arises. The occurrence of such a nonexistence is an understandable fact, and that which can be
understood as occurring by itself, even if it is not a real
entity, can be understood as being related to the power of
the Omnipotent. Through this it is clear that, when one
imagines an event as occuring through the eternal Will, it is
unessential, whether the occurring event is a becoming or a
vanishing.
I say:
On the contrary, when non-existence is assumed to proceed from the
agent as existence proceeds from it, there is the greatest difference
between the two. But when existence is assumed as a primary fact and

135

non-existence as a secondary fact, i.e. when non-existence is assumed to
take place through the agent by means of a kind of existence, i.e. when
the agent transforms actual existence into potential existence by removing
the actuality-which is a quality possessed by the substrate-then it is true.
And from this point of view the philosophers do not regard it as impossible
that the world should become non-existent in the sense of its changing
into another form, b for non-existence is in this case only a subsequent
occurrence and a secondary fact. But what they regard as impossible is
that a thing should disappear into absolute nothingness, for then the act of
the agent would have attached itself to non-existence, primarily and
essentially.
Throughout this discussion Ghazali has mistaken the accidental for the
essential, and forced on the philosophers conclusions which they
themselves regard as impossible. This is in general the character of the
discussion in this book. A more suitable name, therefore, for this book
would be `The Book of Absolute Incoherence’, or `The Incoherence of
Ghazali’, not `The Incoherence of the Philosophers’, and the best name
for my book `The Distinction between Truth and Incoherent Arguments’.’

THE THIRD DISCUSSION
THE DEMONSTRATION OF THEIR CONFUSION IN SAYING
THAT GOD IS THE AGENT AND THE MAKER OF THE
WORLD AND THAT THE WORLD IS HIS PRODUCT AND
ACT, AND THE DEMONSTRATION THAT THESE
EXPRESSIONS ARE IN THEIR SYSTEM ONLY METAPHORS
WITHOUT ANY REAL SENSE

Ghazali says:
All philosophers, except the materialists, agree that the
world has a maker, and that God is the maker and agent of
the world and the world is His act and His work. And this is

136

an imposture where their principle is concerned, nay it
cannot be imagined that according to the trend of their
principle the world is the work of God, and this for three
reasons, from the point of view of the agent, from the point of
view of the act, and from the point of view of the relation
common to act and agent. As concerns the first point, the
agent must be willing, choosing, and knowing what he wills
to be the agent of what he wills, but according to them God
does not will, He has no attribute whatever, and what
proceeds from Him proceeds by the compulsion of
necessity. The second point is that the world is eternal, but
‘act’ implies production. And the third point is that God is
unique, according to their principles, from all points of view,
and from one thing-according to their principles-there can
only proceed one thing. The world, however, is constituted
out of diverse components; how could it therefore proceed
from Him?
I say:
Ghazali’s words ‘The agent must be willing, choosing, and knowing what
he wills to be the agent of what he wills’ are by no means self evident and
cannot be accepted as a definition of the maker of the world without a
proof, unless one is justified in inferring from the empirical to the divine.
For we observe in the empirical world two kinds of agents, one which
performs exclusively one thing and this essentially, for instance warmth
which causes heat and coldness which causes cold; and this kind is called
by the philosophers natural agents. The second kind of agents are those
that perform a certain act at one time and its opposite at another; these,
acting only out of knowledge and deliberation, are called by the
philosophers voluntary and selective agents. But the First Agent cannot be
described as having either of these two actions, in so far as these are
ascribed to transitory things by the philosophers. For he who chooses and
wills lacks the things which he wills, and God cannot lack anything He
wills. And he who chooses makes a choice for himself of the better of two
things, but God is in no need of a better condition. Further, when the willer
has reached his object, his will ceases and, generally speaking, will is a
passive quality and a change, but God is exempt from passivity and

137

change. God is still farther distant from natural action, for the act of the
natural thing is a necessity in its substance, but is not a necessity in the
substance of the willer, and belongs to its entelechy. In addition, natural
action does not proceed from knowledge: it has, however, been proved
that God’s act does proceed from knowledge. The way in which God
becomes an agent and a willer has not become clear in this place, since
there is no counterpart to His will in the empirical world. How is it therefore
possible to assert that an agent can only be understood as acting through
deliberation and choice? For then this definition is indifferently applied to
the empirical and the divine, but the philosophers do not acknowledge this
extension of the definition, so that from their refusal to acknowledge this
definition as applying to the First Agent, it cannot be inferred that they
deny that He acts at all.
This is, of course, self-evident and not the philosophers are impostors,
but he who speaks in this way, for an impostor is one who seeks to
perplex, and does not look for the truth. He, however, who errs while
seeking the truth cannot be called an impostor, and the philosophers, as a
matter of fact, are known to seek the truth, and therefore they are by no
means impostors. There is no difference between one who says that God
wills with a will which does not resemble the human will, and one who
says that God knows through a knowledge which does not resemble
human knowledge; in the same way as the quality of His knowledge
cannot be conceived, so the quality of His will cannot be conceived.
Ghazali says:
We will now test each of these three reasons at the same
time as the illusory arguments which the philosophers give in
their defence.
The first reason. We say: ‘Agent’ means someone from
whom there proceeds an act with the will to act according to
choice and with the knowledge of the object willed. But
according to the philosophers the world stands in relation to
God as the effect to the cause, in a necessary connexion
which God cannot be imagined to sever, and which is like
the connexion between the shadow and the man, light and
the sun, but this is not an act at all. On the contrary, he who

138

says that the lamp makes the light and the man makes the
shadow uses the term vaguely, giving it a sense much wider
than its definition, and uses it metaphorically, relying on the
fact that there is an analogy between the object originally
meant by it and the object to which it is transferred, i.e. the
agent is in a general sense a cause, the lamp is the cause of
the light, and the sun is the cause of luminosity; but the
agent is not called a creative agent from the sole fact that it
is a cause, but by its being a cause in a special way, namely
that it causes through will and through choice. If, therefore,
one said that neither a wall, nor a stone, nor anything
inanimate is an agent, and that only animals have actions,
this could not be denied and his statement would not be
called false. But according to the philosophers a stone has
an action, namely falling and heaviness and a centripetal
tendency, just as fire has an action, namely heating, and a
wall has an action, namely a centripetal tendency and the
throwing of a shadow, and, according to them each of these
actions proceeds from it as its agent; which is absurd.’
I say:
There are in brief two points here, the first of which is that only those
who act from deliberation and choice are regarded as acting causes, and
the action of a natural agent producing something else is not counted
among acting causes, while the second point is that the philosophers
regard the procession of the world from God as the necessary connexion
obtaining between shadow and the person, and luminosity and the sun,
and the downward rolling in relation to the stone, but that this cannot be
called an action because the action can be separated from the agent.
I say:
All this is false. For the philosophers believe that there are four causes:
agent, matter, form, and end. The agent is what causes some other thing
to pass from potency to actuality and from nonexistence to existence; this
actualization occurs sometimes from deliberation and choice, sometimes
by nature, and the philosophers do not call a person who throws a shadow
an agent, except metaphorically, because the shadow cannot be

139

separated from the man, and by common consent the agent can be
separated from its object, and the philosophers certainly believe that God
is separated’ from the world and according to them He is not to be classed
with this kind of natural cause. Nor is He an agent in the sense in which
any empirical agent, either voluntary or involuntary, is; He is rather the
agent of these causes, drawing forth the Universe from non-existence to
existence and conserving it, and such an act is a more perfect and
glorious one than any performed by the empirical agents. None of these
objections therefore touch them, for they believe that God’s act proceeds
from Him through knowledge, not through any necessity which calls for it,
either in His essence or outside His essence, but through His grace and
His bounty. He is necessarily endowed with will and choice in their highest
form, since the insufficiency which is proper to the empirical willer does
not pertain to Him. And these are the very words of Aristotle in one of his
metaphysical treatises: We were asked how God could bring forth the
world out of nothing, and convert it into something out of nothing, and our
answer is this: the Agent must be such that His capacity must be
proportionate to His power and His power proportionate to His will and His
will proportionate to His wisdom, if not, His capacity would be weaker than
His power, His power weaker than His will, and His will weaker than His
wisdom. And if some of His powers were weaker than others, there would
be no difference between His powers and ours, and imperfection would
attach to Him as to us-a very blasphemous theory. But in the opposite
case each of these powers is of the utmost perfection. When He wills He
has the power, and when He has the power He has the capacity and all
this with the greatest wisdom. And He exists, making what He wants out of
nothing. And this is only astonishing through this imperfection which is in
us. And Aristotle said also: Everything that is in this world is only set
together through the power which is in it from God; if this power did not
exist in the things, they could not last the twinkling of an eyes
I say:
Composite existence is of two classes; in the one class the composition
is something additional to the existence of the composed, but in the other
the composition is like the existence of matter and form and in these
existents the existence cannot be regarded as anterior to the composition,
but on the contrary the composition is the cause of their existence and

140

anterior to it. If God therefore is the cause of the composition of the parts
of the world, the existence of which is in their composition, then He is the
cause of their existence and necessarily he who is the cause of the
existence of anything whatever is its agent. This is the way in which
according to the philosophers this question must be understood, if their
system is truly explained to the student.
Ghazali says, speaking on behalf of the philosophers:
The philosophers may say: we call an object anything
that has no necessary existence by itself, but exists through
another, and we call its cause the agent, and we do not mind
whether the cause acts by nature or voluntarily, just as you
do not mind whether it acts by means of an instrument or
without an instrument, and just as ‘act’ is a genus subdivided
into ‘acts which occur by means of an instrument’ and ‘acts
which occur without an instrument’, so it is a genus
subdivided into ‘acts which occur by nature’ and ‘acts which
occur voluntarily’. The proof is that, when we speak of an act
which occurs by nature, our words ‘by nature’ are not
contradictory to the term ‘act’; the words ‘by nature’ are not
used to exclude or contradict the idea of act, but are meant
only to explain the specific character of the act, just as, when
we speak of an act effected directly without an instrument,
there is no contradiction, but only a specification and an
explanation. And when we speak of a ‘voluntary act’, there is
not a redundancy as in the expression a ‘living being-man’;’
it is only an explanation of its specific character, like the
expression, ‘act performed by means of an instrument’. If,
however, the word ‘act’ included the idea of will, and will
were essential to act, in so far as it is an act, our expression
‘natural act’ would be a contradiction.
I say:
The answer, in short, has two parts. The first is that everything that is
necessary through another thing is an object of what is necessary by
itself,z but this can be opposed, since that through which the ‘necessary
through another’ has its necessary existence need not be an agent, unless

141

by ‘through which it has its necessary existence’ is meant that which is
really an agent, i.e. that which brings potency into act. The second part is
that the term ‘agent’ seems like a genus for that which acts by choice and
deliberation and for that which acts by nature; this is true, and is proved by
our definition of the term ‘agent’. Only this argument wrongly creates the
impression that the philosophers do not regard the first agent as endowed
with will. And this dichotomy that everything is either of necessary
existence by itself or existent through another is not self-evident.
Ghazali, refuting the philosophers, says:
This designation is wrong, for we do not call any cause
whatsoever an agent, nor any effect an object; for, if this
were so, it would be not right to say that the inanimate has
no act and that only the living exhibit acts-a statement
generally admitted.
I say:
His assertion that not every cause is called an agent is true, but his
argument that the inanimate is not called an agent is false, for the denial
that the inanimate exhibits acts excludes only the rational and voluntary
act, not act absolutely, for we find that certain inanimate things have
powers to actualize things like themselves; e.g. fire, which changes
anything warm and dry into another fire like itself, through converting it
from what it has in potency into actuality. Therefore fire cannot make a
fire like itself in anything that has not the potency or that is not in
readiness to receive the actuality of fire. The theologians, however, deny
that fire is an agent, and the discussion of this problem will follow later.
Further, nobody doubts that there are in the bodies of animals powers
which make the food a part of the animal feeding itself and generally
direct the body of the animal. If we suppose them withdrawn, the animal
would die, as Galen says. And through this direction we call it alive,
whereas in the absence of these powers we call it dead.
Ghazali goes on:
If the inanimate is called an agent, it is by metaphor, in
the same way as it is spoken of metaphorically as tending
and willing, since it is said that the stone falls down, because

142

it tends and has an inclination to the centre, but in reality
tendency and will can only be imagined in connexion with
knowledge and an object desired and these can only be
imagined in animals.
I say:
If by ‘agent’ or ‘tendency’ or ‘willing’ is meant the performance of an act
of a willer, it is a metaphor, but when by these expressions is meant that it
actualizes another’s potency, it is really an agent in the full meaning of the
word.
Ghazali then says:
When the philosophers say that the term ‘act’ is a genus
which is subdivided into ‘natural act’ and ‘voluntary act’, this
cannot he conceded; it is as if one were to say that ‘willing’ is
a genus which is subdivided into willing accompanied by
knowledge of the object willed, and willing without
knowledge of the object willed. This is wrong, because will
necessarily implies knowledge, and likewise act necessarily
implies will.
I say:
The assertion of the philosophers that ‘agent’ is subdivided into
‘voluntary’ and ‘non-voluntary agent’ is true, but the comparison with a
division of will into rational and irrational is false, because in the definition
of will knowledge is included, so that the division has no sense. But in the
definition of ‘act’ knowledge is not included, because actualization of
another thing is possible without knowing it. This is clear, and therefore
the wise say that God’s word: ‘a wall which wanted to fall to pieces” is a
metaphor.
Ghazali proceeds:
When you affirm that your expression ‘natural act’ is not a
contradiction in terms you are wrong; there is as a matter of
fact a contradiction when ‘natural act’ is taken in a real
sense, only this contradiction is not at once evident to the
understanding nor is the incompatibility of nature and act felt

143

acutely,
because
this
expression
is
employed
metaphorically; for since nature is in a certain way a cause
and the agent is also a cause, nature is called an agent
metaphorically. The expression ‘voluntary act’ is as much
redundant as the expression ‘he wills and knows what he
wills’.
I say:
This statement is undoubtedly wrong, for what actualizes another thing,
i.e. acts on it, is not called agent simply by a metaphor, but in reality, for
the definition of ‘agent’ is appropriate to it. The division of ‘agent’ into
‘natural’ and ‘voluntary agent’ is not the division of an equivocal term, but
the division of a genus. Therefore the division of ‘agent’ into ‘natural’ and
‘voluntary agent’ is right, since that which actualizes another can also be
divided into these two classes.
Ghazali says:
However, as it can happen that ‘act’ is used
metaphorically and also in its real sense, people have no
objection in saying ‘someone acted voluntarily’, meaning that
he acted not in a metaphorical sense, but really, in the way
in which it is said ‘he spoke with his tongue’, or ‘he saw with
his eye’. For, since one is permitted to rise ‘heart’
metaphorically for ‘sight’, and motion of the head or hand for
word-for one can say ‘He nodded assent’-it is not wrong to
say ‘He spoke with his tongue and he saw with his eye’, in
order to exclude any idea of metaphor. This is a delicate
point, but let us be careful to heed the place where those
stupid people slipped.
I say:
Certainly it is a delicate point that a man with scientific pretensions should
give such a bad example and such a false reason to explain the
repugnance people seem to have in admitting the division of ‘act’ into
‘natural’ and ‘voluntary act’. No one ever says ‘He saw with his eye, and
he saw without his eye’ in the belief that this is a division of sight; we only
say ‘He saw with his eye’ to emphasize the fact that real sight is meant,

144

and to exclude the metaphorical sense of ‘sight’. And the intelligent in fact
think that for the man who understands immediately that the real meaning
is intended, this connecting of sight with the eye is almost senseless. But
when one speaks of ‘natural’ and ‘voluntary act’, no intelligent person
disagrees that we have here a division of ‘act’. If, however, the expression
‘voluntary act’ were similar to ‘sight with the eye’ the expression ‘natural
act’ would be metaphorical. But as a matter of fact the natural agent has
an act much more stable than the voluntary agent, for the natural agent’s
act is constant-which is not the case with the act of the voluntary agent.
And therefore the opponents of the theologians might reverse the
argument against them and say that ‘natural act’ is like ‘sight with the eye’
and ‘voluntary act’ is a metaphor-especially according to the doctrine of
the Ash’arites, who do not acknowledge a free will in man and a power to
exercise an influence on reality. And if this is the case with the agent in the
empirical world, how can we know that it is an accurate description of the
real Agent in the divine world to say that He acts through knowledge and
will?
Ghazali says, speaking on behalf of the philosophers:
The philosophers may reply: The designation ‘agent’ is
known only through language. However, it is clear to the
mind that the cause of a thing can be divided into voluntary
and non-voluntary cause, and it may be disputed whether or
not in both cases the word ‘act’ is used in a proper sense,
but it is not possible to deny this since the Arabs say that fire
burns, a sword cuts, that snow makes cold, that scammony
purges, that bread stills hunger and water thirst, and our
expression ‘he beats’ means he performs the act of beating,
and ‘it burns’ it performs the act of burning, and ‘he cuts’ he
performs the act of cutting; if you say, therefore, that its use
is quite metaphorical, you are judging without any evidence.
I say:
I This, in short, is a common-sense argument. The Arabs indeed call that
which exerts an influence on a thing, even if not voluntary, an agent, in a
proper, not in a metaphorical, sense. This argument, however, is
dialectical and of no importance.

145

Ghazali replies to this:
The answer is that all this is said in a metaphorical way
and that only a voluntary act is a proper act. The proof is
that, if we assume an event which is based on two facts, the
one voluntary, the other involuntary, the mind relates the act
to the voluntary fact. Language expresses itself in the same
way, for if a man were to throw another into a fire and kill
him, it is the man who would be called his killer, not the fire.
If, however, the term were used in the same sense of the
voluntary and the non-voluntary, and it were not that the one
was a proper sense, the other a metaphorical, why should
the killing be related to the voluntary, by language, usage,
and reason, although the fire was the proximate cause of the
killing and the man who threw the other into the fire did
nothing but bring man and fire together? Since, however, the
bringing together is a voluntary act and the influence of the
fire non-voluntary, the man is called a killer and the fire only
metaphorically so. This proves that the word ‘agent’ is used
of one whose act proceeds from his will, and, behold, the
philosophers do not regard God as endowed with will and
choice.
I say:
This is an answer of the wicked who heap fallacy on fallacy. Ghazali is
above this, but perhaps the people of his time obliged him to write this
book to safeguard himself against the suspicion of sharing the
philosophers’ view. Certainly nobody attributes the act to its instrument,
but only to its first mover. He who killed a man by fire is in the proper
sense the agent and the fire is the instrument of the killing, but when a
man is burned by a fire, without this fact’s depending on someone’s
choice, nobody would say that the fire burned him metaphorically. The
fallacy he employs here is the wellknown one a dicto secundum quid ad
dictum simpliciter, e.g. to say of a negro, because his teeth are white, that
he is white absolutely. The philosophers do not deny absolutely that God
wills, for He is an agent through knowledge and from knowledge, and He
performs the better of two contrary acts, although both are possible; they
only affirm that He does not will in the way that man wills.

146

Ghazali says, answering in defence of the philosophers:
If the philosophers say: We do not mean anything by
God’s being an agent but that He is the cause of every
existent besides Himself and that the world has its
subsistence through Him, and if the Creator did not exist, the
existence of the world could not be imagined. And if the
Creator should be supposed non-existent, the world would
be non-existent too, just as the supposition that the sun was
non-existent would imply the non-existence of light. This is
what we mean by His being an agent. If our opponents
refuse to give this meaning to the word ‘act’, well, we shall
not quibble about words.
I say:
Such an answer would mean that the philosophers would concede to
their opponents that God is not an agent, but one of those causes without
which a thing cannot reach its perfection; and the answer is wrong, for
against them it might be deduced from it that the First Cause is a principle,
as if it were the form of the Universe, in the way the soul is a principle for
the body; no philosopher, however, affirms this.
Then Ghazali says, answering the philosophers:
We say: Our aim is to show that such is not the meaning
of ‘act’ and ‘work’. These words can mean only that which
really proceeds from the will. But you reject the real meaning
of ‘act’, although you use this word, which is honoured
amongst Muslims. But one’s religion is not perfect when one
uses words deprived of their sense. Declare therefore openly
that God has no act, so that it becomes clear that your belief
is in opposition to the religion of Islam, and do not deceive
by saying that God is the maker of the world and that the
world is His work, for you use the words, but reject their real
sense!
I say:
This would indeed be a correct conclusion against the philosophers, if
they should really say what Ghazali makes them say. For in this case they

147

could indeed be forced to admit that the world has neither a natural nor a
voluntary agent, nor that there is another type of agents besides these
two. He does not unmask their imposture by his words, but lie himself
deceives by ascribing to them theories which they do not hold.
Ghazali says:
The second reason for denying that the world is
according to the principle of the philosophers an act of God
is based on the implication of the notion of an act. ‘Act’
applies to temporal production, but for them the world is
eternal and is not produced in time. The meaning of ‘act’ is
‘to convert from not-being into being by producing it’ and this
cannot be imagined in the eternal, as what exists already
cannot be brought into existence. Therefore ‘act’ implies a
temporal product, but according to them the world is eternal;
how then could it be God’s act?
I say:
If the world were by itself eternal and existent (not in so far as it is
moved, for each movement is composed of parts which are produced),
then, indeed, the world would not have an agent at all. But if the meaning
of ‘eternal’ is that it is in everlasting production and that this production
has neither beginning nor end, certainly the term ‘production’ is more truly
applied to him who brings about an everlasting production than to him who
procures a limited production. In this way the world is God’s product and
the name ‘production’ is even more suitable for it than the word ‘eternity’,
and the philosophers only call the world eternal to safeguard themselves
against the word ‘product’ in the sense of ‘a thing produced after a state of
nonexistence, from something, and in time’.
Then Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers:
The philosophers may perhaps say: The meaning of
‘product’ is ‘that which exists after its non-existence’. Let us
therefore examine if what proceeds from the agent when He
produces, and what is connected with Him, is either pure
existence, or pure non-existence, or both together. Now, it is
impossible to say that previous non-existence was

148

connected with Him, since the agent cannot exert influence
upon non-existence, and it is equally impossible to say ‘both
together’, for it is clear that nonexistence is in no way
connected with the agent, for non-existence qua nonexistence needs no agent at all. It follows therefore that what
is connected with Him is connected with Him in so far as it is
an existent, that what proceeds from Him is pure existence,
and that there is no other relation to Him than that of
existence. If existence is regarded as everlasting, then this
relation is everlasting, and if this relation is everlasting, then
the term to which this relation refers is the most illustrious
and the most enduring in influence, because at no moment
is non-existence connected with it. Temporal production
implies therefore the contradictory statements that it must be
connected with an agent, that it cannot be produced, if it is
not preceded by non-existence, and that non-existence
cannot be connected with the agent.
And if previous non-existence is made a condition of the
existent, and it is said that what is connected with the agent
is a special existence, not any existence, namely an
existence preceded by non-existence, it may be answered
that its being preceded by non-existence cannot be an act of
an agent or a deed of a maker, for the procession of this
existence from its agent cannot be imagined, unless
preceded by non-existence; neither, therefore , can the
precedence of this non-existence be an act of the agent and
connected with him, nor the fact that this existence is
preceded by non-existence. Therefore to make nonexistence a condition for the act’s becoming an act is to
impose as a condition one whereby the agent cannot exert
any influence under any condition.’
I say:
This is an argument put forward on this question by Avicenna from the
philosophical side. It is sophistical, because Avicenna leaves out one of
the factors which a complete division would have to state.

149

For he says that the act of the agent must be connected either with an
existence or with a non-existence, previous to it and in so far as it is nonexistence, or with both together, and that it is impossible that it should be
connected with non-existence, for the agent does not bring about nonexistence and, therefore, neither can it effect both together. Therefore the
agent can be only connected with existence, and production is nothing but
the connexion of act with existence, i.e. the act of the agent is only
bringing into existence,’ and it is immaterial whether this existence be
preceded by non-existence or not. But this argument is faulty, because the
act of the agent is only connected with existence in a state of nonexistence, i.e. existence in potentiality, and is not connected with actual
existence, in so far as it is actual, nor with non-existence, in so far as it is
non-existent. It is only connected with imperfect existence in which nonexistence inheres. The act of the agent is not connected with nonexistence, because non-existence is not actual; nor is it connected with
existence which is not linked together with non-existence, for whatever
has reached its extreme perfection of existence needs neither causation
nor cause. But existence which is linked up with non-existence only exists
as long as the producer exists. The only way to escape this difficulty is to
assume that the existence of the world has always been and will always
be linked together with non-existence, as is the case with movement,
which is always in need of a mover. And the acknowledged philosophers
believe that such is the case with the celestial world in its relation to the
Creator, and a fortiori with the sublunary world. Here lies the difference
between the created and the artificial, for the artificial product, once
produced, is not tied up with non-existence which would be in need of an
agent for the continued sustenance of the product.’
Ghazali continues:
And your statement, theologians, that what exists cannot
be made to exist, if you mean by it, that its existence does
not begin after its nonexistence, is true; but if you mean that
it cannot become an effect at the time when it exists, we
have shown that it can only become an effect at the time
when it exists, not at the time when it does not exist. For a
thing only exists when its agent causes it to exist, and the
agent only causes it to exist at the time when, proceeding

150

from it, it exists, not when the thing does not exist; and the
causation is joined with the existence of the agent and the
object, for causation is the relation between cause and
effect. Cause, effect, and causation are simultaneous with
existence and there is no priority here, and therefore there is
causation only for what exists, if by ‘causation’ is meant the
relation through which the agent and its object exist. The
philosophers say: It is for this reason that we have come to
the conclusion that the world, which is the work of God, is
without beginning and everlasting, and that never at any
moment was God not its agent, for existence is what is
joined with the agent and as long as this union lasts
existence lasts, and, if this union is ever discontinued,
existence ceases. It is by no means what you theologians
mean, that if the Creator were supposed to exist no longer,
the world could still persist; you, indeed, believe that the
same relation prevails as between the builder and the
building, for the building persists when the builder has
disappeared. But the persistence of the building does not
depend on the builder, but on the strength of the structure in
its coherence, for if it had not the power of coherence-if it
were like water, for example-it would not be supposed to
keep the shape which it received through the act of the
agent.’

I say:
Possibly the world is in such a condition, but in general this argument is
not sound. For it is only true that the causing agent is always connected
with the effect , in so far as the effect actually exists without this actuality’s
having any insufficiency and any potency, if one imagines that the
essence of the effect lies in its being an effect, for then the effect can only
be an effect through the causation of the agent. But if its becoming an
effect through a cause is only an addition to its essence, then it is not
necessary that its existence should cease when the relation between the
causing agent and the effect is interrupted. If, however, it is not an
addition, but its essence consists in this relation of being an effect, then

151

what Avicenna says is true. However, it is not true of the world, for the
world does not exit on account of this relation, but it exists on account of
its substance and the relation is only accidental to it. Perhaps what
Avicenna says is true concerning the forms of the celestial bodies, in so
far as they perceive the separate immaterial forms; and the philosophers
affirm this, because it is proved that there are immaterial forms whose
existence consists in their thinking, whereas knowledge in this sublunary
world only differs from its object because its object inheres in matter.’
Ghazali, answering the philosophers, says:
Our answer is that the act is connected with the agent
only in so far as it comes into being, but not in so far as it is
preceded by non-existence nor in so far as it is merely
existent. According to us the act is not connected with the
agent for a second moment after its coming to be, for then it
exists; it is only connected with it at the time of its coming to
be in so far as it comes to be and changes from nonexistence into existence. If it is denied the name of
becoming, it cannot be thought to be an act nor to be
connected with the agent. Your statement, philosophers, that
a thing’s coming to be means its being preceded by nonexistence, and that its being preceded by non-existence
does not belong to the act of the agent and the deed of the
producer, is true; but this prior non-existence is a necessary
condition for the existent’s being an act of the agent. For
existence not preceded by non-existence is everlasting, and
cannot be truly said to be an act of the agent. Not all
conditions necessary to make an act an act need proceed
from the agent’s act; the essence, power, will, and
knowledge of the agent are a condition of his being an
agent, but do not derive from him. An act can only be
imagined as proceeding from an existent, and the existence,
will, power, and knowledge of the agent are a condition of
his being an agent, although they do not derive from him.’
I say:

152

All this is true. The act of the agent is only connected with the effect, in
so far as it is moved, and the movement from potential to actual being is
what is called becoming. And, as Ghazali says, nonexistence is one of
the conditions for the existence of a movement through a mover.
Avicenna’s argument that when it is a condition for the act of the agent to
be connected with the existence, the absence of this connexion implies
that the agent is connected with its opposite, i.e. non-existence, is not
true. But the philosophers affirm that there are existents whose essential
specific differences consist in motion, e.g. the winds and so on; and the
heavens and the sublunary bodies belong to the genus of existents
whose existence lies in their movement, and if this is true, they are
eternally in a continual becoming. And therefore, just as the eternal
existent is more truly existent than the temporal, similarly that which is
eternally in becoming is more truly coming to be than that which comes to
be only during a definite time. And if the substance of the world were not
in this condition of continual movement, the world would not, after its
existence, need the Creator, just as a house after being completed and
finished does not need the builder’s existence, unless that were true
which Avicenna tried to prove in the preceding argument, that the
existence of the world consists only in its relation to the agent; and we
have already said that we agree with. him so far as this concerns the
forms of the heavenly bodies.
Therefore the world is during the time of its existence in need of the
presence of its agent for both reasons together, namely, because the
substance of the world is continually in motion and because its form,
through which it has its subsistence and existence, is of the nature of a
relation, not of the nature of a quality, i.e. the shapes and states which
have been enumerated in the chapter on quality. A form which belongs to
the class of quality, and is included in it, is, when it exists and its
existence is finished, in no need of an agent. All this will solve the
problem for you, and will remove from you the perplexity which befalls
man through these contradictory statements.’
Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers:
The philosophers might say: If you acknowledge that it is
possible that the act should be simultaneous with the agent
and not posterior to it, it follows that if the agent is temporal

153

the act must be temporal, and if the agent is eternal the act
must be eternal. But to impose as a condition that the act
must be posterior in time to the agent is impossible, for when
a man moves his finger in a bowl of water, the water moves
at the same time as the finger, neither before nor after, for if
the water moved later than the finger, finger and water would
have to be in one and the same space before the water
disconnected itself, and if the water moved before the finger,
the water would be separated from the finger and
notwithstanding its anteriority would be an effect of the
finger performed for its sake. But if we suppose the finger
eternally moving in the water, the movement of the water will
be eternal too, and will be, notwithstanding its eternal
character, an effect and an object, and the supposition of
eternity does not make this impossible. And such is the
relation between the world and God.
I say:
This is true in so far as it concerns the relation of movement and mover,
but in regard to the stable existent or to that which exists without moving
or resting by nature (if there exist such things ) and their relation to their
cause, it is not trues Let us therefore admit this relation between the agent
and the world only in so far as the world is in motion. As for the fact that
the act of every existent must be conjoined with its existence, this is true,
unless something occurs to this existent which lies outside its nature, or
one or another accident occurs to it,b and it is immaterial whether this act
be natural or voluntary. See, therefore, what the Ash’arites did who
assumed an eternal existent, but denied that He acted during His eternal
existence, but then, however, allowed this agent to act eternally in the
future, so that the eternal existence of the Eternal would become divided
into two parts, an eternal past during which He does not act and an eternal
future during which He acts! But for the philosophers all this is confusion
and error.
Ghazali answers the philosophers on the question of priority:
We do not say that the simultaneity of agent and act is
impossible, granted that the act is temporal, e.g. the motion

154

of the water, for this happens after its non-being and
therefore it can be an act, and it is immaterial whether this
act be posterior to the agent or simultaneous with him. It is
only an eternal act that we consider impossible, for to call an
act that which does not come into being out of not-being is
pure metaphor and does not conform to reality. As to the
simultaneity of cause and effect, cause and effect can be
either both temporal or both eternal, in the way in which it
may be said that the eternal knowledge is the cause of the
fact that the Eternal is knowing; we are not discussing this,
but only what is called an act. For the effect of a cause is not
called the act of a cause, except metaphorically. It can only
be called an act on condition that it comes into being out of
non-being. And if a man thinks he may describe the
everlasting Eternal metaphorically as acting on something,
what he thinks possible is only the use of a metaphor. And
your argument, philosophers-that if we suppose the
movement of the water to be eternal and everlasting with the
movement of the finger, this does not prevent the movement
of the water from being an act-rests on a confusion, for the
finger has no act, the agent is simply the man to whom the
finger belongs, that is the man who wills the movement; and,
if we suppose him to be eternal, then the movement of the
finger is his act, because every part of this movement comes
out of not-beings and in this sense it is an act. So far as the
motion of the water is concerned, we do not say that it
occurs through the act of this man-it is simply an act of God.
In any case, it is only an act in so far as it has come to be,
and if its coming to be is everlasting, it is still an act, because
it has come to be.
Then Ghazali gives the philosophers’ answer:
The philosophers may say: ‘If you acknowledge that the
relation of the act to the agent, in so far as this act is an
existent, is like the relation of effect and cause and you
admit that the causal relation may be everlasting, we affirm
that we do not understand anything else by the expression

155

“that the world is an act” than that it is an effect having an
everlasting relation to God. Speak of this as an “act” or not
just as you please, for do not let us quibble about words
when their sense has once been established.’
Ghazali says:
Our answer is that our aim in this question is to show that
you philosophers use those venerable names without
justification, and that God according to you is not a true
agent, nor the world truly His act, and that you apply this
word metaphorically-not in its real sense. This has now been
shown.
I say:
In this argument he supposes that the philosophers concede to him that
they only mean by God’s agency that He is the cause of the world, and
nothing else, and that cause and effect are simultaneous. But this would
mean that the philosophers had abandoned their original statement, for
the effect follows only from its cause, in so far as it is a formal or final
cause, but does not necessarily follow from its efficient cause, for the
efficient cause frequently exists without the effect’s existing. Ghazali acts
here like a guardian who tries to extract from his ward the confession of
having done things he did not allow him to do. The philosophers’ theory,
indeed, is that the world has an agent acting from eternity and everlasting,
i.e. converting the world eternally from non-being into being. This question
was formerly a point of discussion between Aristotelians and Platonists.
Since Plato believed in a beginning of the world, there could not in his
system be any hesitation in assuming a creative agent for the world. But
since Aristotle supposed the world to be eternal, the Platonists raised
difficulties against him, like the one which occupies us here, and they said
that Aristotle did not seem to admit a creator of the world. If was therefore
necessary for the Aristotelians to defend him with arguments which
establish that Aristotle did indeed believe that the world has a creator and
an agent. This will be fully explained in its proper place.
The principal idea is that according to the Aristotelians the celestial
bodies subsist through their movement, and that He who bestows this
movement is in reality the agent of this movement and, since the

156

existence of the celestial bodies only attains its perfection through their
being in motion, the giver of this motion is in fact the agent of the celestial
bodies. Further, they prove that God is the giver of the unity through which
the world is united, and the giver of the unity which is the condition of the
existence of the composite; that is to say, He provides the existence of the
parts through which the composition occurs, because this action of
combining is their cause (as is proved), and such is the relation of the First
Principle to the whole world. And the statement that the act has come to
be, is true, for it is movement, and the expression ‘eternity’ applied to it
means only that it has neither a first nor a last term. Thus the philosophers
do not mean by the expression ‘eternal’ that the world is eternal through
eternal constituents,s for the world consists of movement. And since the
Ash’arites did not understand this, it was difficult for them to attribute
eternity at the same time to God and to the world. Therefore the term’
eternal becoming’ is more appropriate to the world than the term ‘eternity’.
Ghazali says:
The third reason why it is impossible for the philosophers
to admit according to their principle that the world is the act
of God is because of a condition which is common to the
agent and the act, namely, their assertion that out of the one
only one can proceed. Now the First Principle is one in every
way, and the world is composed out of different constituents.
Therefore according to their principle it cannot be imagined
that the world is the act of God.
I say:
If one accepts this principle, and its consequences, then indeed the
answer is difficult. But this principle has only been put forward by the later
philosophers of Islam.’
Then Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers:
The philosophers may say perhaps: The world in its
totality does not proceed from God without a mediator; what
proceeds from Him is one single existent, and this is the first
of the created principles, namely, abstract intellect, that is a
substance subsisting by itself, not possessing any volume,

157

knowing itself and knowing its principle, which in the
language of the Divine Law is called ‘angel’. From it there
proceeds a third principle, and from the third a fourth, and
through this mediation the existent beings come to be many.
The differentiation and multiplicity of the act can proceed
either from a differentiation in active powers, in the way that
we act differently through the power of passion and through
the power of anger; or through a differentiation of matters, as
the sun whitens a garment which has been washed,
blackens the face of man, melts certain substances and
hardens others; or through a differentiation of instruments,
as one and the same carpenter saws with a saw, cuts with
an axe, bores with an awl;’ or this multiplication of the act
can proceed through mediation, so that the agent does one
act, then this act performs another act, and in this way the
act multiplies. All these divisions are impossible in the First
Principle, because there is no differentiation nor duality, nor
multiplicity in His essence, as will be proved in the proofs of
His unity. And there is here neither a differentiation of
matters-and the very discussion refers to the first effect,
which is, for example, primary matter, nor a differentiation of
the instrument, for there is no existent on the same level as
God-and the very discussion refers to the coming into
existence of the first instrument. The only conclusion
possible is that the multiplicity which is in the world proceeds
from God through mediation, as has been stated previously.
I say:
This amounts to saying that from the One, if He is simple, there can
proceed only one. And the act of the agent can only be differentiated and
multiplied either through matters (but there are no matters where He is
concerned), or through an instrument (but there is no instrument with
Him). The only conclusion therefore is that this happens through
mediation, so that first the unit proceeds from Him, and from this unit
another, and from this again another, and that it is in this way that plurality
comes into existence.
Then Ghazali denies this, and says:

158

We answer: The consequence of this would be that there
is nothing in the world composed of units, but that everything
that exists is simple and one, and each unit is the effect of a
superior unit and the cause of an inferior, till the series ends
in an effect which has no further effect, just as the ascending
series ends in a cause which has no other cause. But in
reality it is not like this, for, according to the philosophers,
body is composed of form and Kyle, and through this
conjunction there arises one single thing; and man is
composed out of body and soul and body does not arise out
of soul, nor soul out of body: they exist together through
another cause. The sphere, too, is, according to them, like
this, for it is a body possessing a soul and the soul does not
come to be through the body, nor the body through the soul;
no, both proceed from another cause. How do these
compounds, then, come into existence? Through one single
cause? But then their principle that out of the one only one
arises is false. Or through a compound cause? But then the
question can be repeated in the case of this cause, till one
necessarily arrives at a point where the compound and the
simple meet. For the First Principle is simple and the rest are
compound, and this can only be imagined through their
contact. But wherever this contact takes place, this principle,
that out of the one only one proceeds, is false.
I say:
This consequence, that everything which exists is simple, is a necessary
consequence for the philosophers, if they assume that the First Agent is
like a simple agent in the empirical world. But this consequence is binding
only upon the man who applies this principle universally to everything that
exists. But the man who divides existents into abstract existents and
material, sensible existents, makes the principles to which the sensible
existent ascends different from the principles to which the intelligible
existent ascends, for he regards as the principles of the sensible existents
matter and form, and he makes some of these existents the agents of
others, till the heavenly body is reached, and he makes the intelligible
substances ascend to a first principle which is a principle to them, in one

159

way analogous to a formal cause, in another analogous to a final cause,
and in a third way analogous to an efficient cause. All this has been
proved in the works of the philosophers, and we state this proposition
here only in a general way. Therefore these difficulties do not touch them.
And this is the theory of Aristotle.’
About this statement-that out of the one only one proceeds-all ancient
philosophers were agreed, when they investigated the first principle of the
world in a dialectical way (they mistook this investigation, however, for a
real demonstration), and they all came to the conclusion that the first
principle is one and the same for everything, and that from the one only
one can proceed. Those two principles having been established, they
started to examine where multiplicity comes from. For they had already
come to the conclusion that the older theory was untenable. This theory
held that the first principles are two, one for the good, one for the bad; for
those older philosophers did not think that the principles of the opposites
could be one and the same; they believed that the most general opposites
which comprehend all opposites are the good and the bad, and held
therefore that the first principles must be two. When, however, after a
close examination, it was discovered that all things tend to one end, and
this end is the order which exists in the world, as it exists in an army
through its leader, and as it exists in cities through their government, they
came to the conclusion that the world must have one highest principle;
and this is the sense of the Holy Words ‘If there were in heaven and earth
gods beside God, both would surely have been corrupted’. They believed
therefore, because of the good which is present in everything, that evil
occurs only in an accidental way, like the punishments which good
governors of cities ordain; for they are evils instituted for the sake of the
good, not by primary intention. For there exist amongst good things some
that can only exist with an admixture of evil, for instance, in the being of
man who is composed of a rational and an animal soul. Divine Wisdom
has ordained, according to these philosophers, that a great quantity of the
good should exist, although it had to be mixed with a small quantity of evil,
for the existence of much good with a little evil is preferable to the nonexistence of much good because of a little evidence.
Since therefore these later philosophers were convinced that the first
principle must of necessity be one and unique, and this difficulty about the

160

one occurred, they gave three answers to this question. Some, like
Anaxagoras and his school, believe that plurality is only introduced
through matter,’ some believe that plurality is introduced through the
instruments, and some believe that plurality comes only through the
mediators; and the first who assumed this was Plato. This is the most
convincing answer, for in the case of both the other solutions one would
have to ask again; from where does the plurality come in the matters and
in the instruments? But this difficulty touches anyone who acknowledges
that from the one only one can proceed: he has to explain how plurality
can derive from the one. Nowadays, however, the contrary of this theory,
namely, that out of the one all things proceed by one first emanation, is
generally accepted, and with our contemporaries we need discuss only
this latter statement.
The objection which Ghazali raises against the Peripatetics, that, if
plurality were introduced through mediators, there could only arise a
plurality of qualitatively undifferentiated agglomerates which could only
form a quantitative plurality, does not touch them. For the Peripatetics hold
that there exists a twofold plurality, the plurality of simple beings, those
beings namely that do not exist in matter, and that some of these are the
causes of others and that they all ascend to one unique cause which is of
their own genus, and is the first being of their genus, and that the plurality
of the heavenly bodies only arises from the plurality of these principles;
and that the plurality of the sublunary world comes only from matter and
form and the heavenly bodies. So the Peripatetics are not touched by this
difficulty. The heavenly bodies are moved primarily through their movers,
which are absolutely immaterial, and the forms of these heavenly bodies
are acquired from these movers and the forms in the sublunary world are
acquired from the heavenly bodies and also from each other, indifferently,
whether they are forms of the elements which are in imperishable prime
matters or forms of bodies composed out of the elements, and, indeed,
the composition in this sublunary world arises out of the heavenly bodies.
This is their theory of the order which exists in the world. The reasons
which led the philosophers to this theory cannot be explained here, since
they built it on many principles and propositions, which are proved in many
sciences and through many sciences in a systematic way. But when the
philosophers of our religion, like Farabi and Avicenna, had once conceded
to their opponents that the agent in the divine world is like the agent in the

161

empirical, and that from the one agent there can arise but one object (and
according to all the First was an absolutely simple unity), it became
difficult for them to explain how plurality could arise from it. This difficulty
compelled them finally to regard the First as different from the mover of
the daily circular movement; they declared that from the First, who is a
simple existent, the mover of the highest sphere proceeds, and from this
mover, since he is of a composite nature, as he is both conscious of
himself and conscious of the First, a duality, the highest sphere, and the
mover of the second sphere, the sphere under the highest can arise. This,
however, is a mistake,’ according to philosophical teaching, for thinker and
thought are one identical thing in human intellect and this is still more true
in the case of the abstract intellects. This does not affect Aristotle’s theory,
for the individual agent in the empirical world, from which there can only
proceed one single act, can only in an equivocal way be compared to the
first agent. For the first agent in the divine world is an absolute agent,
while the agent in the empirical world is a relative agent, and from the
absolute agent only an absolute act which has no special individual object
can proceed. And thereby Aristotle proves that the agent of the human
intelligibles is an intellect free from matter, since this agent thinks all
things, and in the same way he proves that the passive intellect is
ingenerable and incorruptible,s because this intellect also thinks all things.
According to the system of Aristotle the answer on this point is that
everything whose existence is only effected through a conjunction of parts,
like the conjunction of matter and form, or the conjunction of the elements
of the world, receives its existence as a consequence of this conjunction.
The bestower of this conjunction is, therefore, the bestower of existence.
And since everything conjoined is only conjoined through a unity in it, and
this unity through which it is conjoined must depend on a unity, subsistent
by itself, and be related to it, there must exist a single unity, subsistent by
itself, and this unity must of necessity provide unity through its own
essence. This unity is distributed in the different classes of existing things,
according to their natures, and from this unity, allotted to the individual
things, their existence arises; and all those unities lead upwards to the
First Monad, as warmth which exists in all the individual warm things
proceeds from primal warmth, which is fire, and leads upwards to it? By
means of this theory Aristotle connects sensible existence with intelligible,
saying that the world is one and proceeds from one, and that this Monad

162

is partly the cause of unity, partly the cause of plurality. And since Aristotle
was the first to find this solution, and because of its difficulty, many of the
later philosophers did not understand it, as we have shown. It is evident,
therefore, that there is a unique entity from which a single power
emanates through which all beings exist. And since they are many, it is
necessarily from the Monad, in so far as it is one, that plurality arises or
proceeds or whatever term is to be used. This is the sense of Aristotle’s
theory, a sense very different from that in which those thinkers believe
who affirm that from the one only one can proceed. See therefore how
serious this error proved among the philosophers! You should, therefore,
see for youself in the books of the ancients whether these philosophical
theories are proved, not in the works of Avicenna and others who changed
the philosophical doctrine in its treatment of metaphysics so much that it
became mere guessing.
Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers:
It may be said: If the philosophical theory is properly
understood, the difficulties disappear. Existents can be
divided into what exists in a substratum, like accidents and
forms, and what does not exist in a substratum. The latter
can be divided again into what serves as a substratum for
other things, e.g. bodies, and what does not exist in a
substratum, e.g. substances which subsist by themselves.
These latter again are divided into those which exert an
influence on bodies and which we call souls, and those
which exert an influence not on bodies but on souls, and
which we call abstract intellects. Existents which inhere in a
substratum, like accidents, are temporal and have temporal
causes which terminate in a principle, in one way temporal,
in another way everlasting, namely, circular movement. But
we are not discussing this here. Here we are discussing only
those principles which exist by themselves and do not inhere
in a substratum, which are of three kinds: (i) bodies, which
are the lowest type, (ii) abstract intellects, which are not
attached to bodies, either by way of action or by being
impressed upon them, which are the highest type, and (iii)
souls, which are the intermediate agencies, attached to the

163

bodies in a certain way, namely, through their influence and
their action upon them, and which stand midway in dignity;
they undergo an influence from the intellects and exert an
influence upon the bodies.
Now the number of bodies is ten. There are nine
heavens, and the tenth body is the matter which fills the
concavity of the sphere of the moon. The nine heavens are
animated; they possess bodies and souls, and they have an
order in existence which we shall mention here. From the
existence of the First Principle there emanates the first
intellect-an existent which subsists by itself, immaterial, not
impressed on body, conscious of its principle and which we
philosophers call First Intellect, but which (for we do not
quibble about words) may be called angel, or intellect, or
what you will. From its existence there derive three things,
an intellect, the soul, and the body of the farthest sphere, i.e.
the ninth heaven. Then from the second intellect there derive
a third intellect and the soul and the body of the sphere of
the fixed stars, then from the third intellect there derive a
fourth intellect and the soul and the body of the sphere of
Saturn, then from the fourth intellect there derive a fifth
intellect and the soul and the body of the sphere of Jupiter,
and so on till one arrives at the intellect from which there
derive the intellect, the soul and the body of the sphere of
the moon, and this last intellect is that which is called the
active intellect. Then there follows that which fills the sphere
of the moon, namely, the matter which receives generation
and corruption from the active intellect and from the natures
of the spheres. Then through the action of the movements of
the spheres and the stars the matters are mixed in different
mixtures from which the minerals, vegetables, and animals
arise. It is not necessary that from each intellect another
intellect should derive endlessly, for these intellects are of a
different kind, and what is valid for the one is not valid for the
other. It follows from this that the intellects after the First
Principle are ten in number and that there are nine spheres,
and the sum of these noble principles after the First Principle

164

is therefore nineteen; and that under each of the primary
intellects there are three things, another intellect and a soul
and body of a sphere. Therefore there must be in each
intellect a triple character, and in the first effect a plurality
can only be imagined in this way: (i) it is conscious of its
principle, (ii) it is conscious of itself, (iii) it is in itself possible,
since the necessity of its existence derives from another.
These are three conditions, and the most noble of these
three effects must be related to the most noble of these
conditions. Therefore the intellect proceeds from the first
effect; in so far as the first effect is conscious of its principle;
the soul of the sphere proceeds from the first effect, in so far
as the first effect is conscious of itself; and the body of the
sphere proceeds from the first effect, in so far as by itself the
first effect belongs to possible existence. We must still
explain why this triple character is found in the first effect,
although its principle is only one. We say that from the First
Principle only one thing proceeds, namely, the essence of
this intellect through which it is conscious of itself. The effect,
however, must by itself become conscious of its principle,
and this kind of consciousness cannot derive from its cause.
Also the effect by itself belongs to possible existence, and i
cannot receive this possibility from the First Principle, but
possesses it in its own essence. We do indeed regard it as
possible that one effect should proceed from the one,
although this effect possesses by itself and not through its
principle certain necessary qualities, either relative or
nonrelative. In this way a plurality arises, and so it becomes
the principle of the existence of plurality. Thus the composite
can meet the simple, as their meeting must needs take place
and cannot take place in any other g manner, and this is the
right and reasonable explanation, and it is in this way that
this philosophical theory must be understood.
I say:
All these are inventions fabricated against the philosophers by Avicenna,
Farabi, and others. But the true theory of the ancient philosophers is that

165

there are principles which are the celestial bodies, and that the principles
of the celestial bodies, which are immaterial existents, are the movers of
those celestial bodies, and that the celestial bodies move towards them in
obedience to them and out of love for them, to comply with their order to
move and to understand them, and that they are only created with a view
to movement. For when it was found that the principles which move the
celestial bodies are immaterial and incorporeal, there was no way left to
them in which they might move the bodies other than by ordering them to
move. And from this the philosophers concluded that the celestial bodies
are rational animals, conscious of themselves and of their principles,
which move them by command. And since it was established-in the De
Anima-that there is no difference between knowledge and the object of
knowledge, except for the latter’s being in matter, of necessity the
substance of immaterial beings-if there are such -had to be knowledge or
intellect or whatever you wish to call it. And the philosophers knew that
these principles must be immaterial, because they confer on the celestial
bodies everlasting movement in which there is no fatigue or weariness,’
and that anything which bestows such an everlasting movement must be
immaterial, and cannot be a material power. And indeed the celestial body
acquires its permanence only through these immaterial principles. And the
philosophers understood that the existence of these immaterial principles
must be connected with a first principle amongst them; if not, there could
be no order in the world. You can find these theories in the books of the
philosophers and, if you want to make sure of the truth in these matters,
you will have to consult them. It also becomes clear from the fact that all
the spheres have the daily circular movement, although besides this
movement they have, as the philosophers had ascertained, their own
special movements, that He who commands this movement must be the
First Principle, i.e. God, and that He commands the other principles to
order the other movements to the other spheres. Through this heaven and
earth are ruled as a state is ruled by the commands of the supreme
monarch, which, however, are transmitted to all classes of the population
by the men he has appointed for this purpose in the different affairs of the
state. As it says in the Qur’an: ‘And He inspired every Heaven with its
bidding. This heavenly injunction and this obedience are the prototypes of
the injunction and obedience imposed on man because he is a rational
animal. What Avicenna says of the derivation of these principles from

166

each other is a theory not known amongst the ancients, who merely state
that these principles hold certain positions in relation to the First Principle,
and that their existence is only made real through this relation to the First
Principle. As is said in the Qur’an: ‘There is none amongst us but has his
appointed place. It is the connexion which exists between them which
brings it about that some are the effect of others and that they all depend
on the First Principle. By ‘agent’ and ‘object’, ‘creator’ and ‘creature’, in so
far as it concerns this existence nothing more can be understood than just
this idea of connexion. But what we said of this connexion of every
existent with the One is something different from what is meant by ‘agent’
and ‘object’, ‘maker’ and ‘product’ in this sublunary world. If you imagine a
ruler who has many men under his command who again have others
under their command, and if you imagine that those commanded receive
their existence only through receiving this command and through their
obedience to this command, and those who are under those commanded
can only exist through those commanded, of necessity the first ruler will be
the one who bestows on all existents the characteristic through which they
become existent, and that which exists through its being commanded will
only exist because of the first ruler. And the philosophers understood that
this is what is meant by the divine laws when they speak of creation, of
calling into existence out of nothing, and of command. This is tire best way
to teach people to understand the philosophical doctrine without tile
ignominy attaching to it, which seems to attach when you listen to the
analysis Ghazali gives of it here. Tire philosophers assert that all this is
proved in their books, and the man who, (raving fulfilled the conditions
they impose,’ is able to study their works will find the truth of what they
say---or perhaps its opposite--and will not understand Aristotle’s theory or
Plato’s in any other sense than that here indicated. And their philosophy is
tire highest point human intelligence can reach. It may be that, Nvlrerr it
man discover, these explanations of philosophical theory, lie will find that
they happen not only to be true but to be generally acknowledged, and
teachings which are f;errerally acceptable are pleasing and delightful to
all.
One of the premisses from which this explanation is deduced is that
when one observes this sublunary world, one finds that what is called
‘living’ and ‘knowing’ moves on its own account in welldefined movements
towards well-defined ends and well-defined acts from which new well-

167

defined acts arise. For this reason the theologians say that any act can
only proceed from a living, knowing being. When one has found this first
premiss, that what moves in welldefined movements from which arise
well-defined and ordered actions is living and knowing, and one joins to
this a second premiss which can be verified by the senses, that the
heavens move on their own account in well-defined movements from
which there follow in the existents under them well-defined acts, order,
and rank through which these existents under them receive their
subsistence, one deduces from this, no doubt, a third principle, namely,
that the heavenly bodies are living beings endowed with perception. That
from their movements there follow well-defined acts from which this
sublunary world, its animals, vegetables, and minerals receive their
subsistence and conservation , is evident from observation, for, were it not
that the sun in its ecliptic approaches the sublunary world and recedes
from it, there would not be the four seasons, and without tile four seasons
there would be no plants and no animals, and the orderly origination of
elements out of each other necessary for the conservation of their
existence would not take place. For instance, when the sun recedes
towards tile south the air in the north becomes cold and rains occur and
tire production of the watery element increases, whereas in tile south tile
production of the airy element becomes greater; whereas in summer,
when the sun approaches our zenith, the opposite takes place. Those
actions which the sun exercises everlastingly through its varying distance
from the different existents which always occupy one and the same place
are also found in the moon and all the stars which have oblique spheres,
and they produce tile four seasons through their circular movements, and
the most important of all these movements, in its necessity for tire
existence and conservation of the creation, is tire highest circular
movement which produces day and night. The Venerable Book refers in
several verses to the providential care for man which arises out of God’s
subjection of all tile heavens to His bidding, as, for instance, in tile
Qur’anic verse ‘And the sun and the moon and the stars are subjected to
His bidding’, and wlrcn man observes these acts and this guidance which
proceed necessarily and permanently from tire movcnrcnts of tile stars,
and sees how these stars move in fixed movements, and drat they have
well-defined shapes and move in well-defined directions towards welldefined actions in opposite motions, he understands that these well-

168

defined acts can only arise from beings perceptive, living, capable of
choice and of willing.
And he becomes still more convinced of this when he sees that many
beings in this world which have small, despicable, miserable, and
insignificant bodies are not wholly devoid of life, notwithstanding the
smallness of’ their size, the feebleness of their powers, the shortness of
their lives, the insignificance of their bodies; and that divine munificence
has bestowed on them life and perception, through which they direct
themselves and conserve their existence. And he knows with absolute
certainty that the heavenly bodies are better fitted to possess life and
perception than the bodies of this sublunary world, because of the size of
their bodies, the magnificence of their existence, and the multitude of their
lights,’ as it says in the Divine Words: ‘Surely the creation of the heavens
and the earth is greater than the creation of man, but most men know it
not. But especially when he notices how they direct the living beings of
this sublunary world, does he understand with absolute certainty that they
are alive, for the living can only be guided by a being leading a more
perfect life. And when man observes these noble, living, rational bodies,
capable of choice, which surround us, and recognizes a third principle,
namely, that they do not need for their own existence the providence with
which they guide the sublunary world, he becomes aware that they are
commanded to perform these movements and to control the animals,
vegetables, and minerals of this sublunary world, and that He who
commands them is not one of them and that He is necessarily incorporeal
(for, if not, He would be one of them) and that all these heavenly bodies
control the existents which are under them, but serve Him, who for His
existence is in no need of them. And were it not for this Commander, they
would not give their care everlastingly and continuously to this sublunary
world which they guide willingly, without any advantage to themselves,
especially in this act. They move thus by way of command and obligation
the heavens which repair to them, only in order to conserve this sublunary
world and to uphold its existence. And the Commander is God (glory be to
Him), and all this is the meaning of the Divine Words ‘We come willingly’.
And another proof of all this is that, if a man sees a great many people,
distinguished and meritorious, applying themselves to definite acts without
a moment’s interruption, although these acts are not necessary for their

169

own existence and they do not need them, it is absolutely evident to him
that these acts have been prescribed and ordered to them and that they
have a leader who has obliged them in his everlasting service to act
continually for the good of others. This leader is the highest among them
in power and rank and they are, as it were, his submissive slaves. And this
is the meaning to which the Venerable Book refers in the words: ‘Thus did
we show Abraham the kingdom of heaven. and the earth that he should
be of those who are safe. ‘ And when man observes still another thing,
namely, that all the seven planets in their own special movements are
subservient to their universal daily motion and that their own bodies as
parts of the whole are submissive to the universal body, as if they were all
one in fulfilling this service, he knows again with absolute certainty that
each planet has its own commanding principle, supervising it as a deputy
of the first Commander. Just as, in the organization of armies, l where
each body of troops has one commander, called a centurion, each
centurion is subordinate to the one Commander-in-chief of the army, so
also in regard to the movements of the heavenly bodies which the
ancients observed. They number somewhat more than forty, of which
seven or eight’-for the ancients disagreed about this -dominate the others
and themselves depend on the first Commander, praise be to Him! Man
acquires this knowledge in this way, whether or not lie knows how the
principle of the creation of these heavenly bodies acts, or what the
connexion is between the existence of these commanders and the first
Commander. In any case lie does not doubt that, if these heavenly bodies
existed by themselves, that is, if they were eternal and had no cause, they
might refuse to serve their own commanders or might not obey them, and
the commanders might refuse to obey the first Commander. But, since it is
not possible for them to behave in this way, the relation between them and
the first Commander is determined by absolute obedience, and this means
nothing more than that they possess this obedience in the essence of their
being, not accidentally, as is the case in the relation between master and
servant. Servitude, therefore, is not something additional to their essence,
but these essences subsist through servitude and this is the meaning of
the Divine Words: ‘There is none in the heavens or the earth but comes to
the Merciful as a servant. And their possession is the kingdom of the
heavens and the earth which God showed to Abraham, as it is expressed
in the Devine Words: ‘Thus did we show Abraham the kingdom of heaven

170

and earth that he should be of those who are safe. Therefore you will
understand that the creation of these bodies and the principle of their
becoming cannot be like the coming to be of the bodies of this sublunary
world, and that the human intellect is too weak to understand how this act
works, although it knows that this act exists. He who tries to compare
heavenly with earthly existence, and believes that the Agent of the divine
world acts in the way in which an agent in this sublunary world works, is
utterly thoughtless, profoundly mistaken, and in complete error.
This is the extreme limit we can reach in our understanding of the
theories of the ancients about the heavenly bodies, of their proof for the
existence of a Creator for these bodies who is immaterial, and of their
statements concerning the immaterial existents under Him, one of which is
the soul. But to believe in His existence as if He were the cause through
which these bodies had been produced in time, in the way we see the
production of the bodies of this sublunary world, as the theologians
desired-this, indeed, is very difficult, and the premisses they use for its
proof do not lead them where they desire. We shall show this later, when
we discuss the different proofs for the existence of God.
And since this has been firmly established, we shall now go back to
relate and refute in detail what Ghazali tells of the philosophers, and to
show the degree of truth reached by his assertions, for this is the primary
intention of this book.
Ghazali says, refuting the philosophers:
What you affirm are only suppositions and in fact you do
nothing but add obscurities to obscurities. If a man were to
say that he had seen such things in a dream, it would be a
proof of his bad constitution, or if one should advance such
arguments in juridical controversies, in which everything
under discussion is conjectural, one would say these were
stupidities which could not command any assent.
I say:
This is very much the way the ignorant treat the learned and the vulgar
the eminent, and in this way, too, the common people behave towards the
products of craftsmanship. For, when the artisans show the common

171

people the products of their craftsmanship which possess many qualities
from which they draw wonderful actions, the masses scoff at them and
regard them as insane, whereas in reality they themselves are insane and
ignorant in comparison with the wise. With such utterances as these the
learned and the thoughtful need not occupy themselves. What Ghazali
ought to have done, since he relates these theories, is to show the
motives which led to them, so that the reader might compare them with
the arguments through which he wants to refute them.
Ghazali says:
The ways of refuting such theories are countless, but we
shall bring here a certain number. The first is that we say:
You claim that one of the meanings of plurality in the first
effect is that it is possible in its existence, but we ask
whether its being possible in its existence is identical with its
being or something different? If you say ‘identical’, then no
plurality proceeds from it, but if you say that it is different,
why then do you not assert that there is a plurality in the First
Principle, for it not only has existence, but is necessary in its
existence, and existence and necessary existence are not
identical. Therefore, because of this plurality in the First
Principle, let us allow that different entities proceed from it. If
it is said: ‘Necessity of existence cannot mean anything but
existence’, we answer: ‘Possibility of existence cannot mean
anything but existence. If, however, you say: ‘Its existence
can be known without its possibility being known, and
therefore they are different,’ we answer: ‘In the same way
the existence of the necessary existent can be known
without its necessity being known, unless another proof is
added,’ let them therefore be different! Generally speaking,
existence is a universal which can be divided into necessary
and possible, and if the one specific difference is an addition
to the universal, the other specific difference is also an
addition, for both cases are the same. If you say, ‘It
possesses the possibility of its existence through itself and
its existence through another, how then can what it
possesses through itself and what it possesses through

172

another be identical?’ we answer: ‘How then can the
necessity of its being be identical with its being, so that the
necessity of its existence can be denied and its existence
affirmed? And to God, the One, the Absolute Truth, negation
and affirmation cannot be applied equivocally, for one cannot
say of Him that He is and is not, or that His existence is at
the same time necessary or not necessary; but it can be said
of Him that He exists, but that His existence is not
necessary, as it can be said of Him that He exists, but that
His existence is not possible. And it is through this that His
Unity can be recognized. But this unity in the First cannot be
upheld, if what you say is true, that possibility of existence is
something different from the possible existent.
I say:
Ghazali affirms that, when we say of a thing that it is possible in its
existence, this must either mean that it is identical with its existence or
different from it, i.e. something additional to its existence. If it is identical,
there is no plurality, and the statement of the philosophers that there is a
plurality in the possible existent has no sense. If, however, it is not
identical, the philosophers will have to make the same admission about
the necessary existent, i.e. that there is a plurality in it, but this is in
contradiction to their own principle. This reasoning, however, is not valid,
for Ghazali has overlooked a third case, namely, that necessity of being
might be not something added to existence outside the soul but a
condition’ in the necessary existent which adds nothing to its essence; it
might be said to refer to the denial of its being the effect of something
else, a denial of that which is affirmed of all other entities, just as, when
we say of something that it is one, nothing additional to its essence
existing outside the soul is meant-as is, on the contrary, the case when we
speak of a white existent-but only a negative condition, namely,
indivisibility. In the same way, when we speak of the necessary existent,
we mean by the necessity of His existence a negative condition which is
the consequence of His existence, namely, that His existence is
necessary through Himself, not through something else. And also when
we speak of the existent which is possible through itself, it is not
something additional to its essence outside the soul-as is the case with

173

the real possible-that should be understood, but merely that its essence
determines that its existence can become necessary only through a
cause; what is meant, therefore, is an essence which will not be by itself
necessary in its existence when its cause is removed and therefore is not
a necessary existent, i.e. it is denied the quality of necessary existence. It
is as if Ghazali said that the necessary existent is partially necessary
through itself, partially through a cause, and that which is necessary
through a cause is not necessary through itselfb Nobody doubts that these
specific differences are neither substantial differences which divide the
essence nor additions to the essence, but that they are only negative or
relative relations, just as, when we say that a thing exists, the word ‘exists’
does not indicate an entity added to its essence outside the soul, which is
the case when we say of a thing that it is white. It is here that Avicenna
erred, for he believed that unity is an addition to the essence and also that
existence, when we say that a thing exists, is an addition to the things This
question will be treated later. And the first to develop this theory of the
existent, possible by itself and necessary through another, was Avicenna;
for him possibility was a quality in a thing, different from the thing in which
the possibility is, and from this it seems to follow that what is under the
First is composed of two things, one to which possibility is attributed, the
other to which necessity is attributed; but this is a mistaken theory. But he
who has understood our explanation will not be concerned about the
difficulty which Ghazali adduces against Avicenna. The only question he
will have to ask, when he has understood the meaning of ‘possibility of
existence’ for the first effect, is whether this possibility brings about a
compound character in the first effect or not, for if the quality is relative, it
does not bring about a compound character. For not all the different
dispositions which can be imagined in a thing need determine additional
qualities in its essence outside the soul; indeed, this is the case with the
disposition of privations and relations, and for this reason certain
philosophers do not count the category of relation among things which
exist outside the soul, i.e. the ten categories. Ghazali, however, implies in
his argument that any additional meaning must apply to an additional
entity actually outside the soul; but this is a mistake, and a sophistical
argument. This follows from his words
Generally speaking, existence is a universal which can be divided into
necessary and possible, and if the one specific difference is an addition to

174

the universal, the other specific difference also is an addition, for both
cases are the same.
But the division of existence into possible and necessary is not like the
division of animal into rational and irrational, or into walking, swimming,
and flying animals, for those things are additional to the genus and provide
additional species-animality is their common concept and they are specific
differences added to it. But the possible into which Avicenna divides
existence is not an entity actually outside the soul, and his theory is
wrong, as we said before. For the existence which for its existence is in
need of a cause can, as an entity by itself, only be understood as nonexistence-that is to say, anything that exists through another thing must be
non-existent by itself, unless its nature is the nature of the true possible.
Therefore the division of existence into necessary and possible existence
is not a valid one, if one does not mean by ‘possible’ the true possible; but
we will treat of this later. The summary of what we said here is that the
existent can be divided either into essential differences or into relative
conditions or into accidents additional to its essence; out of the division
into essential differences there must necessarily result a plurality of acts
which arise out of the existent, but out of the division into relational and
accidental dispositions no such plurality of different acts results. And if it
should be claimed that out of relational qualities a plurality of acts results,
well then, a plurality will proceed from the First Principle of necessity
without need of the intervention of an effect as the principle of plurality; on
the other hand, if it should be claimed that out of relational qualities no
plurality of acts results, well then, out of the relational qualities of the first
effect also there will result no plurality of acts, and this latter assumption is
the better.’
Ghazali says:
How then can what it possesses through itself, and what
it possesses through another, be identical?
But how can this same man who affirms that possibility exists only in the
mind, say such a thing? Why then does he not apply this doctrine here, for
it is not impossible for the one essence to be positive and negative in its
relations without there resulting a plurality in this essence-which, however,

175

Ghazali denies. But if you have understood this, you will be able to solve
the problem Ghazali poses in this section.
If it is said: ‘It follows from this that there is no composition, either in
existence, necessary by itself, or in existence, necessary through another,’
we answer: As to what is necessary through another, the mind perceives
in it a composition through cause and effect; if it is a body , there must be
in it both a unity actually, and a plurality potentially; if it is, however,
incorporeal, the mind does not perceive a plurality either in act or in
potency . For this reason the philosophers call this kind of existent simple,
but they regard the cause as more simple than the effect and they hold
that the First is the most simple of them all, because it cannot be
understood as having any cause or effect at all. But composition can be
understood of the principles which come after the First; therefore,
according to the philosophers, the second principle is more simple than
the third, and it is in this way that their theory must be understood. The
meaning of ‘cause’ and ‘effect’ in these existents is that a potential
plurality (as it were) exists in them which shows itself in the effect, i.e.
there proceeds out of it a plurality of effects which it never contains
actually in any definite moments If the hearer has understood their theory
in this way and accepted it, he will see that they are not affected by the
objections of Ghazali. But one should not understand this theory in the
way Ghazali does, namely, that out of the second principle, because it
knows its own essence and knows its principle, and therefore possesses
two forms or a dual existence, there proceed two different things, for this is
a false theory. For this would mean that this second principle is composed
of more than one form and that therefore this form’ is one in its
substratum, many by its definition, as is the case with the soul. But the
theologians keep tenaciously to this false explanation in their statements
about the derivation of these principles from each other, as if they wanted
to understand the divine through an analogy with perceptible acts; indeed,
when metaphysics contains such theories, it becomes more conjectural
than jurisprudence. You will have seen from this that the conclusion
Ghazali wants the philosophers to draw concerning the plurality in the
necessary existent, because of the plurality which he considers must exist
in the possible existent, has no validity. For, if possibility were understood
as real possibility, it would indeed imply here a plurality, but since this is
impossible, according to what we have said and shall show later, nothing

176

similar follows concerning the necessary existent. But if possibility is
understood as being a concept of the mind, it follows that neither the
necessary existent nor the possible existent must be regarded as
composite for this reason; the only reason why composition must be
admitted here is because of the relation of cause ; and effect.
Ghazali says:
The second objection is that we say: ‘Is the knowledge
the first effect has of its principle identical with its own
existence and with the knowledge it has of itself?’ If so, there
is only a plurality in the expression used to describe the
essence, not in the essence itself; if not, this plurality will
exist also in the First, for He knows Himself and He knows
others.
I say:
What is true is that the knowledge the first effect has of its principle is
identical with its own essence and that the first effect belongs to the
domain of relation and is therefore of a lesser rank than the First who
belongs to the domain of what exists by itself. It is true, according to the
philosophers, that the First thinks only His own essencenot something
relative, namely, that He is a principle-but His essence, according to the
philosophers, contains all intellects, nay, all existents, in a nobler and
more perfect way than they all possess in reality, as we shall explain later.
Therefore this theory does not imply the abominable consequences he
ascribes to it.
Ghazali says:
It may be said by the philosophers that His knowing
Himself is identical with His essence, and that he who does
not know that he is a principle for others does not know his
own essence, for knowledge conforms to the thing known
and refers therefore to His essence.
I say:
This statement is wrong, for His being a principle is something relative
and cannot be identical with His essence. If He could think that He is a

177

principle, He would be conscious of the things the principle of which He is,
in the way these things really exist, and in this case the higher would be
perfected through the lower, for the thing known is the perfection of the
knower according to the philosophers, as is set forth in the sciences about
the human intellect.’
Ghazali says:
But we answer: In this case the knowledge the effect has
of itself is identical with its essence, for it thinks with its
substance and knows itself, and intellect and knower and
thing known are all one. Therefore, if its knowing itself is
identical with its essence, well then, let it think itself as the
effect of a cause, for this it really is. But the intellect
conforms to the thing known; therefore all this refers solely to
its essence and so there is no plurality. If, indeed, there is a
plurality, it must exist in the First. Therefore, let
differentiation proceed from the First.
I say:
What he says here of the philosophers, about the exclusive existence
of a plurality in the principles under the First Principle, is wrong and does
not follow from their principles. There is, according to them, no plurality in
these intellects, and they do not distinguish themselves by simplicity and
plurality, but only by being cause and effect. And the difference between
the knowledge of the First Principle, as knowing itself, and the knowledge
of the other principles, as knowing themselves, is that the First Principle
thinks itself as existing by itself, not as being related to a cause, whereas
the other intellects think themselves as related to their cause and in this
way plurality is introduced into them. They need not all have the same
degree of simplicity, since they are not of the same rank in relation to the
First Principle and none of them is simple in the sense in which the First
Principle is simple, because the First Principle is regarded as an existence
by itself whereas they are in related existence.
And as to Ghazali’s words:
Therefore, if its knowing itself is identical with its
essence, well then, let it think itself as the effect of a cause,

178

for this it really is. But the intellect conforms to the thing
known, and therefore all this refers solely to its essence and
so there is no plurality. If, indeed, there is a plurality, it must
exist in the First Principle.
I say:
It does not follow from the fact that intellect and the thing known are
identical in the separate intellects that they are all similar in simplicity, for
in this, according to the philosophers, some are superior to others in a
greater or lesser degree; absolute simplicity is only found in the First
Intellect, and the reason is that the essence of the First Intellect is
subsistent by itself, and the other intellects, when they think themselves,
are conscious that they subsist by it; if intellect and the intelligible were in
each of them of the same degree of unity as in the First Principle, either
the essence existing by reason of itself and the essence existing by
reason of another would be congruous, or intellect would not conform to
the nature of the intelligible thing;’ which is impossible, according to the
philosophers. All these arguments and their answers, as set forth by
Ghazali, are dialectical and the only man who can-notwithstanding the
deficiency of the human understanding concerning these questions-give a
demonstrative argument about them is the man who knows (to begin with)
what the intellect is, and the only man who knows what the intellect is is
the man who knows what the soul is, and the only man who knows what
the soul is is the man who knows what a living being is. There is no sense
in discussing these matters in a superficial way and according to the
common notions, which do not contain specific knowledge and are not
properly related to the problem. To discuss these questions, before
knowing what the intellect is, is nothing more than babbling. The
Ash’arites, therefore, when they relate the philosophical doctrines, make
them extremely hateful and something very different from even the first
speculation of man about what exists.
Ghazali says:
Let us therefore drop the claim of its absolute unity, if this
unity is annulled through plurality of this kind.
I say:

179

Ghazali means that, when the philosophers assume that the First thinks
its own essence and knows through this that it is the cause of others, they
must conclude that it is not absolutely one. For it has not yet been proved
that God must be absolutely one. This is the theory of some Peripatetics
who interpreted it as the theory of Aristotle himself.
Ghazali says:
If it is said that the First knows only its own essence, and
the knowledge of its own essence is identical with its
essence, for intelligence, thinker, and intelligible are all one
and it does not know anything but itself-this can be refuted in
two ways. First, because of its worthlessness this theory was
abandoned by Avicenna and other philosophers of repute,
who affirm that the First knows itself as the principle of what
emanates from it and knows all other existents in their
species by a universal thought, and not individually. For they
repudiate the theory that there emanates out of the First
Principle, which does not know what emanates from it, only
one intellect; that its effect is an intellect from which there
emanates an intellect and the soul and the body of a sphere,
and that this intellect knows itself and its three effects,
whereas its cause and principle knows only itself. For
according to this theory the effect is superior to the cause,
since from the cause only one thing emanates, whereas
from the effect three things emanate; moreover, the First
Principle knows only itself, but the effect knows its principle
and effects besides itself. Who can be satisfied with the idea
that such words can apply to the status of God, for indeed
they make Him lower than any of His creatures, who know
themselves and know Him, and he who knows Him and
knows himself is of a nobler rank than He is, since He knows
none but Himself. Their profound thoughts about God’s glory
end therefore in a denial of everything that is understood by
His greatness, and assimilate the state of God to that of a
dead body which has no notion of what happens in the
world, with the sole exception that God possesses selfknowledge. So does God deal with those who turn aside

180

from His way and deviate from the path of His guidance,
denying His words: ‘I did not make them witnesses of the
creation of the heavens and the earth nor of the creation of
themselves, ‘ who think wicked thoughts about God, who
believe that the powers of man suffice to reach the essence
of the divine, who, deceived in their minds, believe that the
human understanding is competent to free itself from the
authority of the prophets and from obedience to them. For no
doubt they are now forced to acknowledge that the
quintessence of their thought is reduced to absurdities which
would make one wonder if they were told in a dream.
I say:
One who wants to enter deeply into these speculations must know that
much of what is firmly established in the speculative sciences seems at
first sight, and compared to the opinions the common man holds about
them, like the visions of a dreamer, as Ghazali truly says; many of these
truths are deduced from a different kind of premisses from that which
satisfies the masses; indeed there is no other way for anyone to become
convinced of their truth than that of comprehending them by logical proof
and evidence. If, for example, the common man, and even he who has
reached a somewhat higher degree of culture, is told that the sun, which
appears to the eye as being the size of a foot, is about a hundred and
seventy times bigger than the earth, he will say that it is absurd, and will
regard him who believes it as a dreamer; and it is difficult for us to
convince him through propositions which he can easily understand and
acknowledge in a short time. The only way, indeed, to attain such
knowledge is through deductive proof-that is, for the man who is amenable
to proof. If it is the case even with geometrical questions and
mathematical problems in general, that, when a solution is explained to
the common man, it will appear to him fallacious and open to criticism at
first sight and to have the character of a dream, how much more this will
be the case in the metaphysical sciences, since for this kind of knowledge
there are no plausible premisses which satisfy the superficial
understanding, by which I mean the understanding of the masses. One
might say that the final knowledge the understanding can reach will seem
to the common man at first sight something absurd. And this happens not

181

only in the theoretical sciences but in the practical sciences as well.
Therefore, the assumption that one of the sciences should vanish and
then come into existence again, at first sight would seem to be impossible.
For this reason many have thought that those sciences are of supernatural
origin and some attribute them to the Jinn, others to the prophets, so that
Ibn Hazm goes so far as to affirm that the strongest proof of the existence
of prophecy is the existence of these sciences. Therefore, if a lover of
truth finds a theory reprehensible and does not find plausible premisses
which remove its reprehensible character, he must not at once believe that
the theory is false, but must inquire how he who puts it forward has arrived
at it, must employ much time in learning this, and follow the systematic
order corresponding to the nature of the topic. And if this is necessary in
other sciences than metaphysics, how much more will this hold for
metaphysics, since that science is so remote from the sciences built on
common sense. Thus it should be learned that in metaphysics rhetorical
reasoning cannot be applied, as it may be applied in other questions; for
dialectics is useful and permissible in the other sciences but forbidden in
this. For this reason most students of this science seek refuge in the
theory that metaphysics is wholly concerned with the qualification of the
substance which the human mind cannot qualify, for if it could do so, the
eternal and the transitory would be on the same level. If this is so, may
God judge him who discusses these questions with common opinions and
who argues about God without scientific knowledge. So it is often thought
that the philosophers are extremely inefficient in this science, and for this
reason Ghazali says that metaphysics is only conjectural.
But in any case we shall try to show some plausible premisses and true
propositions-and we try this only because Ghazali gave such a false
representation of this noble science and denied people the possibility of
attaining happiness through excellent acts, and God is the inquirer and the
reckoner-in order to set out the motives which moved the philosophers to
believe these theories about the First Principle and other existents, the
limit which the human understanding can reach in this matter, and the
doubts which beset these problems; and we shall show all this also in
respect to the Muslim theologians and indicate how far their wisdom
attained. We hope through this to help the lover of knowledge to find the
truth, and to urge him to study the sciences of both parties, hoping also
that God may assist him in all this!

182

We say:
The philosophers tried to acquire knowledge about reality through
speculation alone, without relying on the words of anyone who should
induce them to acquiesce in them without proof; on the contrary,
sometimes through speculation they came into contradiction with the facts
as shown by the senses. They discovered that the sublunary world can be
divided into two classes, the living and the inanimate, any instance of
which only comes into being through something, called form, which is the
entity by which it comes into being after having been non-existent; through
something, called matter, out of which it comes into being; through
something, called the agent, from which it comes into being; and through
something, called the end, for the sake of which it comes into being; and
so they established that there are four causes. And they found that the
form by which a thing comes into being, i.e. the form of the thing
generated, is identical with the proximate agent, from which it comes into
being, either in species, like the generation of man out of man, or in
genus, like the generation of the mule from a horse and a donkey. And
since, according to them, the causes do not form an infinite series, they
introduced a primary, permanent efficient cause. Some of them believed
that the heavenly bodies are this efficient cause, some that it is an
abstract principle, connected with the heavenly bodies, some that it is the
First Principle, some again that it is a principle inferior to it,’ and these
philosophers thought it sufficient to regard the heavens and the principles
of the heavenly bodies as the cause for the coming into being of the
elements, since according to them they too need an efficient cause. As to
the generation of living beings from each other in the sublunary world, the
philosophers had, because of this faculty of life, to introduce another
principle, which was the bestower of soul and of form, and of the wisdom
which is manifested in this world. This is what Galen calls the formative
faculty’ and some regard it as an abstract principle, some as an intellect,
some as a soul,’ some as the body of the heavens, and some as the First.
Galen called this potency the demiurge and was in doubt whether it is God
or another principle. This faculty acts in the generative animals and in
plants, and is needed still more in those plants and animals which have an
equivocal generation. This was the point they reached in the examination
of the sublunary world.

183

When they had agreed that the heavens were the principles of the
perceptible bodies, they investigated the heavens also and agreed that the
heavenly bodies are the principles of the changeable perceptible bodies
and of the species in the sublunary world, either by themselves or in
combination with an abstract principle. And from their investigation of the
heavenly bodies it appeared to them that these do not come into being in
the way that the transitory things of the sublunary world come into being,
for what comes into being, in so far as it comes into being, is seen to be a
part of this perceptible world and its coming into being is only effected in
so far as it is a part of it, for what has come into being has come into being
out of something, through the act of something, by means of something, in
time and in space. And they discovered that the celestial bodies are, as
remote efficient causes, a condition for the coming into being of
perceptible things. If, however, the celestial bodies themselves had come
into being in this way, they would, as a condition of their becoming, have
required prior to them other bodies which would have needed to be parts
of another world, and there would be in this other world bodies like these,
and if these bodies had also come into being, they would have required
other celestial bodies before, and so ad infinitum. And since this was
established in this way and many others, they were convinced that the
heavenly bodies neither come into being nor are destroyed in the way that
sublunary things come into being and are destroyed, for ‘coming into
being’ has no other definition or description or explanation or meaning
than that which we have laid down here. Then they found that the celestial
bodies have also moving principles by means of which and by the agency
of which they are moved. And when they investigated their principles, they
found that the moving principles were neither bodies nor potencies in
bodies. They are not bodies because they are the first principles of the
bodies encircling the world; they are not potencies in bodies, i.e. their
bodies are not a condition for their existence (as is the case in this
sublunary world with the composite principles in animals), because any
potency in a body is, according to the philosophers, finite, since it can be
divided through the division of the body’ and every body which can be
divided is generable and corruptible, i.e. composed of matter and form,
and the existence of its matter is a condition for the existence of its form.
And again, if the principles of heavenly bodies were like the principles of
earthly bodies, the former would be like the latter and would need other

184

bodies prior to them. Thus they were convinced of the existence of
incorporeal principles which are not potencies in a body.
Moreover, they had already found, concerning the human intellect, that
form has two modes of existence, a sensible existence in matter, as in the
stone there is the form of the inorganic which exists in the matter outside
the soul, and an intelligible existence, namely, perception and intellect,
which is separate from matter and exists in the sou. From this they
concluded that these absolutely abstract existences are pure intellects, for
if what is separated from another is already intellect, how much better
suited to be intellect will something be that is absolutely separates And so,
of necessity, they deduced that the objects of thought of those intellects
are the forms of the existents and of the order which exists in the world, as
is the case with the human intellect, for the human intellect is nothing
other than the perception of the forms of the existents, in so far as they
are without matter. They concluded, therefore, that existents have two
modes of existence, a sensible existence and an intelligible existence, and
that the relation between sensible and intelligible existence is like the
relation between the products of art and the arts of the craftsman, and
they believed therefore that the heavenly bodies are conscious of these
principles and that they can only guide what exists in the sublunary world
because they are animated. And when they compared the separate
intellects with the human intellect, they found that these intellects are
superior to the human intellect, although they have it in common with the
human intellect that their intelligibles are the forms of existents, and that
the form of each of these intellects is nothing but the forms and the order
of the existents it perceives, in the way that the human intellect is nothing
but the forms and the order of the existents it perceives. The difference
between these two kinds of intellect is that the forms of the existents are a
cause of the human intellect, since it receives its perfection through them,
in the way that the existent is brought into being through its form, whereas
the intelligibles of these intellects are the cause of the forms of the
existents. For the order and arrangement in the existents of this sublunary
world are only a consequence and result of the order which exists in these
separate intellects; and the order which exists in the intellect which is in us
is only a consequence of the order and arrangement which it perceives in
the existents, and therefore it is very imperfect, for most of this order and
arrangement it does not perceive. If this is true, there are different degrees

185

in the forms of the sensible existents; the lowest is their existence in
matters, then their existence in the human intellect is superior to their
existence in matters, and their existence in the separate intellects is still
superior to their existence in the human intellect. Then again they have in
the separate intellects different degrees of superiority of existence,
according to the different degrees of superiority in these intellects in
themselves.
And again when they investigated the body of the heavens they found
that in reality it is one unique body similar to one single animal, and that it
has one general movement-which is like the general movement of the
animal which moves the whole body of the animal -namely, the daily
movement, and they found that the other heavenly bodies and their
individual movements were similar to the particular members of a single
animal and its particular movements. And they believed, because of this
connexion between these bodies, their referring to one body and to one
end, and their collaboration in one act-namely, the world in its totality-that
they depended on one principle, as happens to different arts which aim at
one product and which depend on one primary art. For this reason they
believed that these abstract principles depend on a unique abstract
principle which is the cause of all of them, that the forms and the order
and arrangement in this principle are the noblest existence which the
forms, the order, and the arrangement in all reality can possess, that this
order and arrangement are the cause of all the orders and arrangements
in this sublunary world, and that the intellects reach their different degrees
of superiority in this, according to their lesser or greater distance from this
principle. The First amongst all these principles thinks only its own
essence and, by thinking its essence, thinks at the same time all existents
in the noblest mode of existence and in the noblest order and
arrangement. The substance of everything under the First Principle
depends on the way in which it thinks the forms, order, and arrangement
which exist in the First Intellect; and their greater or lesser superiority
consists only in this. They conclude therefore that the inferior cannot think
the superior in the way the superior thinks its own essence, nor does the
superior think the inferior in the way the inferior thinks its own essence;
this means that no one of any pair of existents can be of the same rank as
its fellow, since if this were possible they would have become one and
would not form a numerical plurality. Because of this they say that the First

186

thinks only its own essence, and that the next principle can think only the
First, but cannot think what is under itself, because this is its effect and if it
should think its effect, the effect would become a cause. The philosophers
believe that the consciousness which the First has of its own essence is
the cause of all existents, and that which each of the intellects inferior to it
thinks is in part the cause of those existents the creation of which pertains
especially to it, in part the cause of its own essence, i.e. the human
intellect in its universality.
It is in this way that the doctrine of the philosophers concerning these
things and concerning the motives which lead them to these beliefs about
the world must be understood. On examination they will not be less
convincing than the motives of the theologians of our religion, first the
Mu’tazilites and secondly the Ash’arites, which lead them to their view of
the First Principle. They believed, namely, that there exists an essenceneither corporeal, nor in a body-which is living, knowing, willing, provided
with power, speaking, hearing, and seeing, while the Ash’arites, but not
the Mu’tazilites, held besides that this essence is the agent of everything
without intermediary and knows them with an infinite knowledge, since the
existents themselves are infinite. The Ash’arites denied the existence of
causes, and professed that this living, knowing, willing, hearing, seeing,
powerful, speaking essence exists in continuous existence connected with
everything and in everything. But this assumption may be thought to imply
consequences open to criticism, for an essence with qualities as
mentioned above must necessarily be of the genus of the soul, for the soul
is an essence, incorporeal, living, knowing, provided with power, willing,
hearing, seeing, speaking, and therefore these theologians assumed the
principle of reality to be a universal soul, separated from matter in a way
they did not understand.’
We shall now mention the difficulties which result from this assumption.
The most obvious one concerning their theory of the qualities is that there
must exist a composite, eternal essence and therefore an eternal
compound, which contradicts the Ash’arite theory that every compound is
temporal, because it is an accident and every accident is according to
them a temporal product. They assumed besides that all existents are
possible acts, and they did not believe that there is in them an order, a
proportion, and a wisdom which the nature of these existents requires; no,

187

they held that all things could be different from what they are and this
applies necessarily also to the intellect; still, they believed that in the
products of art, to which they compared the products of nature, there exist
order and proportion, and this was called wisdom, and they called the
Creator wises The argument by which they tried to show that there is in
the universe something like this principle was that they compared natural
acts to acts of will and said that every act, in so far as it is an act,
proceeds from an agent endowed with will, power, choice, life, and
knowledge, and that the nature of an act, in so far as it is an act, demands
this; and they tried to prove the truth of this by arguing that what is not
living is inorganic and dead, and, since from the dead there cannot
proceed any act, there does not proceed any act from what is not alive.
Thus they denied the acts which proceed from natural things and
moreover they refused to admit that the living beings which we see in the
empirical world have acts; they said that these acts seem connected with
the living in the empirical world, but their agent is only the living God in the
divine world. But the logical conclusion for them would be that there is in
the empirical world no life at all, for life is inferred from things in the
empirical world, because of their acts;b and, further, it would be interesting
to know how they arrived at this judgement about the divine world.’
The manner in which they established this creator was by assuming that
every temporal product must have a cause, but that this cannot go on
infinitely, and that therefore of necessity the series must end in an eternal
cause; and this is true enough, only it does not follow from this that this
eternal principle cannot be body. They need therefore the additional
proposition that a body cannot be eternal, but this proposition causes
them many difficulties. For it is not sufficient for them to prove that this
world is produced, since it might still be argued that its cause is an eternal
body which has none of the accidents, no circular movements, nor
anything else, through which---although they themselves admitted an
eternal composite being-they proved that the heavens must be produced.
Now, having assumed that the lileavcnly body has been produced, they
supposed that this production had taken place in quite a different way from
what is understood by production in the empirical world. In the empirical
world, namely, things are produced from something, in time and space,
and with a definite quality, not in their totality, and in the empirical world
there is no production of a body from that which is not a body. Nor did they

188

suppose its agent to act like an agent in the empirical world, for the
empirical agent changes one quality in the existent into another; it does
not change absolute nonexistence into existence-no, it brings the existent
into a form and an intelligible quality through which this existent becomes
another existent instead of this, different from it in substance, definition,
name, and act, as it is expressed in the Divine Words: ‘We have created
man from [an extract of] clay, then we made him a clot in a sure
depository, then we created the clot congealed blood, and we created the
congealed blood a morsel, etc. It is for this reason that the ancient
philosophers believed that the absolute existent neither comes into
existence nor can be destroyed.
Now, if one concedes to the theologians that the heavens were created
in time, they are unable to prove that they are the first of created things, as
is the evident meaning of what is said in the Venerable Book in more than
one verse, for instance, in the Divine Words, ‘Do not those who misbelieve
see that the heavens and the earth were both solid, &c.?’ and in the
words, ‘and His throne was upon the water’ and in the words, ‘then He
made for heaven and it was but smoke, &c.’s And as concerns this agent,
according to the theologians, it creates the matter and the form of that
which becomes, if they believe that it has a matter, or it creates the thing
in its totality, if they believe it to be simple in the way they believe the atom
to be simple; and if this is so, this kind of agent changes either nonexistence into existence, namely, when there is generation, that is when
the atom, which according to them is the element of the bodies, comes
into being; or existence into non-existence, namely, when there is
destruction, that is, when the atom is destroyed. But it is clear that an
opposite cannot be changed into its opposite, and that non-existence itself
cannot become existence nor warmth itself cold. It is the privation which
becomes existent, it is the warm thing which becomes cold and the cold
thing which becomes warm, and for this reason the Mu’tazilites say that
privation is an entity although they deprive this entity of the attribute of
existence before the becoming of the world. And their arguments by which
they believe it can be proved that a thing does not come into being from
another thing are incorrect. The most plausible of them is their affirmation
that, if a thing came into being from another thing, this would imply an
infinite regress. The answer is that this is only impossible for production in
a straight line, which, indeed, needs an infinite existence in act; but, as to

189

circular production, it is not impossible that, for instance, fire should come
from air and air from fire ad infinitum, while the substratum is eternal. They
support their theory of the temporal production of the universe by saying
that that which cannot be devoid of things produced must itself be
produced, and the universe, being the substratum of the things that are
produced, must therefore be produced. The greatest mistake in this
argument, when its premiss is conceded, is that it is a false generalization,
for that which cannot be devoid of things produced in the empirical world
is a thing produced out of something else, not out of nothing, whereas
they assume that the universe is produced out of nothing. Further, this
substratum which the philosophers call primary matter cannot be devoid of
corporeality according to the philosophers, and, according to the
philosophers, absolute corporeality is not produced. Besides, the premiss
which affirms that what cannot be devoid of things produced is produced,
is only true when the things produced of which it cannot be devoid are
individual things, but if the things produced are one generically, they have
no initial term; and from whence then should it follow that their substratum
must be produced? And since among the theologians the Ash’arites
understood this, they added to this proposition another, namely, that it is
not possible that infinite generated things (i.e. without initial and final term)
should exist, a proposition which the philosophers regard as necessary.
Such difficulties follow from the assumption of the theologians, and they
are much more numerous than those which can be held against the
philosophers.
And again their assumption that the identical agent which is the First
Principle is an agent for everything in the world without an intermediary
contradicts the evidence of the senses that things act upon other things.
Their most convincing argument on this point is that, if the agent were an
effect, this would lead to an infinite regress. But this would only follow if
the agent were agent only in so far as it is effect, and if what is moved
were the mover, in so far as it is moved, but this is not the case; on the
contrary the agent is only agent in so far as it is an actual existent, for the
non-existent does not produce any effect. What follows from this is not
that there are no acting effects, as the theologians thought, but that the
acting effects end in an agent which itself is not an effect at all. Further,
the impossibility which is the consequence of their deduction is still greater
than the impossibility which follows from the premisses from which they

190

draw this conclusion. For if the principle of the existents is an essence,
endowed with life, knowledge, power, and will, and if these qualities are
additional to its essence and this essence is incorporeal, then the only
difference between the soul and this existent is that the soul is in a body
and this existent is a soul which is not in a body. But that which has such a
quality is necessarily composed of an essence and attributes, and each
compound requires of necessity a cause for its being a compound, since a
thing can neither be compounded by itself nor produced by itself, for
producing, which is an act of the producer, is nothing but the putting
together of the product. And, in general, just as for each effect there must
be an agent, so for each compound there must be an agent which puts it
together, for the putting together is a condition of the existence of the
compounds And nothing can be a cause of the condition of its own
existence, because this would imply that a thing should be its own cause.
Therefore the Mu’tazilites assumed that these attributes in the First
Principle refer to its essence and are nothing additional to it, in the way in
which this happens with many essential qualities in many existents, like a
thing’s being existent and one and eternal and so on This comes nearer
to the truth than the theory of the Ash’arites, and the philosophers’ theory
of the First Principle approaches that of the Mu’tazilites.
We have now mentioned the motives which led these two parties to their
theories about the First Principle, and the conclusions which their
adversaries can draw from them and hold against them. As concerns the
objections against the philosophers, Ghazali has related them in full; we
have answered some of them already, and we will answer some of them
later. The difficulties which beset the theologians we have shown in this
discussion in detail.
We shall now return to distinguish the degree of conviction and
plausibility reached by the different statements which Ghazali makes in
this book, as we proposed to do, and we were only compelled to mention
the plausible propositions which led the philosophers to their theories
about the principles of the universe because they answer the objections
which their adversaries, the theologians, adduce against them; on the
other hand, we mentioned the difficulties which beset the theologians
because it is only right that their arguments on this problem should be
known and their views represented, since they are free to use them as

191

they wish. It is right, as Aristotle says, that a man should adduce the
arguments of his adversaries as he brings forward his own; that is, he
should exert himself to find the arguments of his opponents in the same
way as he exerts himself to find the arguments of his own school of
thought, and he should accept the same kind of arguments from them as
he accepts when he has found the arguments himself.’
We say: The objection that the First Principle, if it can think only its own
essence, must be ignorant of everything it has created would be only a
valid inference if the way it thinks its essence were to exclude all existents
absolutely. But the philosophers mean only that the manner in which it
thinks its own essence includes the existents in their noblest mode of
existence, and that it is the intellect which is the cause of the existents;
and that it is not an intellect because it thinks the existents, in so far as
they are the cause of its thinking, as is the case with our intellect. The
meaning of their words, that it does not think the existents which are under
it, is that it does not think them in the way we think them, but that it thinks
them in a way no other thinking existent can think them, for if another
existent could think them in the way it thinks them, it would participate in
the knowledge of God, and God is far too exalted for this . This is a quality
which is peculiar to God, and for this reason certain theologians concluded
that God, besides the seven qualities which they attribute to Him, has yet
another which is peculiar to Him. Therefore His knowledge can be
described neither as universal nor as individual, for both the universal and
the individual are effects of existents, and the knowledge of both universal
and individual is transitory. We shall explain this still better when we
discuss the question whether God knows individuals or does not know
them, as the philosophers mostly assert when they pose this problem, and
we shall explain that the whole problem is absurd in relation to Gods This
problem as a whole is based on two necessary points. First, if God
thought existents in such a way that they should be the cause of His
knowledge, His intellect would necessarily be transitory and the superior
would be brought into being through the inferior. Secondly, if His essence
did not contain the intelligibles of all things and their order, there would
exist a supreme intellect which would not perceive the forms of existents
in their order and proportion. And since these two cases are absurd, it
follows that when this principle thinks its own essence, these existents
exist in it in a nobler mode than that in which they exist by themselves.

192

And that one and the same existent can have different degrees of
existence can be shown from what occurs with colour . For we find that
colour has different degrees of existence, some higher than others; the
lowest degree is its existence in matter, a higher degree is its existence in
sight, for it exists in such a way that the colour becomes conscious of
itself, whereas existence in matter is an inorganic existence without
consciousness; further, it has been proved in the science of psychology
that colour has also an existence in the imaginative faculty, and this is a
superior existence to its existence in the faculty of sight; it has equally
been shown that it has an existence in the remembering faculty superior to
that in the imaginative faculty,s and, finally, it has in the intellect an
existence superior to all these existences. Now, in the same way, we are
convinced that it has in the essence of the First Knowledge an existence
superior to all its other existences, and that this is the highest degree of
existence possible.
As for what Ghazali mentions concerning the philosophical theory of the
order in the emanation of these separate principles and of the number of
entities which emanate out of each of them, there is no proof that this
really takes place and that this happens exactly in this way; and the form
in which Ghazali relates it is therefore not to be found in the works of the
ancient philosophers. But these philosophers all agree on the theory that
the principles, both separate and nonseparate, all emanate from the First
Principle, and that through the emanation of this unique power the world in
its totality becomes a unity, and that through this power all its parts are
connected, so that the universe aims at one act, as happens with the one
body of an animal; which, however, has different potencies, members, and
acts; and indeed the world is according to the learned one and the same
existent only because of this one power which emanates from the First
Principle. And they agree about all this, because according to them the
heavens are like a single animal and the daily movement which is
common to all the heavens is like the animal’s general movement in
space, and the particular movements which the different parts of heaven
have are like the particular movements of the members of the animal. And
the philosophers had already proved that there is one power in the animal
through which it becomes one and through which all the potencies which it
possesses tend towards one act, that is, towards the preservation of the
animal,’ and all these potencies are connected with the potency which

193

emanates from the First Principle; and if this were not the case, its parts
would disconnect themselves and it would not persist for the twinkling of
an eye. If, however, it is necessary that for a single animal there should be
a single spiritual potency, permeating all its parts, through which the
plurality of potencies and bodies in it becomes unified, so that it can be
said of its bodies and potencies that they are one, and if, further, the
relations of individual beings to the universe in its totality are like the
relation of the parts of an animal to the animal itself, it needs must be the
case that all the potencies in the particular parts of this unique animal and
in the psychological and intellectual motive powers of these parts should
be such that there is in them one single spiritual force which connects all
the spiritual and bodily potencies and which permeates the universe in
one and the same penetration. If this were not the case, no order and no
proportion would exist. And in this way it is true that God is the creator,
supporter, and preserver of everything, and to this the Divine Words apply:
‘Verily, God supports the heavens and the earth lest they should
decline.’S And it in no way follows from the fact that this one potency
permeates many things that there should be a plurality in it, as those
thought who said that from the First Principle there can in the first place
emanate only one from which plurality can then emanate; for this
statement can only be regarded as valid if the immaterial agent is
compared to the material agent. Therefore the term ‘agent’ can only be
applied equivocally to both the immaterial agent and the material. And this
will explain to you the possibility of the procession of plurality from the
Monad.
Again, the existence of all other separate principles consists only in the
forms in which they conceive the First Principle, and it is not impossible
that this should be one identical thing, notwithstanding the difference of
the forms in which they conceive it, in the same way as it is not impossible
that a plurality should be conceived through one and the same form. And
we find, indeed, that all the heavenly bodies in their daily movement, and
the sphere of the fixed stars, conceive one identical form’ and that they all,
moving in this daily movement, are moved by one and the same mover,
who is the mover of the sphere of the fixed stars; and we find, too, that
they have also different particular movements. Therefore it needs must be
that their movements proceed partly from different movers, partly namely
through the connexion of their movements with the first sphere-from one

194

unique mover . And just as the removal of an organ or a potency vital to
the whole animal would invalidate all the organs and potencies of this
animal, so the same applies to heaven with respect to its parts and its
moving potencies, and in general with respect to the principles of the
world and their parts in relation to the First Principle and in their mutual
relations. According to the philosophers the world is closely similar to a
single state: a state is upheld through one ruler and many deputies
subordinate to him; all the deputies in the state are connected with the first
ruler, because the authority of each of them is based on him alone, with
respect to the ends and the order of the acts which lead to these ends for
the sake of which these deputies exist; and so is the relation of the First
Ruler in the world to His deputies. And it is evident to the philosophers that
he who bestows on the immaterial existents their end is identical with him
who bestows on them their existence, for according to them form and end
are identical in this kind of existent and he who bestows on these existents
both form and end is their agent. And therefore it is clear that the First
Principle is the principle of all these principles, and that He is an agent, a
form, and an ends And as to His relation to the sensible existents, He issince He bestows on them the unity which causes their plurality and the
unification of their plurality-the cause of all of them, being their agent,
form, and end, and all the existents seek their end by their movement
towards Him, and this movement by which they seek their end is the
movement for the sake of which they are created, and in so far as this
concerns all existents, this movement exists by nature, and in so far as
this concerns man, it is voluntary. And therefore man is of all beings the
one charged with duty and obligation. And this is the meaning of the
Divine Words: ‘Verily, we offered the trust to the heavens and the earth
and the mountains, but they refused to bear it and shrank from it; but man
bore it: verily he is ever unjust and ignorant.’
And the philosophers only assert that, although all these ruling principles
proceed from the First Principle, it is only some of them that do so directly,
whereas others, ascending gradually from the lower world to the higher,
proceed mediately. For they discovered that certain parts of heaven exist
for the sake of the movements of other parts, and they related them in
each instance to a first principle, till they finally arrived at the absolutely
First Principle; and so it was evident to them that there was one unique
order and one unique act in which they all participate. But to ascertain the

195

order, which he who contemplates reality and aspires to the knowledge of
the First Principle perceives, is difficult, and what human understanding
can grasp of it is only its general principle. What led the philosophers to
believe in a gradation of these principles, in conformity with the spatial
order of their spheres, is that they saw that the highest sphere seems in its
action superior to what is under it, and that all the other spheres follow its
movement . And therefore they believed that what was said about their
order was based on their spatial order. But one might perhaps object that
the order in the spheres is perhaps only based on their activity, not on
their spatial order; for since it seemed that the activities and movements of
the planets exist because of the movement of the sun, perhaps their
movers in setting them in motion follow the sun, and the movement of the
sun derives perhaps directly from the First. For this reason there are in
this question no indubitable assertions, but only assertions more or less
plausible and likely to be true. And since this is established, let us now
return to our subject.
Ghazali says:
The second answer is: people say of the First Principle
that it knows only itself, because they want to avoid the
implication of plurality in it, for the statement that it ]snows
another would imply a duality: its knowing itself and its
knowing another. However, the same applies to the first
effect: it must necessarily know only itself. If it knew another
and not itself alone, there would have to be a different cause
for its knowing another than that for its knowing itself, but
there is no other cause than that for its knowing itself,
namely the First Principle. So it can only know itself, and the
plurality which arose in this way disappears.
If it is said that it follows from its existence and from its
knowing itself that it must know its principle, we answer:
Does this necessity arise from a cause or without a cause? If
the former is the case, there is no other cause than the one
first cause from which only one effect can proceed, and
indeed has proceeded, namely this first effect itself; how,
therefore, could this second effect proceed from it? In the
latter case, then, let the existence of the First Principle imply

196

a plurality of existents without a cause, and let the plurality
follow from them! But if such a thing cannot be imagined,
because the necessary existent can be only one, and
anything added to it must be a possible, and the possible
needs a cause, then the following conclusion must be drawn
concerning the effect: if it is an existent necessary by itself,
then what the philosophers say is untrue, that there is only
one necessary existent; if it is a possible,’ then it needs a
cause; but it has no cause,’ and therefore it cannot know the
existence of its cause.
There is no special necessity for the first effect to have a
possible existence; this is necessary for any effect. However,
that the effect should know its cause is not necessary for its
existence, just as the knowledge of its effect is not
necessary for the existence of the cause; still, it seems more
plausible that the cause should know its effect than that the
effect should know its cause. Therefore the plurality which
would arise from its knowing its principle is impossible; there
is no principle for this knowledge and it is not a necessary
consequence of an effect that it should know its principle;
and out of this there is no issue.
I say:
This is a proof of one who affirms that the First Principle must, besides
knowing itself, know its effect; for, if not, its knowing itself would be
imperfect.
The meaning of Ghazali’s objection is that the knowledge the effect has
of its principle must either be based on a cause or be without a cause. In
the former case, there must be a cause in the First Principle, but there is
none; in the latter case, a plurality must follow from the First Principle,
even if it does not know it; if, however, a plurality follows from it, it cannot
be a necessary existent, for there can be only one necessary existent, and
that from which there proceeds more than one is only a possible existent;
but the possible existent needs a cause, and therefore their assertion that
the First Principle is a necessary existent is false, even if it does not know
its effect. He says also that if it is not a necessity of its existence that the

197

effect should have knowledge of its cause, it even seems more fitting that
it is not a necessity of its existence that the cause should know its effect.
My answer to this is that all this is sophistical. If we assume that the
cause is an intellect and knows its effect, it does not follow that this is an
addition to the essence of the cause; on the contrary, it belongs to the
essence itself, since the emergence of the effect is the consequence of its
essences And it is not true that if the effect proceeds from the First
Principle not because of a cause, but because of the essence of this
principle, a plurality proceeds from it, for according to the thesis of the
philosophers the emergence of the effect depends on the essence of the
First Principle: if its essence is one, one proceeds from it; if many, many
proceed from it. What he assumes in this discussion, namely, that every
effect is a possible existent, is only true for the composite effect, for there
cannot be a compound that is eternal, and everything that is of a possible
existence is generated, according to the philosophers, as Aristotle has
shown in different passages of his works;’ and we shall prove this more
fully later in our discussion of the necessary being. What Avicenna calls
the possible existent has only its name in common with what is in reality
the possible existent; it is, therefore, by no means clear that it needs an
agent in the way it is clear that the possible existent needs an agent.
Ghazali says:
The third objection is: Is the self-knowledge of the first
effect identical with its essence or not? If the former , this is
impossible, for knower and known cannot be identical; if the
latter, let the same apply to the First Principle, so that
plurality will follow from the First Principle. And if the selfknowledge of the effect is not identical with the essence of
the effect, there will not only be a triplicity in the effect, as
they affirm, but a quadruplicity, to wit: its essence, its
knowledge of itself, its knowledge of its principle, and its
being a possible existent by itself, and to this it should
perhaps be added that it is an existent necessary through
another-and then it would be fivefold. From this you can see
and measure the depth of their ignorance.
I say:

198

In this discussion of the intellects there are two points: first the question
about what these intellects know or do not know (this question was fully
treated by the ancients); secondly, the question of what proceeds from
these intellects. What Ghazali mentions here as the theory of the
philosophers is in fact the individual opinion of Avicenna on this latter
problem. Ghazali exerts himself especially to refute him and his followers,
in order to create the impression that he has refuted them all; and this is
acting like one who is, as he puts it, in the depths of ignorance. But this
theory is not found in the works of any of the ancients; and there is no
proof of it except the supposition that from the one there can proceed only
one. But this proposition does not apply in the same way to the agents
which are forms in matter as to the agents which are forms separate from
matter, and according to the philosophers an intellect which is an effect
must necessarily know its principle, and there are here not two entities, i.e.
the intellect and something additional to its essence, for, if so, it would be
a compound, and the intellect, which is simple, cannot be composite. And
the difference in the separate forms between cause and effect is that the
First Cause exists by itself and the second cause exists through its
relation with the First Cause, for the fact of its being an effect lies in its
substance and is not an additional entity, in contrast with material effects;
e.g. colour is an entity which exists by itself in a body, but it is the cause of
sight, in so far as it is related, and sight has no existence except in this
relation;’ and in the same way substances which are separate from matter
are substances which are of the nature of relation. For this reason the
cause and the effect are unified in the forms separated from matter, and in
the same way sensible forms are of the nature of relation, as has been
proved in the book on psychology.’
Ghazali says:
The fourth objection is that it can be said: Triplicity is not
sufficient in the first effect, for the body of heaven which,
according to the philosophers, proceeds from one entity out
of the essence of its principle is composite, and this in three
ways.
The first way is that it is composed of form and matter, as
is body generally, according to the philosophers, and both
must have a principle, since matter differs from form and

199

they are, according to the philosophers, interdependent
causes, so that the one cannot come into being by means of
the other without the intervention of another cause.
I say:
What he says here is that according to the philosophers the body of the
heavens is composed of matter, form, and soul, and that therefore there
must be in the second intellects from which the body of the heavens
proceeds, four entities, namely, one from which the form proceeds, one
from which the hyle proceeds-as both are interdependent, for matter is in
one way a cause of form and form in one way a cause of matterb-one
from which the soul proceeds, and one from which the mover of the
second sphere proceeds. But the view that the body of the heavens is
composed of form and matter like other bodies is falsely ascribed by
Avicenna to the Peripatetics. On the contrary, according to them the body
of the heavens is a simple body; if it were composite, it would, according
to them, suffer corruption, and therefore they say that it neither comes into
being nor perishes, and does not possess the potency for contraries. If it
were as Avicenna says, it would be composite like a living being, and if
this were true, quadruplicity would be a necessary consequence for the
man who asserted that from the one only one can proceed. And we have
already stated that the way these forms are causes for each other, for the
heavenly bodies, and for the sublunary world, and the way the First Cause
is a cause for all of them, is quite different from all this.
Ghazali says:
The second way is that the highest sphere has a definite
measure of size, and its determination by this special
measure taken from among all other measures is an addition
to the existence of its essence, since its essence might be
smaller or bigger than it is; therefore, it must have a
determinant for this measure, added to the simple entity
which causes its existence. The same necessity does not
exist for the existence of the intellect, which is pure
existence and not specified by any measure taken from
among other measures, and therefore may be said to need
only a simple cause.

200

I say:
The meaning of this statement is that when the philosophers say that the
body of the sphere proceeds as a third entity, which by itself is not simple
(for it is a body possessing quantity), there are here in reality two entities,
the one which provides the substantial corporeality, the other the definite
quantity; therefore there must be in the intellect from which the body of the
sphere proceeds more than one entity, and therefore the second cause is
not triple but quadruple. But this is a false assumption, for the
philosophers do not believe that body in its entirety’ proceeds from the
separate principles; if anything proceeds from them, according to the
philosophers, it is only the substantial form, and according to them the
measures of the bodily parts follow from the forms; this, however, refers
only to the forms in matter, but the heavenly bodies, since they are simple,
are not susceptible of measure. Therefore, to assume that form and
matter proceed from an abstract principle is by no means in conformity
with philosophical principles, and is quite absurd. In reality, the agent in
transitory things,’ according to the philosophers, produces neither the form
nor the matter; it only makes a compound out of matter and form. If the
agent produced the form in matter, it would produce the form in
something, not from something. This is not philosophical theory, and there
is no sense in refuting it, as if it were.
Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers:
It might be said: If the sphere were bigger than it is, this
greater size would be superfluous for the order of the
universe; if smaller, it would not suffice for the intended
order.
I say:
He means by this statement that the philosophers do not believe that, for
example, the body of the sphere could be bigger or smaller than it is, for in
either case the order intended in the universe would not be realized, and
the sphere would not set the world in motion according to its natural
power, but either too strongly or too weakly, both of which would involve
the corruption of the world. A greater size of the world would not be a
superfluity, as Ghazali says; no, out of both, bigness and smallness, the
corruption of the world would result.’

201

Ghazali says, to refute the philosophers:
We answer: Does the determination of the manner of this
order suffice in itself for the existence of what possesses this
order, or does it need a cause to effect it? If you believe it
suffices, then you regard it as superfluous to assume causes
at all, and you may well judge that from the order of these
existents the existents themselves result without any
additional cause; if, however, you believe it does not suffice,
but a cause is necessary, this new cause will not suffice
either for the specification of these measures, but will itself
need a cause for its specifying .’
I say:
The summary of this is that he makes the objection against them that in
the body there are many things which cannot proceed from one agent,
unless they admit that many acts can proceed out of one agent, or unless
they believe that many accidents of the body result from the form of the
body and that the form of the body results from the agent. For, according
to such an opinion, the accidents resulting from the body which comes into
being through the agent do not proceed from the agent directly but
through the mediation of the form. This is a conception permissible to the
doctrines of the philosophers, but not to those of the theologians.
However, I believe that the Mu’tazilites think as the philosophers do that
there are things which do not directly proceed from the agent . We have
already explained how the Monad is the cause of the order, and of the
existence of all things which support this order, and there is no sense in
repeating ourselves.
Ghazali says:
The third way is that in the highest heavens there are
marked out two points, the poles, which are immovable and
do not leave their position, whereas the parts of the equator
change their position. Now either all the parts of the highest
sphere are similar (and then there will not be a special
determination of two points amongst all the points to be
poles), or the parts of the sphere are different and some
have a special character which others have not. What, then,

202

is the principle of these differences? For the body of the
heavens proceeds from only one and the same simple entity
and the simple can cause only that which is simple of shape,
namely the sphere, and that which is homogeneous, that is,
has no special distinguishable character. And out of this
there is no issue.
I say:
‘Simple’ has two meanings: first, simplicity can be attributed to that which
is not composed of many part, although it is composed of form and matter,
and in this way the four elements are called simple;’ secondly, it can be
attributed to that which is not composed of form and matter capable of
changing its form, namely to the heavenly bodies; further, simplicity can
be attributed to the agglomerate which has the same definition for its
whole and its part, even when it is composed of the four elements. The
simple character which is attributed to the heavenly bodies can very well
possess parts which are differentiated by nature, as are the right and left
sides of the sphere and the poles; for the globe, in so far as it is a globe,
must have definite poles and a definite centre through which globes differ
individually, and it does not follow from the fact that the globe has definite
sides that it is not simple, for it is simple in so far as it is not composed of
form and matter in which there is potency, and it is non-homogeneous in
so far as the part which receives the place of the poles cannot be any part
of the globe, but is a part determined by nature in each globe individually.
If this were not so, globes could not have centres by nature through which
they were differentiated; thus they are heterogeneous-in this special
meaning of the word ‘heterogeneous’-but this does not imply that they are
composed of bodies different by nature, nor that their agent is composed
of many potencies, for every globe is one. Nor do the philosophers regard
it as true that every point of whatever globe can be a centre and that only
the agent specifies the points, for this is only true in artificial things, not in
natural globes. And from the assumption that every point of the globe can
be a centre, and that it is the agent which specifies the points, it does not
follow that the agent is a manifold unless one assumes that there is in the
empirical world nothing that can proceed from a single agent; for in the
empirical world things are composed of the ten categories and therefore
anything whatever in the world would need ten agents. But all this, to

203

which the view in question leads, which is very much like babbling in
metaphysics, is stupid and senseless talk. The artificial product in the
empirical world is produced, indeed, by only one agent, even if it
possesses the ten categories. How untrue is this proposition that the one
can produce only one, if it is understood in the way Avicenna and Farabi
understand it, and Ghazali himself in his Niche for Lights, where he
accepts their theory of the First Principle.’
Ghazali says:
One might say: ‘Perhaps there are in the principle
different kinds of plurality which do not result from its being a
principle, only three or four are manifest to us, and the rest
we do not perceive, but our incapacity for observation does
not shake our belief that the principle of plurality is plurality
and that from the one no manifold can proceed.’
I say:
If the philosophers made such a statement, they would have to believe
that there is in the first effect an infinite plurality, and one would
necessarily have to ask them whence plurality comes in the first effect.
And since they say that from the one no manifold proceeds, they would
have to concede that the manifold cannot proceed from the One, but their
statement that from the one only one proceeds contradicts their statement
that what proceeds from the First Monad possesses plurality, for from the
One one must proceed. Of course they can say that each term in the
plurality of the first effect is a first term, but then there must be a plurality
of first terms. It is most astonishing how this could remain hidden from
Farabi and Avicenna, for they were the first who made these silly
statements, and many followed them and attributed these theories to the
philosophers. For when Farabi, Avicenna, and their school say that the
plurality in the second principle arises through its self-knowledge and its
knowing another, it follows for them that its essence has two natures or
two forms, and it would be interesting to know which form proceeds from
the First Principle and which does not. And there is a similar difficulty in
their statement that the second principle is possible by itself, but
necessary by another, for its possible nature must necessarily be different
from its necessary nature, which it acquires from the necessary being. But

204

the possible nature cannot become necessary, unless the nature of the
possible can become necessary. Therefore there is in necessary natures
no possibility at all, be it a possibility necessary by itself or a possibility
necessary by another. All these are senseless statements and assertions,
weaker than those of the theologians, extraneous to philosophy, and not
congruous with its principles, and none of these affirmations reaches the
level of rhetorical persuasion, to say nothing of dialectic persuasion.
And therefore what Ghazali says in different passages of his books is true,
that the metaphysics of Farabi and Avicenna are conjectural.
Ghazali says:
We answer: If you regard this as possible, say then that
all existing things in their multiplicity (and indeed their
number reaches thousands) derive from the first effect and
one need not limit this to the body of the extreme sphere’
and its soul, but all souls, heavenly and human, and all
earthly and heavenly bodies can proceed from it, with the
many diversities, belonging to them, which nobody has ever
seen. But then the first effect will suffice.
I say:
This conclusion is true, especially when they imagine that the first act
proceeding from the First Principle is the unity through which the first
effect becomes a unique existent, notwithstanding the plurality in it. And
indeed, if they allow an undetermined plurality in the first effect, it must be
less or more than the number of existents, or equal to it; if less, they must
introduce a third principle unless there is a thing without cause, if equal or
more, the plurality assumed in it will be superfluous.
Ghazali says:
And then it follows that the First Cause by itself will
suffice too. For if one regards it as possible that a plurality
should arise inevitably, although without a cause, and
although there is no necessity for it in the existence of the
first effect, this will be permissible also with reference to the
First Cause, and the existence of all things will be without a
cause, although it is said that they follow inevitably and their

205

number is not known. And if their existence without a cause
can be imagined with reference to the First Cause, it can
also be imagined with reference to the second cause;
indeed, there is no sense in speaking of a reference to the
first or to the second cause, since there is no distinction
between them in time and place and neither the first nor the
second cause can be characterized by its relation to things
which do not differ from them in time and place and can exist
without a cause.
I say:
He says that if a plurality in the first effect is permissible without a cause,
because out of the First Cause there does not follow a plurality,
one may also suppose a plurality within the First Cause, and there is no
need to assume a second cause and a first effect. And if the existence of
something without cause within the First Cause is impossible, then it is
also impossible within the second cause; indeed, our expression ‘second
cause’ has no sense, since in fact they are one and the same thing, and
the one is not different from the other either in time or in space, and if it is
permissible that something should exist without a cause, neither the First
Cause nor the second can be specially distinguished by this; it suffices
that it refers to one of them and therefore it is not necessary to refer it to
the second cause.
Ghazali says by way of an answer in the name of the philosophers:
It might be said: ‘The entities have become so many that
they exceed thousands, but it seems absurd that a plurality
of that extent exists in the first effect and for this reason we
have multiplied the intermediates.’
Then he says in refutation of this:
We answer, however: To say ‘it seems absurd’ is pure
conjecture, and such a judgement should not be applied to
intelligibles. But if one says that it is impossible, we ask:
‘Why is it impossible, what will refute it, and where is the
criterion?’ For, once we exceed the one and believe that
one, two, or three entities can arise in the first effect without

206

a cause, what makes it impossible that there should be four,
five, indeed, a thousand and many thousands , and who
could fix the limit? No, if unity is once exceeded, nothing can
be rejected. This proof again is decisive.
I say:
If, however, Avicenna and these other philosophers had answered that
the first effect possesses plurality, and that necessarily any plurality
becomes one through a unity which requires that plurality should depend
on unity, and that this unity through which plurality becomes one is a
simple entity which proceeds from an individual simple Monad, then they
would have saved themselves from these objections of Ghazali, and
disengaged themselves from these false theories. But since Ghazali
secured his point by ascribing a false assumption to the philosophers, and
did not find anyone to give him a correct answer, he made merry and
multiplied the impossibilities which can be deduced from their theory, for
anyone who lets his horse canter in an empty space can make merry. But
if he had known that he did not thereby refute the philosophers, he would
not have been so delighted about it. The fundamental mistake of Avicenna
and Farabi was that they made the statement that from the one only one
can proceed, and then assumed a plurality in the one which proceeds.
Therefore they were forced to regard this plurality as uncaused. And their
assumption that this plurality was a definite plurality; which demanded the
introduction of a third and fourth principle was a supposition not enforced
by any proof. And generally, this assumption is not a legitimate
assumption for a first and second principle, for they might be asked, ‘Why
has only the second principle and rot the first this special character of
possessing a plurality?’ All this is foolish and senseless talk. The fact is
that Avicenna and Farabi did not know how the Monad was a cause in the
system of Aristotle and the Peripatetics. Aristotle, in the twelfth book of his
Metaphysics, expresses pride in his solution,’ and says that none of his
predecessors could say anything about this problem. In the sense in which
we have expounded the Aristotelian doctrine, this statement that out of the
one only one can proceed is true, and the statement that out of the one a
plurality proceeds is equally true.
Ghazali says:

207

Further, we affirm that the statement that out of the one
only one can proceed is false in respect of the second effect,
for out of it there emanates the sphere of the fixed stars, in
which there are a thousand and twenty-odd stars ,’ different
in magnitude, shape, position, colour,’ and influence, be it of
ill omen or auspicious, some in the shape of a ram, a bull, or
a lion, ; others in the shape of a man; they influence one and
the same place of the sublunary world differently in
conferment of cold and warmth, fortune and misfortune,’ and
their own measures are variable . On account of their
differences it cannot be said that they are all of one kind; for
if this could be said, it might also be said that all the bodies
of the world were of one and the same kind of corporeal
nature, and that one cause sufficed for them all. But just as
the differences in qualities, substances, and natures of the
bodies of the sublunary world show that they themselves are
different, in the same way the stars, no doubt, are shown to
differ, and each of them will need a cause for its form, a
cause for its matter, a cause for the special function in its
nature, to bring warmth or cold or happiness or calamity, a
cause for its being in the definite place it occupies, then
again a cause for its special tendency to group itself with
others in the shapes of different animals. And if this plurality
can be imagined to be known in the second intellect, it can
also be imagined in the first intellect; and then this first
intellect will suffice.
I say:
He had already exhausted this difficulty which is of a type he uses
abundantly in this book, and if the answer we have given in defence of the
philosophers is valid, none of these impossibilities need follow. But if by
this expression one understands that, from the simple numerically one,
only one simple one-not something numerically one in one way, but plural
in another-can proceed, and that its unity is the cause of the existence of
plurality, then one can never escape from these doubts. And again, things
only become many, according to the philosophers, through substantial
differences, and differences through accidents-be they quantitative,

208

qualitative, or in whichsoever of the nine categories of the accident-do not
cause, according to them, differentiations in the substance,’ and the
heavenly bodies, as we said, are not composed of matter and form and
are not specifically different, since they have, according to the
philosophers, no common genus (for, if so, they would be composite, not
simple). But we have treated of this already, and there is no sense in
repeating ourselves.
Ghazali says:
The fifth objection is to say: If we concede these inept
assumptions and these erroneous judgements, how is it then
that they are not ashamed to say that from the fact that the
first effect is of a possible existence, there results the
existence of the highest sphere, and that from its knowledge
of itself there follows the existence of the soul of the sphere
and from its knowledge of the First Principle there follows the
existence of an intellect? What is the difference between this
and the statement that the existence of an unknown man is
necessary , and that he is of a possible existence and knows
himself and his Creator and then that from the fact that he is
of a possible existence there follows the existence of a
sphere? But it will be objected: What is the relation between
his having a possible existence and the existence of a
sphere following from him? And the same holds for the fact
that from his knowing himself and his Creator there follow
two other entities. But it would be ridiculous to say such a
thing about a man or any other existent whatever, for the
possibility of existence is a concept which does not change
through the changing of the possible object, be it a man or
an angel or a sphere. I do not know how any madman could
content himself with any of these assertions, let alone the
learned who split hairs in their discussions about intelligibles.
I say:
These are all theories of Avicenna and his followers, which are not true
and are not built on the foundations of the philosophers; still they are not
so inept as this man says they are, nor does he represent them in a true

209

light. For the man whom he supposed to be of a possible existence
through himself and necessary through another, knowing himself and his
agent, is only a true representation of the second cause, when it is
assumed in addition that through his essence and through his knowledge
he is the agent of the existents, in the way this is assumed by Avicenna
and his school of the second principle, and in the way all philosophers
must admit it of the First Principle, God, glory be to Him. If this is admitted,
it follows that from this man two things proceed: one in so far as he knows
himself, the other, in so far as he knows his Creator, for he is supposed to
act only because of his knowledge, and it is not absurd, if he is supposed
to act because of his essence, to say that what proceeds from him, in so
far as lie has a possible existence, is different from what proceeds from
him in so far as he has a necessary existence, since both these attributes
exist in his nature. This theory, therefore, is not so ignominious as this
man tries to represent it to be through this comparison, in order to cast
odium on the theories of the philosophers and to make them despicable in
the eyes of students.’
There is no difference between Ghazali’s comparison and a person who
said: If you assume a being living through life, willing through will, knowing
through knowledge, hearing, seeing, and speaking through audition, sight,
and speech, and the whole world proceeds from him, it is possible that
from man, living, knowing, hearing, seeing, speaking, the whole world
proceeds, for if these attributes by themselves determine the existence of
the world, it cannot make any difference in the effect through whichever
being possessing these attributes they produce it. If this man Ghazali
sought to speak the truth in this and erred, he might be forgiven; if,
however, he understood how to deceive in these things and tried that, and
if there were no necessity for him to do so, there is no excuse for him. And
if he only wanted to show that he possessed no proof by which he could
provide an answer to the question whence plurality proceeds, as might be
inferred from what he says below, he speaks the truth, for Ghazali had not
reached the degree of knowledge necessary for comprehending this
problem, as will be seen from what he says later; and the reason is that he
studied only the books of Avicenna, and through this the deficiency in his
knowledge arose.
Ghazali says:

210

But if one should say to us: ‘Certainly, you have refuted
their theory, but what do you say yourself? Do you affirm that
from one thing two different things can in any way proceed?
In that case you offend reason. Or will you say that in the
First Principle there is plurality? In that case you abandon
the doctrine of God’s unity. Or will you say that there is no
plurality in the world? In that case you contradict the
evidence of the senses. Or will you say that plurality occurs
through intermediates? In that case you are forced to
acknowledge the theory of your opponents. We answer: ‘We
have not made a deep inquiry in this book; our aimwhich we
have attained-was only to disturb the claims of our
opponents. To this we may add that the claim that the thesis
that two proceed from one is an affront to reason, and the
claim that the attribution of eternal attributes to the First
Principle contradicts the doctrine of God’s unityboth these
claims, we say, are vain and possess no proof. The
impossibility that two should proceed from one is not known
in the way the impossibility of one single person’s being in
two places is known in short, it is known neither by intuitive
necessity nor by deduction. What is the objection against
saying: ‘The First Principle is provided with knowledge,
power, will; He acts as He wants, He judges as He wants,
He creates the dissimilar and the similar as He Hants and in
the way He wants?’The impossibility of this is known neither
by immediate necessity nor by deduction. But the prophets
have brought us this truth, justifying it through their miracles,
and we must accept it. To inquire, however, how God’s act
proceeds from Him through His Will is vain and an illusory
pursuit. Those who have sought to represent and
understand this have arrived as a result of their inquiry at a
first effect from which as a possible existent there proceeds
a sphere, and from which, so far as it knows itself, there
proceeds the soul of the sphere. But this is nonsense and is
by no means an appropriate explanation. Let us therefore
accept the principles of these things from the prophets, and
let us believe in this, since the intellect does not regard it as

211

impossible. And let us abandon the inquiry about quality,
quantity, and quiddity,’ for the human powers do not suffice
for this. And therefore the master of the Divine Law has said:
Think about God’s creation, but do not think about God’s
essence.
I say:
His statement is true, that we have to refer to the Law of God everything
which the human mind is unable to grasp. For the knowledge which
results from revelation comes only as a perfection of the sciences of the
intellect; that is, any knowledge which the weakness of the human mind is
unable to grasp is bestowed upon man by God through revelation. This
inability to comprehend things the knows ledge of which is, however,
necessary in the life and existence of man, is either absolute-i.e. it is not in
the nature of the intellect, in so far as it is intellect, to comprehend such a
thing-or it is not in the nature of a certain class of men, and this kind of
weakness is either a fundamental character of his disposition or
something accidental through a lack of education. Revelation is a mercy
bestowed on all these classes of men.
And as to Ghazali’s words:
Our aim-which we have attained-was only to disturb our
opponents; this aim is not a proper one for him and is
censurable in a learned man, for the intention of the learned,
in so far as they are learned, must be to seek the truth, not
to sow doubts and perplex minds.
And as to his words:
the impossibility that two should proceed from one is not
known in the way the impossibility a single person’s being in
two places is known; although these two propositions are not
of the same degree of assent, still the proposition that from
the simple unit there proceeds only one single unit keeps its
evidence inside the empirical world. Propositions which are
evident differ in their degree of evidence, as has been shown
in the Posterior Analytics, and the reason for this is that
when evident propositions are supported by imagination they

212

receive a stronger degree of assent, and unsupported by
imagination their assent is weakened; but only the masses
rely on imagination, and he who is well trained in intellectual
thought and renounces imagination accepts both
propositions with the same degree of assent.
The strongest degree of evidence pertains to this proposition when a
man makes an induction from transitory existents and sees that they only
change their names and definitions through their acts and that, if any
existent whatever could arise from any act and any agent whatever, the
essences and definitions would become mixed and knowledge would be
annihilated. The soul, for instance, distinguishes itself from the inorganic
only through its special acts which proceed from it, and inorganic things
are only distinguished from one another through the acts that are proper to
them; and the same applies to souls. And if many acts were to proceed
from a single potency, in the way that many acts proceed from composite
potencies, there would be no difference between the simple and the
composite essence and they would be indistinguishable for us. And again,
if many acts could proceed from one single essence, an act without an
agent would be possible, for an existent comes to be through an existent,
not through a non-existent, and therefore the non-existent cannot come to
be by itself; and if it is true that the mover of the privation and the
transposer of its potency into act transposes it only through the actuality it
possesses itself, of necessity the actuality it possesses must be of the
same kind as the act it transposes If any effect whatever could proceed
from any agent whatever, it would not be impossible that the effects
should be actualized by themselves without an agent. And if many kinds of
potency could be actualized through one and the same agent, this agent
would itself have to possess these kinds or related kinds, for if it
possessed only one of these kinds, all the other kinds would have to be
actualized by themselves without a cause. It is not permissible to say: The
only condition for the agent is that it exists as acting with an absolute
action, not with a specified kind of action; for, in that case, any existent
whatever would be able to perform any act whatever and what exists
would be mixed;’ besides, the absolute, that is the universal, existent
stands nearer to non-existence than the real individual existent. So those
who denied the theory of universals denied the belief in a universal
existent and in a universal becoming , whereas the champions of this

213

theory regarded them as something midway between being and nonbeing; but if this were the case, it would follow that the universals could be
a cause of existents. The proposition that from the one only one act can
proceed is more evident for the empirical than for the divine world. For
knowledge multiplies through the multiplying of the objects of thought in
the world, since the intellect knows these objects in the way that they exist
in the world, and they are the cause of its knowledge. It is not possible for
many objects of thought to be known through one act of thought, nor can
one act of thought produce many effects in the empirical world, e.g. the
knowledge of the artisan which produces, for example, a cupboard is
different from the knowledge which produces a chair. But eternal wisdom
and the eternal agent differ in this matter from temporal knowledge and
the temporal agent.
If I were asked ‘what is your own point of view in this question? You
have denied Avicenna’s theory of the cause of plurality, but what do you
say yourself? For it has been pointed out that the different schools of
philosophy have three different answers to this question; that the plurality
comes only through matter; that the plurality comes only through
instruments; that the plurality comes through mediators. And it is said of
the Peripatetics that they accept the theory which makes mediation the
cause of plurality’-I cannot give in this book an answer to this question
supported by a demonstrative proof. We find, however, neither in Aristotle
nor in any of the known Peripatetics this theory which is ascribed to them,
with the exception of Porphyry, the Tyrian, the author of the Introduction to
Logic, and he is not among the most subtle of philosophers My opinion is
that according to the principles of the Peripatetics the cause of plurality is
a combination of three factors, the intermediates, the dispositions, and the
instruments; and we have already explained how all these depend on the
Monad and refer to it, for each of them exists through an absolute unity
which is the cause of plurality. For it seems that the cause of the plurality
of the separate intellects is the difference in their natures, by which they
receive the knowledge they gain of the First Principle and which acquire
from the First Principle a unity which by itself is one single act, but which
becomes many through the plurality of the recipients, just as there are
many deputies under the power of a king and many arts under one art.
This we shall examine in another place, and if some part of it becomes
clear it will suffice; otherwise we must take refuge in revelation. In so far

214

as the differences depend on differences between the four causes, the
question is clear. For the differentiation of the spheres arises from the
differences of their movers, of their forms, of their matter, supposing they
have matter,’ and of their acts which serve a special end in the world,
even if the philosophers did not believe that these spheres exist for the
sake of these acts As to the differences which arise primarily in the
sublunary world in the elements, as for instance the differences between
fire and earth, and in short the opposites, they are based on the
differentiation of matter and on their varying distances from their movers,
which are the heavenly bodies. As to the difference between the two
supreme movements, one of which is the agent of generation and the
other the agent of corruption, they depend on the differentiation of the
heavenly bodies and their motions, as is proved in the book On
Generation and Corruption. For the difference which arises from the
heavenly bodies resembles the difference which arises from the difference
in the instruments. To sum up: the factors for the origination of plurality
from the one Agent are three, according to Aristotle, and he refers to the
One in the sense mentioned above, namely, that the One is the cause of
the plurality. In the sublunary world the differences arise from the four
causes, that is to say, the difference of the agents, the matter, the
instruments, and the intermediaries which transmit the acts of the First
Agent without its direct interference, and those intermediaries are very
similar to the instruments. And an example of the differentiation which
arises through the difference of the recipients, and out of the fact that
certain differentiated things cause others, is colour. For the colour which
arises in the air differs from the colour in the body, and the colour in the
faculty of sight, i.e. in the eye, from the colour in the air, and the colour in
the common internal sense from the colour in the eye, and the colour in
the imagination from the colour in the common internal sense, and the
colour in the memorative and retentive faculty from the colour in the
imagination; and all this has been explained in the book of psychology.

215

THE FOURTH DISCUSSION
SHOWING THAT THEY ARE UNABLE TO PROVE THE
EXISTENCE OF A CREATOR OF THE WORLD
Ghazali says:
We say: Mankind is divided into two categories; one, the
men of truth who have acknowledged that the world has
become and know by necessity that what has become does
not become by itself but needs a creator, and the
reasonableness of their view lies in their affirmation of a
creator; the other, the materialists, believe the world, in the
state in which it exists,, to be eternal and do not attribute a
creator to it, and their doctrine is intelligible, although their
proof shows its inanity. But as to the philosophers, they
believe the world to be eternal and still attribute a creator to
it. This theory is self-contradictory and needs no refutation.
I say:
The theory of the philosophers is, because of the factual evidence,
more intelligible than both the other theories together. There are two kinds
of agent: (t) the agent to which the object which proceeds from it is only
attached during the process of its becoming; once this process is finished,
the object is not any more in need of it-for instance, the coming into
existence of a house through the builder; (2) the agent from which nothing
proceeds but an act which has no other existence than its dependence on
it. The distinctive mark of this act is that it is convertible with the existence
of its object, i.e. when the act does not exist the object does not exist, and
when the act exists the object exists-they are inseparable. This kind of
agent is superior to the former and is more truly an agent, for this agent
brings its object to being and conserves it, whereas the other agent only
brings its objects to being, but requires another agent for its further
conservation. The mover is such a superior agent in relation to the moved
and to the things whose existence consists only in their movement. The
philosophers, believing that movement is the act of a mover and that the
existence of the world is only perfected through motion, say that the agent
of motion is the agent of the world, and if the agent refrained for only one

216

moment from its action, the world would be annihilated. They use the
following syllogism: The world is an act, or a thing whose existence is
consequent upon this act. Each act by its existence implies the existence
of an agent. Therefore the world has an agent existing by reason of its
existence. The man who regards it as necessary that the act which
proceeds from the agent of the world should have begun in time says: The
world is temporal through an eternal agent. But the man for whom the act
of the Eternal is eternal says: The world has come into being, from an
eternal agent having an eternal act, i.e. an act without beginning or end;
which does, however, not mean that the world is eternal by itself, as
people who call the world eternal imagine it to be.
Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers:
The philosophers might answer: When we affirm that the
world has a creator, we do riot understand thereby a
voluntary agent who acts after not having acted, as we
observe in the various kinds of agents, like tailors, weavers,
and builders, but we mean the cause of the world, and we
call it the First Principle, understanding by this that there is
no cause for its existence, but that it is a cause of the
existence of other things; and if we call this principle the
Creator, it is in this sense. It is easy to establish by a strict
proof an existent for the existence of which there is no
cause. For we say that the world and its existents either
have a cause or have not. If it has a cause, this cause itself
either has or has not a cause, and the same can be said
about the latter cause, and either we go on ad infinitum in
this way, and this is absurd, or we arrive at a last term, and
this end is the First Cause, which has no cause for its
existence and which we call First Principle. And if the world
existed by itself without cause, then it would be clear what
the First Principle is, for we only mean by it an existent
without a cause and which is necessarily eternal. However, it
is not possible that the First Principle should be the heavens,
for there are many of these and the proof of unity contradicts
this, and its impossibility is shown on examination of the
attribute of the principle. Nor can it be said that one single

217

heaven, or one single body, the sun or any other body, can
be the First Principle; for all these are bodies, and body is
composed of matter and form, and the First Principle cannot
be composite, as is clear on a second examination. Our
intention is to show that an existent which has no cause is
eternal by necessity and by universal consent, and only
about its qualities is there a divergence of opinion. And this
is what we mean by a first principle.
I say:
This argument carries a certain conviction, but still it,is not true. For the
term `cause' is attributed equivocally to the four causesagent, form,
matter, and end. Therefore if this were the answer of the philosophers, it
would be defective. For if they were asked which cause they mean by their
statement that the world has a first cause, and if they answered, `That
agent whose act is uncreated and everlasting, and whose object is
identical with its act', their answer would be true according to their
doctrine; for against this conception, in the way we expounded it, there is
no objection. But if they answered `The formal cause', the objection would
be raised whether they supposed the form of the world to subsist by itself
in the world, and if they answered, `We mean a form separate from
matter', their statement would be in harmony with their theory; but if they
answered, `We mean a form in matter', this would imply that the First
Principle was not something incorporeal; and this does not accord with
philosophical doctrine. Further, if they said, `It is a cause which acts for an
end', this again would agree with the philosophical doctrine. As you see,
this statement is capable of many interpretations, and how can it be
represented there as an answer of the philosophers?
And as to Ghazali's words
We call it the First Principle, understanding by this that
there is no cause for its existence, but that it is a cause for
the existence of other things.
This again is a defective statement, for this might be said also of the
first sphere, or of heaven in its entirety, or generally of any kind of
existents which could be supposed to exist without a cause; and between
this and the materialistic theory' there is no difference.

218

And as to Ghazali's words:
It is easy to establish by a strict proof an existent for the
existence of which there is no cause.
This again is a defective statement, for the causes must be specified,
and it must be shown that each kind has an initial term without cause-that
is, that the agents lead upwards to a first agent, the formal causes to a
first form, the material causes to a first matter, and the final causes to a
first end. And then it must still be shown that these four ultimate causes
lead to a first cause. This is not clear from the statement as he expresses
it here.
And in the same way the statement in which he brings a proof for the
existence of a first cause is defective, i.e. his statement:
For we soy that the world and its existents either have a
cause or have not ....
For the term `cause' is used in an equivocal way. And similarly the
infinite regress of causes is according to philosophical doctrine in one way
impossible, in another way necessary; impossible when this regress is
essential and in a straight line and the prior cause is a condition of the
existence of the posterior, not impossible when this regress is accidental
and circular, when the prior is not a condition for the posterior and when
there exists an essential first cause-for instance, the origin of rain from a
cloud, the origin of a cloud from vapour, the origin of vapour from rain. And
this is according to the philosophers an eternal circular process, which of
necessity, however, presupposes a first cause. And similarly the coming
into existence of one man from another is an eternal process, for in such
cases the existence of the prior is not a condition for the existence of the
posterior; indeed, the destruction of some of them is often a necessary
condition. This kind of cause leads upwards to an eternal first cause which
acts in each individual member of the series of causes at the moment of
the becoming of its final effect; for instance, when Socrates engenders
Plato, the ultimate mover, according to the philosophers, is the highest
sphere, or the soul, or the intellect,z or all together, or God the Creator.
And therefore Aristotle says that a man and the sun together engender a
man, and it is clear that the sun leads upwards to its mover and its mover
to the First Principle. Therefore the past man is not a condition for the

219

existence of the future man. Similarly, when an artisan produces
successively a series of products of craftsmanship with different
instruments, and produces these instruments through instruments and the
latter again through other instruments, the becoming of these instruments
one from another is something accidental, and none of these instruments
is a condition for the existence of the product of craftsmanship except the
firsts instrument which is in immediate contact with the work produced .
Now the father is necessary for the coming into existence of the son in the
same way as the instrument which comes into immediate contact with the
product of craftsmanship is necessary for its coming into existence. And
the instrument with which this instrument is produced will be necessary for
the production of this instrument, but will not be necessary for the
production of the product of craftsmanship unless accidentally. Therefore
sometimes, when the posterior instrument is produced from the matter of
the anterior, the destruction of the anterior is a condition for the existence
of the posterior, for instance, when a man comes into being from a man
who has perished, through the latter becoming first a plant, then sperm or
menstrual blood? And we have already discussed this problem. Those,
however, who regard an infinite series of essential causes as possible are
materialists, and he who concedes this does not understand the efficient
cause. And about the efficient cause there is no divergence of opinion
among philosophers.
And as to Ghazali's words:
And if the world existed by itself without cause, then it
would be clear what the First Principle is.
He means that the materialists as well as others acknowledge a first
cause which has no cause, and their difference of opinion concerns only
this principle, for the materialists say that it is the highest sphere and the
others that it is a principle beyond the sphere and that the sphere is an
effect; but these others are divided into two parties, those who say that the
sphere is an act that has a beginning and those who say that it is an
eternal act. And having declared that the acknowledgement of a first
cause is common to the materialists as well as to others, Ghazali says:

220

However, it is not possible that the First Principle should
be the heavens, for there are many of these and the proof of
unity contradicts this;
Meaning that from the order of the universe it is evident that its directing
principle is one, just as it appears from the order in an army that its leader
is one, namely, the commander of the army. And all this is true.
And as to Ghazali's words:
Nor can it be said that one single heaven or one single
body, the sun or any other body, can be the First Principle;
for all these are bodies, and body is composed of matter and
form, and the first body cannot be composite.
I say:
The statement that each body is composed of matter and form does not
accord with the theory of the philosophers (with the exception of Avicenna)
about the heavenly body, unless one uses `matter' here equivocally. For
according to the philosophers everything composed of matter and form
has a beginning, like the coming into existence of a house and a
cupboard; and the heavens, according to them, have not come into
existence in this sense, and so they called them eternal, because their
existence is coeternal with the First Principle. For since according to them
the cause of corruption is matter, that which is incorruptible could not
possess matter, but must be a simple entity. If generation and corruption
were not found in sublunary bodies, we should not draw the conclusion
that they were composed of matter and form, for the fundamental principle
is that body is a single essence not less in its existence than in perception,
and if there were no corruption of sublunary bodies, we should judge that
they were simple and that matter was body. But the fact that the body of
the heavens does not suffer corruption shows that its matter is actual
corporeality. And the soul which exists in this body does not exist in it
because this body requires, as the bodies of animals do, the soul for its
continuance, nor because it is necessary for the existence of this body to
be animated, but only because the superior must of necessity exist in the
condition of the superior and the animate is superior to the inanimate.
According to the philosophers there is no change in the heavenly bodies,
for they do not possess a potency in their substance. They therefore need

221

not have matter in the way the generable bodies need this, but they are
either, as Themistius affirms, forms,z or possess matter in an equivocal
sense of the word. And I say that either the matters of the heavenly bodies
are identical with their souls, or these matters are essentially alive, not
alive through a life bestowed on them.
Ghazali says:
To this there are two answers. The first is that it can be
said: Since it follows from the tenets of your school that the
bodies of the world are eternal, it must follow too that they
have no cause, and your statement that on a second
examination such a conclusion must be rejected will itself be
rejected when we discuss God's unity and afterwards the
denial of attributes to God.
I say:
Ghazali means that since they cannot prove the unity of the First
Principle, and since they cannot prove either that the One cannot be bodyfor since they cannot deny the attributes, the First Principle must,
according to them, be an essence endowed with attributes, and such an
essence must be a body or a potency in a body4-it follows that the First
Principle which has no cause is the celestial bodies. And this conclusion is
valid against those who might argue in the way he says the philosophers
argue. The philosophers, however, do not argue thus, and do not say that
they are unable to prove the unity and incorporeality of the First Principle.
But this question will be discussed later.
Ghazali says:
The second answer, and it is the answer proper to this
question, is to say: it is established as a possibility that these
existents can have a cause, but perhaps for this cause there
is another cause, and so on ad infinitum. And you have no
right to assert that to admit an infinite series of causes is
impossible, for we ask you, `Do you know this by immediate
necessary intuition or through a middle term?' Any claim to
intuition is excluded, and any method of deductive proof is
forbidden to you, since you admit celestial revolutions

222

without an initial term; and if you permit a coming into
existence for what is without ends it is not impossible that
the series should consist of causal relations and have as a
final term an effect which has no further effect, although in
the other direction the series does not end in a cause which
has no anterior cause,' just as the past has a final term,
namely the everchanging present, but no first term. If you
protest that the past occurrences do not exist together at one
moment or at certain moments, and that what does not exist
cannot be described as finite or infinite, you are forced to
admit this simultaneous existence for human souls in
abstraction from their bodies; for they do not perish,
according to you, and the number of souls in abstraction
from their bodies is infinite, since the series of becoming
from sperm a to man and from man to sperm a is infinite,
and every man dies, but his soul remains and is numerically
different from the soul of any man who dies before,
simultaneously, or afterwards, although all these souls are
one in species. Therefore at any moment there is an infinite
number of souls in existence.
If you object that souls are not joined to each other, and
that they have no order, either by nature or by position, and
that you regard only those infinite existents as impossible
which have order in space, like bodies which have a spatial
order of higher and lower, or have a natural order like cause
and effect, and that this is not the case with souls; we
answer: 'This theory about position does not follow any more
than its contrary;' you cannot regard one of the two cases as
impossible without involving the other, for where is your
proof for the distinction? And you cannot deny that this
infinite number of souls must have an order, as some are
prior to others and the past days and nights are infinite. If we
suppose the birth of only one soul every day and night, the
sum of souls, born in sequence one after the other, amounts
at the present moment to infinity.

223

The utmost you can say about the cause is that its
priority to the effect exists by nature, in the way that its
superiority to the effect is a matter of essence and not of
space. But if you do not regard an infinite sequence as
impossible for real temporal priority, it cannot be impossible
for natural essential priority either. But what can the
philosophers mean when they deny the possibility of an
infinite spatial superposition of bodies, but affirm the
possibility of an infinite temporal sequence? Is this theory not
really an inept theory without any foundation?
I say: As to Ghazali's words:
But perhaps for this cause there is another cause and so
on ad infinitum . . . and any method of deductive proof is
forbidden to you, since you admit celestial revolutions
without an initial term: To this difficulty an answer was given
above, when we said that the philosophers do not allow an
infinite causal series, because this would lead to an effect
without a cause, but assert that there is such a series
accidentally from an eternal cause-not, however, in a straight
line, nor simultaneously, nor in infinite matters, but only as a
circular process.
What he says here about Avicenna, that he regarded an infinite number
of souls as possible and that infinity is only impossible in what has a
position, is not true' and no philosopher has said it; indeed, its impossibility
is apparent from their general proof which we mentioned, and no
conclusion can be drawn against them from this assumption of an actual
infinity of souls. Indeed, those who believed that the souls are of a certain
number through the number of bodies and that they are individually
immortal profess to avoid this assumption through the doctrine of the
transmigration of souls.
And as to Ghazali's words:
But what can the philosophers mean when they deny the
possibility of an infinite spatial superposition of bodies, but
affirm the possibility of an infinite temporal sequence?

224

I say:
The difference between these two cases is very clear to the
philosophers, for from the assumption of infinite bodies existing
simultaneously there follows an infinite totality and an actual infinite, and
this is impossible. But time has no position, and from the existence of an
infinite temporal series of bodies no actual infinite follows.
Ghazali says on behalf of the philosophers:
The philosophers might say: The strict proof of the
impossibility of an infinite causal series is as follows: each
single cause of a series is either possible in itself or
necessary; if it is necessary, it needs no cause, and if it is
possible, then the whole series needs a cause additional to
its essence, a cause standing outside the series.
I say:
The first man to bring into philosophy the proof which Ghazali gives
here as a philosophical one, was Avicenna, who regarded this proof as
superior to those given by the ancients, since he claimed it to be based on
the essence of the existent, whereas the older proofs are based on
accidents consequent on the First Principle! This proof Avicenna took from
the theologians, who regarded the dichotomy of existence into possible
and necessary as self-evident, and assumed that the possible needs an
agent and that the world in its totality, as being possible, needs an agent
of a necessary existence. This was a theory of the Mu'tazilites before the
Ash'arites,s and it is excellent, and the only flaw in it is their assumption
that the world in its totality is possible, for this is not self-evident. Avicenna
wanted to give a general sense to this statement, and he gave to the
`possible' the meaning of `what has a cause',' as Ghazali relates. And
even if this designation can be conceded, it does not effect the division
which he had in view. For a primary division of existence into what has a
cause and what has no cause is by no means self-evident. Further, what
has a cause can be divided into what is possible and what is necessary. If
we understand by `possible' the truly possible we arrive at the necessarypossibles and not at the necessary which has no cause; and if we
understand by `possible' that which has a cause and is also necessary,
there only follows from this that what has a cause has a cause and we

225

may assume that this cause has a cause and so ad infinitum. We do not
therefore arrive at an existent without cause-for this is the meaning of the
expression `entity of a necessary existence'-unless by the possible which
Avicenna assumes as the opposite of what has no cause we understand
the truly possible, for in these possibles there cannot exist an infinite
series of causes. But if by `possible' is meant those necessary things
which have a cause, it has not yet been proved that their infinite number is
impossible, in the way it is evident of the truly possible existents, and it is
not yet proved that there is a necessary existent which needs a cause, so
that from this assumption one can arrive at a necessary entity existing
without a cause. Indeed, one has to prove that what applies to the total
causal series of possible entities applies also to the total causal series of
necessary existents.
Ghazali says:
The terms `possible' and `necessary' are obscure, unless
one understands by `necessary' that which has no cause for
its existence and by `possible' that which has a cause for its
existence;' then, by applying the terms as defined to the
statement, we say: Each member of a causal series is
possible in this sense of `possible', namely, that it has a
cause additional to its essence, but the series as a whole is
not possible in this sense of `possible'.'' And if anything else
is meant by `possible', it is obscure. If it is objected that this
makes the necessary existent consist of possible existents
and this is impossible, we answer: By defining `necessary'
and `possible' as we have done, you have all that is needed
and we do not concede that it is impossible. To say that it is
impossible would be like saying that it is impossible that
what is eternal should be made up of what is temporal, for
time according to you philosophers is eternal, but the
individual circular movements are temporal and have initial
terms, though collectively they have no initial term; therefore,
that which has no initial term consists of entities having initial
terms, and it is true of the single units that they have a
beginning, but not true of them collectively. In the same way
it can be said of each term of the causal series that it has a

226

cause, but not of the series as a whole. And so not
everything that is true of single units is true of their
collectivity, for it is true of each single unit that it is one and a
portion and a part, but not true of their collectivity; and any
place on the earth which we choose is illuminated by the sun
by day and is dark by night, and according to the
philosophers each unit has begun, but not the whole.
Through this it is proved that the man who admits temporal
entities without a beginning, namely, the forms of the four
elements,' cannot at the same time deny an infinity of
causes, and we conclude from this that because of this
difficulty there is no way in which they can prove the First
Principle, and their dichotomy is purely arbitrary.
I say:
The assumption of infinite possible causes implies the assumption of a
possible without an agent, but the assumption of infinite necessary entities
having causes implies only that what was assumed to have a cause has
none, and this argument is true with the restriction that the impossibility of
infinite entities which are of a possible nature does not involve the
impossibility of infinite necessary entities. If one wanted to give a
demonstrative form to the argument used by Avicenna one should say:
Possible existents must of necessity have causes which precede them,
and if these causes again are possible it follows that they have causes
and that there is an infinite regress; and if there is an infinite regress there
is no cause, and the possible will exist without a cause, and this is
impossible. Therefore the series must end in a necessary cause, and in
this case this necessary cause must be necessary through a cause or
without a cause, and if through a cause, this cause must have a cause
and so on infinitely; and if we have an infinite regress here, it follows that
what was assumed to have a cause has no cause, and this is impossible.
Therefore the series must end in a cause necessary without a cause, i.e.
necessary by itself, and this necessarily is the necessary existent. And
when these distinctions are indicated, the proof becomes valid . But if this
argument is given in the form in which Avicenna gives it, it is invalid for
many reasons, one of which is that the term `possible' used in it is an
equivocal one and that in this argument the primary dichotomy of all

227

existents into what is possible and what is not possible, i.e. this division
comprising the existent qua existent, is not true.
And as to Ghazali's words in his refutation of the philosophers:
We say: Each member of a causal series is possible in
this sense of `possible', namely, that it has a cause
additional to its essence, but the whole series is not possible
in this sense of `possible'.
I say:
Ghazali means that when the philosophers concede that they
understand by `possible existent' that which has a cause and by
`necessary existent' that which has no cause, it can be said to them
`According to your own principles the existence of an infinite causal series
is not impossible, and the series in its totality will be a necessary existent,'
for according to their own principles the philosophers admit that different
judgements apply to the part and to the whole collectively. This statement
is erroneous for many reasons, one of which is that the philosophers, as
was mentioned before, do not allow an infinite series of essential causes,
whether causes and effects of a possible' or of a necessary nature, as we
have shown. The objection which can be directed against Avicenna is that
when you divide existence into possible and necessary and identify the
possible existent with that which has a cause and the necessary existent
with that which has none, you can no longer prove the impossibility of the
existence of an infinite causal series, for from its infinite character it
follows that it is to be classed with existents which have no cause and it
must therefore be of the nature of the necessary existent, especially as,
according to him and his school, eternity can consist of an infinite series
of causes each of which is temporal. The fault in Avicenna's argument
arises only from his division of the existent into that which has a cause
and that which has none. If he had made his division in the way we have
done, none of these objections could be directed against him. And
Ghazali's statement that the ancients, since they admit an infinite number
of circular movements, make the eternal consist of an infinite number of
entities, is false. For the term `eternal', when it is attributed both to this
infinite series and to the one eternal being, is used equivocally.'
And as to the words of Ghazali:

228

If it is objected that this makes the necessary existent
consist of possible existents, and this is impossible, we
answer: By defining `necessary' and `possible' as we have
done you have all that is needed, and we do not concede
that it is impossible.
I say:
Ghazali means that the philosophers understand by `necess: that which
has no cause and by `possible' that which has a cause, and that he,
Ghazali, does not regard it as impossible that what has no cause should
consist of an infinite number of causes, because, if he conceded that this
was impossible, he would be denying the possibility of an infinity of
causes, whereas he only wants to show that the philosophers' deduction
of a necessary being is a petitio principii.`
Then Ghazali says:
To say that it is impossible would be like saying that it is
impossible that what is eternal should be made up of what is
temporal, for time, according to you philosophers, is eternal,
but the individual circular movements are temporal and have
initial terms; therefore that which has no initial term consists
of entities having initial terms, and it is true of the single units
that they have a beginning, but not true of them collectively.
In the same way it can be said of each term of the causal
series that it has a cause, but not of the series as a whole.
And so not everything that is true of single units is true of
their collectivity, for it is true of each single unit that it is one
and a portion and a part, but not true of their collectivity.
I say:
Ghazali means that it is not impossible that what has no cause should
consist of infinite effects in the way the eternal, according to the
philosophers, consists of temporal entities, which are infinite in number.
For time, according to the philosophers, is eternal, and consists of limited
temporal parts, and likewise the movement of heaven is eternal according
to the philosophers, and the circular movements of which it consists are
infinite. And the answer is that the existence of an eternal consisting of

229

temporal parts, in so far as they are infinite in number, is not a
philosophical principle; on the contrary they deny it most strongly, and only
the materialists affirm it. For the sum must consist either of a finite number
of transitory members or of an infinite number. If the former is the case, it
is generally admitted that the members must also be generically transitory.
For the latter case there are two theories. The materialists believe that the
totality is of a possible nature and that the collectivity must be eternal and
without a cause . The philosophers admit this infinity and believe that such
genera, because they consist of possible transitory constituents, must
necessarily have an external cause, lasting and eternal, from which they
acquire their eternity . It is not true either, as Ghazali seems to imply, that
the philosophers believe that the impossibility of an infinite series of
causes depends on the impossibility that the eternal should consist of an
infinity of constituents. They affirm that the eternity of these generically
different movements must lead to one single movement, and that the
reason why there exist genera which are transitory in their individuals, but
eternal as a whole, is that there is an existent, eternal partly and totally,
and this is the body of the heavens. The infinite movements are
generically infinite only because of the one single continuous eternal
movement of the body of the heavens. And only for the mind does the
movement of heaven seem composed of many circular movements. And
the movement of the body of the heavens acquires its eternity-even if its
particular movements are transitory-through a mover which must always
move and through a body which also must always be moved and cannot
stop in its motion, as happens with things which are moved in the
sublunary world.
About genera there are three theories, that of those who say that all
genera are transitory, because the individuals in them are finite, and that
of those who say that there are genera which are eternal and have no first
or last term, because they appear by their nature to have infinite
individuals; the latter are divided into two groups: those, namely the
philosophers, who say that such genera can only be truly said to be
everlasting, because of one and the same necessary cause, without which
they would perish on innumerable occasions in infinite time; and those,
namely the materialists, who believe that the existence of the individuals
of these genera is sufficient to make them eternal. It is important to take
note of these three theories, for the whole controversy about the eternity

230

or non-eternity of the world, and whether the world has an agent or not, is
based on these fundamental propositions. The theologians and those who
believe in a temporal creation of the world are at one extreme, the
materialists at the other, while the philosophers hold an intermediate
position.
If all this is once established, you will see that the proposition that the
man who allows the existence of an infinite series of causes cannot admit
a first cause is false, and that on the contrary the opposite is evident,
namely, that the man who does not acknowledge infinite causes cannot
prove the existence of an eternal first cause, since it is the existence of
infinite effects which demands the necessity of an eternal cause from
which the infinite causes acquire their existence; for if not, the genera, all
of whose individuals are temporal, would be necessarily finite. And in this
and no other way can the eternal become the cause of temporal existents,
and the existence of infinite temporal existents renders the existence of a
single eternal first principle necessary, and there is no God but He.
Ghazali, answering this objection in the name of the philosophers, says:
The philosophers might say: The circular movements and
the forms of the elements do not exist at the present
moment; there actually exists only one single form of them,
and what does not exist can be called neither finite nor
infinite, unless one supposes them to exist in the
imagination, and things which are only suppositions in the
mind cannot be regarded as impossible, even if certain of
these suppositions are supposed to be causes of other
suppositions;' for man assumes this only in his imagination,
and the discussion refers only to things in reality, not to
things in the mind. The only difficulty concerns the souls of
the dead and, indeed, some philosophers have arrived at the
theory that there is only one eternal soul before it is united
with bodies, and that after its separation from the bodies it
becomes one again, so that it has no numerical quantity and
can certainly not be called infinite. Other philosophers have
thought that the soul follows from the constitution of the
body, that death is nothing but the annihilation of the soul,
and that the soul cannot subsist by itself without the body. In

231

that case souls have no existence except in respect of the
living, and the living are beings limited in number, and their
finitude is not denied, and those that have ceased to exist
cannot be qualified at all, either by finitude or by infinity,
except when they are supposed to exist in imagination.
Then Ghazali says:
We answer: This difficulty about the souls has come to us
from Avicenna and Farabi and the most acknowledged
philosophers, since they concluded that the soul was a
substance subsistent by itself; and this is also the view taken
by Aristotle and by the commentators on the ancient
philosophers. And to those philosophers who turn aside from
this doctrine we say: Can you imagine that at each moment
something comes into being which will last for ever? A
negative answer is impossible, and if they admit this
possibility, we say: If you imagine that every day some new
thing comes into being and continues to exist, then up to the
present moment there will have been an infinite collection of
existents and, even if the circular movement itself comes to
an end, the lasting and endless existence of what has come
into being during its revolution is not impossible. In this way
this difficulty is firmly established, and it is quite irrelevant
whether this survival concerns the soul of a man or a Jinni,
the soul of a devil or an angel, or of any being whatever. And
this is a necessary consequence of every philosophical
theory which admits an infinity of circular movements.
I say:
The answer which lie gives in the name of the philosophers, that the
past revolutions and the past forms of the elements which have come from
each others are non-existent, and that the non-existent can be called
neither finite nor infinite, is not a true one. And as to the difficulty he raises
against them as to their theory about souls, no such theory is held by any
philosophers, and the transference of one problem to another is a
sophistical artifice.

232

THE FIFTH DISCUSSION
TO SHOW THEIR INCAPACITY TO PROVE GOD’S UNITY
AND THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF TWO NECESSARY
EXISTENTS BOTH WITHOUT A CAUSE
Ghazali says:
The philosophers have two proofs of this. The first is to
say, ‘If there were two necessary existents, the species of
necessary existence would be attributed to them both. ‘ But
what is said to be a necessary existent must either be so
through itself, and cannot be imagined to be so through
another, or it must be so through a cause, and the essence
of the necessary existent will be an effect; and its cause then
determines its necessity of existence. ‘ ‘But’, say the
philosophers, ‘we understand by “necessary existent” only
an entity whose existence has no connexion with a cause. ‘
And the philosophers affirm that the species ‘man’ is
asserted of Zaid and of Amr and that Zaid is not a man
through himself-for in that case Amr would not be a man-but
through a cause which makes both him and Amr a man; and
the plurality of men arises from the plurality of matter in
which humanity inheres, and its inherence in matter is an
efficct which does not lie in the essence of humanity. The
same is the case with necessary existence in respect to the
necessary existent: if it is through itself a necessary existent,
it must possess this qualification exclusively, and if it exists
because of a cause, it is an effect and cannot be a
necessary existent. And from this it is clear that the
necessary existent must needs be one.
To this Ghazali objects and says:
We say: Your statement that the species of necessary
existence must belong to the necessary existent either
through the necessary existent itself or through a cause is a

233

self-contradictory disjunction, for we have already shown
that the expression ‘necessary existence’ is obscure, unless
we mean by it the denial of a cause, and so let us rather use
the term which is really meant by it and say: To admit two
existents without a cause, and without the one’s being a
cause of the other, is not impossible. And your statement
that what has no cause has none, either because of its own
essence or through some cause, is a faulty disjunction, for
one does not ask for the cause of a thing which is said to
have no cause and to need no cause for its existence. And
what sense is there in the statement that what has no cause
has no cause either because of its own essence or through a
cause? For to say ‘no cause’ is an absolute negation, and an
absolute non-entity has no cause, and cannot be said to
exist either by its own essence or not by its own essence.
But if you mean by ‘necessary existence’ a positive
qualification of the necessary existent, besides its being an
existent without a cause for its existence, it is quite obscure
what this meaning is. But the genuine meaning of this word
is the negation of a cause for its existence, and this is an
absolute negation about which it cannot be said that it is due
to its essence or to a cause, such that the intended proof
might be based on the supposition of this disjunction. To
regard this as a proof is senseless and has no foundation
whatever. On the contrary, we say that the meaning of its
necessity is that it has no cause for its existence and no
cause for its coming into existence, without there being any
cause whatever for this; its being without a cause is, again,
not caused by its essence; no, the fact that there is no cause
for its existence and no cause for its being, has itself no
cause whatsoever. This disjunction cannot be applied even
to positive qualities, not to speak of that which is really
equivalent to a negation. For suppose one were to say:
‘Black is a colour because of its essence or through a cause,
and if it is a colour because of its essence, then red cannot
be a colour, and then the species of colouredness can exist
only because of the essence of black; if, however, black is a

234

colour because of a cause which has made it a colour, then
black can be thought of as being without a colour, i. e. as not
having been made a colour by a cause, for a determination
added to an essence through a cause can be represented in
the imagination as absent, even if it exists in reality. “ ‘But’, it
will be objected, ‘this disjunction is false in itself, for one
cannot say of black that it is a colour because of its essence,
meaning by this that it cannot be through anything but its
essence, and in the same way one cannot say that this
existent is necessary because of its essence, i. e. that it has
no cause because of its own essence, meaning by this that it
cannot exist through anything but its essence. ‘
I say:
This method of proving the unity of God is peculiar to Avicenna, and is
not found in any of the ancient philosophers; its premisses are commonsense premisses, and the terms are used in a more or less equivocal way.
For this reason many objections can be urged against it. Still, when those
terms and the aim they intend are properly analysed, this statement
comes near to being a proof.
That this primary disjunction is faulty, as Ghazali asserts, is not true. He
says that the meaning of ‘necessary existent’ is ‘that which has no cause’,
and that the statement ‘that what has no cause, has no cause, either
because of its own essence or through another cause’, and similarly the
statement ‘that the necessary existent is a necessary existent, either
because of its own essence or through another cause’ are meaningless
statements. But this is by no means the case. For the meaning of this
disjunction is only whether the necessary existent is such, because of a
nature which characterizes it, in so far as it is numerically one, ‘ or
because of a nature which it has in common with others-for instance,
when we say that Amr is a man because lie is Amr, or because of a nature
he has in common with Khalid. If he is a man because he is Amr, then
humanity does not exist in anyone else, and if he is a man because of a
general nature, then he is composed of two natures, a general one and a
special one and the compound is an effect; but the necessary existent has
no cause, and therefore the necessary existent is unique. And when
Avicenna’s statement is given in this form it is true.

235

And Ghazali’s words:
and an absolute non-entity has no cause and it cannot be
said to exist either by its own essence or not by its own
essence form a statement which is not true either. For there
are two kinds of negation, the negation of a particular quality,
proper to something (and this kind of negation must be
understood in respect of the words ‘by its own essence’ used
in this statement), and the negation of a quality, not
particular to something (and this kind of negation must be
understood here in respect of the term ‘cause’). ‘
Ghazali affirms that this disjunction is not even true of positive qualities
and therefore certainly not of negative and he objects to thus disjunction
by giving as ati example black acid colouredness. And lie means that now
we say of black that it is a colour, either because of its essence or through
a cause, neither alternative can be true, send both are false. For it black
were a cause, because of its essence, red could not he a colour. just as if
Amr were a man because of his essence, Khalid could not be cc man; on
the other hand, if black were a colour through a cause, colour would have
to be an addition to its essence, and an essence which receives an
addition can be represented without this addition, and therefore this
assumption would imply that black could be represented without
colouredness, and this is absurd. But this argument, Ghazali is erroneous
and sophistical, because of the equivocation in the terms ‘essence’ and
‘cause’. For if by ‘by its essence’ is understood the opposite of ‘by
accident’, our statement that black is a colour because of its essence is
true, and at the same time it is not impossible that other things, red for
instance, should be colours. And if by ‘cause’, in the expression that black
is a colour through a cause, is understood something additional to its
essence, i. e. that it is a colour through a cause external to black, it does
not follow that black can be represented without colouredness. For the
genus is an addition to the specific quality and the species, and the
species or the specific quality cannot be represented without the genus,
and only an accidental additional quality-not the essential additional
quality-can be represented without the genus. And therefore our statement
that black is a colour either because of its essence or through a cause is a
disjunction of which, indeed, one of the alternatives must be true, i. e.

236

black must be a colour either by black itself or through an entity additional
to black. And this is what Avicenna meant by his assertion that the
necessary existent must be a necessary existent, either through its own
special character or through an addition which is not peculiar to it; if
through the former, there cannot be two existents which are both
necessary existents; if through the latter, both existents must be
composed of a universal and of a peculiar entity, and the compound is not
a necessary existent through itself. And if this is true, the words of Ghazali
: ‘What prevents us from representing two existents which should both be
of a necessary existence?’ are absurd.
And if it is objected, ‘You have said that this statement comes near
being a proof, but it seems to be a proper proof’, we answer: We said this
only because this proof seems to imply that the difference between those
two assumed necessary existents must lie either in their particularity, and
then they participate in their specific quality, or in their species, and then
they participate in their generic quality, and both these differences are
found only in compounds, and the insufficiency of this proof lies in this,
that it has been demonstrated that there are existents which are
differentiated, although they are simple and differ neither in species nor
individually, namely, the separate intellects. ‘ However, it appears from
their nature that there must be in their existence a priority and posteriority
of rank, for no other differentiation can be imagined in them. Avicenna’s
proof about the necessary existent must be therefore completed in this
way: If there were two necessary existents, the difference between them
must consist either in a numerical difference, or in a specific difference, or
in rank. In the first case they would agree in species; in the second case in
genus, and in both cases the necessary existent would have to be
composite. In the third case, however, the necessary existent will have to
be one, and will be the cause of all the separate existents. And this is the
truth, and the necessary existent is therefore one. For there is only this
tripartite disjunction, two members of which are false, and therefore the
third case, which necessitates the absolute uniqueness of the necessary
existent, is the true one. ‘
Ghazali says:
The second proof of the philosophers is that they say: If
we assumed two necessary existents, they would have to be

237

similar in every way or different. If they were similar in every
way, they could not be thought to be a plurality or a duality,
since two blacks can have only a duality, when they are in
two places, or in one place at different times, for black and
movement can only exist in one place and be two at the
same time, because they differ essentially. When the two
essences, like the two blacks, do not differ and at the same
time are simultaneous and in one place, they cannot be
thought to be a plurality; if one could speak of two
simultaneous blacks as being in the same place, any
individual could be said to be two, although not the slightest
difference could be perceived between the two. Since they
cannot be absolutely similar, they must be different, but they
cannot differ in time or in place, and they can therefore only
differ in essence. But two things which differ in something
must either participate in something or not participate in
anything. The latter is impossible, for it would mean that they
would participate neither in existence, ‘ nor in the necessity
of existence, nor in being subsistent in themselves and not
inhering in a substratum. But if they agree in something and
differ in something, that in which they agree must be
different from that through which they differ; there will
therefore be composition in them, and it will be possible to
analyse them in thought. But there is no composition in the
necessary existent, and just as it cannot be divided
quantitatively, so it cannot be analysed by thought either, for
its essence is not composed of elements which intellectual
analysis could enumerate. ‘ The words ‘animal’ and ‘rational’,
for instance, mean that which constitutes the essence of
man, namely, animal and rational, and what is meant by the
word ‘animal’ when one speaks of a man is different from
what is meant by ‘rational’, and therefore man is composed
of parts which are ordered in the definition by words which
indicate these parts, and the term ‘man’ is applied to the
whole of them. ‘ This composition, however, cannot be
imagined in the necessary existent, while duality cannot be
imagined except in this way.

238

The answer is that we concede that duality can only be
imagined where there is a differentiation, and that in two
things, similar in every way, no difference can be imagined.
But your statement that this kind of composition is
impossible in the First Principle is a mere presumption, and
where is your proof of it?
Let us now treat this problem in detail. It belongs to their
well-known theories that the First Principle can as little be
analysed intellectually as divided quantitatively, and on this
fundamental truth, according to the philosophers, the
uniqueness of God must be based.
I say:
Ghazali does not know the mistake which is in this second proof, and
he begins to discuss with the philosophers the question to which they give
a negative answer, namely, if one may introduce a plurality into the
definition of the necessary existent. He wants to consider this problem in
detail, since the Ash’arites allow a plurality in God, regarding Him as an
essence with attributes. ‘ The mistake in this second proof is that two
different things can be essentially different and have nothing in common
but their name, in the case where they have no common genus, either
proximate or remote, for instance, the term ‘body’, attributed by the
philosophers to both the body of the heavens and the transitory body, and
the term ‘intellect’ attributed to the intellect of man and the separate
intellects, and the term ‘existent’ attributed to transitory things and to
eternal. Such terms must be regarded as equivocal rather than as
univocal, and therefore it does not follow that things which are
differentiated must be composite. And since Ghazali, in his answer to this
proof of the philosophers, limits himself in the way he has indicated, he
begins first by stating their theory of God’s unity and then tries to refute
the philosophers.
Ghazali, expounding the philosophical theory, says:
For the philosophers assert that God’s unity can only be
perfected by establishing the singleness of God’s essence in
every way, and by the denial of any possible plurality in Him.
Now plurality can belong to things in five ways. ‘

239

First, to what can undergo division actually or in
imagination, and therefore the single body is not absolutely
one-it is one through the continuity which exists in it, which
can suffer a decrease and can be quantitatively divided in
imagination. This is impossible in the First Principle.
Secondly: a thing may be divided by thought, not
quantitatively, into two different concepts, as for instance the
division of body into matter and form, for although neither
matter nor form can subsist separately, they are two different
things in definition and in reality, and it is by their
composition that a unity results, namely body. This also must
be denied of God, for God cannot be a form or a matter in a
body, or be the compound of both. There are two reasons
why God cannot be their compound, first because this
compound can be divided into quantitative parts, actually or
in imagination, secondly, because this compound can be
divided conceptually into form and matter, and God cannot
be matter, because matter needs a form, and the necessary
existent is self-sufficient in every respect and its existence
cannot be conjoined with the condition of something else
besides it, and God cannot be form, because form needs
matter.
Thirdly: the plurality through attributes implied in
knowledge, power, and will; if these attributes had a
necessary existence, the essence and these attributes would
participate in necessary existence and the necessary
existent must be a plurality, and its uniqueness would be
denied.
Fourthly: the rational plurality which results from the
composition of genus and species. For black is black and
colour, and blackness is not colouredness for the intellect,
but colouredness is a genus, and blackness a specific
difference, and therefore black is composed of genus and
species; and animality is for the mind something different
from humanity, for man is a rational animal, animal is a
genus and rational a specific difference, and man is

240

composed of genus and species, and this is a kind of
plurality, and the philosophers affirmed that this kind also
must be denied of the First Principle.
Fifthly: the plurality which results from the duality of a
quiddity and the existence of this quiddity; for man before his
existence has a quiddity, and existence occurs to it and
enters into relation with it, and in this way the triangle has a
quiddity, namely, it is a figure surrounded by three sides, and
existence is not a component of this quiddity, and therefore
the intellect can perceive the quiddity of man and the
quiddity of a triangle without knowing whether they exist in
the external world or not. z If existence were a component of
the quiddity to which it is added, the fixation of this quiddity
in the mind before its existence could not be imagined.
Existence stands in a relation to quiddity, whether in a
necessary inseparable relation, for instance, heaven, or in
an accidental relation occurring after a thing’s non-existence,
like the quiddity of man in respect of Zaid or Amr and the
quiddity of accidents and forms which occur. ‘ And the
philosophers affirm that this kind of plurality also must be
denied of the First Principle. They say that the First Principle
has no quiddity to which existence is joined, but existence is
necessary to it, as is quiddity to the other entities. Therefore
necessary existence is at once a quiddity, a universal reality
and a real nature, in the same way as a man, a tree, and
heaven are quiddities. For if the necessary existent needed
a quiddity for its existence, it would be consequent on this
essence and would not constitute it, and the consequent is
something secondary and an effect, so that the necessary
existent would be an effect, and that would be in opposition
to its being necessary.
I say:
These arc the theories of the philosophers which Ghazali mentions on
the subject of their denial of plurality in the Monad. Then he begins to
show how they contradict themselves on this question. We must now first
examine these statements which he ascribes to them, and explain the

241

degree of consent they reach; we shall then investigate the contradictions
of the philosophers which he mentions, and his methods of opposing them
on this problem.
The first kind of division which, according to Ghazali, the philosophers
deny of the First Principle, is the quantitative division, either in supposition
or in reality. Everyone who believes that the First Principle is not a body,
whether he believes that a body is composed of atoms or not, agrees
about this. The proof of this is that the First Principle is not a body, and its
discussion will follow.
The second kind is the qualitative division, like the division of body into
matter and form, and this according to the doctrine of those, namely, the
philosophers, who believe that body is composed of matter and form and
this is not the place to discuss the truth of either of these theories. This
division also is denied of the First Principle by everyone who believes that
the First Principle is not body. As to the denial of the corporeality of the
First Principle in so far as it is essentially a necessary existent, the
discussion of this will follow later, when we give a complete account of the
whole argument used in this matter. For as to Ghazali’s words that the
necessary existent does not need another, i. e. it does not consist of
anything else, but that body consists of form and matter and neither of
them are necessary existents, for form cannot dispense with matter and
matter cannot dispense with form-there is here a problem; for according to
the philosophers the body of the heavens is not composed of matter and
form, but is simple, and it has sometimes been thought that it is a
necessary existent by its own essence; but this problem will be treated
later, and I do not know of any philosopher who has believed that the body
of the heavens is composed of matter and form, with the sole exception of
Avicenna. We have already spoken on this question in another place, and
shall discuss it still later on.
The third kind is the denial of the plurality of attributes in the necessary
existent, for if these attributes were of a necessary existence, the
necessary existent would be more than one, since the essence also is a
necessary existent. And if the attributes were caused by- the essence,
they could not be necessary existents, and attributes of the necessary
existent would not be necessary existents, otherwise the term ‘necessary
existent’ would comprise the necessary existent and that which is not a

242

necessary existent, and this is impossible and absurd. And this is a proof
which comes very near to being an absolute truth, when it is conceded
that the ‘necessary existent’ must indicate an immaterial existent, and in
such existents, which subsist by themselves without being bodies, there
cannot be imagined essential attributes of which their essence is
constituted, not to speak of attributes which are additional to their
essence, that is, the so-called accidents, for when accidents are imagined
to be removed, the essence remains, which is not the case with the
essential attributes. And therefore it is right to attribute essential attributes
to their subject, since they constitute its identity, but it is not right to
attribute non-essential attributes to it, except through derivative words, for
we do not say of a man that he is knowledge, but we only say that he is an
animal and that he is knowing;; however, the existence of such attributes
in what is incorporeal is impossible, since the nature of these attributes is
extraneous to their subject, and for this reason they are called accidents
and are distinct from what is attributed essentially to the subject, be it a
subject in the soul or in the external world. If it is objected that the
philosophers believe that there are such attributes in the soul, since they
believe that the soul can perceive, will, and move, although at the same
time they hold that the soul is incorporeal, we answer that they do not
mean that these attributes are additional to the essence, but that they are
essential attributes, and it is of the nature of essential attributes not to
multiply the substratum which actually supports them; they are a plurality
only in the sense that the thing defined becomes a plurality through the
parts of the definitions, that is, they are only a subjective plurality in the
mind according to the philosophers, not an actual plurality outside the
soul. For instance, the definition of man is ‘rational animal’, but reason and
life are not actually distinguishable from each other outside the soul in the
way colour and shape are. And therefore he who concedes that matter is
not a condition for the existence of the soul must concede that in the
separate existences there is a real oneness existing outside the soul,
although this oneness becomes a plurality through definition . This is the
doctrine of the Christians concerning the three hypostases in the divine
Nature. They do not believe that they are attributes additional to the
essence, but according to them they are only a plurality in the definitionthey are a potential, not an actual, plurality. Therefore they say that the
three are one, i. e. one in act and three in potency. We shall enumerate

243

later the reprehensible consequences and absurdities which arise from the
doctrine that the First Principle possesses attributes additional to His
essence.
The fourth kind of plurality is that which occurs to a thing because of its
genus and specific difference; this plurality comes very near to that which
belongs to a thing because of its matter and form, for there are only
definitions for that which is composed of matter and form, and not for
simple, non-compound things, and nobody need disagree about denying a
plurality through definition to the First Principle.
The fifth kind of plurality is the plurality of essence and existence.
Existence in the nature of things is a logical concept which affirms the
conformity of a thing outside the soul with what is inside the soul. Its
meaning is synonymous with the true, and it is this that is meant by the
copula in categorical propositions. The term ‘existence’ is used in two
senses; the first synonymous with the true, when we ask, for instance, if
something exists or not, or whether a certain thing has such and such a
quality or not. The second sense stands in relation to the existing things
as their genus, in the way the existent is divided into the ten categories,
and into substance and accident. When by existent is understood the true,
there is no plurality outside the souks when by existent is understood what
is understood by entity and thing, the term ‘existent’ is attributed
essentially to God and analogically to all other things in the way warmth is
attributed to fire and to all warm things? This is the theory of the
philosophers.
But Ghazali based his discussion on the doctrine of Avicenna, and this
is a false doctrine, for Avicenna believed that existence is something
additional to the essence outside the soul and is like an accident of the
essence. And if existence were a condition for the being of the essence
and a condition for the essence of the necessary existent, the necessary
existent would be composed of the conditioning and the conditioned and it
would be of a possible existence. Avicenna affirms also that what exists as
an addition to its essence has a cause. Now, existence for Avicenna is an
accident which supervenes on the essence, and to this Ghazali refers
when he says:

244

For man before his existence has a quiddity and
existence occurs to it and enters into relation with it, and in
this way the triangle has a quiddity, namely, it is a figure
surrounded by three sides, and existence is not a
component of this quiddity, and therefore the intellect can
perceive the quiddity of man and the quiddity of a triangle
without knowing whether they exist in the exterior world or
not.
This shows that the term ‘existence’ which he uses here is not the term
which signifies the most universal genus of all entities, nor the term which
indicates that a thing exists outside the soul. For the term ‘existence’ is
used in two meanings, the former signifies the true and the latter the
opposite of non-existence, and in this latter sense it is that which is divided
into the ten categories and is like their genus. This essential sense which
refers to the things which exist in the real world outside the soul is prior to
the sense it has in the existents of second intention, ‘ and it is this sense
which is predicated of the ten categories analogically, and it is in this
sense that we say of the substance that it exists by itself and of the
accident that it exists through its existing in the existent which subsists by
itself. As to the existent which has the meaning of the ‘true’, all the
categories participate in it in the same way, and the existent which has the
meaning of the ‘true’ is something in the mind, namely that a thing is
outside the soul in conformity with what it is inside the sou1, and the
knowledge of this is prior to the knowledge of its quiddity; that is,
knowledge of the quiddity of a thing cannot be asked for, unless it is
known that it exists. ‘ And as to those quiddities which precede in our
minds the knowledge of their existence, they are not really quiddities, but
only nominal definitions, and only when it is known that their meaning
exists outside the soul does it become known that they are quiddities and
definitions. And in this sense it is said in the book of the Categories that
the intelligible universals of things become existent through their
particulars, and that the particulars become intelligible through their
universals. s And it is said in the De Anima that the faculty by which it is
perceived that a thing is a definite particular and exists is another faculty
than the faculty by which the quiddity of the definite particular is perceived,
b and it is in this way that it is said that particulars exist in the external
world and universals in the mind? And there is no difference in the

245

meaning of the ‘true’, whether it concerns material existents or separate
existents. The theory that existence is an addition to the quiddity and that
the existent in its essence does not subsist by its-and this is the theory of
Avicenna-is a most erroneous theory, for this would imply that the term
‘existence’ signified an accident outside the soul common to the ten
categories. And then it can be asked about this accident when it is said to
exist, if ‘exist’ is taken here in the meaning of the ‘true’ or whether it is
meant that an accident exists in this accident, and so on ad infinitum,
which is absurd, as we have shown elsewhere. ‘ I believe that it is this
meaning of ‘existence’ which Ghazali tried to den) of the First principle,
and indeed in this sense it must be denied of all existents and a fortiori of
the First Principle, since it is a false theory.
Having mentioned this sense of unity in the statements of the
philosophers, Ghazali now proceeds to describe . the ways in which they
contradict themselves in his opinion, and lie says:
Now notwithstanding all this, the philosophers affirin of
God that He is the First and a principle, an existent, a
substance, a monad, that He is eternal, everlasting,
knowledge and knower and known, an agent and a creator,
that He is endowed with will and power and life, that He is
the lover and the beloved, the enjoyer and the enjoyed, that
He is generous, and the absolute good, and they believe that
all this is meant by the term ‘one’, and does not imply airy
plurality. And this indeed is something very wonderful.
Now we must first state their theory clearly in order to
understand it well, and then we shall occupy ourselves with
its refutation, for it is an absurd undertaking to refute a
theory before it is well understood. Now the central point forthe understanding of their doctrine is that they say that the
essence of the Principle is one, and the plurality of terms
arises only through bringing something in relation to it or
through bringing it in relation to something, or through
denying something of it; for the negation of something does
not cause plurality in that of which it is denied, nor does the
establishment of relation produce a plurality. Therefore they
do not deny the plurality of the negations and the relations,

246

and it is thus their task to refer all the qualities mentioned to
negation and relation.
They say that when God is said to be the First this means
a relation to all the existents after Him. When He is said to
be a principle, it signifies that the existence of everything
else depends on Him and is caused by Him; it means
therefore a relation to an effect. And when He is said to
exist, it means that He is apprehended, and when He is said
to be a substance it means that He is the being of which it is
denied that it inheres in a substratum and this is a negation.
When He is said to be eternal, it means that His nonexistence in the past is denied; and when He is said to be
everlasting, it means that His non-existence in the future is
denied, and the terms ‘eternal’ and ‘everlasting’ are reduced
to an existence not preceded nor followed by a nonexistence. When He is said to be a necessary existent, it
means that there is no cause for His existence and that He is
the cause of everything else, and this is a combination of
negation and relation: the denial of a cause for His existence
is a negation, and making Him the cause of everything else
is a relation.
When He is said to be intellect, this means that He is free
from matter and everything free from matter is intellect, i. e.
thinks its own substance, is self-conscious, and knows
everything else, and the essence of God is such: He is free
from matter and therefore-for these two expressions have
the same meaning-He is an intellect. When He is said to be
knowing, it means that His essence which is intellect has an
object of thought, namely His essence, for He is selfconscious and knows His own self, and His essence is the
known and the knower for all that is one, since He is the
known in so far as He is a quiddity, abstract from matter, not
hidden from His essence which is intellect in the sense that it
is a quiddity abstract from matter, from which nothing is
hidden; and because He thinks His own self, He is knowing,
and because He is His own object of thought, He is an object

247

known, and since He thinks through His own essence, not
through something additional to His own essence, He is
intellect, and it is not impossible that the knower and the
thing known should be one, for the knower, when he knows
that he knows, knows it because he is a knower, so that
knower and known are in a way the same; although our
intellect is in this respect different from the intellect of the
First Principle, for the intellect of the First Principle is
eternally in act, whereas our intellect is sometimes in
potency, sometimes in act. And when He is said to be a
creator, an agent and an originator and to have the other
attributes of action, it means that His existence is eminent,
from which the existence of the universe emanates in a
necessary emanation, and that the existence of everything
derives from Him and is consequent on His existence in the
way that light is consequent on the sun and heat consequent
on fire. But the relation of the world to God resembles the
relation of light to the sun only in this, that both are effects,
and not in any other way, for-the sun is not aware of the
emanation of light from it, nor fire of the emanation of heat
from it; for this is mere nature. But the First is conscious of
Himself and is aware that His essence is the principle of
everything else, and the emanation of everything which
emanates from Him is known to Him, and He is not
inattentive to anything that proceeds from Him. Nor can He
be compared to one of us who puts himself between a sick
man and the sun, for then it is the case that because of him,
but not through his choice (although he does it consciously
and not unwillingly either), the sick man is protected against
the sun’s heat, and it is his body which causes the shadow,
but it is his soul, not his body, which knows that the shadow
is falling and is pleased about it. But this does not apply to
the First: in Him the agent is at the same time the knower
and the one that is pleased; that is, He is not unwilling, and
He is conscious that His perfection consists in the emanation
proceeding from Him. Yes, even if it were possible to
assume that the man’s body causing the shadow were

248

identical with the knower of the shadow, who is pleased with
it, even then he would not be similar to the First. For the First
is both knower and agent, and His knowledge is the principle
of His act; and His consciousness of Himself as the principle
of the universe is the cause of the emanation of the universe
and the existing order; and the existing order is the
consequence of the order thought of, in the sense that it
occurs through Him and that He is the agent of the universe
without there being an addition to His knowledge of the
universe, since His knowledge of the universe is the cause
of the emanation of the universe from Him, and His
knowledge of the universe does not add anything to His selfconsciousness, for He could not be self-conscious if He did
not know that He is the principle of the universe, the object
of His knowledge is in first intention His own essence, and
the universe is the object of His knowledge in second
intention, ‘ and this is the meaning of His being an agent.
And when it is said that He has power, nothing is meant but
that He is an agent in the way we have stated, namely, that
His existence is the existence from which the powers
emanate through the emanation of which the arrangement of
the world is ordered in the most perfect way possible in
accomplishment and beauty. And when it is said that He is
willing, nothing is meant but that He is not inattentive to what
emanates from Him and that He is not opposed to it; no, He
knows that in the emanation of the universe His own
perfection is attained, and it is permissible to say in this
sense that He is satisfied, and it is permissible to say of the
satisfied that He is willing; and His will is nothing but His very
power and His power is nothing but His very knowledge and
His knowledge nothing but His very essence, so that
everything is reduced to His very essence. For His
knowledge of things is not derived from things, for otherwise
He would acquire His quality and perfection through another,
and this is impossible in the necessary existent. But our
knowledge is twofold: partly knowledge of a thing which
results from its form like our knowledge of the form of

249

heaven and earth, partly knowledge of our own invention,
when we represent in ourselves the form of a thing we do
not see and then produce it; in this case the existence of the
form is derived from the knowledge and not the knowledge
from the existence. Now the knowledge the First has is of
the second category, for the representation of the order in
Himself is the cause of the emanation of the order from Him.
Indeed, if the mere presence of the form of a picture or of
writing in our souls were sufficient for the occurrence of this
form, then our knowledge would be identical with our power
and our wills but through our deficiency our representation
does not suffice to produce the form, but we need besides a
new act of will which results from our appetitive faculty, so
that through these two the power which moves our muscles
and our nerves in our organs can enter into motion, and
through the movement of our muscles and nerves our hand
or any other member can move, and through its movement
the pen or any other external instrument can come into
motion and through the movement of the pen the matter, e.
g. the ink, can move, and so the form is realized which we
represented in our souls. Therefore the very existence of this
form in our souls is not a power and an act of will; no, in us
power lies in the principle which moves our muscles and this
form moves the mover which is the principle of the power.
But this is not the case with the necessary existent, for He is
not composed of bodies from which the powers in His
extremities originate, and so His power, His will, His
knowledge, and His essence are all one.
When it is said that He is living, nothing is meant but that
He is conscious of the knowledge through which the existent
which is called His act emanates from Him. For the living is
the doer, the perceiver, and the meaning of the term is His
essence in relation to His acts in the way we have described,
not at all like our life, which can be only perfected through
two different faculties from which perception and action
result. But His life again is His very essence.

250

And when it is said that He is generous, what is meant is
that the universe emanates from Him, but not for an end
which refers to Himself, for generosity is perfected by two
conditions: first that the receiver of the benefit has profit of
what is given to him, for the giving of something to one who
is not in need of it is not called generosity; secondly, that the
benefactor is not himself in need of generosity, so that he
himself becomes a benefactor through a need he
experiences himself, and anyone who is generous out of a
desire for praise and approbation or to avoid blame seeks a
reward and is not generous. But true generosity belongs to
God alone, for He does not seek to avoid blame, nor does
He desire a perfection acquired through praise, and the term
‘generosity’ indicates His existence in relation to His act and
with the denial of an end, and this does not imply a plurality
in His essence.
When He is said to be the absolute good, it means that
His existence is free from any imperfection and from any
possibility of non-existence, for badness has no essence, but
refers to the non-existence of an essence or to the absence
of the goodness of the essence. , For existence itself, in so
far as it is existence, is good, and therefore this term refers
to the negation of the possibility of non-existence and of
badness. Sometimes ‘good’ means that which is the cause
of the order in things, and the First is the principle of the
order of everything and therefore He is good;’ and in this
case the term signifies existence in a certain kind of relation.
When He is said to be a necessary existent, this
existence is meant with the denial of a cause for His
existence and the impossibility of a cause for His nonexistence, in the beginning and at the end.
When it is said that He is the lover and the beloved, the
enjoyer and the enjoyed, it means that He is every beauty
and splendour and perfection, and that He is beloved and
desired by the possessor of this perfection and the only
meaning of ‘enjoyment’ is the perception of appropriate

251

perfection. If it could be imagined of a single man that he
knew his own perfection in comprehending all intelligibles, if
he could comprehend them, that he knew the beauty of his
own form, the perfection of his power, the strength of his
limbs, in short if he perceived in himself the presence of all
perfection of which he was capable, he would love his
perfection and enjoy it, and his enjoyment would only be
incomplete through the possibility of its loss and its
diminution, for the joy which refers to the transitory, or to
what is feared to be transitory, is not perfect. ‘ But the First
possesses the most perfect splendour and the most
complete beauty, since all perfection is possible to Him and
present in Him, and He perceives this beauty, secure against
the possibility of its diminution and loss, and the perfection
He possesses is superior to all perfection, and His love and
His enjoyment of this perfection are superior to all love and
to all enjoyment, and His enjoyment cannot be compared in
any way to our enjoyment and is too glorious to be called
enjoyment, joy, and delight, for we have no expressions for
such concepts, and using these terms metaphorically for
Him, we must be conscious of the great difference, just as
when we apply to Him metaphorically our terms, ‘willing’,
choosing’, ‘acting’, we are convinced of the great distance
between His will, power, and knowledge, from our will,
power, and knowledge, and it is not impossible that this term
‘enjoyment’ should be regarded as improper and that
another term should be used. , What we want to express is
that His state is more glorious than the conditions of the
angels, and more desirable, and the condition of the angels
is more glorious than our condition; and if there were no
other joy than in bodily desire and sex, the condition of the
ass and the pig would be superior to the state of the angels,
but the angels, who are separate from matter, have no other
joy than the joy arising from the knowledge of their share in
perfection and beauty, the cessation of which is not to be
feared. But the joy of the First is superior to the joy of the
angels, and the existence of the angels which are intellects

252

separate from matter is possible in its essence and
necessary of existence through another, and the possibility
of non-existence is a kind of badness and imperfection, and
nothing is absolutely free from badness except the First, and
He is the absolute good and He possesses the utmost
splendour and beauty; further, He is the beloved, whether
anyone else loves Him or not, as He is the knower and the
known, whether anyone else knows Him or not. And all
these concepts refer to His essence and to His perception
and to His knowledge of His essence, and the knowledge of
His essence is His very essence, for He is pure intellect, and
all this leads back to one single notion.
This is the way to set forth their doctrine, and these
things can be divided into that which may be believed (but
we shall show that according to their own principles they
must regard it as untrue) and into that which may not be
believed (and we shall show its falsehood). We shall now
return to the five classes of plurality and to their claim to
deny them, and shall show their inability to establish their
proof, and shall treat each question separately.
I say:
The greater part of what he mentions in his description of the
philosophical theories about God as being one, notwithstanding the
plurality of attributes ascribed to Him, he has stated accurately, and we
shall not argue with him about it, with the exception of his statement that
to Him the designation of ‘intellect’ is a negation; for this is not true-on the
contrary it is the most special appellation for His essence according to the
Peripatetics, in contrast to Plato’s opinion that the intellect is not the First
Principle and that intellect cannot be attributed to the First Principle? Nor
is his statement that in the separate intellects there is potency, nonexistence, and badness a philosophical theory. But we shall now return to
his refutations in these five questions.

253

THE SIXTH DISCUSSION
TO REFUTE THEIR DENIAL OF ATTRIBUTES
Ghazali says:
The philosophers agree-exactly as do the Mu’tazilitesthat it is impossible to ascribe to the First Principle
knowledge, power, and will, and they affirm that we have
received these terms through the Divine Law, and that they
may be used as verbal expressions, but that they refer to
one essence as we have explained previously, and that it is
not permissible to accept an attribute additional to its
essence in the way we may consider, as regards ourselves,
our knowledge, power, and will, as attributes of ourselves,
additional to our essence. And they affirm that this causes a
plurality, because if these attributes are supposed to occur to
us in the course of our development, we know that they are
additional to our essence, because they constitute new facts;
on the other hand, if they are supposed to be simultaneous
with our existence without any time-lag, their simultaneity
does not prevent them from being an addition to our
essence. ; For when one thing is added to another and it is
known that they are not identical, it is thought, even if they
are simultaneous, that they are two. Therefore the fact that
these qualities would be simultaneous with the essence of
the First does not prevent them from being extraneous to its
essence, and this causes a plurality in the necessary
existent, and this is impossible; and therefore they all agree
in the denial of the attributes.
I say:
The difficulty for the man who denies a plurality of attributes consists in
this: that different attributes are reduced to one essence, so that for
instance knowledge, will, and power would mean one and the same thing
and signify one single essence, and that also knowledge and knower,
power and possessing power, will and willer would have one and the
same meaning. The difficulty for the man, however, who affirms that there

254

exist both an essence and attributes additional to the essence, consists in
this: that the essence becomes a condition for the existence of the
attributes and the attributes a condition for the perfection of the essence,
and that their combination would be a necessary existent, that is, one
single existent in which there is neither cause nor effect. And this latter
difficulty cannot be really solved when it is assumed that there exists an
essentially necessary existent, for this implies that it must be one in every
way and can in no way be composed of the condition and the conditioned
and of cause and effect, for such a composition would have to be either
necessary or possible; (t) if necessary, it would be necessary through
another, not through itself, since it is difficult to assume an eternal
compound as existing through itself, i. e. as not having a cause for its
composition, and this is especially difficult for the man who believes that
every accident is temporal, ‘ since the fact of being a compound would be
an eternal accident; (2) if possible, a cause would be needed to join
together the effect and the cause. Now, according to philosophical
principles it is quite impossible that there should be a compound existing
by itself, having eternal attributes, since the composition would be a
condition of its existence; and its parts could not be agents for the
composition, for the composition would have to be a condition for their
existence. Therefore, when the parts of any natural compound are
disjoined, their original name can be only applied to them equivocally, e. g.
the term `hand’, used of the hand which is a part of the living man and the
hand which has been cut off; and every compound is for Aristotle
transitory and a fortiori cannot be without a cause?
But as to the system of Avicenna, with its division of the necessary
existent from the possible existent, it does not lead to the denial of an
eternal compound; for when we assume that the possible ends in a
necessary cause and that the necessary cause must either have a cause
or not, and in the former case must end in a necessary existent which has
no cause, this reasoning leads through the impossibility of an infinite
regress to a necessary existence which has no efficient causenot,
however, to an existent which has no cause at all, for this existent might
have a formal or a material cause, unless it is assumed that everything
which has matter and form, or in short every compound, must have an
external cause; but this needs a proof which the demonstration based on
the principle of the necessary existent does not contain, even if we do not

255

consider the mistake in it we have already mentioned. And for exactly the
same reason the proof of the Ash’arites that every temporal occurrence
needs a cause does not lead to an eternal First Principle which is not
composite, but only to a First Principle which is not temporal.
As to the fact that knower and knowledge are one, it is not impossible,
but necessary, that such pairs of things lead up to the unity of their
concepts; e. g. if the knower knows through knowledge, that through
which he becomes a knower is more apt to be a knower, for the quality
which any thing acquires from another is in itself more apt to possess the
concept which is acquired, e. g. if the living bodies in our sublunary world
are not alive by themselves, but through a life which inheres in them, then
necessarily this life through which the non-living acquires life is alive by
itself, or there would be an infinite regress; and the same is the case with
knowledge and the other attributes.
Now, it cannot be denied that one essence can have many attributes
related, negative, or imaginary, in different ways without this implying a
plurality in the essence, e. g. that a thing is an existent and one and
possible or necessary, l for when the one identical entity is viewed in so
far as something else proceeds from it, it is called capable and acting, and
in so far as it is viewed as differentiating between two opposite acts, it is
called willing, and in so far as it is viewed as perceiving its object,
knowing, and in so far as it is viewed as perceiving and as a cause of
motion, it is called living, since the living is the perceiving and the selfmoving. What is impossible is only a single simple existence with a
plurality of attributes, existing by themselves, and especially if these
attributes should be essential and exist in act, and as to these attributes
existing in potency, it is not impossible, according to the philosophers, that
something should be one in act and a plurality in potency, and this is the
case according to them, with the parts of the definition in their relation to
the thing defined.
And as to Ghazali’s words:
And they affirm that this causes a plurality . . . that they
are two.
He means by them that the fact that these attributes are simultaneous
with the essence does not prevent them from being necessarily a plurality

256

by themselves, just as, if their existence were posterior to the essence, or
if some of them were posterior to others, mind would not conceive them as
being one.
After stating the view of the philosophers, Ghazali says:
But it must be said to the philosophers: How do you know
the impossibility of plurality of this kind? for you are in
opposition to all the Muslims, the Mu’tazilites excepted, and
what is your proof of it? If someone says: ‘Plurality is
impossible, since the fact that the essence is regarded as
one is equivalent to the impossibility of its having a plurality
of attributes’ this is just the point under discussion, and the
impossibility is not self-evident, and a proof is needed. They
have indeed two proofs. The first is that they say that, when
subject and attribute are not identical, either both, subject
and attribute, can exist independently of the other, or each
will need the other, or only one of them will depend on the
other. In the first case they will both be necessary existents,
and this implies an absolute duality and is impossible. In the
second case neither of them will be a necessary existent,
because the meaning of a necessary existent is that it exists
by itself and does not depend in any way on anything else,
and when a thing requires something else, that other is its
cause, since, if this other were annulled, its existence would
be impossible and it would therefore exist not by itself but
through another. In the third case the one which was
dependent would be an effect and the necessary existent
would be the other, on which it would be dependent, and that
which was an effect would need a cause and therefore this
would necessarily involve connecting the essence of the
necessary existent with a cause. ‘
I say:
When their opponents concede to the philosophers that there is an
existent necessary by itself and that the meaning of the necessary existent
is that it has no cause at all, neither in its essence through which it
subsists, or through something external, they cannot escape the

257

conclusion which the philosophers forced upon them: that if the attributes
existed through the essence, the essence would be an existent necessary
through itself, and the attributes would be necessary through something
different from themselves, and the essence of the necessary existent
would exist by itself, but the attributes would be necessary through
something different from themselves, and essence and attributes together
would form a compound. z But the Ash’arites do not concede to the
philosophers that the existence of a necessary existent, subsisting by
itself, implies that it has no cause whatsoever, for their argument leads
only to the denial of an efficient cause additional to the essence. ;
Ghazali says:
The objection against this is to say: The case to be
accepted is the last, but we have shown in the fifth
discussion that you have no proof for your denial of the first
case, that of absolute duality; what is affirmed by you in the
fifth discussion can only be justified by basing it upon your
denial of plurality in this and the following discussions: how
can you therefore base this discussion upon what” is itself
the upshot of this discussion?’ But the correct solution is to
say: `The essence does not need the attributes for its
subsistence, whereas the attributes need a subject, as is the
case with us ourselves. ‘ There remains their statement that
what is in need of something else is not a necessary
existent.
One may ask them: Why do you make such a statement,
if you understand by `necessary existent’ only that which has
no efficient cause, and why is it impossible to say that, just
as there is no agent for the essence of the necessary
existent, which is eternal, there is no agent for its attributes,
which are equally eternal? If, however, you understand by
`necessary existent’ that which has no receptive cause, we
answer that that is not implied in this conception of the
necessary existent, which, according to this conception is all
the same eternal and has no agent; and what is wrong with
this conception?

258

If it is answered that the absolute necessary existent is
that which has no efficient cause and no receptive cause, x
for if a receptive cause for it were conceded, it would be
conceded that it was an effect-we say: To call the receptive
essence a receptive cause is one of your technical terms,
and there is no proof of the real existence of a necessary
existent corresponding to your terminology; all that. is proved
is that there must be a final term to the series of causes and
effects, and no more, and this series can end in a unit with
eternal attributes which have no more an agent than the
essence itself, and are supposed to be in the essence itself.
But let us put aside this term ‘necessary existent’, which is
full of possible confusion. The proof indeed only
demonstrates the end of the series and nothing more, and
your further claims are pure presumption.
If it is said: In the same way as the series of efficient
causes must have an end, the series of receptive causes
must have an end, since if every existent needed a
substratum to inhere in it and this substratum again needed
a substratum, this would imply an infinite series, just as this
would be the case if every existent needed a cause and this
cause again another cause-we answer: You are perfectly
right and for this very reason we say that the series has an
end and that the attribute exists in its essence and that this
essence does not exist in something else, just as our
knowledge exists in our essence and our essence is its
substratum, but does not exist itself in a substratum. The
series of efficient causes comes to an end for the attribute at
the same time as for the essence, since the attribute has an
agent no more than the essence has, still the essence
provided with this attribute does not cease to exist, although
neither itself nor its attribute has a cause. As to the receptive
causes, its series can only end in the essence, for how could
the negation of a cause imply the negation of a substratum?
The proof does not demonstrate anything but the termination
of the series, and every method by which this termination
can be explained is sufficient to establish the proof which

259

demands the existence of the necessary existent. But if by
`necessary existent’ is understood something besides the
existent which has no efficient cause and which brings the
causal series to an end, we do not by any means concede
that this is necessary. And whenever the mind regards it as
possible to acknowledge an eternal existent which has no
cause for its existence, it regards it as possible to
acknowledge an eternal subject for which there is no cause,
either for its essence or for its attribute.
As to Ghazali’s words:
We have shown in the fifth discussion that you have no
proof for your denial of the first case, that of absolute duality;
what is affirmed by you in the fifth discussion can only be
justified by basing it upon your denial of plurality.
I say:
Ghazali means the philosophers’ denial that subject and attribute are
both subsistent by themselves, for from this it follows that they are
independent of each other and that both are independent gods, which is a
dualistic theory, since there is no connexion through which attribute and
subject could become a unity. And since the philosophers used as an
argument for the denial of this kind of plurality the fact that it has dualism
as its consequence, ‘ and a demonstration ought to proceed in the
opposite sense, namely, that dualism would have to be denied, because
of the impossibility of plurality, he says that their proof is circular and that
they proved the principle by the conclusion.
Their objection, however, was not based upon the facts themselves, but
on the theory of their opponents who deny dualism. And you have learned
in another place that there are two kinds of refutation, one based on the
objective facts, the other based on the statement of the opponent, and
although the former is the true kind of refutation, the second type may also
be used .
As to Ghazali’s words:
But the correct solution is to say: ‘The essence does not
need the attributes for its subsistence, whereas the attributes

260

need a subject, as is the case with us ourselves. ‘ There
remains their statement that what is in need of another is not
a necessary existent.
I say:
Ghazali means that, when this tripartite division which they use to deny
plurality is submitted to them, the facts lead them to establish that (i) the
necessary existent cannot be a compound of attribute and subject; (2) the
essence cannot be a plurality of attributes, for they cannot accept these
things according to their principles. Then he starts to show that the
impossibility which they strive to deduce from this division is not strict.
As to Ghazali’s words:
One may ask them: Why do you make such a statement,
if you understand by `necessary existent’ only that which has
no efficient cause, and why is it impossible to say that, just
as there is no agent for the essence of the necessary
existent, which is eternal, there is no agent for its attributes,
which are equally eternal?
I say:
All this is an objection to Avicenna’s method of denying the attributes by
establishing the necessary existent which exists by itself, but in this
question the most convincing method of showing the necessity of unity
and forcing it as a consequence upon the Ash’arites is the method of the
Mu’tazilites. For the latter understand by ‘possible existence’ the truly
possible, ‘ and they believe that everything below the First Principle is
such. Their opponents, the Ash’arites, accept this, and believe also that
every possible has an agent, and that the series comes to an end through
what is not possible in itself. The Mu’tazilites concede this to them, but
they believe that from this concession it follows that the First, which is the
final term of the series of possibility, is not a possible, and that this implies
its absolute simplicity. The Ash’arites, however, say that the denial of true
possibility does not imply simplicity, but only eternity and the absence of
an efficient cause, and therefore there is among the Ash’arites no proof of
the simplicity of the First through the proof based on the necessary
existent. z

261

And Ghazali says:
If it is answered that the absolute necessary existent is
that which has no efficient cause and no receptive cause, for
if a receptive cause for it were conceded, it would be
conceded that it was an effect.
I say:
Ghazali means that, if the philosophers say that the proof has led to a
necessary existent which has no efficient cause, it has, according to them,
no receptive cause either, and that according to the philosophers the
assumption of essence and attributes implies the assumption of a
receptive cause.
Then Ghazali, answering this, says:.
We say: To call the receptive essence a receptive cause
is one of your technical terms, and there is no proof for the
real existence of a necessary existent corresponding to your
terminology; all that is proved is that there must be a final
term to the series of causes and effects.
I say:
Ghazali means that the Ash’arites do not concede that this essence in
which the attributes inhere is a receptive cause, ‘ so as to be forced to
admit an efficient cause for it. He says that the proof of the philosophers
does not lead to an existent which has no receptive cause, let alone
proving the existence of what has no essence and no attributes. It only
proves that it has no efficient cause. This objection is a necessary
consequence of their own proof. Even if the Ash’arites had accepted the
philosophical theory that what has no efficient cause has no receptive
cause, their own statement would not have been overthrown, for the
essence which they assume only receives attributes which do not belong
to the First, since they assume that the attributes are additional to the
essence of the First, and they do not admit essential attributes in the way
the Christians do.
And as to Ghazali’s words:

262

If it is said: In the same way as the series of efficient
causes must have an end, the series of receptive causes
must have an end, since if every existent needed a
substratum to inhere in it and this substratum again needed
a substratum, this would imply an infinite series, just as this
would be the case if every existent needed a cause and this
cause again another causewe answer: You are perfectly
right and for this very reason we say that the series has an
end and that the attribute exists in its essence and that this
essence does not exist in something else, just as our
knowledge exists in our essence and our essence is its
substratum, but does not exist itself in a substratum.
I say:
This statement has no connexion with this discussion either with
respect to the philosophical theories he mentions or with respect to the
answers he gives, and it is a kind of sophism, for there exists no relation
between the question, whether the receptive causes must or must not
have an end, and the problem which is under discussion, namely whether
it is a condition of the First Agent that it should have a receptive cause.
For the inquiry about the finiteness of receptive causes differs from the
inquiry about the finiteness of efficient causes, since he who admits the
existence of receptive causes admits necessarily that their series must
end in a primary receptive cause which is necessarily external to the First
Agent, just as he admits the existence of a First Agent external to the
receptive matter. For if the First Agent possessed matter, this matter
would not exist numerically and individually either in the first recipient or in
the inferior recipients of other things; ‘ no, if the First Agent possessed
matter, this matter would have to be a matter peculiar to it, and in short it
would belong to it; that is, either it would be its primary matter or we
should arrive at a first recipient, and this recipient would not be of the
genus which is the condition for the existence of all the other existents
proceeding from the First Agent. ‘ But if matter were the condition for the
existence of the First Agent, it would be a condition for the existence of all
agents in their actions, and matter would not only be a condition for the
existence of the agent’s act-since every agent acts only on a recipient -but

263

it would be a condition for the existence of the agent itself, and therefore
every agent would be a body. ;
All this the Ash’arites neither admit nor deny. But when the philosophers
tell them that an essence to which such an attribute is ascribed must be a
body, they answer: `Such an attribute is ascribed by you to the soul and
yet, according to you, the soul is not a body. ‘ This is the limit to which
dialectical arguments in this question can be carried. But the
demonstrations are in the works of the ancients which they wrote about
this science, and especially in the books of Aristotle, not in the statements
of Avicenna about this problem and of other thinkers belonging to Islam, if
anything is to be found in them on this question. For their metaphysical
theories are pure presumptions, since they proceed from common, not
particular, notions, i. e. notions which are extraneous to the nature of the
inquiry.
And as to Ghazali’s words:
The series of efficient causes comes to an end for the
attribute at the same time as for the essence, since the
attribute has an agent no more than the essence has, still
the essence provided with this attribute does not cease to
exist, although neither itself nor its attribute has a cause.
I say:
This is a statement which is not accepted by their opponents, the
philosophers; on the contrary, they affirm that it is a condition of the First
Agent that it should not receive an attribute, because reception indicates
matter and it is therefore not possible to assume as the final term of the
causal series an agent of any description whatsoever, but only an agent
which has absolutely no agent, and to which no attribute-from which it
would follow that it had an agent-can be ascribed. For the assumption of
the existence of an attribute of the First Agent existing in a receptive
cause which would be a condition for its existence is thought by the
philosophers to be impossible. Indeed, anything for the existence of which
there is a condition can only be connected with this condition through an
external cause, for a thing cannot itself be the cause of its connexion with
the condition of its existence, just as it cannot be the cause of its own
existence. For the conditioned, if it were not connected with its condition,

264

would have to exist by itself, and it needs an efficient cause to connect the
condition with it, since a thing cannot be the cause of the existence of the
condition of its own existence; but all these are common notions. And in
general one cannot imagine that it is possible to arrive by this method, as
applied to this problem, at something near evidence, because of the
equivocation in the term `existent necessary by itself’, and in the term
`possible by itself, necessary through another’, and the other preliminary
notions which are added to them.
Ghazali says:
The second proof of the philosophers is that they say that
the knowledge and the power in us do not enter the quiddity
of our essence, but are accidental, and when these
attributes are asserted of the First, they too do not enter the
quiddity of its essence, but are accidental in their relation to
it, even if they are lasting; for frequently an accident does not
separate itself from its quiddity and is a necessary attribute
of it, but still it does not therefore become a constituent of its
essence. And if it is an accident, it is consequent on the
essence and the essence is its cause, and it becomes an
effect, and how can it then be a necessary existent?’
Then Ghazali says, refuting this:
This proof is identical with the first, notwithstanding the
change of expression. For we say: If you mean by its being
consequent on the essence, and by the essence’s being its
cause, that the essence is its efficient cause, and that it is
the effect of the essence, this is not true, for this is not valid
of our knowledge in relation to our essence, since our
essence is not an efficient cause of our knowledge. If you
mean that the essence is a substratum and that the attribute
does not subsist by itself without being in a substratum, this
is conceded, and why should it be impossible? For if you call
this `consequent’ or `accident’ or `effect’ or whatever name
you want to give it, its meaning does not change, since its
meaning is nothing but `existing in the essence in the way
attributes exist in their subjects’. And it is by no means

265

impossible that it should exist in the essence, and be all the
same eternal and without an agent. All the proofs of the
philosophers amount to nothing but the production of a
shock by the use of a depreciating expression: `possible’,
`permissible’, ‘consequent’, `connected’, `effect’-but all this
may be ignored. For it must be answered: If by this you
mean that it has an agent, it is not true, and if only it is meant
that it has no agent, but that it has a substratum in which it
exists, then let this meaning be indicated by any expression
you want, and still it will not become impossible.
I say:
This is using many words for one idea. But in this question the
difference between the opponents consists in one point, namely: `Can a
thing which has a receptive cause be without an agent or not?’ Now it
belongs to the principles of the theologians that the connexion of condition
and conditioned appertains to the domain of the permissible’ and that
whatever is permissible needs for its realization and actualization an agent
which actualizes it and connects the condition with the conditioned, and
that the connexion is a condition for the existence of the conditioned and
that it is possible neither that a thing should be the cause of the condition
of its existence, nor that the condition should be the efficient cause of the
existence of the conditioned, for our essence is not the efficient cause of
the existence of the knowledge which exists in it, but our essence is a
condition for the existence of the knowledge existing in it. And because of
all these principles it is absolutely necessary that there should exist an
efficient cause which brings about the connexion of condition and
conditioned, and this is the case with every conjunction of a condition and
a conditioned. But all these principles are annulled by the philosophical
theory that heaven is eternal, although it possesses essence and
attributes, for the philosophers do not give it an agent of the kind which
exists in the empirical world, as would be the consequence of these
principles; they only assume that there is a proof which leads to an eternal
connexion through an eternal connecting principle, and this is another kind
of connexion, differing from that which exists in transitory things. But all
these are problems which need a serious examination. And the
assumption of the philosophers that these attributes do not constitute the

266

essence is not true, for every essence is perfected by attributes through
which it becomes more complete and illustrious, and, indeed, it is
constituted by these attributes, since through knowledge, power, and will
we become superior to those existents which do not possess knowledge,
and the essence in which these attributes exist is common to us and to
inorganic things. How therefore could such attributes be accidents
consequent on our essence? All these are statements of people who have
not studied well the psychological and accidental attributes.
Ghazali says:
And often they shock by the use of a depreciating
expression in another way, and they say: This leads to
ascribing to the First a need for these attributes, so that it
would not be self-sufficient absolutely, since the absolutely
self-sufficient is not in need of anything else. ‘
Then Ghazali says, refuting this:
This is an extremely weak verbal argument, for the
attributes of perfection do not differ from the essence of the
perfect being in such a way that he should be in need of
anything else. And if he is eternally perfect through
knowledge, power, and life, how could he be in need of
anything, or how could his being attached to perfection be
described as his being in need? It would be like saying that
the perfect needs no perfection and that he who is in need of
the attributes of perfection for his essence is imperfect; the
answer is that perfection cannot mean anything but the
existence of perfection in his essence, and likewise being
self-sufficient does not mean anything but the existence of
attributes that exclude every need in his essence. How
therefore can the attributes of perfection through which
divinity is perfected be denied through such purely verbal
arguments?
I say:
There are two kinds of perfection: perfection through a thing’s own self
and perfection through attributes which give their subject its perfection,

267

and these attributes must be in themselves perfect, for if they were perfect
through perfect attributes, we should have to ask whether these attributes
were perfect through themselves or through attributes, and we should
have therefore to arrive at that which is perfect by itself as a final term.
Now the perfect through another will necessarily need, according to the
above principles if they are accepted, a bestower of the attributes of
perfection; otherwise it would be imperfect. But that which is perfect by
itself is like that which is existent by itself, and how true it is that the
existent by itself is perfect by itself!If therefore there exists an existent by
itself, it must be perfect by itself and self-sufficient by itself; otherwise it
would be composed of an imperfect essence and attributes perfecting this
essence. If this is true, the attribute and its subject are one and the same,
and the acts which are ascribed to this subject as proceeding necessarily
from different attributes exist only in a relative way.
Ghazali says, answering the philosophers:
And if it is said by the philosophers: When you admit an
essence and an attribute and the inherence of an attribute in
the essence, you admit a composition, and every compound
needs a principle which composes it, and just because a
body is composed, God cannot be a body-we answer:
Saying that every compound needs a composing
principle is like saying that every existent needs a cause for
its existence, and it may be answered
The First is eternal and exists without a cause and
without a principle for its existence, and so it may be said
that it is a subject, eternal, without a cause for its essence,
for its attribute and for the existence of its attribute in its
essence; indeed all this is eternal without a cause. But the
First cannot be a body, because body is a temporal thing
which cannot be free from what is temporal’: however, he
who does not allow that body has a beginning must be
forced to admit that the first cause can be a body, and we
shall try later to force this consequence on the philosophers.
I say:

268

Composition is not like existence, because composition is like being set
in motion, namely, a passive quality, additional to the essence of things
which receive the composition, z but existence is a quality which is the
essence itself, and whoever says otherwise is mistaken indeed. Further,
the compound cannot be divided into that which is compound by itself and
that which is compound through another, so that one would finally come to
an eternal compound in the way one arrives, where existents are
concerned, at an eternal existent, and we have treated this problem in
another place. ; And again: If it is true, as we have said, that composition
is something additional to existence, then one may say, if there exists a
compound by itself, . then there must exist also something moved by itself,
and if there exists something moved by itself, then also a privation will
come into existence by itself, for the existence of a privation is the
actualization of a potency, and the same applies to motion and the thing
moved. But this is not the case with existence, for existence is not an
attribute additional to the essence, and every existent which does not exist
sometimes in potency and sometimes in act is an existent by itself,
whereas the existence of a thing as moved occurs only when there is a
moving power, and every moved thing therefore needs a movers
The distinctive point in this problem is that the two parts in any
compound must be either (i) mutually a condition for each other’s
existence, as is, according to the Peripatetics, the case with those which
are composed of matters and forms, b or (2) neither of them a condition
for the existence of the other, or (3) exclusively one the condition for the
other.
In the first case the compound cannot be eternal, because the
compound itself is a condition for the existence of the parts and the parts
cannot be the cause of the compound, nor the compound its own cause,
for otherwise a thing might be its own cause, and this kind of compound,
therefore, is transitory and needs an agent for its actualization. ‘
In the second case-and for these compounds it is not in the nature of
either of their parts that it implies the other-there is no composition
possible without a composing factor, external to the parts, since the
composition is not of their own nature so that their essence might exist
through their nature or be a consequence of their nature; and if their
nature determined the composition and they were both in themselves

269

eternal, their composition would be eternal, but would. need a cause
which would give it unity, since no eternal thing can possess unity
accidentally.
In the third case, and this is the case of the non-essential attribute and
its subject, if the subject were eternal and were such as never to be
without this attribute, the compound would be eternal. But if this were so,
and if an eternal compound were admitted, the Ash’arite proof that all
accidents are temporal would not be true, since if there were an eternal
compound there would be eternal accidents, one of which would be the
composition, whereas the principle on which the Ash’arites base their
proof of the temporality!of accidents is the fact that the parts of which a
body, according to them, is composed must exist first separately; if,
therefore, they allowed an eternal compound, it would be possible that
there should be a composition not preceded by a separation, and a
movement, not preceded by a rest, and if this were permissible, it would
be possible that a body possessing eternal accidents should exist, and it
would no longer be true for them that what cannot exist without the
temporal is temporal. And further, it has already been said that every
compound is only one because of a oneness existing in it, and this
oneness exists only in it through something which is one through itself.
And if this is so, then the one, in so far as it is one, precedes every
compound, and the act of this one agent-if this agent is eternal-through
which it gives all single existents which exist through it their oneness, is
everlasting and without a beginning, not intermittent; for the agent whose
act is attached to its object at the time of its actualization is temporal and
its object is necessarily temporal, but the attachment of the First Agent to
its object is everlasting and its power is everlastingly mixed with its object.
And it is in this way that one must understand the relation of the First,
God, praise be to Him, to all existents. But since it is not possible to prove
these things here, let us turn away from them, since our sole aim was to
show that this book of Ghazali does not contain any proofs, but mostly
sophisms and at best dialectical arguments. But proofs are very rare, and
they stand in relation to other arguments as unalloyed gold to the other
minerals and the pure pearl to the other jewels. ‘ And now let us revert to
our subject.
Ghazali says:

270

All their proofs where this problem is concerned are
imaginary. Further, they are not able to reduce all the
qualities which they admit to the essence itself, for they
assert, that it is knowing, and so they are forced to admit that
this is something additional to its mere existence, and then
one can ask them: `Do you concede that the First knows
something besides its essence?’ Some of them concede
this, whereas others affirm that it only knows its own self.
The former position is that taken by Avicenna, for he affirms
that the First knows all things in a universal timeless way,
but that it does not know individuals, because to
comprehend their continual becoming would imply a change
in the essence of the knower. z But, we ask, is the
knowledge which the First has of all the infinite number of
species and genera identical with its self-knowledge or not?
If you answer in the negative, you have affirmed a plurality
and have contradicted your own principle; if you answer in
the affirmative, you are like a man claiming that man’s
knowledge of other things is identical with his self-knowledge
and with his own essence, and such a statement is mere
stupidity. And it may be argued: `The definition of an
identical thing is that its negation and affirmation cannot be
imagined at the same time, and the knowledge of an
identical thing, when it is an identical thing, cannot at the
same time be imagined as existing and not existing. And
since it is not impossible to imagine a man’s self-knowledge
without imagining his knowledge of something else, it may
be said that his knowledge of something else is different
from his self-knowledge, since, if they were the same, the
affirmation or negation of the one would imply the affirmation
or negation of the other. For it is impossible that Zaid should
be at one and the same time both existing and not existing,
but the existence of self-knowledge simultaneously with the
non-existence of the knowledge of something else is not
impossible, nor is this impossible with the self-knowledge of
the First and its knowledge of something else, for the
existence of the one can be imagined without the other and

271

they are therefore two things, whereas the existence of its
essence without the existence of its essence cannot be
imagined, and if the knowledge of all things formed a unity, it
would be impossible to imagine this duality. Therefore all
those philosophers who acknowledge that the First knows
something besides its own essence have undoubtedly at the
same time acknowledged a plurality.
I say:
The summary of this objection to the proposition that the First knows
both itself and something else is that knowing one’s self is different from
knowing something else. But Ghazali falls here into confusion. For this can
be understood in two ways: first, that Zaid’s knowledge of his own
individuality is identical with his knowledge of other things, and this is not
true; secondly, that man’s knowledge of other things, namely of existents,
is identical with the knowledge of his own essence, and this is true. ‘ And
the proof is that his essence is nothing but his knowledge of the existents.
z For if man like all other beings knows only the quiddity which
characterizes him, and if his quiddity is the knowledge of things, then
man’s self-knowledge is necessarily the knowledge of all other things, for
if they were different his essence would be different from his knowledge of
things. This is clear in the case of the artisan, for his essence, through
which he is called an artisan, is nothing but his knowledge of the products
of art. ; And as to Ghazali’s words, that if his self-knowledge were identical
with his knowledge of other things, then the negation of the one would be
the negation of the other and the affirmation of the one the affirmation of
the other, he means that if the self-consciousness of man were identical
with his knowledge of other things, he could not know his own self without
knowing the other things; that is, if he were ignorant of other things, he
would not know his own self, and this proposition is in part true, in part
false. For the quiddity of man is knowledge, and knowledge is the thing
known in one respect and is something different in another. And if he is
ignorant of a certain object of knowledge, he is ignorant of a part of his
essence, and if he is ignorant of all knowables, he is ignorant of his
essence; and to deny man this knowledge is absolutely the same as to
deny man’s selfconsciousness, for if the thing known is denied to the
knower in so far as the thing known and knowledge are one, man’s self-

272

consciousness itself is denied. But in so far as the thing known is not
knowledge, it is not man, and to deny man this knowledge does not imply
the denial of man’s self-consciousness. And the same applies to individual
men. For Zaid’s knowledge of Amr is not Zaid himself, and therefore Zaid
can know his own self, while being ignorant of Amr.
Ghazali says:
If it is said: `The First does not know other things in first
intention. No, it knows its own essence as the principle of the
universe, and from this its knowledge of the universe follows
in second intention, since it cannot know its essence except
as a principle, for this is the true sense of its essence, and it
cannot know its essence as a principle for other things,
without the other things entering into its knowledge by way of
implication and consequence; it is not impossible that from
its essence consequences should follow, and this does not
imply a plurality in its essence, and only a plurality in its
essence is impossible’-there are different ways of answering
this. First your assertion that it knows its essence to be a
principle is a presumption; it suffices that it knows the
existence of its essence, and the knowledge that it is a
principle is an addition to its knowledge of its essence, since
being a principle is a relation to the essence and it is
possible that it should know its essence and not this relation,
and if this being-a-principle were not a relation, its essence
would be manifold and it would have existence and be a
principle, and this forms a duality. And just as a man can
know his essence without knowing that he is an effect, for
his being an effect is a relation to his cause, so the fact that
the First is a cause is a relation between itself and its object.
This consequence is implied in the mere statement of the
philosophers that it knows that it is a principle, since this
comprises the knowledge of its essence and of its being a
principle, and this is a relation, and the relation is not the
essence, and the knowledge of the relation is not the
knowledge of the essence and we have already given the
proof of this, namely that we can imagine knowledge of the

273

essence, without the knowledge of its being a principle, but
knowledge of the essence without the knowledge of the
essence cannot be imagined, since the essence is an
identical unity.
I say:
The proposition which the philosophers defend against Ghazali in this
question is based on philosophical principles which must be discussed
first. For if the principles they have assumed and the deductions to which,
according to them, their demonstration leads, are conceded, none of the
consequences which Ghazali holds against them follows. The
philosophers hold, namely, that the incorporeal existent is in its essence
nothing but knowledge, for they believe that the forms’ have no knowledge
for the sole reason that they are in matter; but if a thing does not exist in
matter, it is known to be knowing, and this is known because they found
that when forms which are in matter are abstracted in the soul from matter
they become knowledge and intellect, for intellect is nothing but the forms
abstracted from matter, z and if this is true for things which by the principle
of their nature are not abstracted, then it is still more appropriate for things
which by the principle of their nature are abstracted to be knowledge and
intellect. And since what is intelligible in things is their innermost reality,
and since intellect is nothing but the perception of the intelligibles, our own
intellect is the intelligible by itself, in so far as it is an intelligible, and so
there is no difference between the intellect and the intelligible, except in so
far as the intelligibles are intelligibles of things in the nature of which there
is no intellect and which only become intellect because the intellect
abstracts their forms from their matters, and through this our intellect is not
the intelligible in every respect. But if there is a thing which does not exist
in matter, then to conceive it by intellect is identical with its intelligible in
every respect, and this is the case with the intellectual conception of the
intelligibles. And no doubt the intellect is nothing but the perception of the
order and arrangement of existing things, but it is necessary for the
separate intellect that it should not depend on the existing things in its
intellectual conception of the existing things and of their order, and that its
intelligible should not be posterior to them, for every other intellect is such
that it follows the order which exists in the existents and perfects itself
through it, and necessarily falls short in its intellectual conception of the

274

things, and our intellect, therefore, cannot adequately fulfil the demands of
the natures of existing things in respect of their order and arrangement.
But if the natures of existing things follow the law of the intellect and our
intellect is inadequate to perceive the natures of existent things, there
must necessarily exist a knowledge of the arrangement and order which is
the cause of the arrangement, order and wisdom which exist in every
single being, and it is necessary that this intellect should be the harmony
which is the cause of the harmony which exists in the existents, and that it
should be impossible to ascribe to its perception knowledge of universals,
let alone knowledge of individuals, ‘ because universals are intelligibles
which are consequent on and posterior to existents, z whereas on the
contrary the existents are consequent on this intellect. And this intellect
necessarily conceives existents by conceiving the harmony and order
which exist in the existents through its essence, not by conceiving
anything outside its essence, for in that case it would be the effect, not the
cause, of the existent it conceives, and it would be inadequate.
And if you have understood this philosophical theory, you will have
understood that the knowledge of things through a universal knowledge is
inadequate, for it knows them in potency, and that the separate intellect
only conceives its own essence, and that by conceiving its own essence it
conceives all existents, since its intellect is nothing but the harmony and
order which exist in all beings, and this order and harmony is received by
the active powers which possess order and harmony and exist in all
beings and are called natures by the philosophers. For it seems that in
every being there are acts which follow the arrangement and order of the
intellect, and this cannot happen by accident, nor can it happen through
an intellect which resembles our intellect; no, this can only occur through
an intellect more exalted than all beings, and this intellect is neither a
universal nor an individual. And if you have understood this philosophical
theory, all the difficulties which Ghazali raises here against the
philosophers are solved; but if you assume that yonder intellect resembles
our own, the difficulties mentioned follow. For the intellect which is in us is
numerable and possesses plurality, but this is not the case with yonder
intellect, for it is free from the plurality which belongs to our intelligibles
and one cannot imagine a difference in it between the perceiver and the
perceived, whereas to the intellect which is in us the perception of a thing
is different from the perception that it is a principle of a thing, and likewise

275

its perception of another is different in a certain way from the perception of
itself. Still, our intellect has a resemblance to yonder intellect, and it is
yonder intellect which gives our intellect this resemblance, for the
intelligibles which are in yonder intellect are free from the imperfections
which are in our intellect: for instance, our intellect only becomes the
intelligible in so far as it is an intelligible, because there exists an intellect
which is the intelligible in every respect. The reason for this is that
everything which possesses an imperfect attribute possesses this attribute
necessarily through a being which possesses it in a perfect way. For
instance, that which possesses an insufficient warmth possesses this
through a thing which possesses a perfect warmth, and likewise that
which possesses an insufficient life or an imperfect intellect possesses this
through a thing which possesses a perfect life or a perfect intellect. ‘ And
in the same way a thing which possesses a perfect rational act receives
this act from a perfect intellect, and if the acts of all beings, although they
do not possess intellects, are perfect rational acts, then there exists an
intellect through which the acts of all beings become rational acts.
It is weak thinkers who, not having understood this, ask whether the
First Principle thinks its own essence or if it thinks something outside its
essence. But to assume that it thinks something outside its essence would
imply that it is perfected by another thing, and to assume that it does not
think something outside its essence would imply that it is ignorant of
existents. One can only wonder at these people who remove from the
attributes which are common to the Creator and the created, all the
imperfections which they possess in the created, and who still make our
intellect like His intellect, whereas nothing is more truly free from all
imperfection than His intellect. This suffices for the present chapter, but
now let us relate the other arguments of Ghazali in this chapter and call
attention to the mistakes in them.
Ghazali says:
The second way to answer this assertion is to say that
their expression that everything is known to it in second
intention is without sense, for as soon as its knowledge
comprehends a thing different from itself, in the way it
comprehends its own essence, this First Principle will have
two different objects of knowledge and it will know them

276

both, for the plurality and the difference of the object known
imply a plurality in the knowledge, since each of the two
objects known receives in the imagination the discrimination
which distinguishes it from the other. And therefore the
knowledge of the one cannot be identical with the knowledge
of the other, for in that case it would be impossible to
suppose the existence of the one without the other, and
indeed there could not be an other at all, since they would
both form an identical whole, and using for it the expression
`second intention’ does not make any difference. Further, I
should be pleased to know how he who says that not even
the weight of an atom, either in heaven or earth, escapes
God’s knowledge, ‘ intends to deny the plurality, unless by
saying that God knows the universe in a universal way.
However, the universals which form the objects of His
knowledge would be infinite, and still His knowledge which is
attached to them would remain one in every respect,
notwithstanding their plurality and their differentiation.
I say:
The summary of this is found in two questions. The first is, `How can its
knowledge of its own self be identical with its knowledge of another?’ The
answer to this has already been given, namely that there is something
analogous in the human mind which has led us to believe in the necessity
of its being in the First Intellect.
The second question is whether its knowledge is multiplied through the
plurality of its objects known and whether it comprehends all finite and
infinite knowables in a way which makes it possible that its knowledge
should comprehend the infinite. The answer to this question is that it is not
impossible that there should exist in the First Knowledge, notwithstanding
its unity, a distinction between the objects known, and it is not impossible,
according to the philosophers, that it should know a thing, different from
itself, and its own essence, through a knowledge which differs in such a
way that there should exist a plurality of knowledge. The only thing which
is absolutely impossible according to them is that the First Intellect should
be perfected through the intelligible and caused by it, and if the First
Intellect thought things different from itself in the way we do, it would be an

277

effect of the existent known, not its cause, and it has been definitely
proved that it is the cause of the existent. The plurality which the
philosophers deny does not consist in its knowing through its own
essence, but in its knowing through a knowledge which is additional to its
essence; the denial, however, of this plurality in God does not imply the
denial of a plurality of things known, except through dialectics, and
Ghazali’s transference of the problem of the plurality which is in the
knowledge, according to the philosophers, to the problem of plurality
which is in the things known themselves, is an act of sophistry, because it
supposes that the philosophers deny the plurality which is in the
knowledge through the things known, in the way they deny the plurality
which arises through the duality of substratum and inherent.
But the truth in this question is that there is not a plurality of things
known in the Eternal Knowledge like their numerical plurality in human
knowledge. For the numerical plurality of things known in human
knowledge arises from two sources: first the representations, and this
resembles spatial plurality;’ secondly the plurality of what is known in our
intellect, namely the plurality which occurs in the first genus-which we may
call being-through its division into all the species which are subsumed
under it, for our intellect is one; with respect to the universal genus which
comprises all species existing in the world, whereas it becomes manifold
through the plurality of the species. And it is clear that when we withhold
the idea of the universal from the Eternal Knowledge, this plurality is in
fact abandoned and there only remains in the Divine a plurality the
perception of which is denied to our intellect, for otherwise our knowledge
would be identical with this eternal knowledge, and this is impossible. And
therefore what the philosophers say is true, that for the human
understanding there is a limit, where it comes to a stand, and beyond
which it cannot trespass, and this is our inability to understand the nature
of this knowledge. And again, our intellect is knowledge of the existents in
potency, not knowledge in act, and knowledge in potency is less perfect
than knowledge in act; and the more our knowledge is universal, the more
it comes under the heading of potential knowledge and the more its
knowledge becomes imperfect . But it is not true of the Eternal Knowledge
that it is imperfect in any way, and in it there is no knowledge in potency,
for knowledge in potency is knowledge in matter. Therefore the
philosophers believe that the First Knowledge requires that there should

278

be a knowledge in act and that there should be in the divine world no
universal at all and no plurality which arises out of potency, like the
plurality of the species which results from the genus. And for this reason
alone we are unable to perceive the actually infinite, that the things known
to us are separated from each other, and if there exists a knowledge in
which the things known are unified, then with respect to it the finite and the
infinite are equivalent.
The philosophers assert that there are definite proofs for all these
statements, and if we understand by `plurality in knowledge’ only this
plurality and this plurality is denied of the Divine, then the knowledge of
God is a unity in act, but the nature of this unity and the representation of
its reality are impossible for the human understanding, for if man could
perceive the unity, his intellect would be identical with the intellect of the
Creator, and this is impossible. And since knowledge of the individual is
for us knowledge in act, we know that God’s knowledge is more like
knowledge of the individual than knowledge of the universal, although it is
neither the one nor the other. And he who has understood this
understands the Divine Words: `Nor shall there escape from it the weight
of an atom, either in the heavens or in the earth’, and other similar verses
which refer to this idea.
Ghazali says:
Avicenna, however, has put himself in opposition to all
the other philosophers who, in order not to commit
themselves to the consequence of plurality, took the view
that the First only knows itself; how, then, can he share with
them the denial of plurality’ Still he distinguished himself
from them by admitting its knowledge of other things, since
he was ashamed to say that God is absolutely ignorant of
this world and the next and knows only His own self-whereas
all others know Him, and know also their own selves and
other things, and are therefore superior to Him in knowledgeand he abandoned that blasphemous philosophical theory,
refusing to accept it. Still he was not ashamed of persisting
in the denial of this plurality in every respect, and he affirmed
that God’s knowledge of Himself and of other things, yes, of
the totality of things, is identical with His essence without this

279

implying any contradiction, and this is the very contradiction
which the other philosophers were ashamed to accept,
because of its obviousness. And thus no party among the
philosophers could rid itself of a blasphemous doctrine, and
it is in this manner that God acts towards the man who
strays from His path and who believes that he has the power
through his speculation and imagination to fathom the
innermost nature of the Divine.
I say:
The answer to all this is clear from what we have said already, namely
that the philosophers only deny that the First Principle knows other things
than its own self in so far as these other things are of an inferior existence,
so that the effect should not become a cause, nor the superior existence
the inferior; for knowledge is identical with the thing known. They do not,
however, deny it, in so far as it knows these other things by a knowledge,
superior in being to the knowledge by which we know other things; on the
contrary, it is necessary that it should know them in this way, because it is
in this way that the other things proceed from the First Agent. As to the
inquiry about the possibility of a plurality of things known in the Eternal
Knowledge, that is a second question, and we have mentioned it, and it is
not because of this that the philosophers sought refuge in the theory that
the First knows only its own self, as Ghazali wrongly supposes; no, only
because in short-as we have dcclared already-its knowledge should not
be like our knowledge which differs from it in the extreme. And Avicenna
wanted only to combine these two statements, that it knows only its own
essence and that it knows other things by a knowledge superior to man’s
knowledge of them, since this knowledge constitutes its essence, and this
is clear from Avicenna’s words that it knows its own self and other things
besides itself, and indeed all things which constitute its essence, although
Avicenna does not explain this, as we have done. And, therefore, these
words of his are not a real contradiction, nor are the other philosophers
ashamed of them; no, this is a statement about which, explicitly or
implicitly, they all agree. And if you have grasped this well, you will have
understood Ghazali’s bad faith in his attack on the philosophers, although
he agrees with them in the greater part of their opinions.
Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers:

280

It may be said that if it is asserted that the First knows its
own self as a principle by way of relation, the knowledge of
two correlatives is one and the same, for the man who
knows the son knows him through one single knowledge in
which the knowledge of the father, of fatherhood, and
sonhood are comprised, so that the objects of knowledge
are manifold, but the knowledge is one. ‘ And in the same
way the First knows its essence as a principle for the other
things besides itself and so the knowledge is one, although
what is known is manifold. Further, if the First thinks this
relation in reference to one single effect and its own relation
towards it, and this does not imply a plurality, then a plurality
is not implied by an addition of things which generically do
not imply a plurality. ‘ And likewise he who knows a thing
and knows his knowing this thing, knows this thing through
this knowledge, and therefore all knowledge is selfknowledge connected with the knowledge of the thing
known, ‘ and the known is manifold, but knowledge forms a
unity. ; An indication of this is also that you theologians
believe that the things known to God are infinite, but His
knowledge is one, and you do not attribute to God an infinite
number of cognitions; if, indeed, the manifoldness of the
known implied a plurality in the knowledge itself, well, let
there then be an infinite number of cognitions in the essence
of God. But this is absurd.
Then Ghazali says, answering the philosophers:
We say: Whenever knowledge is one in every respect, it
cannot be imagined that it should be attached to two things
known; on the contrary, this determines a certain plurality,
according to the assumption and tenet of the philosophers
themselves about the meaning of ‘plurality’, so that they
even make the excessive claim that if the First had a quiddity
to which existence were attributed, this would imply a
plurality. And they do not think that to a single unity
possessing reality existence also can be attributed; no, they
assert that the existence is brought in relation to the reality

281

and differs from it and determines a plurality, and on this
assumption it is not possible that knowledge should attach
itself to two objects of knowledge without this implying a
greater and more important kind of plurality than that which
is intended in the assumption of an existence, brought in
relation to a quiddity. And as to the knowledge of a son and
similarly of other relative concepts, there is in it a plurality,
since there must necessarily be knowledge of the son
himself and the father himself, and this is a dual knowledge,
and there must be a third knowledge, and this is the relation;
indeed, this third knowledge is implied in the dual knowledge
which precedes it, as they are its necessary condition, for as
long as the terms of relation are not known previously, the
relation itself cannot be known, and there is thus a plurality
of knowledge of which one part is conditioned through
another. Likewise when the First knows itself as related to
the other genera and species by being their principle, it
needs the knowledge of its own essence and of the single
genera and it must further know that there exists between
itself and those genera and species the relation of being a
principle, for otherwise the existence of this relation could
not be supposed to be known to it. And as to their statement
that he who knows something knows that he is knowing
through this knowledge itself, so that the thing known can be
manifold, but the knowledge remains one, this is not true; on
the contrary, he knows that he knows through another
knowledge, and this ends in a knowledge to which he does
not pay attention and of which he is no longer conscious,
and we do not say that there is an infinite regress, but there
is a final term of knowledge attached to the thing known, and
he is unconscious of the existence of the knowledge, but not
of the existence of the known, like a man who knows the
colour black and whose soul at the moment of his knowing it
is plunged in the object of his knowledge, the colour black,
and who is unconscious of his knowing this colour black and
whose attention is not centred on it, for if it were, he would
need another knowledge till his attention came to a stand. ‘

282

And as to the affirmation of the philosophers that this can be
turned against the theologians concerning the things known
by God, for they are infinite, whereas God’s knowledge
according to the theologians is one, we answer, `We have
not plunged ourselves into this book to set right, but to
destroy and to refute, and for this reason we have called this
book “The Incoherence of the Philosophers”, not “The
Establishment of the Truth”, and this argument against us is
not conclusive. ‘
And if the philosophers say: `We do not draw this
conclusion against you theologians in so far as you hold the
doctrine of a definite sect but in so far as this problem is
applied to the totality of mankind, and the difficulty for all
human understanding is the same, and you have no right to
claim it against us in particular, for it can be turned against
you also, and there is no way out of it for any party’-we
answer: `No, but our aim is to make you desist from your
claim to possess knowledge of the essential realities through
strict proofs, and to make you doubt. And when your
impotence becomes evident, we say that there are men who
hold that the divine realities cannot be attained through
rational inquiry, for it is not in human power to apprehend
them and it was for this reason that Muhammad, the Lord of
the Law, said “Ponder over God’s creation, but do not
ponder over God’s essence”. Why then do you oppose this
group of men who believe in the truth of the prophet through
the proof of his miracles, ‘ who confine the judgement of the
intellect to a belief in God, the Sender of the Prophets, who
guard themselves against any rational speculation about the
attributes, who follow the Lord of the Law in his revelations
about God’s attributes, who accept his authority for the use
of the terms “the knowing” “the wifer”, “the powerful”, “the
living”, who refuse to acknowledge those meanings which
are forbidden and who recognize our impotence to reach the
Divine Intellect? You only refute these men in so far as they
are ignorant of the methods of demonstration and of the
arrangement of premisses according to the figures of the

283

syllogisms, and you claim that you know these things by
rational methods; but now your impotence, the breakdown of
your methods, the shamelessness of your claim to
knowledge, have come to light, and this is the intention of
our criticism. And where is the man who would dare to claim
that theological proofs have the strictness of geometrical
proofs?’;
I say:
All this prolix talk has only a rhetorical and dialectical value. And the
arguments which he gives in favour of the philosophers about the doctrine
of the unity of God’s knowledge are two, the conclusion of which is that in
our concepts there are conditions which do not through their plurality bring
plurality into the concepts themselves, just as there appear in the existents
conditions which do not bring plurality into their essences, for instance that
a thing should be one and exist and be necessary or possible. And all this,
if it is true, is a proof of a unique knowledge comprising a multitude,
indeed an infinite number, of sciences.
The first argument which he uses in this section refers to those mental
processes which occur to the concept in the soul and which resemble the
conditions in the existents with respect to the relations and negations,
which exist in them; for it appears from the nature of the relation which
occurs in the concepts that it is a condition through which no plurality
arises in the concepts, ‘ and it is now argued that the relation which
presents itself in the related things belongs to this class of conditions.
Ghazali objects to this that the relation and the terms of the relation form a
plurality of knowledge, and that for instance our knowledge of fatherhood
is different from our knowledge of the father and the son. Now the truth is
that the relation is an attribute additional to the terms of the relation
outside the soul in the existents, but as to the relation which exists in the
concepts, it is better suited to be a condition than an attribute additional to
the terms of the relation;’ however, all this is a comparison of man’s
knowledge with the Eternal Knowledge, and this is the very cause of the
mistake. Everyone who concerns himself with doubt about the Eternal
Knowledge and tries to solve it by what occurs in human knowledge does
indeed transfer the knowledge from the empirical to the Divine concerning

284

two existents which differ in an extreme degree, not cxistents which
participate in their species or genus, but which are totally unlike.
The second proof is that we know a thing through a single knowledge
and that we know that we know by a knowledge which is a condition in the
first knowledge, not an attribute additional to it, and the proof of this is that
otherwise there would arise an infinite series. Now Ghazali’s answer, that
this knowledge is a second knowledge and that there is no infinite series
here, is devoid of sense, for it is self-evident that this implies such a
series, and it does not follow from the fact that when a man knows a thing
but is not conscious that he knows the fact that he knows, that in the case
when lie knows that he knows, this second knowledge is an additional
knowledge to the first; no, the second knowledge is one of the conditions
of the first knowledge and its infinite regress is therefore not impossible; if,
however, it were a knowledge existing by itself and additional to the first
knowledge, an infinite series could not occur. ‘
As to the conclusion which the philosophers force upon the theologians,
that all the theologians recognize that God’s knowledge is infinite and that
at the same time it is one, this is an negumentum ad hominem, not an
objective argument based on the facts themselves. And from this there is
no escape for the theologians, unless they assume that the knowledge of
the Creator differs in this respect from the knowledge of the creature, and
indeed there is no one more ignorant than the man who believes that the
knowledge of God differs only quantitatively from the knowledge of the
creature, that is that He only possesses more knowledge. All these are
dialectical arguments, but one may be convinced of the fact that God’s
knowledge is one and that it is not an effect of the things known; no, it is
their cause, and a thing that has numerous causes is indeed manifold
itself, whereas a thing that has numerous effects need not be manifold in
the way that the effects form a plurality. And there is no doubt that the
plurality which exists in the knowledge of the creature must be denied of
God’s knowledge, just as any change through the change of the objects
known must be denied of Him, and the theologians assume this by one of
their fundamental principles. ‘ But the arguments which have been given
here are all dialectical arguments.
And as to his statement that his aim here is not to reach knowledge of
the truth but only to refute the theories of the philosophers and to reveal

285

the inanity of their claims, this is not worthy of him-but rather of very bad
men. And how could it be otherwise? For the greater part of the subtlety
this man acquired-and he surpassed ordinary people through the subtlety
he put in the books he composed-he only acquired from the books of the
philosophers and from their teaching. And even supposing they erred in
something, he ought not to have denied their merit in speculative thought
and in those ideas through which they trained our understanding. Nay
more, if they had only invented logic, he and anyone else who
understands the importance of this science ought to thank them for it, and
he himself was conscious of the value of logic and urged its study and
wrote treatises about it, and he says that there is no other way to learn the
truth than through this science, and he had even such an exaggerated
view of logic that he extracted it from the book of God, the holy Qur’an. ‘
And is it allowed to one who is indebted to their books and to their
teaching to such an extent that he excelled his contemporaries and that
his fame in Islam became immense, is it really allowed to such a man to
speak in this way of them, and to censure them so openly, so absolutely,
and condemn their sciences? And suppose they erred in certain
theological questions, we can only argue against their mistakes by the
rules they have taught us in the logical sciences, and we are convinced
that they will not blame us when we show them a mistake which might be
found in their opinions. And indeed their aim was only the acquisition of
truth, and if their only merit consisted in this, it would suffice for their
praise, although nobody has said anything about theological problems that
can be absolutely relied upon and nobody is guaranteed against mistakes
but those whom God protects in a divine, superhuman way, namely the
prophets, and I do not know what led this man to this attack against such
statements; may God protect me against failings in word and in deed and
forgive me if I fail!
And what he says of the belief held by those who follow the Divine Law
in these things is in agreement with what is said by the renowned
philosophers, for when it is said that God’s knowledge and attributes
cannot be described by, or compared to, the attributes of the creature, so
that it cannot even be asserted that they are essence or an addition to the
essence, this expresses the thought of genuine philosophers and other
true thinkers, and God is the Saviour, the Leader.

286

Ghazali says:
It may be said, `This difficulty applies only to Avicenna in
so far as he says that the First knows other things, but the
acknowledged philosophers are in agreement that it does
not know anything besides itself, and this difficulty is
therefore set aside. ‘
But we answer, `What a terrible blasphemy is this
doctrine! Verily, had it not had this extreme weakness, later
philosophers would not have scorned it, but we shall draw
attention to its reprehensible character, for this theory rates
God’s effects higher than Himself, since angel and man and
every rational being knows himself and his principle and
knows also of other beings, but the First knows only its own
self and is therefore inferior to individual men, not to speak
of the angels; indeed, the animals besides their awareness
of themselves know other things, and without doubt
knowledge is something noble and the lack of it is an
imperfection. And what becomes of their statement that God,
because He is the most perfect splendour and the utmost
beauty, is the lover and the beloved? But what beauty can
there be in mere existence which has no quiddity, no
essence, which i observes neither what occurs in the world
nor what is a consequence or proceeds from its own
essence? And what deficiency in God’s whole world could
be greater? And an intelligent man may well marvel at a
group of men who according to their statement speculate
deeply about the intelligibles, but whose inquiry culminates
in a Lord of Lords and Cause of causes who does not
possess any knowledge about anything that happens in the
world. What difference is there then between Him and the
dead, except that He has self-consciousness? And what
perfection is there in His self-knowledge, if He is ignorant of
everything else? And the blasphemy of this doctrine releases
us from the use of many words and explanations.
Further, there may be said to them: `Although you plunge
yourselves in these shameful doctrines, you cannot free

287

yourselves from plurality, for we ask: “Is the knowledge He
has of His essence identical with His essence or not?” If you
say, “No”, you introduce plurality, and if you say they are
identical, what then is the difference between you and a man
who said that a man’s knowledge of his essence was
identical with his essence, which is pure foolishness? For the
existence of this man’s essence can be conceived, while he
gives no attention to his essence, ‘ whereas when afterwards
his attention returns, he becomes aware of his essence.
Therefore his awareness of his essence differs from his
essence. ‘
If it is argued: `Certainly a man can be without knowledge
of his essence, but when this knowledge occurs to him, he
becomes a different being’, we answer: ‘Non-identity cannot
be understood through an accident and conjunction, for the
identical thing cannot through an accident become another
thing and that other thing, conjoined with this, does not
become identical with it, but keeps its individual otherness.
And the fact that God is eternally self-conscious does not
prove that His knowledge of His essence is identical with His
essence, for His essence can be imagined separately and
the occurrence of His awareness afterwards, and if they
were identical this could not be imagined.
And if it be said: `His essence is intellect and knowledge,
and He has not an essence in which afterwards knowledge
exists’, we answer: `The foolishness of this is evident, for
knowledge is an attribute and an accident which demands a
subject, and to say, “He is in His essence intellect and
knowledge” is like saying, “He is power and will, and power
and will exist by themselves”, and this again is like saying of
black and white, quantity, fourness and threeness and all
other accidents that they exist by themselves. And in exactly
the same way as it is impossible that the attributes of bodies
should exist by themselves without a body which itself is
different from the attributes, it is known to be impossible that
attributes like the knowledge, life, power, and will of living

288

beings should exist by themselves, for they exist only in an
essence. For life exists in an essence which receives life
through it, and the same is the case with the other attributes.
And therefore they do not simply content themselves with
denying to the First all qualities (and not merely its real
essence and quiddity); no, they deny to it also its very
existence by itself’ and reduce it to the entities of accidents
and attributes which have no existence by themselves; and
besides we shall show later in a special chapter their
incapacity to prove that it is conscious either of itself or of
other things. ‘
I say:
The problem concerning the knowledge of the Creator of Himself and of
other things is one of those questions which it is forbidden to discuss in a
dialectical way, let alone put them down in a book, for the understanding
of the masses does not suffice to understand such subtleties, and when
one embarks on such problems with them the meaning of divinity
becomes void for them and therefore it is forbidden to them to occupy
themselves with this knowledge, since it suffices for their blessedness to
understand what is within their grasp. The Holy Law, the first intention of
which is the instruction of the masses, z does not confine itself to the
explanation of these things in the Creator by making them understood
through their existence in human beings, for instance by the Divine Words:
`Why dost thou worship what can neither hear nor see nor avail thee
aught?’, ‘ but enforces the real understanding of these entities in the
Creator by comparing them even to the human limbs, for instance in the
Divine Words: `Or have they not seen that we have created for them of
what our hands have made for them, cattle and they are owners thereof?’
and the Divine Words, `I have created with my two hands’. s This problem
indeed is reserved for the men versed in profound knowledge to whom
God has permitted the sight of the true realities, and therefore it must not
be mentioned in any books except those that are composed according to
a strictly rational pattern, that is, such books as must be read in a rational
order and after the acquisition of other sciences the study of which
according to a demonstrative method is too difficult for most men, even for
those w_ o possess by nature a sound understanding, although such men

289

are very scarce. But to discuss these questions with the masses is like
bringing poisons to the bodies of many animals, for which they are real
poisons. Poisons, however, are relative, and what is poison for one animal
is nourishment for another. The same applies to ideas in relation to men;
that is, there are ideas which are poison for one type of men, but which
are nourishment for another type. And the man who regards all ideas as fit
for all types of men is like one who gives all things as nourishment for all
people; the man, however, who forbids free inquiry to the mature is like
one who regards all nourishment as poison for everyone. But this is not
correct, for there are things which are poison for one type of man and
nourishment for another type. ‘ And the man who brings poison to him for
whom it is really poison merits punishment, although it may be
nourishment for another, and similarly the man who forbids poison to a
man for whom it is really nourishment so that this man may die without it,
he too must be punished. And it is in this way that the question must be
understood. But when the wicked and ignorant transgress and bring
poison to the man for whom it is really poison, as if it were nourishment,
then there is need of a physician who through his science will exert
himself to heal that man, and for this reason we have allowed ourselves to
discuss this problem in such a book as this, and in any other case we
should not regard this as permissible to us; on the contrary, it would be
one of the greatest crimes, or a deed of the greatest wickedness on earth,
and the punishment of the wicked is a fact well known in the Holy Law.
And since it is
impossible to avoid the discussion of this problem, let
us treat it in such a way as is possible in this place for those who do not
possess the preparation and mental training needed before entering upon
speculation about it.
So we say that the philosophers, when they observed all perceptible
things, found that they fell into two classes, the one a class perceptible by
the senses, namely the individual bodies existing by themselves and the
individual accidents in these bodies, and the other a class perceptible by
the mind, namely, the quiddities and natures of these substances and
accidents. And they found that in these bodies there are quiddities which
exist essentially in them, and I understand by the `quiddities’ of bodies
attributes existing in them, through which these bodies become existent in
act and specified by the act which proceeds from them; and according to
the philosophers these quiddities differ from the accidental attributes,

290

because they found that the accidents were additions to the individual
substance which exists by itself and that these accidents were in need of
the substances for their existence, whereas the substances do not need
the accidents for their own existence. And they found also that those
attributes which were not accidents were not additional to the essence, but
that they were the genuine essence of the individual which exists by itself,
so that if one imagined these attributes annulled, the essence itself would
be annulled. Now, they discovered these qualities in individual bodies
through the acts which characterize each of them; for instance they
perceived the attributes through which plants by their particular action
become plants’ and the attributes through which animals by their particular
actions become animals, and in the same way they found in the minerals
forms of this kind which are proper to them, through the particular actions
of minerals. Then, when they had investigated these attributes, they
learned that they were in a substratum of this essence and this substratum
became differentiated for them, because of the changing of the individual
existents from one species into another species and from one genus into
another genus through the change and alteration of these attributes; for
instance the change of the nature of fire into air by the cessation of the
attribute from which the actuality of fire, through which fire is called fire,
proceeds, and its change into the attribute from which the actuality
peculiar to air, through which air is called air, proceeds. They also proved
the existence of this substratum through the capacity of the individual
essence to receive an actuality from another, just as they proved by the
actuality the existence of form, for it could not be imagined that action and
passivity proceed from one and the same natures They believed therefore
that all active and passive bodies are composed of two natures, one active
and the other passive, and they called the active nature form, quiddity,
and substance, and the passive part subject, ultimate basis of existenceb
and matter. And from this it became clear to them that the perceptible
bodies are not simple bodies as they appear to be to the senses, nor
compounded of simple bodies, since they are compounded of action and
passivity; and they found that what the senses perceive are these
individual bodies, which are compounded of these two things which they
called form and matter and that what the mind perceives of these bodies
are these forms which only become concepts and intellect when the
intellect abstracts them from the things existing by themselves, i. e. what

291

the philosophers call substratum and matter. ? And they found that the
accidents also are divided in the intellect in a way similar to those two
natures, s although their substratum in which they exist in reality is the
bodies compounded of these two natures. And when they had
distinguished the intelligibles from the sensibles and it had become clear
to them that in sensible things there are two natures, potency and act,
they inquired which of these two natures was prior to the other and found
that the act was prior to the potency, because the agent was prior to its
object, ‘ and they investigated also causes and effects, which led them to
a primary cause which by its act is the first cause of all causes, and it
followed that this cause is pure act and that in it there is no potency at all,
since if there were potency in it, it would be in part an effect, in part a
cause, and could not be a primary cause. And since in everything
composed of attribute and subject there is potency and act, it was a
necessary implication for them that the First could not be composed of
attribute and subject, and since everything free from matter was according
to them intellect, it was necessary for them that the First should be
intellect.
This in summary is the method of the philosophers, and if you are one
of those whose mind is sufficiently trained to receive the sciences, and
you are steadfast and have leisure, it is your duty to look into the books
and the sciences of the philosophers, so that you may discover in their
works certain truths (or perhaps the reverse) ; but if you lack one of these
three qualities, it is your duty to keep yourself to the words of the Divine
Law, and you should not look for these new conceptions in Islam; for if you
do so, you will be neither a rationalist nor a traditionalist. ‘
Such was the philosophers’ reason for their belief that the essence
which they found to be the principle of the world was simple and that it
was knowledge and intellect. And finding that the order which reigns in the
world and its parts proceeds from a knowledge prior to it, they judged that
this intellect and this knowledge was the principle of the world, which gave
the world existence and made it intelligible. This is a theory very remote
from the primitive ideas of mankind and from common notions, so that it is
not permitted to divulge it to the masses or even to many people; indeed,
the man who has proved its evidence is forbidden to reveal it to the man
who has no power to discover its truth, for he would be like his murderer.

292

And as to the term `substance’ which the philosophers give to that which
is separate from matter, the First has the highest claim on the term
`substance’, the terms `existent’, `knowing’, `living’, and all the terms for
the qualities it bestows on the existents and especially those attributes
which belong to perfection, for the philosophers found that the proper
definition of substance was what existed by itself and the First was the
cause of everything that existed by itself.
To all the other reproofs which he levels against this doctrine no
attention need be paid, except in front of the masses and the ordinary
man, to whom, however, this discussion is forbidden.
And as to Ghazali’s words:
What beauty can there be in mere existence which has
no quiddity, no essence, which observes neither what occurs
in the world nor what is a consequence or proceeds from its
own essence? . . .
-this whole statement is worthless, for if the philosophers assume a
quiddity free from a substratum it is also void of attributes, and it cannot be
a substratum for attributes except by being itself in a substratum and
being composed of the nature of potency and the nature of act. The First
possesses a quiddity that exists absolutely, and all other existents receive
their quiddity only from it, and this First Principle is the existent which
knows existents absolutely, because existents become existent and
intelligible only through the knowledge this principle has of itself; for since
this First Principle is the cause of the existence and intelligibility of
existents, of their existence through its quiddity and of their intelligibility
through its knowledge, it is the cause of the existence and intelligibility of
their quiddities. The philosophers only denied that its knowledge of
existents could take place in the same way as human knowledge which is
their effect, whereas for God’s knowledge the reverse is the case. For they
had established this superhuman knowledge by proof. According to the
Ash’arites, however, God possesses neither quiddity nor essence at all
but the existence of an entity neither possessing nor being a quiddity
cannot be understood, ‘ although some Ash’arites believed that God has a
special quiddity by which He differs from all other existents, ‘ and

293

according to the Sufis it is this quiddity which is meant by the highest
name of God.
And as to Ghazali’s words:
Further, there may be said to them: `Although you plunge
yourself in these shameful doctrines, you cannot free
yourselves from plurality, for we ask: “Is the knowledge He
has of His essence identical with His essence or not?” If you
say, “No”, you introduce plurality, and if you say, “they are
identical”, what then is the difference between you and a
man who said that a man’s knowledge of his essence was
identical with his essence?’
I say:
This is an extremely weak statement, and a man who speaks like this
deserves best to be put to shame and dishonoured. For the consequence
he draws amounts to saying that the perfect one, who is free from the
attributes of becoming and change and imperfection, might have the
attribute of a being possessing imperfection and change. For a man
indeed it is necessary, in so far as he is composed of a substratum and
knowledge, which exists in this substratum, that his knowledge should
differ from his essence in such a way as has been described before, since
the substratum is the cause of change in the knowledge and the essence.
And since man is man and the most noble of all sentient beings only
through the intellect which is conjoined to his essence, but not by being
essentially intellect, it is necessary that that which is intellect by its
essence should be the most noble of all existents and that it should be
free from the imperfections which exist in the human intellect. ‘
And as to Ghazali’s words:
And if it be said: His essence is intellect and knowledge
and He has not an essence in which afterwards knowledge
exists, we answer: `The foolishness of this is evident, for
knowledge is an attribute and an accident which demands a
subject, and to say “He is in His essence intellect and
knowledge” is like saying “He is power and will, and power
and will exist by themselves”, and this again is like saying of

294

black and white, fourness and threeness, and all other
accidents that they exist by themselves. ‘
I say:
The error and confusion in his statement is very evident, for it has been
proved that there is among attributes one that has a greater claim to the
term `substantiality’ than the substance existing by itself, and this is the
attribute through which the substance existing by itself becomes existing
by itself. For it has been proved that the substratum for this attribute is
something neither existing by itself nor existing in actuality; no, its existing
by itself and its actual existence derive from this attribute, and this
attribute in its existence is like that which receives the accidents, although
certain of these attributes, as is evident from their nature, need a
substratum in the changeable things, since it is the fundamental law of the
accidents, that they exist in something else, whereas the fundamental law
of the quiddities is that they exist by themselves, except when, in the
sublunary world, these quiddities need a substratum through being in
transitory i things. But this attribute is at the greatest distance from the
nature of an accident, and to compare this transcendent knowledge to
sublunary accidents is extremely foolish, indeed more foolish than to
consider the soul an accident like threeness and fourness.
And this suffices to show the incoherence and the foolishness of this
whole argument, and let us rather call this book simply `The Incoherence’,
not `The Incoherence of the Philosophers’. And what is further from the
nature of an accident than the nature of knowledge, and especially the
knowledge of the First? And since it is at the greatest distance from the
nature of an accident, it is at the greatest distance from having a necessity
for a substratum.

THE SEVENTH DISCUSSION
TO REFUTE THEIR CLAIM THAT NOTHING CAN SHARE
WITH THE FIRST ITS GENUS, AND BE DIFERENTIATED
FROM IT THROUGH A SPECK DIFERENCE, AND THAT
WITH RESPECT TO ITS INTELLECT THE DIVISION INTO

295

GENUS AND SPECK DIFFERENCE CANNOT BE APPLIED
TO IT,
Ghazali says:
Indeed, they are all of this opinion, and they deduce from
this that, since nothing can share its genus, it cannot be
differentiated through a specific difference and cannot have
a definition, since a definition is constructed out of genus
and specific difference and what has no composition cannot
have a definition, for a definition is a kind of composition. ‘
And they affirm that, since the First is said to resemble the
first effect in being an existent and a substance and a cause
for other things, and to differ from it in other respects, this
certainly does not imply sharing in its genus; no, it is nothing
but a sharing in a common necessary attribute. The
difference between genus and necessary attribute consists
in their content, not in universality, according to logical
theory, for the genus, namely, the essential universal, is the
answer to the question what the thing is, and is subsumed
under the quiddity of the thing defined, and constitutes its
essence: a man’s being alive is subsumed under the quiddity
of man, i. e. his animality, and is his genus, but his being
born and created are his necessary attributes, and, although
they are universals which can never be separated from him,
are not subsumed under his quiddity, according to logical
theory, about which there can be no misgiving. ; And the
philosophers affirm that existence is never subsumed under
the quiddity of things, but stands in a relation to the quiddity,
either necessarily and inseparably, like its relation to heaven,
or subsequently, after their nonexistence, like its relation to
temporary things, and that the sharing of existence does not
imply a sharing in genus. And as to its sharing in ‘being a
cause to other things’ with all the other causes, this is a
necessary relation which likewise cannot be subsumed
under the quiddity, s for neither the fact of being a principle
nor existence constitutes the essence, but they are
necessary attributes of the essence, consequent upon the

296

constitution of the essence out of the parts of its quiddity,
and this community is only the sharing of a necessary
common attribute consecutive to the essence, not a
community of genus. Things therefore are only defined by
their constituents, and if they are defined by the necessary
attributes this is only a description’ to differentiate them, not
to define their essential forms; for the triangle is not defined
by the fact that its angles are equal to two right angles,
although this is a necessary and common attribute of all
triangles, but it is defined as a figure bounded by three sides.
And the same applies to its being a substance, and the
meaning of its being a substance is that it is an existent
which does not exist in a substratum. ‘ And the existent is
not a genus, since, as it is related to a negation, namely not
being in a substratum, it cannot become a constituent genus;
indeed, even if it could be brought into a relation to
something positive and it could be said that it existed in a
substratum, it could not become a genus in the accident.
And the reason is that the man who knows substance by its
definition, which is rather its description, namely that it is an
existent which does not exist in a substratum, does not know
whether it exists, and a fortiori does not know whether it
exists in a substratum or not; no, the meaning of the
description of substance is that it is the existent which does
not exist in a substratum, i. e. that it is a certain reality which,
when it does exist, does not exist in a substratum, but we do
not mean that it actually exists at the time of the definition,
and its community is not the community of the genus, for
only the constituents of the quiddity form the community of
the genus which needs also a specific differences But the
First has no other quiddity, except necessary existence, and
necessary existence is its real nature and its own quiddity,
exclusively confined to it, and since necessary existence is
exclusively confined to the First, it cannot be shared by
others, it cannot have a specific difference, and it cannot
have a definition.
I say:

297

Here ends what Ghazali says of the philosophical views about this
question, and it is partly true, partly false. As to his statement that no other
thing can share with the First its genus and be distinguished from it
through a specific difference, if he means by this the genus and the
difference that are predicated univocally, it is true, for anything of this
description is composed of a common form and a specific form, and such
things possess a definition. But if by ‘genus’ is meant what is predicated
analogically, I mean pier prius et piosterius, then it can have a genus, e. g.
existent, or thing, or identity, or essence, and it can have a kind of
definition, and this kind of definition is used in the sciences-for instance,
when it is said of the soul that it is the entelechy of the natural organic
body, a and when it is said of the substance that it is the existent which
does not exist in a substratum -but these definitions do not suffice for
knowledge of the thing, and they are only given to indicate through it the
different individuals which fall under such definitions and to represent their
peculiarities. But as to his statement that according to the philosophers the
term ‘existence’ only indicates a necessary attribute of the essences of
things, this is not true, and we have already explained this in another
place and none of the philosophers has said this but Avicenna. Having
denied that existence is a genus, predicted either univocally or
equivocally, Avicenna affirmed that it was a term which signified a
common necessary attribute of things. But the difficulty he found in
regarding existence as an essence can be held up against him when it is
regarded as a necessary attribute, for if it were a necessary attribute, this
necessary attribute could not be given as an answer to the question what
a thing is. I And further, if ‘existence’ really signifies a necessary attribute
in things, does it signify this necessary attribute univocally, or equivocally,
or in some other mode of attribution? And if it has a univocal meaning,
how can there be an accident univocally predicated of things essentially
different (I believe that Avicenna regarded this as possible)? z It is,
however, impossible, because from different things the congruous and
identical can only derive, when these different things agree in one nature,
since necessarily a single necessary attribute must come from one nature,
just as a single act can proceed only from one nature. And since this is
impossible, the term ‘existence’ indicates essences which have analogical
meanings, essences some of which are more perfect than others; and
therefore there exists in the things which have such an existence a

298

principle which is the cause of that which exists in all the other things of
this genus, just as our term ‘warm’ is a term which is predicated per prius
et posterius of fire and all other warm things, and that of which it is
asserted first, i. e. fire, is the cause of the existence of warmth in all other
things, and the same is the case with substance, intellect, and principle
and such terms (most metaphysical terms are of this kind), and such
terms can indicate both substances and accidents.
And what he says of the description of substance is devoid of sense,
but existence is the genus of substance and is included in its definition in
the way the genera of the sublunary things are included in their definitions,
and Farabi proved this in his book about demonstration, and this is the
commonest view amongst philosophers. Avicenna erred in this only
because, since he thought that the ‘existent’ means the ‘true’ in the Arabic
language, and that what indicates the true indicates an accident4-the true,
however, really indicates one of the second, predicates, i. e. a predicablehe believed that when the translator used the word ‘existent’ it meant only
the ‘true’. This, however, is not so, for the translators meant only to
indicate what is also meant by ‘entity’ and ‘thing’. Farabi explains this in
his Book of the Letters and he shows that one of the reasons for the
occurrence of this mistake is that the term ‘existent’ in Arabic is a
derivative in form and that a derivative signifies an accident, and in fact an
accident is linguistically a derivative. But since the translators did not find
in Arabic a term which signified that concept which the ancient
philosophers subdivided into substance and accident, potency and act, a
term namely which should be a primitive symbol, some translators
signified that concept by the term ‘existent’, not to be understood as
having a derivative meaning and signifying therefore an accident, but as
having the same meaning as ‘essence’. It is thus a technical term, not an
idiomatic word. Some translators, because of the difficulty attached to it,
decided to use for the concept, which the Greek language tried to express
by deriving it from the pronoun which joins the predicate and the subject,
the term which expresses this, because they thought that this word comes
nearer to expressing this meaning, and they used instead of the term
‘existent’ the term ‘haeceitas’, but the fact that its grammatical form is not
found in Arabic hindered its use, and the other party therefore preferred
the term ‘existent’. -, And the term ‘existent’ which signifies the true does
not signify the quiddity, and therefore one may often know the quiddity

299

without knowing the existence, and this meaning of ‘existent’ of necessity
does not signify the quiddity in the compound substance, but is in the
simple substance identical with the quiddity; and this meaning is not what
the translators intended by ‘existence’, for they meant the quiddity itself,
and when we say of the existent that it is in part substance, in part
accident, the sense meant by the translators must be understood, and this
is the sense which is predicated analogically of different essences of
things. When we say, however, that substance exists, it must be
understood in the sense of the true. And therefore if we have understood
the well-known discussion of the ancient philosophers, whether the
existent is one or more than one, which is found in the first book of
Aristotle’s Physics where he conducts a discussion with the ancient
philosophers Parmenides and Melissus, s we need only understand by
‘existent’ that which signifies the essence. And if the ‘existent’ meant an
accident in a substratum, then the statement that the existent was one
would be self-contradictory. ‘ And all this is clear for the man who is well
grounded in the books of the philosophers.
And having stated the views of the philosophers, Ghazali begins to refute
them, and says:
This is the sense of the doctrine of the philosophers. And
the discussion with them consists of two parts: a question
and a refutation. The question is: This is the simple narration
of your doctrine, but how do you know the impossibility of
this with respect to God, so as to build on it the refutation of
dualism, since you say that a second God would have to
participate in something and differ from the first in
something, and that which partly possesses something in
common with another, partly is different from it, is
compound, whereas that He should be compound is absurd?
I say:
I have already said that this is only valid for something which possesses
a common feature through a genus which is predicated univocally, not
analogically. For if, by the assumption of a second God, a God were
assumed of the same rank of divinity as the first, then the name of God
would be predicated univocally, and He would be a genus, and the two

300

Gods would have to be separated by a specific distinction and both would
be compounded of a genus and a specific distinction, and the
philosophers do not allow a genus to an eternal being; but if the term
‘existence’ is predicated per prius et posterius, the prior will be the cause
of the posterior.
Ghazali says, refuting the philosophers:
But we say: How do you know the impossibility of this
kind of composition? For there is no proof except your denial
of the attributes, which has been mentioned, namely that the
compound of genus and species is an aggregate of parts;
thus if it is possible for one or for a collection of the parts to
exist without the others, this single one will be the necessary
existent and the others will not be necessary; and if it is
possible neither for the parts to exist without the totality, nor
for the totality to exist without the parts, then the whole is an
effect needing something else as its cause. We have already
discussed this in the case of the attributes, and have shown
that their plurality is not impossible, since an end of the
causal series is admitted and all that is proved is that there is
an end of the causal series. For those enormous difficulties
which the philosophers have invented concerning the
inherence of attributes in the necessary existent there is no
proof whatever. If the necessary existent is what the
philosophers describe it to be, namely to possess no plurality
and not to need anything else for its existence, then there is
no proof of the existence of this necessary existent; the only
thing proved is that there is an end of the causal series, and
we have exhausted this subject in our discussion of
attributes. And for this kind of plurality it is still more obvious,
for the division of a thing into genus and specific difference is
not like the division of the subject into essence and attribute,
since, indeed, the attribute is not the essence and the
essence is not the attribute, but the species is not in every
way different from the genus, for whenever we mention the
species, we mention the genus with an addition, and when
we speak of a man we only mention animal with the addition

301

of reason. ‘ And to ask whether humanity can be free from
animality is like asking whether humanity can be without
itself, when something is added to it. And indeed genus and
species are more distant from plurality than attribute and
subject. ‘ And why should it be impossible that the causal
series should end in two causes, one the cause of the
heavens and the other the cause of the elements, or one the
cause of the intellects and the other the cause of all bodies,
and that there should be between those two causes a
conceptual difference and separation as between redness
and warmth when they exist in one and the same place? For
they differ in content without our being obliged to assume in
the redness a compound of genus and specific difference
through which this difference is established; indeed, if it
possesses a plurality, this kind of plurality does not impair
the singleness of its essence, and why should this be
impossible with respect to the causes? Through this there is
shown the weakness of their refutation of the existence of
two Gods.
I say:
Composition out of genus and specific difference is exactly the same as
the composition of a thing in potency and a thing in act, for the nature
which is indicated by the genus does not actually exist at any time without
the presence of the nature which is called specific difference and form. ;
And everything which is composed of these two natures is, according to
the philosophers, transitory, and possesses an agent, for the specific
difference is one of the conditions for the existence of the genus in so far
as the genus is in potency and does not exist without the specific
difference. And the conjunction of either with its partner is in a certain way
a condition for the existence of the other. And as a thing cannot itself be a
cause of the condition of its existence, it necessarily possesses a cause
which provides it with existence by conjoining the condition and the
conditioned. Also, according to the philosophers the recipient is in reality
something which possesses only potency, and if it is actually, then only
accidentally; and what is received is actuality, and if it is potency, then
only accidentally; for the recipient and the thing it receives are only

302

distinguished by the fact that one of them is potentially something else,
whereas actually it is the thing received and whatever is potentially
another thing must necessarily receive this other thing and lose the thing it
actually is. ‘ Therefore, if there should exist a recipient in actuality and a
thing received in actuality, both would exist by themselves, but the
recipient is necessarily body, for only body, or what is in a body,
possesses receptivity primarily, and receptivity cannot be attributed to
accidents and forms, nor to the plane, the line, and the point, ‘ nor in
general to what cannot be divided. As regards an incorporeal agent, this
has been already proved, and as to an incorporeal recipient, or a recipient
not embedded in matter, such a recipient is impossible, although there is a
problem for the philosophers about the potential intellects And indeed, if
the compound has a subject and an attribute which is not additional to its
essence, b it is transitory and necessarily a body, and if it has a subject
and an attribute additional to its essence, without its having any potency in
its substance even in respect of this attribute, as is the case according to
the ancients with the body of the heavens, ? it possesses quantity of
necessity and is a body. For, if from such an essence, supporting the
attribute, bodiliness were taken away, it would no longer be a perceptible
recipient, and equally the sensory perception of its attribute would be
annulled and its attribute and subject would both become intellect, and
they would be reduced to one single simple entity, for from the nature of
the intellect and the intelligible it is evident that they are both one and the
same thing, since plurality exists in them accidentally, namely through the
substratum. ‘ And in short, when the philosophers assume an essence
and attributes additional to the essence, this amounts to their assuming an
eternal body with accidents inherent in it, and they do not doubt that if they
took away the quantity which is corporeity, the perceptible element in it
would be annulled, and neither substratum nor inherent would exist any
more; but if, on the other hand, they regarded the substratum and the
inherent as abstracted from matter and body, the substratum and inherent
would of necessity be both intellect and intelligible; but this is the Unique,
the Uncompounded, God, the Truth.
As to his statement that the whole mistake of the philosophers consists
in their calling the First the ‘necessary existent’, and that if instead they
called it ‘the causeless”, the conclusion which they draw about the First,
concerning the necessary attributes of the necessary existent, would not

303

follow-this statement is not true. For since they assume an existent which
has no cause, it follows necessarily that it is in itself a necessary existent,
just as, when a necessary existent existing by itself is assumed, it follows
necessarily that it has no cause, and if it has no cause it is more
appropriate that it should not be divided into two things, cause and effect.
The assumption of the theologians that the First is composed of an
attribute and a subject implies that it has an efficient cause, ‘ and that
therefore it is neither a first cause nor a necessary existent, and this is in
contradiction to their assumption that it is one of those existents of which
the attribute and the subject are reduced to one single simple entity; but
there is no sense in repeating this and expatiating on it.
And as to his statement that it is not impossible of God, the First, that
He should be composed of a substratum and an attribute additional to the
substratum, and that therefore a fortiori it is not impossible that He should
be composed of a substratum and an attribute which is identical with its
substratum, we have already explained the way in which this is not
impossible, namely when both are abstract from matter.
And as to his statement that their refutation of dualism does not prevent
the possibility of the existence of two Gods, one of whom would be, for
instance, the cause of heaven and the other the cause of the earth, or one
the cause of the intelligible and the other the cause of the sensible in the
bodies, and that their differentiation and distinction need not determine a
contradiction, as there is no contradiction in redness and warmth which
exist in one place-this statement is not true. For if the production and
creation of the existent is assumed to be the effect of one nature and of
one essence, not of two different natures, it would necessarily follow that if
a second thing of this nature were assumed, similar in nature and intellect
to the first, they would share in one attribute and differ in another. And
their difference would come about either through the kind of differentiation
which exists between individuals or through the kind of differentiation
which exists between species. In the latter case the term ‘God’ would be
predicated of them equivocally, and this is in contradiction with their
assumption, for the species which participate in the genus are either
contraries or stand between contraries, and this is wholly impossible. And
if they were individually differentiated, they would both be in matter, and
this is in opposition to what is agreed about them. But if it is assumed that

304

one of these natures is superior to the other and that this nature is
predicated of them per prius et posterius, then the first nature will be
superior to the second and the second will be necessarily its effect, so that
for instance the creator of heaven will be the creator of the cause which
creates the elements; and this is the theory of the philosophers. And both
theories lead to the acceptance of a first cause; that of those who believe
that the First acts through the mediation of many causes, and that of those
who believe that the First is directly the cause of all other things without
mediation. But according to the philosophers this latter theory cannot be
true. For it is evident that the worlds exist through cause and effect, and it
is inquiry concerning these causes which leads us to a first cause for
everything. And if some of these different principles were wholly
independent of others-that is, if some were not the cause of others-then
the world could not be a single well connected whole, and to the
impossibility of this the Divine Words refer, ‘Were there in both heaven
and earth Gods beside God, both surely would have been corrupted’.
Ghazali says:
It may be said: This is impossible so far as the difference
which exists between these two essences is either a
condition for their necessary existence (and in that case it
will exist in both the necessary existents, and then they will
not differ anyhow), or neither the one nor the other specific
difference is a condition (and since the necessary existence
is able to exist without the things that are not a condition for
it, the necessary existence will be perfected by something
else).
But we reply: This is exactly the same answer as you
gave concerning the attributes and we have already
discussed it, ‘ and the source of confusion throughout this
problem is the expression ‘necessary existent’; let us
therefore get rid of this term; and indeed, we do not accept
that demonstration proves a necessary existent, if anything
else is meant by it but an eternal existent which has no
cause, and if this is meant by it, let us abandon the term
‘necessary existent’ and let it be proved that an existent
which has no cause and no agents cannot have a plurality

305

and a distinctive mark, but indeed there is no proof of it.
There remains therefore your question whether this specific
difference is a condition of the causeless character of this
causeless existent, and this is nonsense. For we have
shown that there is no cause for its being without a cause,
so as to make it possible to ask for its condition. It would be
like asking whether blackness is a condition for the colour’s
becoming a colour, and if it is a condition, why redness is
then a colour. And the answer is: as to the essential nature
of colour, i. e. in so far as the essence of colouredness is
asserted in the intellect, neither of them is a condition, < and
as to its existence, each of them is a condition for its
existence, but not individually, since a genus cannot exist in
reality without a specific differences And likewise the man
who accepts two causes as starting-points of the series must
say that they are differentiated through a specific difference,
and both differences are a condition for their existence, no
doubt, though not through their individuality.
I say:
The summary of what he says here of the proof of the philosophers is
that they say that the specific difference through which the duality in the
necessary existent occurs is either a condition or not a condition for
necessary existence. If the specific difference through which they are
distinguished is a condition for both the necessary existents, they will no
longer be separated in their necessary existence and the necessary
existent will be of necessity one and the same, just as, if black were to be
a condition for the necessity of colour and white a condition for
colouredness, they could not differ in colouredness. If, on the other hand,
the specific difference does not enter into the essence of necessary
existence, then both these necessary existents will have necessary
existence only by accident, and their duality will not be based on their both
being necessary existents. This, however, is not true, for the species are a
condition for the existence of the genus, and both colours are a condition
for the existence of the genus, though not individually (for in this case they
could not exist together in the existence of the colour).

306

Ghazali opposes this statement with two arguments. The first is that this
can only happen in so far as ‘necessary existent’ means a special nature;
according to the theologians, however, this is not the case, for they
understand by ‘necessary existent’ only something negative, namely
something which has no cause, and since negative things are not caused,
how can, for the denial of the causeless, an argument like the following be
used: ‘That which distinguishes one causeless entity from another
causeless entity is either a condition of its being causeless or not; if it is a
condition, there cannot be any plurality or differentiation; and if it is not a
condition, it cannot occasion a plurality in the causeless, which therefore
will be one. ‘ However, the erroneous part in Ghazali’s reasoning is that he
regards the causeless as a mere negation, and, as a negation has no
cause, he asks how it could possess a condition which is the cause of its
existence. But this is a fallacy, for particular negations, which are like
infinite terms and which are used for distinguishing between existents, ,
have causes and conditions which determine this negation in them, just as
they have causes and conditions which determine their positive qualities;
and in this sense there is no difference between positive and negative
attributes, and the necessity of the necessary existent is a necessary
attribute of the causeless and there is no difference between saying ‘the
necessary existent’ or ‘the causeless’.
And the nonsense comes from those who talk like Ghazali, not from his
opponents.
And the summary of Ghazali’s second objection is that to say, as the
philosophers do, that the specific difference through which the necessary
existent is distinguished is either a condition or not, that in the former case
the one necessary existent cannot be distinguished from the other in so
far as they are necessarily existent and that therefore the necessary
existent is one, and that in the latter case the necessary existent has no
specific difference through which it can be divided: that to speak like this is
like saying that if there exist more colours than one of the genus colour,
the difference through which one colour is distinguished from another is
either a condition for the existence of colour or not; that in the former case
the one cannot be distinguished from the other in so far as they are colour,
and colour is therefore one single nature; that in the latter case, if neither
of them is a condition for the existence of colouredness, one colour has no

307

specific difference through which it can be distinguished from another, and
this is not true. ‘
Ghazali says, answering this problem on behalf of the philosophers:
It may be said perhaps: This is possible in the case of
colour, for it has an existence related to the quiddity and
additional to the quiddity, but it is not possible for the
necessary existent, for it possesses only necessary
existence, and there is therefore no quiddity to which its
existence might be related, and just as the specific
differences of black and red are not conditions for
colouredness being colouredness, but only a condition for
the actual realization of colour through a cause, , in the
same way the specific difference cannot be a condition for
necessary existence, for necessary existence is in relation to
the First what colouredness is in relation to the colour, and
not like the existence brought in relation to colouredness.
But we reply, we do not accept this; on the contrary, the
necessary existent has a real essence to which existence is
attributed, as we shall show in the next discussion, and their
statement that the First is an existence without quiddity is
incomprehensible. The trend of their argument is, in short,
that they base their denial of dualism on the denial that the
First is composed of the generic and the specific, then they
base the denial of this on their denial that there is a quiddity
behind the existence. Therefore as soon as we have refuted
this last proposition, which is their fundamental principle,
their whole structure (which is a very shaky fabrication, just
like a spider’s web) tumbles down.
I say:
Ghazali builds the answer he gives here in the name of the
philosophers on their statement that existence is an accident in the
existent, i. e. the quiddity, and he objects against them that the existence
in everything is something different from the essence, and he affirms that
their whole argument is built only on this. ‘ But the distinction which the
philosophers make here does not save them from the implication held

308

against them about colouredness and its specific differences, in whatever
way they may turn the question. Indeed, nobody doubts that the specific
differences of the genus are the cause of the genus, whether it is
assumed that the existence of the genus is different from its essence, or
that the essence and existence of the genus are identical; for if the
specific differences were differences in the existence, and the existence of
the colour were different from the quiddity of the colour, it would follow that
the specific differences by which the colour is divided are not differences
in the quiddity of the colour, but differences in one of its accidents, and
this is an absurd assumption. Therefore the truth is to say, ‘When we
divide colour by its specific differences, the existence of the colour in so
far as it is colour is only actual, either because it is white, or because it is
black or any other colour. Thus we do not divide an accident of the colour,
but we divide only the essence of the colour. Through this solution the
statement that existence is an accident in the existent is seen to be false,
and the argument and his answer arc unsound.
As to Ghazali’s words:
They base their denial of dualism on the denial that the
First is composed of the generic and the specific, then they
base the denial of this on the denial that there is a quiddity
behind the existence. Therefore as soon as we have refuted
this last proposition, which is their fundamental principle,
their whole structure tumbles down.
I say:
This argument is not sound, for their structure, the denial of individual
duality attributed to simple things univocally, is self-evident, for if we
assume a duality and two simple things possessing a common trait, the
simple becomes a compounds And the summary of the philosophical
proof for this is that the nature called ‘necessary existent’, i. e. the cause
which has no cause and which is a cause for other things, must be either
numerically one or many; if many, it must be many through its form, one
through the genus predicated univocally of it, or one through a relation, or
one through the term only. b If it is like Zaid and Amr individually
differentiated and specifically one, then it necessarily possesses hyle, and
this is impossible. If it is differentiated through its form, but one through the

309

genus predicated univocally of it, then it is necessarily composite. If it is
one in its genus, predicated by analogy to one thing, there is no objection,
and one part of it will be the cause of another and the series will end in a
first cause, and this is what happens with the forms abstracted from
matter, according to the philosophers. If it is only common through the
term, then there is no objection to its being more than one, and this is the
case with the four primary causes, i. e. the first agent, the ultimate form,
the ultimate end, the ultimate matter. ‘ Therefore, no strict proof is attained
through this method, and one does not arrive at the First Principle as
Avicenna thought; nor to its being necessarily one.
Ghazali says:
The second way is the drawing of the consequence, and
we say: If existence, substantiality and being a principle are
not a genus, because they do not give an answer to the
question ‘What is it? ‘, then according to you the First is pure
intellect just like the other intellects which are the principles
of existence, called angels, according to the philosophers,
and which are the effects of the First, are intellects separate
from matter. And this abstract reality comprises the First and
the first effect. This First, further, is according to the
philosophers simple, and there is no compound in its
essence except through its necessary attributes, and both
the First Cause and the first effect participate in being
intellect without matter. This, however, is a generic reality.
Nor is intellectuality, separate from matter, a necessary
attribute, for it is indeed a quiddity, and this quiddity is
common to the First and all the other intellects. Therefore, if
they do not differ in anything else, you have necessarily
conceived a duality without a further difference; and if they
do differ, what then is this distinction apart from their
intellectuality, which they have in common? For what they
have in common is participation in this abstract reality. For
indeed the First is conscious of its own self and of others,
according to those who believe that it is in its es3ence
intellect separate from matter; and also the first effect, which
is the first intellect which God has created without a

310

mediator, participates in this characteristic. This proves that
the intellects which are effects are different species, that
they only participate in intellectuality and are besides this
distinguished by specific differences, and that likewise the
First participates with all the other intellects in this
intellectuality. The philosophers, therefore, are either in plain
contradiction to their own fundamental thesis, or have to
affirm that intellectuality does not constitute God’s essence.
And both positions are absurd according to them.
I say:
If you have understood what we have said before this, that there are
things which have a term in common not univocally or equivocally, but by
the universality of terms analogically related to one thing, and that the
characteristic of these things is that they lead upwards to a first term in
this genus which is the first cause of everything to which this word refers,
like warmth, which is predicated of fire and all other warm things, and like
the term ‘existent’ which is predicated of the substance and all other
accidents, and like the term ‘movement’ predicated of motion in space and
all the other movements, you will not have to occupy yourself with the
mistakes in this reasoning. For the term ‘intellect’ is predicated
analogically of the separate intellects according to the philosophers, and
there is among them a first intellect which is the cause of all the other
intellects, and the same thing is true of substance. And the proof that they
have not one nature in common is that some of them are the causes of
others and the cause of a thing is prior to the effect, and the nature of
cause and effect cannot be one in genus except in the individual causes,
and this kind of community is contradictory to genuine generic community,
for things which participate in genus have no first principle which is the
cause of all the others-they are all of the same rank, and there is no
simple principle in them-whereas the things which participate in something
predicated of them analogically must have a simple first principle. And in
this First no duality can be imagined, for if a second were assumed, it
must be of the same level of existence and of the same nature as the
First, and they would have one nature in common in which they would
participate by generic participation and would have to be distinguished
through specific differences, additional to the genus, and both would be

311

composed of genus and specific difference, and everything which is of this
description is temporal; and lastly that which is of the extreme perfection i
of existence must be unique, for if it were not unique, it could not be of the
extreme perfection of existence, for that which is in the extreme degree
cannot participate with anything else, for in the same way as one single
line cannot have two extreme points at the same end, things extended in
existence and differentiated through increase s and decrease have not
two extremes at the same side. And since Avicenna was not aware of this
nature, which stands midway between the nature of that which is
univocally predicated and those natures which participate only through the
equivocation of the term or in a distant, accidental way, this objection was
valid against him.

THE EIGHTH DISCUSSION
TO REFUTE THEIR THEORY THAT THE EXISTENCE OF
THE FIRST IS SIMPLE, NAMELY THAT IT IS PURE
EXISTENCE AND THAT ITS EXISTENCE STANDS IN
RELATION TO NO QUIDDITY AND TO NO ESSENCE, BUT
STANDS TO NECESSARY EXISTENCE AS DO OTHER
BEINGS TO THEIR QUIDDITY
Ghazali says:
There are two ways of attacking this theory. The first is to
demand a proof and to ask how you know this, through the
necessity of the intellect, or through speculation and not by
immediate necessity; and in any case you must tell us your
method of reasoning.
If it is said that, if the First had a quiddity, its existence
would be related to it, and would be consequent’ on this
quiddity and would be its necessary attribute, and the
consequent is an effect and therefore necessary existence
would be an effect, and this is a contradiction, we answer:
This is to revert to the source of the confusion in the

312

application of the term ‘necessary existence’, for we call this
entity ‘reality’ or ‘quiddity’ and this reality exists, i. e. it is not
non-existent and is not denied, but its existence is brought
into a relation with it, and if you like to call this ‘consequent’
and ‘necessary attribute’, we shall not quibble about words, if
you have once acknowledged that it has no agent for its
existence and that this existence has not ceased to be
eternal and to have no efficient cause; if, however, you
understand by ‘consequent’ and ‘effect’ that it has an
efficient cause, this is not true. But if you mean something
else, this is conceded, for it is not impossible, z since the
demonstration proves only the end of a causal series and its
ending in an existent reality; a positive quiddity, therefore, is
possible, and there is no need to deny the quiddity.
If it is said: Then the quiddity becomes a cause for the
existence which is consequent on it, and the existence
becomes an effect and an object of the act, we answer: The
quiddity in temporal things is not a cause of their existence,
and why should it therefore be the case in the eternal, if you
mean by ‘cause’ the agent? But if you mean something else
by it, namely that without which it could not be, let that be
accepted, for there is nothing impossible in it; the
impossibility lies only in the infinite causal series, and if this
series only comes to a final term, then the impossibility is
cancelled; impossibility can be understood only on this point,
therefore you must give a proof of its impossibility.
All the proofs of the philosophers are nothing but
presumptions that the term has a sense from which certain
consequences follow, and nothing but the supposition that
demonstration has in fact proved a necessary existent with
the meaning the philosophers ascribed to it. We have,
however, shown previously that this is not true. In short, this
proof of the philosophers comes down to the proof of the
denial of attributes and of the division into genus and specific
difference; only this proof is still more ambiguous and weak,
for this plurality is purely verbal, for the intellect does allow

313

the acceptance of one single existent quiddity. The
philosophers, however, say that every existent quiddity is a
plurality, for it contains quiddity and existence, and this is an
extreme confusion; for the meaning of a single existent is
perfectly understandable-nothing exists which has no
essence, and the existence of an essence does not annul its
singleness.
I say:
Ghazali does not relate Avicenna’s doctrine literally as he did in his
book The Aims of the Philosophers. ‘ For since Avicenna believed that the
existence of a thing indicated an attribute additional to its essence, he
could no longer admit that its essence was the agent of its existence out of
the possibles, for then the thing would be the cause of its own existence
and it would not have an agent. It follows from this, according to Avicenna,
that everything which has an existence additional to its essence has an
efficient cause, and since according to Avicenna the First has no agent, it
follows necessarily that its existence is identical with its essence. z And
therefore Ghazali’s objection that Avicenna assimilates existence to a
necessary attribute of the essence is not true, because the essence of a
thing is the cause of its necessary attribute and it is not possible that a
thing should be the cause of its own existence, because the existence of a
thing is prior to its quiddity. To identify the quiddity and the existence of a
thing is not to do away with its quiddity, as Ghazali asserts, but is only the
affirmation of the unity of quiddity and existence. If we regard existence as
an accidental attribute of the existent, and it is the agent which gives
possible things their existence, necessarily that which has no agent either
cannot have an existence (and this is absurd), or its existence must be
identical with its essence.
But the whole of this discussion is built on the mistake that the
existence of a thing is one of its attributes. For the existence which in our
knowledge is prior to the quiddity of a thing is that which signifies the true.
Therefore the question whether a thing exists, either (i) refers to that which
has a cause that determines its existence, and in that case its potential
meaning is to ask whether this thing has a cause or not, according to
Aristotle at the beginning of the second chapter of the Posterior
Analytics;s or (2) it refers to that which has no cause, and then its

314

meaning is to ask whether a thing possesses a necessary attribute which
determines its existence. ‘ And when by ‘existent’ is meant what is
understood by ‘thing’ and ‘entity’, it follows the rule of the genus which is
predicated analogically, and whatever it is in this sense is attributed in the
same way to that which has a cause and to that which has none, and it
does not signify anything but the concept of the existent, and by this is
meant ‘the true’, and if it means something additional to the essence, it is
only in a subjective sense which does not exist outside the soul except
potentially, as is also the case with the universal. And this is the way in
which the ancient philosophers considered the First Principle, and they
regarded it as a simple existent. As to the later philosophers in Islam, they
stated that, in their speculation about the nature of the existent qua
existent, they were led to accept a simple existent of this description.
The best method to follow, in my opinion, and the nearest to strict proof,
is to say that the actualization of existents which have in their substance a
possible existence necessarily occurs only through an actualizer which is
in act, i. e. acting, and moves them and draws them out of potency into
act. And if this actualizer itself is also of the nature of the possible, i. e.
possible in its substance, there will have to be another actualizer for it,
necessary in its substance and not possible, so that this sublunary world
may be conserved, and the nature of the possible causes may remain
everlastingly, proceeding without end. And if these causes exist without
end, as appears from their nature, and each of them is possible,
necessarily their cause, i. e. that which determines their permanence,
must be something necessary in its substance, and if there were a
moment in which nothing was moved at all, there would be no possibility
of an origination of movements The nexus between temporal existence
and eternal can only take place without a change affecting the First
through that movement which is partly eternal, partly temporal. b And the
thing moved by this movement is what Avicenna calls ‘the existence
necessary through another’, and this ‘necessary through another’ must be
a body everlastingly moved, and in this way it is possible that the
essentially temporal and corruptible should exist in dependence on the
eternal, and this through approach to something and through recession
from it, as you observe it happen to transitory existents in relation to the
heavenly bodies. ? And since this moved body is necessary in its
substance, possible in its local movement, it is necessary that the process

315

should terminate in an absolutely necessary existent in which there is no
potency at all, either in its substance, or locally or in any of the other forms
of movement; and that which is of this description is necessarily simple,
because if it were a compound, it would be possible, not necessary, and it
would require a necessary existent. And this method of proving it is in my
opinion sufficient, and it is true.
However, what Avicenna adds to this proof by saying that the possible
existent must terminate either in an existent necessary through another or
in an existent necessary through itself, and in the former case that the
necessary through another should be a consequence of the existent
necessary through itself, for he affirms that the existent necessary through
another is in itself a possible existent and what is possible needs
something necessary-this addition, is to my mind superfluous and
erroneous, for in the necessary, in whatever way you suppose it, there is
no possibility whatsoever and there exists nothing of a single nature of
which it can be said that it is in one way possible and in another way
necessary in its existence. ‘ For the philosophers have proved that there is
no possible whatsoever in the necessary; for the possible is the opposite
of the necessary, and the only thing that can happen is that a thing should
be in one way necessary, in another way possible, as they believed for
instance to be the case with the heavenly body or what is above the body
of the heavens, namely that it was necessary through its substance and
possible in its movement and in space. What led Avicenna to this division
was that he believed that the body of the heavens was essentially
necessary through another, possible by itself, and we have shown in
another place that this is not true. And the proof which Avicenna uses in
dealing with the necessary existent, when this distinction and this
indication are not made, is of the type of common dialectical notions;
when, however, the distinction is made, it is of i the type of demonstrative
proof.
You must know further that the becoming of which the Holy Law speaks
is of the kind of empirical becoming in this world, and this occurs in the
forms of the existents which the Ash’arites call mental qualitiesand the
philosophers call forms, and this becoming occurs only through another
thing and in time, and the Holy Words: ‘Have not those who have
disbelieved considered that the heavens and the earth were coherent, and

316

we have rent them . . . ‘and the Divine Words ‘then he straightened
himself up to the sky which was smoke . . . ‘, refer to this. But as to the
relation which exists between the nature of the possible existent and the
necessary existent, about this the Holy Law is silent, because it is too
much above the understanding of the common man and knowledge of it is
not necessary for his blessedness. When the Ash’arites affirm that the
nature of the possible’ is created and has come into existence in time out
of nothing (a notion which all the philosophers oppose, whether they
believe in the temporal beginning of the world or not), they do not say this,
if you consider the question rightly, on the authority of the law of Islam,
and there is no proof for it. What appears from the Holy Law is the
commandment to abstain from investigating that about which the Holy Law
is silent, and therefore it is said in the Traditions: ‘The people did not
cease thinking till they said: God has created this, but who has created
God? And the Prophet said: When one of you finds this, this is an act of
pure faith’, and in another version: ‘When one of you finds this, let him
read the verse of the Qur’an: Say, He, God is one. And know that for the
masses to turn to such a question comes from the whisperings of Satan
and therefore the prophet said: This is an act of pure faith.
Ghazali says:
The second way is to say that an existence without
quiddity or essence cannot be conceived, and just as mere
non-existence, without a relation to an existent the nonexistence of which can be supposed, cannot be conceived,
in the same way existence can be only conceived in relation
to a definite essence, especially when it is defined as a
single essence; for how could it be defined as single,
conceptually differentiated from others, if it had not a real
essence? For to deny the quiddity is to deny the real
essence, and when you deny the real essence of the
existent, the existent can no longer be understood. It is as if
the philosophers affirmed at the same time existence and a
non-existent, which is contradictory. This is shown by the
fact that, if it were conceivable, it would be also possible in
the effects that there should be an existence without an
essence, participating with the First in not having a real

317

essence and a quiddity, differing from it in having a cause,
whereas the First is causeless. And why should such an
effect not be imagined? And is there any other reason for
this than that it is inconceivable in itself? But what is
inconceivable in itself does not become conceivable by the
denial of its cause, nor does what is conceivable become
inconceivable because it is supposed to have a cause. Such
an extreme negation is the most obscure of their theories,
although they believe indeed that they have proved what
they say. Their doctrine ends in absolute negation, and
indeed the denial of the quiddity is the denial of the real
essence, and through the denial of this reality nothing
remains but the word ‘existence’, which has no object at all
when it is not related to a quiddity. ‘
And if it is said: ‘Its real essence is that it is the
necessary, and the necessary is its quiddity’, we answer:
‘The only sense of “necessary” is “causeless”, and this is a
negation which does not constitute a real essence; and the
denial of a cause for the real essence presupposes the real
essence, and therefore let the essence be conceivable, so
that it can be described as being causeless; but the essence
cannot be represented as non-existent, since “necessity” has
no other meaning than “being causeless”. ‘ Besides, if the
necessity were added to the existence, this would form a
plurality; and if it is not added, how then could it be the
quiddity? For the existence is not the quiddity, and thus what
is not added to the existence cannot be the quiddity either. ‘
I say:
This whole paragraph is sophistry. For the philosophers do not assume
that the First has an existence without a quiddity and a quiddity without an
existence. They believe only that the existence in the compound is an
additional attribute to its essence and it only acquires this attribute through
the agent, and they believe that in that which is simple and causeless this
attribute is not additional to the quiddity and that it has no quiddity
differentiated from its existence; but they do not say that it has absolutely
no quiddity, as he assumes in his objection against them.

318

Having assumed that they deny the quiddity-which is false Ghazali
begins now to charge them with reprehensible theories and says:
If this were conceivable it would also be possible in the
effects that there should be an existence without an
essence, participating with the First in not having a real
essence.
I say:
But the philosophers do not assume an existent absolutely without a
quiddity: they only assume that it has not a quiddity like the quiddities of
the other existents; and this is one of the sophistical fallacies, for the term
‘quiddity’ is ambiguous, and this assumption, and everything built upon it,
is a sophistical argument, for the non-existent cannot be described either
by denying or by affirming something of it. And Ghazali, by fallacies of the
kind perpetrated in this book, is not exempt from wickedness or from
ignorance, and he seems nearer to wickedness than to ignorance-or
should we say that there is a necessity which obliged him to do this?
And as to his remark, that the meaning of ‘necessary existent’ is ,
causeless’, this is not true, but our expression that it is a necessary
existent has a positive meaning, consequent on a nature which has
absolutely no cause, no exterior agent, and no agent which is part of it.
And as to Ghazali’s words:
If the necessity were added to the existence, this would
form a plurality; and if it is not added, how then could it be
the quiddity? For existence is not the quiddity, and thus what
is not added to the existence cannot be the quiddity either.
I say:
According to the philosophers necessity is not an attribute added to the
essence, and it is predicated of the essence in the same way as we say of
it that it is inevitable and eternal. ‘ And likewise if we understand by
‘existence’ a mental attribute, it is not an addition to the essence, but if we
understand it as being an accident, in the way Avicenna regards it in the
composite existent, then it becomes difficult to explain how the
uncompounded can be the quiddity itself, although one might say

319

perhaps: ‘In the way the knowledge in the uncompounded becomes the
knower himself. ‘ If, however, one regards the existent as the true, all
these doubts lose their meaning, and likewise, if one understands
‘existent’ as having the same sense as ‘entity’, and according to this it is
true that the existence in the uncompounded is the quiddity itself.

THE NINTH DISCUSSION
TO REFUTE THEIR PROOF THAT THE FIRST IS
INCORPOREAL

Ghazali says:
There is a proof only for him who believes that body is
only temporal, because it cannot be exempt from what is
temporal and everything that is temporal needs a creator.
But you, when you admit an eternal body which has no
beginning for its existence, although it is not exempt from
temporal occurrences, why do you regard it as impossible
that the First should be a body, either the sun, or the
extreme heaven, or something else?
If the answer is made ‘Because body must be composite
and divisible into parts quantitatively, and into matter and
form conceptually, and into qualities which characterize it
necessarily so that it can be differentiated from other bodies
(for otherwise all bodies in being body would be similar) and
the necessary existent is one and cannot be divided in any
of these ways’ we answer: ‘We have already refuted you in
this, and have shown that you have no proof for it except
that a collection is an effect, since some of its parts require
others, and we have argued against it and have shown that
when it is not impossible to suppose an existent without a
creator, it is not impossible to suppose a compound without
a composing principle and to suppose many existents
without a creator, since you have based your denial of

320

plurality and duality on the denial of composition and your
denial of composition on the denial of a quiddity distinct from
existence, and with respect to the last principle we have
asked for its foundation and we have shown that it is a mere
presumption. ‘
And if it is said: ‘If a body has no soul, it cannot be an
agent, and when it has a soul, well, then its soul is its cause,
and then body cannot be the First’, we answer: ‘Our soul is
not the cause of the existence of our body, nor is the soul of
the sphere in itself a cause of its body, according to you, but
they are two, having a distinct cause; and if they can be
eternal, it is possible that they have no cause. ‘
And if the question is asked, ‘How can the conjunction of
soul and body come about? ‘, we answer, ‘One might as well
ask how the existence of the First comes about; the answer
is that such a question may be asked about what is
temporal, but about what is eternally existent one cannot ask
how it has come about, and therefore” since body and its
soul are both eternally existent, it is not impossible that their
compound should be a creator. ‘
I say:
When a man has no other proof that the First is not body than that he
believes that all bodies are temporal, how weak is his proof, and how far
distant from the nature of what has to be proved!-since it has been shown
previously that the proofs on which the theologians build their statement
that all bodies are temporal are conflicting; and what is more appropriate
than to regard an eternal composite as possible, as I said in this book
when speaking of the Ash’arites, i. e. in saying that according to them an
eternal body is possible, since in the accidents there is some eternal
element, according to their own theory, for instance, the characteristic of
forming a compound; and therefore their proof that all bodies are temporal
is not valid, because they base it exclusively on the temporal becoming of
the accidents. ‘ The ancient philosophers do not allow for the existence of
a body eternal through itself, but only of one eternal through another, and
therefore according to them there must be an existent eternal through

321

itself through which the eternal body becomes eternal. But if we expound
their theories here, they have only a dialectical value, and you should
therefore instead ask for their proofs in their proper place.

And as to Ghazali’s refutation of this, and his words:
We answer: ‘We have already refuted you in this, and we
have shown that you have no proof for this except that a
collection is an effect, since some of its parts require others.
I say:
He means that he has discussed this already previously, and he says
that the philosophers cannot prove that the existent necessary through
itself is not a body, since the meaning of ‘existent necessary through itself’
is ‘that which has no efficient cause’, and why should they regard an
eternal body which has no efficient cause as impossible-and especially
when it should be supposed to be a simple body, indivisible quantitatively
or qualitatively, and in short an eternal composite, without a composing
principle? This is a sound argument from which they cannot escape
except through dialectical arguments. z But all the arguments which
Ghazali gives in this book either against or on behalf of the philosophers
or against Avicenna are dialectical through the equivocation of the terms
used, and therefore it is not necessary to expatiate on this.
And as to his answer on behalf of the Ash’arites that what is eternal
through itself does not need a cause for its eternity, and that when the
theologians assume something eternal through itself and assume its
essence as the cause of its attributes, this essence does not become
eternal because of something else,
I say:
It is a necessary consequence to be held up against Ghazali that the
Eternal will be composed of a cause and an effect, and that the attributes
will be eternal through their cause, i. e. the essence. And since the effect
is not a condition for its own existence, the Eternal is the cause. And let us
say that the essence which exists by itself is God and that the attributes
are effects; then it can be argued against the theologians that they

322

assume one thing eternal by itself and a plurality of things eternal through
another, and that the combination of all these is God. But this is exactly
their objection against those who say that God is eternal through Himself
and the world eternal through another, namely God. Besides, they say that
the Eternal is one, and all this is extremely contradictory.
And as to Ghazali’s statement that to assume a compound without the
factor which composes it, is not different from assuming an existent
without a creator, and that the assumption either of a single existent of this
description or of a plurality is not an impossible supposition for the mind,
all this is erroneous. For composition does not demand a composing
factor which again itself is composed, but there must be a series leading
up to a composing factor composing by itself, just as, when the cause is
an effect, there must finally be a cause which is not an effect. Nor is it
possible, by means of an argument which leads to an existent without a
creator, to prove the oneness of this existent. ‘
And as to his assertion that the denial of the quiddity implies the denial
of the composition, and that this implies the assertion of composition in the
First, this is not true. And indeed the philosophers do not deny the quiddity
of the First, but only deny that it has the kind of quiddity which is in the
effects, and all this is a dialectical and doubtful argument. And already
previously in this book we have given convincing arguments, according to
the principles of the philosophers, to prove that the First is incorporeal,
namely that the possible leads to a necessary existent and that the
possible does not proceed from the necessary except through the
mediation of an existent which is partly necessary, partly possible, and
that this is the body of the heavens and its circular motion; and the most
satisfactory way of expressing this according to the principles of the
philosophers is to say that all bodies are finite in power, and that they only
acquire their power of infinite movement through an incorporeal being. ‘
Ghazali answering the objection which infers that according to the
philosophers the agent is nothing but the sphere, composed of soul and
body, says:
If it is answered: ‘This cannot be so, because body in so
far as it is body does not create anything else and the soul
which is attached to the body does not act except through

323

the mediation of the body, but the body is not a means for
the soul in the latter’s creating bodies or in causing the
existence of souls and of things which are not related to
bodies’, we answer: ‘And why is it not possible that there
should be amongst the souls a soul which has the
characteristic of being so disposed that both bodies and
incorporeals are produced through it? The impossibility of
this is not a thing known necessarily, nor is there a proof for
it, except that we do not experience this in the bodies we
observe; but the absence of experience does not
demonstrate its impossibility, and indeed the philosophers
often ascribe things to the First Existent which are not
generally ascribed to existents, and are not experienced in
any other existent, and the absence of its being observed in
other things is not a proof of its impossibility in reference to
the First Existent, and the same holds concerning the body
and its soul. ‘
I say:
As to his assertion that bodies do not create bodies, if by ‘creating’ is
understood producing, the reverse is true, for a body in the empirical world
can only come into being through a body, , and an animated body only
through an animated body, but the absolute body does not come into
being at all, for, if it did, it would come into being from non-existence, not
after non-existence. ‘ Individual bodies only come into being out of
individual bodies and through individual bodies, and this through the
body’s being transferred from one name to another and from one definition
to another, so that for instance the body of water changes into the body of
fire, because out of the body of water is transformed the attribute through
the transformation of which the name and definition of water is transferred
to the name and definition of fire, and this happens necessarily through a
body which is the agent, participating with the becoming body specifically
or generically in either a univocal or an analogical ways and whether the
individual special corporeality in the water is transformed into the
individual special corporeality of the fire is a problem to be studied.
And as to Ghazali’s words:

324

But the body is not a means for the soul in the latter’s
creating bodies or in causing the existence of souls,
I say:
This is an argument which he builds on an opinion some of the
philosophers hold, that the bestower of forms on inanimate bodies and of
souls is a separate substance, either intellect or a separate soul, and that
it is not possible that either an animated body or an inanimate body should
supply this. And if this opinion is held and at the same time it is assumed
that heaven is an animated body, it is no longer possible for heaven to
supply any of the transitory forms, either the soul or any other of these
forms. For the soul which is in the body only acts through the mediation of
the body, and that which acts through the mediation of the body can
produce neither form nor soul, since it is not of the nature of the body to
produce a substantial form, either a soul or any other substantial form.
And this theory resembles that of Plato about forms separate from matter,
and is the in theory of Avicenna and others among the Muslim
philosophers; their proof is that the body produces in the body only
warmth or cold or moisture or dryness, ? and only these are acts of the
heavenly bodies according to them. But that which produces the
substantial forms, and especially those which are animated, is a separate
substance which they call the giver of forms. ‘ But there are philosophers’
who believe the contrary and affirm that what produces the forms in the
bodies is bodies possessing forms similar to them either specifically or
generically, those similar specifically being the living bodies which produce
the living bodies of the empirical world, like the animals which are
generated from other animals, whereas those forms produced by forms
generically similar, and which are not produced from a male or a female,
receive their lives according to the philosophers from the heavenly bodies,
since these are alive. And these philosophers have non-empirical proofs
which, however, need not be mentioned here.
And therefore Ghazali argues against them in this way:
And why is it not possible that there should be among the
souls a soul which has the characteristic of being so
disposed that both bodies and incorporeals are produced
through it?

325

I say:
He means: ‘Why should it not be possible that there should be among
the souls in bodies souls which have the characteristic of generating other
animate and inanimate forms? ‘ And how strange it is that Ghazali
assumes that the production of body out of body does not happen in the
empirical world, whereas nothing else is ever observed.
But you must understand that when the statements of the philosophers
are abstracted from the demonstrative sciences they certainly become
dialectical, whether they are generally acknowledged, or, if not, denied
and regarded as strange. The reason is that demonstrative statements are
only distinguished from statements which are not demonstrative, by being
considered in the genus of science which is under investigation. Those
statements which can be subsumed under the definition of this genus of
science, or which comprise in their definition this genus of science, are
demonstrative, and those statements which do not seem to fulfil these
conditions are not demonstrative. Demonstration is only possible when the
nature of this genus of science under investigation is defined, and the
sense in which its essential predicates exist is distinguished from the
sense in which they do not, and when this is retained in mind by keeping
to that sense in every statement adopted in this science, and by having
the identical meaning always present in the mind. And when the soul is
convinced that the statement is essential to this genus or a necessary
consequence of its essence, the statement is true; but when this relation
does not enter into the mind, or when it is only weakly established, the
statement is only an opinion, and is not evident. And therefore the
difference between proof and convincing opinion is more delicate than the
appearance of a hair and more completely hidden than the exact limit
between darkness and light, especially in theological questions which are
laid before the common people, because of the confusion between what is
essential and what is accidental. Therefore we see that Ghazali, by
relating the theories of the philosophers in this and others of his books and
by showing them to people who have not studied their works with the
necessary preparation the philosophers demand, changes the nature of
the truth which exists in their theories or drives most people away from all
their views. And by so doing he does more harm than good to the cause of
truth. And God knows that I should not have related a single one of their

326

views, or regarded this as permissible, but for the harm which results from
Ghazali’s doings to the cause of wisdom; and I understand by ‘wisdom’
speculation about things according to the rules of the nature of proof.
Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers:
If it is said that the highest sphere, or the sun, or
whatever body you may imagine, possesses a special size
which may be increased or decreased, and this possible size
needs for its differentiation a differentiating principle and can
therefore not be the First, ‘ we answer: By what argument
will you refute the man who says that this body must have
the size it possesses for the sake of the order of the
universe, and this order could not exist if this body were
smaller or larger-since you philosophers yourselves affirm
that the first effect’ determines the size of the highest sphere
because all sizes are equivalent in relation to the essence of
the first effect, but certain sizes are determined for the sake
of the order which depends on them and therefore the actual
size is necessary and no other is possible; and all this holds
just as well when no effect is assumed. Indeed, if the
philosophers had established in the first effect, which is
according to the philosophers the cause of the highest
sphere, a specifying principle, as for instance the will, a
further question might be put, since it might be asked why
this principle willed this actual size rather than another, in the
way the philosophers argued against the Muslims about their
theory of the relation between the temporal world and the
Eternal Will, an argument which we turned against them with
respect to the problems of the determination of the direction
of the heavenly movement and of the determination of the
points of the poles. And if it is clear that they are forced to
admit that a thing is differentiated from a similar one and that
this happens through a cause, it is unessential whether this
differentiation be regarded as possible without a cause or
through a cause, for it is indifferent whether one puts the
question about the thing itself and asks why it has such-and
such a size, or whether one puts the question about the

327

cause, and asks why it gave this thing this special size; and
if the question about the cause may be answered by saying
that this special measure is not like any other, because the
order depends on it exclusively, the same answer may be
made about the thing itself, and it will not need a cause. And
there is no escape from this. For if the actual size which has
been determined and has been realized were equivalent to
the size which has not been realized, one might ask how one
thing comes to be differentiated from a similar one,
especially according to the principle of the philosophers who
do not admit a differentiating will. If, however, there is no
similar size, no possibility exists, and one must answer: ‘This
has been so from all eternity, and in the same way therefore
as, according to the philosophers, the eternal cause exists. “
And let the man who studies this question seek help from
what we said about their asking about the eternal will, a
question which we turned against them with respect to the
points of the poles and the direction of the movement of the
sphere. It is therefore clear that the man who does not
believe in the temporal creation of the bodies cannot
establish a proof that the First is incorporeal.
I say:
This indeed is a very strange argument of Ghazali’s. For he argues that
they cannot prove another creator than the heavenly body, since they
would have to give an answer by a principle in which they do not believe.
For only the theologians accept this principle, since they say that heaven
receives the determinate size it has, to the exclusion of other sizes it might
have, from a differentiating cause, and that the differentiating principle
must be eternal. He either attempted to deceive in this matter or was
himself deceived. For the differentiation which the philosophers infer is
different from that which the Ash’arites intend, for the Ash’arites
understand by ‘differentiation’ the distinguishing of one thing either from a
similar one or from an opposite one without this being determined by any
wisdom in the thing itself which makes it necessary to differentiate one of
the two opposite things. The philosophers, on the other hand, understand
here by the differentiating principle only that which is determined by the

328

wisdom in the product itself, namely the final cause, for according to them
there is no quantity or quality in any being that has not an end based on
wisdom, an end which must either be a necessity in the nature of the act
of this being or exist in it, based on the principle of superiority. ‘ For if, so
the philosophers believe, there were in created things a quantity or quality
not determined by wisdom, they would have attributed to the First Maker
and Creator an attitude in relation to His work which may be only
attributed to the artisans among His creatures, with the intention of
blaming them. For when one has observed a work with respect to its
quantity and quality, and asked why the maker of this work chose this
quantity or this quality to the exclusion of all other possible quantities and
qualities, there is no worse mistake than to answer ‘Not because of the
intrinsic wisdom and thoughtfulness in the product itself, but because he
willed it, ‘ since according to this view all quantities and qualities are
similar with respect to the end of this product, which in fact the maker
produced for its own sake, namely for the sake of the act for whose
purpose it exists. For indeed every product is produced in view of
something in it which would not proceed from it, if this product had no
definite quantity, quality and nature, although in some products an
equivalent is possible. If any product whatever could determine any act
whatever, there would exist no wisdom at all in any product, and there
would be no art at all, and the quantities and qualities of the products
would depend on the whim of the artisan and every man would be an
artisan. Or should we rather say that wisdom exists only in the product of
the creature, not in the act of the Creator? But God forbid that we should
believe such a thing of the First Creator; on the contrary, we believe that
everything in the world is wisdom, although in many things our
understanding of it is very imperfect and although we understand the
wisdom of the Creator only through the wisdom of nature. And if the world
is one single product of extreme wisdom, there is one wise principle
whose existence the heavens and the earth and everything in them need.
Indeed, nobody can regard the product of such wonderful wisdom as
caused by itself, and the theologians in their wish to elevate the Creator
have denied Him wisdom and withheld from Him the noblest of His
qualities.

329

THE TENTH DISCUSSION
TO PROVE THEIR INCAPACITY TO DEMONSTRATE THAT
THE WORLD HAS A CREATOR AND A CAUSE, AND THAT
IN FACT THEY ARE FORCED TO ADMIT ATHEISM
Ghazali says:
Their statement that body needs a creator and a cause
can be understood from the theory of those’ who argue that
all bodies are temporal, because they cannot exist without
what is temporal. But what keeps you philosophers from the
doctrine of the materialists, namely that the world is eternal
in the condition in which it actually is, and that it has no
cause and no creator, that there is only a cause for temporal
events and that no body comes into existence and no body
is annihilated, and that only forms and accidents come into
existence, for the bodies are the heavens (which are eternal)
and the four elements, which are the stuff of the sublunary
world, and their bodies and matters are eternal too, and
there is only a change of forms in them through mixtures and
alterations ;and that the souls of men and animals and plants
come into existence, that all the causes of these temporal
events terminate in the circular movement, and that the
circular movement is eternal and its source the eternal soul
of the sphere. Therefore there is no cause for the world and
no creator for its bodies, but since the world, as it is, is
eternal, there is no cause for it, i. e. no cause for its bodies.
For indeed, what sense is there in the doctrine of the
philosophers that these bodies exist through a cause,
although they are eternal?
I say:
The philosophers assert that the man who says that all bodies have
been produced (and by ‘produced’ must be understood creation ex nihilo)
gives a meaning to the term ‘produced’ which is never found in the
empirical world, and his statement surely stands in need of a proof. As to

330

his attacks on the philosophers in this passage, so that he even forces on
them the implication of atheism, we have already answered them
previously and there is no sense in repeating ourselves, but, in short, the
philosophers hold that body, be it temporal or eternal, cannot be
independent in existence through itself; and this principle is, according to
the philosophers, binding for the eternal body in the same way as for the
temporal, although imagination does not help to explain how this is the
case with the eternal body in the way it is with the temporal body. Aristotle
therefore, in the second book of De caelo et mundo, when he wanted to
explain the fact that the earth was circular by nature, first assumed it to
have come into being in time so that the intellect might imagine its cause,
and then transferred its existence to eternity.
Having forced on the philosophers these reprehensible deductions,
Ghazali now gives an answer in defence of them and objects then to their
answer.
Ghazali says:
And if the philosophers say: ‘Everything that has no
cause is of a necessary existence, and we philosophers
have already mentioned the qualities of the necessary
existent through which it is proved that body cannot be the
necessary existent, ‘ we answer: We have shown the
mistake in your claim about the attributes of the necessary
existent, and that your proof does not demonstrate anything
but the termination of a causal series, and this termination
also exists for the materialists at the beginning of things, , for
they say that there is no cause for the bodies, and the forms
and accidents are causes for each other and terminate in the
circular movement part of which is the cause of another part
in the same way as it takes place according to the doctrine
of the philosophers, and this causal series’ ends in this
circular movement.
And the man who observes what we have related will
understand the inability of those who believe in the eternity
of bodies to claim at the same time that they have a cause,
and the consequence of their theory is atheism and

331

apostasy, which one party has clearly admitted, those
namely who rely solely on the determinations of the intellect.
I say:
All this has been already answered, and its degree of truth has been
stated, and there is no reason to repeat ourselves. And as to the
materialists, they rely only on the senses, and when according to them the
movements had terminated in the heavenly body and through this the
causal series was ended, they thought that where sensation had come to
a limit, the intellect also had come to a limit; but this is not true. But the
philosophers considered the causes till they ended in the heavenly body,
then they considered the intelligible causes and arrived at an existent
which cannot be perceived and which is the principle of perceptible being,
and this is the meaning of the words: ‘Thus did we show Abraham the
Kingdom of Heaven and of the earth . . . . ‘The Ash’arites, however,
rejected sensible causes; that is, they denied that certain sensible things
are the causes of other sensible things, and they made the cause of
sensible being a nonsensible being by a way of becoming which is neither
experienced nor perceived, and they denied causes and effects; and this
is a kind of view which is inconsistent with the nature of man in so far as
he is man.
Ghazali says, objecting to the argument of the philosophers:
If it is said that the proof that body is not a necessary
existent is that, if it were a necessary existent, it would have
neither an external nor an internal cause, but if it has a
cause for its being composed, it will be possible in respect of
its essence, and every possible needs a necessary existent,
we answer: The terms ‘necessary existent’ and ‘possible
existent’ are devoid of sense, and your whole confusion lies
in these terms; but let us revert to their plain sense, which is
the denial and the affirmation of a cause, for then your words
amount to nothing else but saying that bodies either have a
cause or not, and the materialists affirm the latter, ‘ and why
should you deny it? And when this is understood by
‘possibility’ and ‘necessity’, we say body is necessary and

332

not possible, and your statement that body cannot be
necessary is pure presumption without any foundation.
I say:
We have already said that if by ‘necessary existent’ is understood the
causeless and by ‘possible existent’ is understood that which has a cause,
the division of being into these two sections is not acknowledged, and
opponents might say that this division is not true, but that, indeed, all
existents are causeless. But when by ‘necessary existent’ is understood
absolute necessary being and by ‘possible’ the genuinely possible, then
we must arrive at a being which has no cause, for we can say that every
being is either possible or necessary; if possible, it has a cause, and if this
cause is of the nature of the possible, we have a series which ends in a
necessary cause. Then, concerning this necessary cause it may be asked
again whether some necessary beings might have a cause and other
necessary beings none, and if a cause is ascribed to the nature of the
necessary being which can have a cause, there will follow a series which
ends in a necessary being which has no cause. Avicenna wanted by this
division only to conform to the opinion of the philosophers concerning
existents, for all philosophers agree that the body of the heavens is
necessary through something else; whether, however, this thing
necessary through another is possible by itself is a problem which has to
be studied. And this argument is therefore faulty when this method is
followed, and this method is of necessity faulty, because being is not
primarily divided into the genuinely possible and the necessary, for this is
a division which is only known through the nature of existing things.
Then Ghazali answers the philosophers’ statement that body cannot be
a necessary existent by itself, because it has parts which are its cause.
If it is said: ‘It cannot be denied that body has parts, and
that the whole is only constituted through the parts, and that
the parts in a thing are prior to the whole, ‘ we answer: ‘Let it
be so; certainly, the whole is constituted by the parts and
their aggregation, but there is no cause for the parts nor for
their aggregation, which on the contrary are eternally in the
condition in which they are without an efficient cause. ‘ And
the philosophers cannot refute this, except by the argument

333

of theirs which we have mentioned, which is based on the
denial of plurality in the First; we have shown its futility, and
apart from it there is no other method. It is therefore clear
that for the man who does not believe in the temporal
creation of bodies there is no foundation for believing in a
creator at all.
I say:
This argument is, without doubt, binding for the man who follows the
method of a necessary existent to prove the existence of an incorporeal
being, but this is not the method followed by the ancient philosophers, and
the first, so far as we know, who used it was Avicenna. He said that it was
superior to the proof of the ancients, because the ancients arrived only at
an immaterial being, the principle of the universe, through derivative
things, namely motion and time; whereas this proof, according to
Avicenna, arrives at the assertion of such a principle as the ancients
established, through the investigation of the nature of the existent in so far
as it is an existent. If indeed it did arrive at such an affirmation, what
Avicenna says would be true; however, it does not. ‘ For the most that
could be affirmed of the existent necessarily existing by itself would be
that it is not composed of matter and form, and generally speaking that it
has no definition. But if it is supposed to exist as composed of eternal
parts which are continuous by nature, as is the case with the world and its
parts, it may indeed be said of the world with its parts that it is a necessary
existent, z it being of course understood that there is a necessary existent.
And we have already said that the method Avicenna followed to establish
an existent of this description is not demonstrative and does not by nature
lead to it, except in the way we have stated. The utmost consequence of
this argument-and this constitutes its weakness-is the theory of those,
namely the Peripatetics, who assume that there exists a simple body not
composed of matter and form. For the man who assumes an eternal
compound of actual parts must necessarily acknowledge that it is
essentially one, and every oneness in a compound is one through an
essential unity, namely a simple, and through this unity the world becomes
one, and therefore Alexander of Aphrodisias says that there must exist a
spiritual force which is diffused in all the parts of the universe in the same
way as there is a force in all the parts of a single animal which binds them

334

together, and the difference between the two forces is that the binding
force in the world is eternal, because the conjoining principle is eternal,
whereas the conjunction between the parts of the sublunary animal is
individually transitory-although, through the eternal conjunction, not
specifically transitory-since it cannot be individually imperishable like the
world . z And through this theory the Creator will be deprived of that very
kind of perfection which nothing else can equal, as Aristotle says in his
book De animalibus. And we see nowadays that many of Avicenna’s
followers because of this aporia ascribe this opinion to him, and they say
that he does not believe that there exists a separate existence, and they
assert that this can be seen from what he says about the necessary
existent in many passages, and that this is the view which he has laid
down in his Oriental Philosophy, and they say that he only called this book
Oriental Philosophy’ because it is the doctrine of the Orientals; for they
believed that according to the Orientals divinity is located in the heavenly
bodies, as Avicenna himself had come to believe. However,
notwithstanding this they accept Aristotle’s argument to prove the First
Principle through movement.
And as for ourselves, we have discussed this argument at other times
and have shown in what sense it can be regarded as evident, and we
have solved all the doubts concerning it; we have also discussed
Alexander’s argument on this question, namely the one he uses in his
book called On the printiples. s For Alexander imagined that he was
turning from Aristotle’s argument to another; his argument, however, is
taken from the principles which Aristotle proved, and both arguments are
sound, though the more usual is Aristotle’s.
And when the argument for a necessary existent is verified, it is true
according to me in the way I shall describe it, although it is used too
generally and its different senses must be distinguished. It must, namely,
be preceded by knowledge of the different kinds of possible existents in
substance and the different kinds of necessary existents in substance.
And then this argument takes this form: The possible existent in bodily
substance must be preceded by the necessary existent in bodily
substance, and the necessary existent in bodily substance must be
preceded by the absolute necessary existent which does not possess any
potency whatsoever, either in its substance or in any other of the different

335

kinds of movements, and such an entity is not a body. For instance, it
appears from the nature of the body of the heavens that it is a necessary
existent in its bodily substance, ‘ for otherwise there would have to be a
body prior to it, and it appears also from its nature that it is a possible
existent in its local movement; it is therefore necessary that its mover
should be a necessary existent in its substance, and that there should be
in it no potency whatsoever, either as regards movement or in any other
respect, and that neither movement nor rest could be ascribed to it nor
any other kind of change, and such an entity is absolutely without body
and without any potency in a body. But the eternal parts of the world are
only necessary existents in their substance, either universally like the four
elements, or individually like the heavenly bodies. ,

THE ELEVENTH DISCUSSION
TO SHOW THE INCAPACITY OF THOSE PHILOSOPHERS
WHO BELIEVE THAT THE FIRST KNOWS OTHER THINGS
BESIDE ITS OWN SELF AND THAT IT KNOWS THE GENERA
AND THE SPECIES IN A UNIVERSAL WAY, TO PROVE
THAT THIS IS SO
Ghazali says:
Since for the Muslims existence is confined to the
temporal and the eternal, and there is for them nothing
eternal except God and His attributes, and everything
besides Him is temporally created by Him through His will,
according to them the existent of necessity exists previously
in His knowledge, for the object willed must be known by the
willer. They deduced from this that the universe is known to
Him, for the universe was willed by Him and produced by
Him, and nothing comes into existence but what is produced
through His will, and nothing is everlasting but His essence
alone. And when once it was established that God wills and
knows what He wills, He must be necessarily living, ; and
every living being is conscious of its own self, and He is the
most capable of knowing Himself. Therefore the whole

336

universe is known to God, and they understood this through
this argument, since they had found that He willed
everything that happens in the world.
I say:
He says this only as an introduction and preparation for the comparison
between his theory and that of the philosophers about eternal
knowledge, because his theory seems at first sight more satisfactory than
that of the philosophers. But when the theory of the theologians is tested,
and shown up to him for whom such an exposure is necessary, it
becomes clear that they only made God an eternal man, , for they
compared the world with the products of art wrought by the will and
knowledge and power of man. And when it was objected against them that
He must then have a body, they answered that He is eternal and that all
bodies are temporal. They were therefore forced to admit an immaterial
man who produces all existents. But this theory is nothing but a metaphor
and a poetical expression; and metaphorical expressions are certainly
very convincing, till they are explored, but then their deficiency becomes
evident. For indeed there is no nature more distant from that of the
transitory than that of the eternal. And if this is true, it cannot be that there
should exist one single species which is differentiated by eternity and noneternityz as one single genus is differentiated through the various
differences into which it is divided. For the distance between the eternal
and the temporal is far greater than that between the different species
which participate in temporality. And if the distance between eternity and
non-eternity is greater than that between the various species, how then is
it possible to apply a judgement about the empirical world to the invisible:
for those two are opposite extremes? And when you have understood the
sense of the attributes which exist in the visible world and those which
exist in the invisible world, it will be clear to you that through the ambiguity
of the terms they are so equivocal that they do not permit a transference
from the visible to the invisible.
Life, for instance, added to the intellect of man only applies to the
potentiality of motion in space through will and sense-perception, ; but
senses are impossible for the Creator and still more impossible for Him is
motion in space. But the theologians ascribe to the Creator the faculty of

337

sense-perception without sense-organs, and deny His movement
absolutely. Therefore either they do not ascribe life to the Creator in the
sense it has in the animal and which is a condition for the existence of
knowledge in man, or they identify it with perception in the way the
philosophers say that perception and knowledge in the First are identical
with life. Further, the meaning of ‘will’ in man and in animal is a desire
which rouses movement and which happens in animal and man to perfect
a deficiency in their essence, and it is impossible that there should be in
the Creator a desire because of an imperfection in His essence, which
could be a cause of movement and action either in Himself or in
something different from Himself. And how could an eternal will be
imagined which should be the cause of an act occurring without an
increase of the desire at the time of the act, , or how could a will and a
desire be imagined which would be before, during, and after the act in the
same state without any change occurring to them? And again, desire (in
so far as it is _the cause of movement) and movement are only found in
body, and desire is only found in the animate body. Therefore according to
the philosophers the meaning of ‘will’ in God is nothing but that every act
proceeds from Him through knowledge, and knowledge in so far as it is
knowledge is the knowledge of opposites, either of which can proceed
from Him. And the Knower is called excellent by the fact that there always
proceeds from Him the better of the opposites to the exclusion of the
worse. Therefore the philosophers say that three attributes are most
appropriate to the Creator, namely that He has knowledge, excellence,
and power. And they say that His power is not inferior to His will, as is the
case with man.
All this is the theory of the philosophers on this problem and in the way
we have stated it here with its proofs, it is a persuasive not a
demonstrative statement. It is for you to inquire about these questions in
the places where they are treated in the books of demonstration, if you are
one of the people of perfect eudaemonia, and if you are one of those who
learn the arts the function of which is proof. For the demonstrative arts are
very much like the practical; for just as a man who is not a craftsman
cannot perform the function of craftsmanship, in the same way it is not
possible for him who has not learned the arts of demonstration to perform
the function of demonstration which is demonstration itself: indeed this is
still more necessary for this art than for any other-and this is not generally

338

acknowledged in the case of this practice only because it is a mere actand therefore such a demonstration can proceed only from one who has
learned the art. The kinds of statement, however, are many, some
demonstrative, others not, and since non-demonstrative statements can
be adduced without knowledge of the art, it was thought that this might be
also the case with demonstrative statements; but this is a great error. And
therefore in the spheres of the demonstrative arts, no other statement is
possible but a technical statement which only the student of this art can
bring, just as is the case with the art of geometry. Nothing therefore of
what we have said in this book is a technical demonstrative proof; they are
all non-technical statements, some of them having greater persuasion
than others, and it is in this spirit that what we have written here must be
understood. So this book of Ghazali might be best given the name of the
‘Incoherence of both parties together’.
All this in my opinion is in excess of the Holy Law, and an inquiry into
something not ordered by a religious law because human power does not
suffice for it. For not all knowledge about which the Holy Law is silent
needs to be explored and explained to the masses as being, according to
speculative thought, part of the dogmas of religion; for from this the
greatest confusion arises. One must not speak about those things
concerning which the Holy Law is silent; the masses must learn that
human understanding is not sufficient to treat these problems, and must
not go beyond what the teaching of the Holy Law explains in its texts,
since this is teaching in which all can participate and which suffices for the
attainment of their happiness. And just as the physician investigates the
measure of health which agrees most with the healthy for the preservation
of their health, and with the sick for the curing of their illness, so the Lord
of the Holy Law instructs the masses only in so far as is needed for their
acquisition of happiness. And the same thing holds in respect of the facts
of human behaviour, only the investigation of these facts in so far as the
Holy Law is silent about them is more legitimate, especially when they are
of the same genus as those about which the Law pronounces judgement.
For this reason the lawyers disagree about this kind of facts; some of
them, the Zahirites, deny the use of analogy, whereas others, the
analogists, admit it, , and this is absolutely the same thing as happens in
the sphere of knowledge, only perhaps the Zahirites are happier in the
purely intellectual sphere than in the practical.

339

And anyone amongst the two opposing parties who inquires after these
questions must either belong to the followers of proof, i. e. the rationalists,
or not; in the former case he will speak about them and base his
statements on demonstration, he will know that this way of discussion is
limited to the followers of proof, and he will know the places in which the
Holy Law gives to the people who possess this kind of knowledge a hint
about the conclusions to which demonstration leads; in the latter case he
will be either a believer or an unbeliever: if he is a believer he will know
that to discuss those questions is forbidden by the Holy Law, and if he is
an unbeliever, it is not difficult for the followers of proof to refute him with
the stringent proofs they possess. The rationalist must act in this way in
every religion, but especially in our Divine Revelation, which although it is
silent on certain intellectual problems nevertheless hints at the
conclusions about them to which demonstration leads, without, however,
mentioning these problems in its instruction of the masses.
Since this is established, we shall revert now to our subject, which is
forced upon us by necessity-for otherwise, by God, the Knower, the
Witness, the Revealer, we should not think it permissible to discuss such
questions in this way. And Ghazali, having described the arguments
through which the theologians prove the attribute of knowledge and other
attributes, and shown that they are very evident because they are
generally admitted and extremely easy to accept, begins to compare these
arguments with those of the philosophers about these attributes, and this
is an act of rhetoric. ‘
Ghazali says, addressing the philosophers:
And you, philosophers, when you affirm that the world is
eternal and not produced by God’s will, how do you know
that He knows something beside His essence, for you
require a proof of this?
Then Ghazali says:
And the summary of what Avicenna says to prove this in
the course of his argument can be reduced to two heads:
First, that the First does not exist in matter, and everything
which does not exist in matter is pure intellect and all the
intelligibles are revealed to it, for the obstacle to perceiving

340

all things is attachment to matter and being occupied with
matter, and the human soul is occupied by directing matter,
i. e. its body, and when this occupation is terminated and it is
not any longer defiled by the bodily passions and the
despicable conditions which affect it through the things of
nature, all the realities of the intelligibles are revealed to it,
and therefore is it asserted that all the angels know all the
intelligibles without exception, for they too are pure
immaterial intellects.
And having related their theory; Ghazali argues against them:
But we say: If by your assertion that the First does not
exist in matter, you mean that it is not a body, nor impressed
on a body, but exists by itself not comprised by space nor
locally specified by a direction, this is admitted by us. There
remains then your answer to the question what its attribute
is, namely that it is pure intellect-and what do you
understand by ‘intellect’? If you mean by it that which thinks
all the other things, this is just what we are trying to find out
and the point under discussion, and how, therefore, can you
take it as the premiss of a syllogism which must prove it?
And if you mean by it something else, namely that it thinks
its own self-and some of your fellow-philosophers may
concede this to you, but this amounts again to your saying
that what thinks its own self thinks other things also-the
answer to be made is ‘Why do you claim this? For this is not
known by necessity, and only Avicenna of all the
philosophers affirmed it; and how can you claim this as
necessary knowledge, or, if you know it by deduction, what
is your proof? ‘
And if the assertion is made: ‘Because what prevents the
perception of things is matter, and the First is not matter’, we
answer: We concede that matter is an impediment, but we
do not admit that it is the only impediment; and let them
arrange their syllogism in the figure of the hypothetical
syllogism and say: ‘If this First is in matter it cannot think
things, but it is not in matter, therefore it thinks things’. ‘ And

341

this is the assumption as a minor premiss of the opposite of
the antecedent, but such an assumption does not lead to a
conclusion in all cases, for it is like saying: ‘If this is a man, it
is an animal, but it is not a man, therefore it is not an animal’.
But this is not a necessary conclusion, for although not a
man, it might be a horse, and therefore an animal. The
assumption as a minor premiss of the opposite of the
antecedent is valid only conditionally, as we have shown in
our logic-namely, when the consequent is universally
convertible with the antecedent, as when the logicians say:
‘If the sun has risen, it is day, but the sun has not risen,
therefore it is not day’, for the only cause of its being day is
the fact that the sun has risen-an example in which
antecedent and consequent are convertible with each otherand the explanation of these theories and terms can be
understood from our book ‘The Touchstone of Knowledge’,
which we have written as an appendix to this book. If,
however, they say ‘We claim that antecedent and
consequent are here convertible, and that the one and only
obstacle to thinking is being in matter’, we answer: ‘This is a
pure presumption; where is your proof? ‘
I say:
The first mistake he makes here is that, in relating the theory and the
proof, he regards the premisses he mentions as first principles, whereas
for the philosophers they are conclusions from many premisses. For the
philosophers had seen that every sensible existent is composed of matter
and form, and that the form is the entity through which the existent
becomes existentand that it is the form which is designated by the name
and the definitions and that the specific act proceeds from the form in
every existent, and it is this act which shows the existence of the forms in
the existent. b For they had found that in substances there are active
potencies, particular to every single existent, and passive potencies, either
particular or common, ? and that a thing cannot be passive by reason of
the same thing as it is active; for activity is the opposite of passivity, and
opposites do not admit each other, and it is only their substratum which
admits them successively, e. g. hotness does not accept coldness, it is

342

simply the hot body that accepts coldness by divesting itself of hotness
and accepting coldness, and vice versa. Now when the philosophers
found that this was the case with activity and passivity, they understood
that all existents of this description were composed of two substances, a
substance which is the act and a substance which is the potency, and they
realized that the substance in act is the perfection of the substance in
potency and that the substance in act stands in relation to the substance
in potency as if it were the end of its actualization, for there is no actual
difference between them. ‘ Then, when they looked through all the
different forms of existents, they found that all these substances must
necessarily lead up to a substance in act which is absolutely devoid of
matter, and this substance must necessarily be active and cannot have
any passivity and cannot be subject to exhaustion, weariness, and decay;
for such things occur to the substance in act only because it is the
perfection of the substance in potency, not because it is pure act. For
since the substance in potency only goes forth into act through a
substance in act, the series of substances which are at the same time
both active and passive must terminate in a substance which is pure act,
and the series must terminate in that substance. And the proof of the
existence of this substance, in so far as it is a mover and agent, through
essential particular premisses, can be found in the eighth book of
Aristotle’s Physics.
Having established the existence of this substance by special and
general arguments according to what is known in their books, the
philosophers now investigated the nature of the forms in matter which
produce motion, and they found some of them nearer to actuality and
farther from potency because they are less than others involved in
passivity, which is the special sign of the matter which exists in them. And
they realized that that which among these forms is most destitute of matter
is the soul, and especially the intellect, so that they started to doubt
whether the intellect belongs to the forms which are in matter or not. z But
when they investigated the perceiving forms amongst the forms of the soul
and found that they were free from matter, they understood that the cause
of perception consists in freedom from matter, ; and since they discovered
that the intellect is without passivity they understood that the reason why
one form is inorganic and another perceptive consists in the fact that when
it is the perfection of a potency it is inorganic or not percipient, ‘ and when

343

it is pure perfection with which no potency is mixed it is intellect. ‘ All this
they proved in a demonstrative order and by natural deductions which
cannot be reproduced here in this demonstrative sequence, for this would
involve collecting in one place what by its nature is treated in many
different books, and anyone who has the slightest experience of the
science of logic will acknowledge that this is an impossibility. Through
arguments of this kind they came to realize that what has no passivity
whatever is intellect and not body, for what is passive is body which exists
in matter according to them.
An objection against the philosophers in these questions ought to be
made only against the first principles they use in the proof of these
conclusions, not against those conclusions themselves, as it is made by
Ghazali. Through this they came to understand that there exists here an
existent which is pure intellect, and when they saw further that the order
which reigns in nature and in the act of nature follows an intellectual plan
very much like the plan of the craftsman, they realized that there must
exist an intellect which causes these natural potencies to act in an
intellectual way, and through these two points they received the conviction
that this existent which is pure intellect is that which bestows on the
existents the order and arrangement in their acts. And they understood
from all this that its thinking its own self is identical with its thinking all
existents, and that this existent is not such that its thinking its own self is
something different from the thought by which it thinks other things, as is
the case with the human intellect. And about this intellect the disjunction
assumed as a premiss, that every intellect either thinks its own self or
thinks something else or thinks both together, is not valid. For when this
disjunction is admitted, what is said is: ‘If it thinks other things, it is selfevident that it must think its own self; however, if it thinks its own self, it is
not at all necessary that it should think other things. ‘ And we have
discussed this previously.
And all the things which he says about the hypothetical syllogism which
he formed in the figure he explained are not true. For the hypothetical
syllogism is only valid when the minor and the legitimacy of the
inferenceare proved through one or more categorical syllogisms. For
correct hypothetical inference in this question is: ‘If what does not think is
in matter, then what is not in matter thinks. ‘ But, of course, first the truth of

344

this conjunction and disjunction must be proved. ‘ And these are the
premisses of which we said that they are according to the philosophers
conclusions, whereas Ghazali pretends they are first principles for them,
or nearly so. And when it is explained as we have done, it is a syllogism of
a legitimate figure and of true premisses. As to its legitimate form, the
minor is the opposite of the consequent and the conclusion is the opposite
of the antecedent, not as Ghazali believed, the minor the opposite of the
antecedent and the conclusion the opposite of the consequent. ‘ But since
they are not first principles, nor generally acknowledged, nor evident at
first sight, they are regarded, no doubt, by those who have never heard
anything of these things as very much open to objection. But indeed
Ghazali confused the sciences in a most terrible way, and he uprooted
science from its foundation and its method.
Ghazali says:
The second argument is that the philosophers say:
‘Although we assert neither that the First wills temporal
production nor that it produces the world in time by
secondary intention, we nevertheless affirm that the First has
made the world and that indeed the world has its existence
through the First only, the First never losing its character as
an agent and never ceasing to act; our theory only
distinguishes itself from others in this point, in no way
however with respect to the principle of the act. And since
the agent must have knowledge in conformity with its act, the
universe, according to us, exists through its act. ‘
But there are two ways to answer this, of which the first
is: ‘There are two kinds of action: voluntary, like the action of
animal and man; and involuntary, like the action of the sun in
producing light, of fire in producing heat, of water in
producing cold. Now knowledge of the act is only necessary
in voluntary acts, as in the human products of art, not in the
acts of nature. But according to you philosophers, God has
made the world consequent on His essence by nature and
by necessity, not through will and choice; indeed, the
universe is consequent on His essence, as light is on the
sun, and just as the sun has no power to check its light, nor

345

fire to repress its producing heat, so the First cannot check
its acts. Now this kind of occurrence, although it may be
called an act, does not imply knowledge at all. ‘ And if it is
answered that there is a difference between the two things,
in that the procession of the universe from God’s essence
occurs through His knowledge of the universe and His
representing the universal order in the course of the
emamation of the universe, and He has no other cause than
His knowledge of the universe, and His knowledge of the
universe is identical with His essence, and if He had not this
knowledge of the universe, the universe would not exist
through Him, which is not the case with light in relation to the
sun, we answer: ‘In this you are in contradiction to your
fellow-philosophers, for they say that His essence is the
essence from which the existence of the universe in its order
follows naturally and necessarily, and it is not because He
knows this. ‘ And what is wrong with this conception, once
you agree with them in denying His will? And since the sun’s
knowledge of its light is no condition for its light, but its light
is necessarily consequent on the sun, so let us accept this
also in the case of the First; and nothing prevents this. ‘
I say:
In this section Ghazali begins by saying something reprehensible about
the philosophers, namely that the Creator possesses a will neither with
respect to the things produced nor with respect to the universe as a whole,
because His act proceeds from His essence necessarily like the
procession of light from the sun. Then he says of them that they say that
through His acting He must have knowledge. The philosophers, however,
do not deny the will of God, nor do they admit that He has a human will,
for the human will implies a deficiency in the willer and a being affected by
the object willed, and when the object is attained, the deficiency is
completed and the passivity, which is called will, ceases. The philosophers
only attribute a will to God in the sense that the acts which proceed from
Him proceed through knowledge, and everything which proceeds through
knowledge and wisdom proceeds through the will of the agent, not,
however, necessarily and naturally, since the nature of knowledge does

346

not imply (as he falsely affirms of the philosophers) the proceeding of the
act. For if the nature of knowledge did imply this, then, when we say that
God knows the opposites, it would be necessary that the opposites should
proceed from Him together, and this is absurd. The fact that only one of
the opposites proceeds from Him shows that there is another attribute
present beside knowledge, namely will, and it is in this way that the
affirmation of will in the First must be understood according to the
philosophers. z For God, according to the philosophers, necessarily knows
and wills through His knowledge. As to Ghazali’s assertion that the act can
be subdivided into two, into a natural act and a voluntary act, this is false.
God’s act according to the philosophers is in a certain way not natural, nor
is it absolutely voluntary; it is voluntary without having the deficiency which
is attached to the human will. Therefore the term ‘will’ is attributed to the
Divine Will and the human in an equivocal way, just as the term
‘knowledge ‘is attributed equivocally to eternal knowledge and to temporal.
For the will in animals and man is a passivity which occurs to them
through the object of desire
and is caused by it. This is the meaning of ‘will’ in the case of the human
will, but the Creator is too exalted to possess an attribute which should be
an effect. Therefore by ‘will’ in God only the procession of the act joined to
knowledge can be understood. And ‘knowledge’, as we said, refers to the
two opposites, and in the knowledge of God there is knowledge of the
opposites in a certain way, and His performing only the one shows that
there exists in Him another attribute which is called ‘will’.
Ghazali says:
The second way of answering is to concede that the
procession of a thing from the agent implies knowledge of
the thing which proceeds. Now, according to them, the act of
God is one, namely the effect which is pure intellect, and
God can only know this effect. The first effect again will only
know what proceeds from it. For the universe does not
proceed from God immediately, but through mediators and
derivation and a series of consequences. For that which
proceeds from what proceeds from Him need not be known
to Him, and from Him Himself only one thing proceeds. And
how should He know everything that proceeds mediately

347

from Him? For this is not even necessary in voluntary acts,
and how could it be necessary in natural acts? For the
movement of a stone from the top of a mountain can occur
through a voluntary propulsion which implies knowledge of
the principle of motion, but does not imply knowledge of all
the consequences which may occur through its knocking and
breaking something. ‘ And to this again the philosophers
have no answer.
I answer:
The answer to this is that the Agent whose knowledge is of the highest
perfection knows everything which proceeds from Him and which
proceeds from that which proceeds from Him, and so from the first term to
the last. And if the knowledge of the First is of the highest perfection, the
First must know everything that proceeds from it either mediately or
immediately, and its knowledge need not be of the same kind as our
knowledge, for our knowledge is imperfect and posterior to the thing
known.
Then Ghazali says, answering the objection he brought forward against
the philosophers:
If, however, the philosophers should say: ‘If we declared
that the First only knows its own self, this would be a very
reprehensible doctrine, for all other beings know themselves
and know the First, and would therefore be superior to it; and
how can the effect be superior to the cause?
I say:
This is an insufficient answer, for it opposes a rational argument with a
moral one.
Then Ghazali answers this and says:
We should answer: ‘This reprehensible doctrine is a
necessary consequence for those who follow the
philosophers in denying the Divine Will and the production of
the world, and one must either adhere to it as the other

348

philosophers do, or abandon the philosophers
acknowledge that the world is produced through will. ‘

and

I say:
Ghazali means that if they belong to those who affirm that God knows
His work, only to avoid the reprehensible doctrine that He does not know
anything but His own self, they are forced to acknowledge this
reprehensible doctrine just as well, since they affirmed another
reprehensible doctrine, namely the eternity of the world and the denial of
the Will. ‘ However, the philosophers do not deny the Will, and only deny
that part of it which implies a deficiency.
Then Ghazali says:
How will you refute those philosophers who say that this
knowledge does not add to God’s dignity, since other beings
need knowledge only in order to acquire perfection (for in
their essence there is a deficiency) and man receives dignity
through the intelligibles either that he may see his advantage
in the coming events of this world and the next, or that his
obscure and insufficient essence may be perfected, and
likewise all the other creatures, but that the essence of God
does not stand in need of perfection: nay, if a knowledge
could be imagined through which He would be perfected, His
essence, in so far as it is His essence, would be imperfect’
This is just the same kind of remark as your assertions,
Avicenna, concerning His hearing and seeing and His
knowing the particular beings which fall under the concept of
time, for you agree with all the other philosophers in saying
that God is too exalted for that, and that the changes which
fall under the concept of time and which are divided into past
and future events are not known to the First, since this would
imply a change in its essence and a being influenced, and
the denial of this does not imply an imperfection, but rather a
perfection, and there is only an imperfection in the senses
and the need for them. ‘ If there were not this human
imperfection, man would not be in need of the senses to
guard himself against any change which might affect him.

349

And in the same way you affirm that the knowledge of
particular events is an imperfection. And if it is true that we
can know all particular events and perceive all sensible
things, whereas the First cannot know anything of the
particulars nor perceive anything of sensible things without
this implying any imperfection in the First, it may also be
permitted to ascribe to others knowledge of the intelligible
universals but to deny it of the First without this implying any
imperfection in the First. There is no way out of this.
I say:
This is the proof of those who say that the First knows only itself, and we
have already spoken of the theory of those who combine the doctrine that
the First knows only itself with the theory that it knows all existents; and for
this reason some of the best known philosophers affirm that God the
Creator is Himself all existents and that He grants them in His
benevolence, and there is no sense in repeating ourselves. The premisses
used in this section are common dialectical propositions, since they all
belong to those which compare the Divine to the empirical, although no
common genus unites these two spheres and they do not possess any
common factor at all. In general his discussion in this section, when he
argues with Avicenna, who adduces the argument of those philosophers
who believe that God in knowing Himself must know other things, since
He must necessarily know what proceeds from Himself, and all the other
assertions of Avicenna to prove this, which he relates, and which he uses
himself again to refute Avicenna, are all taken from human conditions
which he tries to refer to the Creator; and this is false, since the terms of
these two types of knowledge are predicated equivocally.
Avicenna’s assertion that any intelligent being from whom an act
proceeds knows this act is a true proposition; not, however, in the sense in
which the word ‘knowledge’ is used of the human intellect, when it
understands a thing, for the human intellect is perfected by what it
perceives and knows, and is affected by it, and the cause of action in man
is the representation he forms in his intellect. ‘ And Ghazali argues against
this kind of proposition by saying that when a man acts and there follows
from his act another act and from the second act a third and from the third
a fourth, it is not necessary that the conscious agent should know all the

350

consequences which follow from his first act; and Ghazali says to his
opponent this is a fact which concerns voluntary acts, but how is it when
one assumes an agent whose acts are not voluntary? And he only says
this because he means that the affirmation of God’s knowledge implies the
affirmation of God’s will.
And therefore Ghazali says:
To this again the philosophers have no answer.
I say:
Ghazali means that it does not follow that the First according to Avicenna
thinks anything but the act which proceeds from it primarily, and this act is
the second cause and the first effect. Neither is there an answer to the
other difficulty which he states that if the First thinks only itself and nothing
else, man would be more noble than it. And the reason why Ghazali’s
words carry a certain conviction is that if one imagines two men, one of
whom thinks only his own self, whereas the other thinks his own self and
other things besides, the latter intellect is regarded as superior to the
former. However, as the term ‘intellect’ is applied to the human intellect
and to this Divine Intellect in a purely equivocal way, since the latter is an
agent and not a patient and the former a patient and not an agent, this
analogy does not hold any longer.
Having given as Avicenna’s argument the maxim which Avicenna applies
to every intelligent being, ‘ that the more knowledge an intellect possesses
the nobler it is, and having affirmed that, according to him (Ghazali), it is
just the philosophers’ denial of God’s will and of temporal creation which
forces them to deny to God a knowledge of anything but Himself, since the
conscious agent knows his effect only in so far as it differs from himself by
being an object of his will, he says that this reprehensible assertion, i. e.
the assertion that the effect which is man must be nobler than the cause
which is the Creator, is a consequence for the philosophers only, sincc as
the philosophers deny the coming into being of the world, they deny the
Divine Will, as he affirms, and as they deny the Divine Will, they deny that
God knows what proceeds from Him. But all this, namely the denial of
God’s will, has been shown previously not to be true; for they deny only
His temporal will. And having repeated Avicenna’s arguments, which he
regarded as being applicable both to the knowledge of the temporal and

351

the knowledge of the eternal, he begins to argue against him, showing the
distinction which the philosophers established on this point between these
two sciences, and indeed this consequence is incumbent on Avicenna.
And Ghazali says:
How will you refute those philosophers who say that this
knowledge does not add to God’s dignity, for only other
beings need knowledge. . . ?
I say:
The summary of this is that, if all these perceptions exist only because of
man’s imperfection, then God is too exalted for them; and therefore
Ghazali says to Avicenna: Just as you acknowledge with your fellowphilosophers that God’s not perceiving individual things is not a
consequence of an imperfection in Him, for you have proved
that the perception of individuals rests on an imperfection in the perceiver,
in the same way the perception of other things than Himself need not
derive from an imperfection in Him, since the perception of these other
things depends on the imperfection of the perceiver. ‘
The answer to all this is that God’s knowledge cannot be divided into the
opposites of true and false in which human knowledge is divided; for
instance, it may be said of a man that either he knows or he does not
know other things, because these two propositions are contradictory, and
when the one is true the other is false; but in the case of God both
propositions, that He knows what He knows and that He does not know it,
are true, for He does not know it through a knowledge which determines
an imperfection, namely human knowledge, but knows it through a
knowledge which does not carry with it any imperfection, and this is a
knowledge the quality of which nobody but God Himself can understand.
And concerning both universals and individuals it is true of Him that He
knows them and does not know them. This is the conclusion to which the
principles of the ancient philosophers led; but those who make a
distinction, and say that God knows universals but does not know
particulars have not fully grasped their theory, and this is not a
consequence of their principles. For all human sciences are passivities
and impressions from the existents, and the existents operate on them.

352

But the knowledge of the Creator operates on existents, and the existents
receive the activities of His knowledge.
Once this is established, the whole quarrel between Ghazali and the
philosophers comes to an end in regard to this chapter as well as the next
two. We shall, however, give an account of these chapters and mention in
them both what is particular to them and those arguments which have
been already discussed above.

THE TWELFTH DISCUSSION
ABOUT THE IMPOTENCE OF THE PHILOSOPHERS TO
PROVE THAT GOD KNOWS HIMSELF
Ghazali says:
We say that when the Muslims understood that the world
was created through the will of God, they proved His
knowledge from His will, then His life from His will and His
knowledge together, ‘ then from His life, according to the
principle that every living being knows itself, they proved that
He too must know His own essence, since He is alive. And
this is a rational procedure of extreme force. For you
philosophers, however, since you deny the divine will and
the world’s coming into existence, and since you affirm that
what proceeds from Him proceeds in a necessary and
natural sequence, why should it be impossible that His
essence should be of such a nature that only the first effect
proceeded from it, and that then the second effect followed
the first till the whole order of existents was completed, but,
notwithstanding this, the First would not know itself, just as
neither fire from which heat proceeds, nor the sun from
which light proceeds, know themselves or anything else? For
only that which knows itself knows what proceeds from itself,
and therefore knows other things besides itself. And we have
already shown that, according to the theory of the
philosophers the First does not know other things, and we
have forced those who do not agree with them on this point
to acknowledge this consequence which follows from their

353

assumption. And if it does not know others, it is not absurd to
suppose that it does not know its own self.
If they say: ‘Everyone who does not know himself is
dead, and how could the First be dead? ‘-we answer: ‘This is
indeed a conclusion which follows from your theory, since
there is no difference between you and those who say that
every one who does not act through will, power and choice,
who neither hears nor sees, is dead, and he who does not
know other things is dead. And if it is possible that the First
is destitute of all these attributes, what need has it of
knowing itself? ‘ And if they return to the doctrine that
everything which is free from matter is intellect by itself and
therefore thinks itself, we have shown that this is an arbitrary
judgement without any proof.
And if they say: ‘The proof is that what is existent is
divided into what is alive and what is dead, and what is alive
is prior and superior to what is dead, and the First is prior
and superior: therefore let it be alive; and every living being
knows itself, since it is impossible that the living should be
amongst its effects and should not itself be alive’, we
answer: ‘All this is pure presumption, for we affirm that it is
not impossible that that which knows itself should follow from
that which does not, either through many intermediaries or
without mediation. And if the reason for its impossibility is
that in that case the effect would be superior to the cause,
well, it is not impossible that the effect should be superior to
the cause, for the superiority of the cause to the effect is not
a fundamental principle. Further, how can you refute the
view that its superiority might consist not in its knowledge but
in the fact that the existence of the universe is a
consequence of its essence? For the proof is that, whereas
the First neither sees nor hears, there are many other beings
who know other things than themselves and who do see and
hear. ‘
And if it were said, ‘Existents are divided into the seeing
and the blind, the knowing and the ignorant’, we answer:

354

‘Well, let the seeing then be superior and let the First see
and have knowledge of things!” But the philosophers deny
this, and say that its excellence does not consist in seeing
and knowing things, but in not being in need of sight and
knowledge and being the essence from which there
proceeds the universe in which the knowing and the seeing
beings exist. And in the same way it may be said that this
essence does not possess excellence because it has
knowledge itself, but because it is the principle of essences
which possess knowledge, and this is an excellence which is
peculiar to it.
The philosophers are therefore forced to deny also that
the First knows itself, for nothing proves such a knowledge
but will, and nothing proves will except the temporal
beginning of the world, and if this principle is destroyed, all
these things are destroyed which are accepted through the
speculation of the mind alone. For, they do not possess a
proof for any thing they affirm or deny concerning the
attributes of the First, but they make only such guesses and
conjectures as lawyers would despise in their suppositions.
However, no wonder that the intellect should be perplexed
about the divine attributes; one should wonder only at the
wonderful self-complacency of the philosophers, at their
satisfaction with their proofs and their belief that they know
those things through evident proofs, notwithstanding the
mistakes and the errors in them.
I say:
The most wonderful thing is the claim of the theologians that the
temporal becoming of the world implies that it has been willed by a will, for
we find that temporal things occur through nature, through will, and by
chance. x Those that occur through will are the products of art, and those
that occur through nature are natural things, and if temporal things
occurred only through will, will would have to be included in the definition
of the temporal, whereas it is well known that the definition of temporal
becoming is ‘existence succeeding non-existence’. If indeed the world had
come into being temporally, it would be more appropriate that it should

355

have come into being, in so far as it was a natural existent, from principles
appropriate to natural things, rather than from principles appropriate to
artificial things, i. e. the will. Since, however, it is established that the world
exists through a First Agent which preferred its existence to its
nonexistence, it is necessary that this agent should be a willer, and if this
First Agent does not cease to prefer the world’s existence to its
nonexistence, and the willer-as Ghazali says-must have knowledge, the
philosophers are in complete agreement with the theologians about this
fundamental point. The whole theological argument, however, which he
gives has only persuasive power, because it compares natural things to
artificial.
As to what he says of the philosophers, that they believe that what
proceeds from the Creator proceeds in a natural way, this is a wrong
imputation. What they really believe is that existents proceed from Him in
a way superior to nature and to the human will, for both these ways are
subject to an imperfection, but they are not the only possible ways, since it
has been proved that the act of God can proceed from Him neither in a
natural way nor in a voluntary, in the sense in which this is understood in
the sublunary world. For will in an animal is the principle of movement,
and if the Creator is devoid of movement, He is devoid of the principle of
movement in the way a voluntary agent in the empirical world moves. ‘
What proceeds from God proceeds in a nobler way than the voluntary, a
way which nobody can understand but God Himself. And the proof that He
wills is that He knows the opposites, and if He were an agent in absolutely
the same way as He is a knower, He would carry out the two contrary acts
together, and this is impossible; and therefore it is necessary that He
should perform one of the two contraries through choice.
The error of the theologians with regard to this question is that they say
that every act is either natural or voluntary, but do not understand the
meaning of either of these words. For nature, according to the
philosophers, has different meanings, the primary being the ascending of
fire and the descending of earth, ‘ and an existent only has this movement
when something has prevented it from being in its natural place, and there
was therefore something that constrained it; but the Creator is too high for
this kind of nature. The philosophers also apply the term ‘nature’ to every
potency from which an intellectual act proceeds, in the same way as the

356

acts which proceed from the arts, and some of the philosophers ascribe
intellect to this nature, and some say that this nature does not possess
intellect but acts only by natures And they say that this nature proceeds
from an intellect, because they compare it to artificial things which move
themselves and from which orderly well-arranged acts proceed . And
therefore their master Aristotle asserts that it is manifest that the nature of
intellect rules the universe. ? And how far is this belief from what Ghazali
ascribes to them!
Who, however, assumes as a universal maxim that he who knows
himself must know other things which proceed from him, must conclude
that he who does not know other things cannot know himself.
And having refuted Avicenna’s theory that God knows other things, by the
arguments of the philosophers on this point which he adduces against
him, ‘ he concludes against him that the First does not know itself; and this
conclusion is valid. ,
And as to what he relates of the argument of the philosophers on this
point, namely that they say that he who does not know himself is dead and
the First cannot be dead, this is a persuasive argument composed of
common propositions, for he who is not alive is not dead unless it is in his
nature to receive life’-or one must mean by ‘dead’ what is meant by
‘inanimate’ and ‘inorganic’, and then this is a true dichotomy, for every
existent is either alive or inorganic, provided we understand by ‘life’ a term
which is equivocally used of the eternal and the corruptible.
And as to Ghazali’s words:
And if they return to the doctrine that everything which is
free from matter is intellect by itself and therefore thinks
itself, we have shown that this is an arbitrary judgement
without any proof.
I say:
We have already shown the manner in which this proof of the
philosophers must be taken, in so far as this proof preserves its power by
being given in this book-I mean its power is diminished, as is necessary
when a thing is removed from its natural context. And as to what he says
of their arguing on this point against the philosophers that the existent is

357

either alive or dead, and that which is alive is more noble than that which
is dead, and that the principle is nobler than that which is alive and that it
is therefore necessarily alive, if by ‘dead’ is understood the inanimate,
these propositions are common and true.
His assertion, however, that life can proceed from the lifeless and
knowledge from what does not possess knowledge, and that the dignity of
the First consists only in its being the principle of the universe, is false. For
if life could proceed from the lifeless, then the existent might proceed from
the non-existent, and then anything whatever might proceed from anything
whatever, and there would be no congruity between causes and effects,
either in the genus predicated analogically or in the species. 4
As to his assertion that, when the philosophers say that what is nobler
than life must be alive, it is like saying that that which is nobler than what
has hearing and seeing must have hearing and seeing: the philosophers
do not say so, for they deny that the First Principle can hear and see. And
Ghazali’s argument that, since, according to the philosophers, that which
is superior to what hears and sees . need not hear and see, then also
what is superior to the living and the knowing need not itself be alive and
possessed of knowledge and that, just as according to the philosophers
that which possesses sight can proceed from what has no sight, so it is
possible that knowledge should proceed from what has no knowledge: this
is a very sophistical and false argument.
For according to the philosophers that which has no hearing or seeing is
not absolutely superior to that which has hearing and seeing, but only
because it has a perception superior to seeing and hearing, namely
knowledge. ‘ But, since there is nothing superior to knowledge, it is not
possible that that which does not possess knowledge should be superior
to that which does, be it a principle or not. For since some of the principles
possess knowledge, others not, it is not permissible that those which do
not know should be superior to those that do, just as little as this is
possible in regard to effects which do and do not possess knowledge. And
the nobility of being a principle cannot surpass the nobility of knowledge,
unless the nobility of a principle that does not possess knowledge could
surpass the nobility of a principle that does. And the excellence of being a
principle cannot surpass the excellence of knowledge. And therefore it is
necessary that the principle which has the utmost nobility should possess

358

the utmost excellence, which is knowledge. The philosophers only avoid
ascribing to the First hearing and seeing, because this would imply its
possessing a soul. The Holy Law ascribes hearing and seeing to God to
remind us that God is not deprived of any kind of knowledge and
understanding, and the masses cannot be made to grasp this meaning
except by the use of the terms ‘hearing’ and ‘seeing’, and for this reason
this exegesis is limited to the learned, and therefore cannot be taken as
one of the dogmas of the Holy Law common to the masses. And the same
is the case with many questions the solutions of which the Holy Law
leaves to science.
Everything this chapter contains is the confusion and the incoherence of
Ghazali himself. But, we appeal to God on account of the mistakes the
learned have made, and that He may pardon them because of their wish
to glorify His name in all such questions, and we pray God that He may
not place us among those who are excluded from the next world through
their faults in this, or from the highest through their desire for the lowest,
and that He may bestow on us final blessedness!

THE THIRTEENTH DISCUSSION
TO REFUTE THOSE WHO AFFIRM THAT GOD IS
IGNORANT OF THE INDIVIDUAL THINGS WHICH ARE
DIVIDED IN TIME INTO PRESENT, PAST, AND FUTURE
Ghazali says:
About this theory they all agree; for as to those who
believe that God only knows Himself, this is implied in their
belief; and as to those who believe that He knows things
besides Himself (and this is the theory which Avicenna has
chosen) they believe that God knows other things in a
universal knowledge which does not fall under the concept of
time and which is not differentiated through past, future, and
present although, nevertheless, Avicenna affirms that not the
weight of a grain escapes God’s knowledge either on earth
or in the heavens, since He knows individual things in a
universal way. ‘

359

Now we must first understand this theory, and then
occupy ourselves with refuting it. We shall explain this
through an example, namely that the sun, for example,
suffers an eclipse, after not having been eclipsed, and
afterwards recovers its light. There are therefore in an
eclipse three moments: the moment when there was not yet
an eclipse but the eclipse was expected in the future, the
time when the eclipse was actually there, its being, and
thirdly, the moment the eclipse had ceased but had been.
Now we have in regard to these three conditions a threefold
knowledge: we know first that there is not yet an eclipse, but
that there will be one, secondly that it is now there, and
thirdly, that it has been present but is no longer present. This
threefold knowledge is numerically distinguishable and
differentiated and its sequence implies a change in the
knowing essence, for if this knowing essence thought after
the cessation of the eclipse that the eclipse was present as
before, this would be ignorance, not knowledge, and if it
thought during its presence that it was absent, this again
would be ignorance, and the one knowledge cannot take the
place of the other.
The philosophers affirm now that the condition of God is
not differentiated by means of these three moments, for this
would imply a change, and that He whose condition does not
change cannot be imagined to know these things, for
knowledge follows the object of knowledge, and when the
object of knowledge changes, the knowledge changes, and
when the knowledge changes, without doubt the knower
changes too; but change in God is impossible. However,
notwithstandng this, the philosophers affirm that God knows
the eclipse and all its attributes and accidents, but through a
knowledge which is attributed to Him in an eternal attribution
and is unchangeable: God knows for instance that the sun
exists and that the moon exists, and that they have
emanated from God Himself through the medium of angels
whom the philosophers in their technical terminology call
‘separate intellects’, and God knows that the sun and moon

360

move in circles and that between their orbits there is an
intersection at two points, the ascending and the descending
node, ‘ and that at certain times the sun and moon are
together in these nodes and that then the sun is eclipsedi. e.
the body of the moon comes between the sun and the eyes
of the observer, and the sun is concealed from his eyes, and
that when the sun has passed a certain distance beyond this
node, say a year, it is eclipsed again, and that this eclipse is
either total or for a third or for a half, and that it will last an
hour or two hours, and God knows equally all other time
determinations and all other accidents of the eclipse; and
nothing of this escapes God’s knowledge. However, God’s
knowledge before, during, and after the eclipse is all of one
kind without any differentiation and without any implication of
a change in His essence. And such is His knowledge of all
temporal occurrences which take place through causes
which have other causes terminating finally in the circular
movement of the heavens, and the cause of this movement
is the soul of the heavens, and the cause of the soul’s
movement is its desire to assimilate itself to God and to the
angels near Him . z And the whole universe is known to Him,
that is, it is manifested to Him in one single congruous
manifestation which is not influenced by time. Still, at the
time of the eclipse it cannot be said that He knows that the
eclipse is taking place now, nor does He know when it has
passed that it has passed now, for He cannot be imagined to
know anything which for its definition needs a relation to
time, since this implies a change. This is their solution in so
far as it concerns a division in time.
And as concerns their theory about what is divided in
matter and space, like individual men and animals, they say
that God does not know the accidents of Zaid, Amr, and
Khalid and that He knows only man in general, through a
universal knowledge, and that He knows the accidents and
properties of man in general, namely that he must have a
body composed of limbs, some to grasp with, some to walk
with, some to perceive with, some of which form a pair while

361

some are single, and that the bodily faculties must be
dispersed in all parts of the body. And the same applies to all
the qualities which are inside and outside man’s body and all
its accidents, attributes, and consequences, so that there is
nothing that is hidden from God in His knowledge of the
universal. But the individual Zaid can only be distinguished
from Amr through the senses, not through the intellect, and
this distinction is based on pointing to a special direction,
whereas the intellect can only understand direction and
space absolutely as universals. And when we say ‘this’ and
‘that’, this is a case of pointing to a special relation of a
sensible thing to the observer as being near to him or far
from him, or in a definite place, and this is impossible where
God is concerned.
This then is the principle in which they believe, and
through it they uproot the Divine Laws absolutely, for this
principle implies that God cannot know whether Zaid obeys
or disobeys Him, since God cannot know any new
occurrences that happen to Zaid, as He does not know the
individual Zaid; for the individual and his acts come into
existence after nonexistence, and as God does not know the
individual, He cannot know his conditions and his actsindeed, He cannot know that Zaid becomes a heretic or a
true believer, for He can know only the unbelief and the
belief of man in general, not as it is specified in individuals.
Yes, God cannot know Muhammad’s proclaiming himself a
prophet at the time he did, nor can God know this of any
definite prophet; He can only know that some people
proclaim themselves prophets and that they have such-andsuch qualities, but any individual prophet He cannot know,
for he can only be known by sense-perception. Nor can He
know the acts which proceed from the prophets, since they
are divided as acts of a definite man through the division of
time, and their perception with their diversity implies a
change in the observer.

362

This is what we wanted to do first, namely to expound
their view, then to render it intelligible, thirdly to show the
perversities implied in it.
We shall now pass on to relate the artfulness of their
theory and the point where it fails. Their artfulness lies in the
fact that they say: ‘There are here three different moments,
and a sequence of different things in one single subject no
doubt implies a change in it. For if at the moment of the
eclipse God thought that what was happening was like what
had been before, He would be ignorant; if, on the other
hand, He knew that it was happening and knew previously
that it was not happening, but would happen, His knowledge
and His condition would have become different, and this
would imply a change, for “change” means only a difference
in the knowledge and a difference in the knowledge implies a
difference in the knower, for he who did not know a thing and
then knows it, has changed; previously he had no knowledge
that it was happening, and then his knowledge was realized:
therefore he changed. ‘
And they have elaborated this by saying that there are
three kinds of conditions;, first a condition which is a mere
relation, as when we say right and left, for this does not refer
to an essential attribute, but is a mere relation; for if you
change a thing from your right to your left, your relation to it
changes, but the condition of your essence does not change,
for the relation changes with respect to the essence, but the
essence does not change. The second kind of condition is of
the same type, i. e. when you have the capacity to move
bodies in front of you, and those bodies or part of them
disappear, your innate power and your capacity does not
change, for your capacity is first the capacity to move body
in general and secondly to move a definite body in so far as
it is a body; and the relation of the capacity to the definite
body is not an essential attribute, but a mere relation, and
the disappearance of the body determines the cessation of
the relation, but not a change in the condition of the one who

363

possesses this capacity. The third kind of condition,
however, is a change in the essence, for when one who had
no knowledge acquires knowledge and one who had no
power becomes powerful there is indeed a change. ‘
And the change in the object known causes a change in
the knowledge, for the relation to the definite object known
enters into the essence of the knowledge itself, since the
essence of the definite knowledge is attached to the definite
object known as it exists in reality, and when the knowledge
attaches itself to it in another relation, it becomes necessarily
another knowledge and this succession implies a
differentiation in the essence of the knowledge. And it cannot
be said that God has one single knowledge which, having
been knowledge of the future event, could become
knowledge of the present event, and having been knowledge
of the present event, could become knowledge of the past
event, for although the knowledge would be one and the
same and have similar conditions, there would be a change
of relation to Him and the change of relation would enter into
the essence of the knowledge; and this change would imply
a change in the essence of the knowledge, and from this
there would result a change (which is impossible) in God.
The objection to this is twofold.
First one can say: How will you refute one who says that
God has one single knowledge of the eclipse, for instance, at
a definite time, and that this knowledge before the
occurrence of the eclipse is the knowledge that the eclipse
will occur, and during the eclipse is identical with the
knowledge that it is occurring, and after the eclipse identical
with the knowledge that it has ceased, and that these
differences refer to relations which imply neither a change in
the essence of the knowledge nor a change in the essence
of the knower, and that this is exactly like a mere relation?
For one single person can be at your right and then turn in
front of you and go to your left, and there is a succession of
relations with respect to you; but that which is changing is

364

the person who takes up different positions, and God’s
knowledge must be understood in this way, for indeed we
admit that God comprehends things in one single knowledge
in everlasting eternity, and that His condition does not
change; with their intention, the denial of His change, we do
agree, but their assertion that it is necessary to regard the
knowledge of an actual becoming and its cessation as a
change, we refuse to accept. For how do you know this?
Indeed, suppose God had created in us a knowledge that
Zaid will arrive tomorrow at daybreak, and had made this
knowledge permanent without creating for us another
knowledge or the forgetfulness of this knowledge; then, by
the mere previous knowledge, we should know at daybreak
that at present Zaid is arriving and afterwards that he had
arrived, and this one permanent knowledge would suffice to
comprehend these three moments.
There still remains their assertion that the relation to a
definite object known enters into the essence of the
knowledge of this object, and that whenever the relation
becomes different the thing which has this essential relation
becomes different, and that whenever this differentiation and
this sequence arise there is a change. ‘
We say: If this is true, then rather follow the path of your
fellow-philosophers when they say that God knows only
Himself and that knowing Himself is identical with His
essence, for if He knew man and animal and the inorganic in
general (and these are undoubtedly different things), His
relation to them would undoubtedly be different too; and one
single knowledge cannot be a knowledge of different things,
since the object related is differentiated, and the relation is
differentiated, and the relation to the object known is
essential to the knowledge, and this implies a multiplicity and
a differentiation-not a mere multiplicity with a similarity, for
similar things are things which can be substituted for each
other, but the knowledge of an animal cannot be substituted
for the knowledge of the inorganic, nor the knowledge of

365

white for the knowledge of black, for they are two different
things. ‘ Besides, these species and genera and universal
accidents are infinite and they are different, and how can
different sciences fall under one science? Again, this
knowledge is the essence of the knower without any
addition, and I should like to know how an intelligent man
can regard the unity of the knowledge of one and the same
thing, when this knowledge is divided through its relations
with the past, the future, and the present, as impossible, and
uphold the unity of the knowledge which is attached to all
genera and all different species! For the diversity and the
distance between the genera and the remote species is far
greater than the difference which occurs in the conditions of
one thing which is divided through the division of time; and if
the former does not imply a plurality and differentiation, why
then does the latter? And as soon as it is proved that the
diversity of times is less important than the diversity of
genera and species, and that the latter does not imply a
plurality and a diversity, the former also will not imply this.
And if this does not imply a diversity, then it will be possible
that the whole universe should be comprehended in one
everlasting knowledge in everlasting time, and that this
should not imply a change in the essence of the knower.
I say:
This sophistry is based on the assimilation of Divine Knowledge to
human and the comparison of the one knowledge with the other, for man
perceives the individual through his senses, and universal existents
through his intellect, and the cause of his perception is the thing perceived
itself, and there is no doubt that the perception changes through the
change in the things perceived and that their plurality implies its plurality.
As to his answer that it is possible that there should exist a knowledge
the relation of which to the objects known is that kind of relation which
does not enter into the essence of the thing related, like the relation of
right and left, to that which has a right and a left his is an answer which
cannot be understood from the nature of human knowledge. ‘ And his
second objection, that those philosophers who affirm that God knows

366

universals must, by admitting in His knowledge a plurality of species,
conclude that a plurality of individuals and a plurality of conditions of one
and the same individual is permissible for His knowledge, is a sophistical
objection. For the knowledge of individuals is sensation or imagination,
and the knowledge of universals is intellect, z and the new occurrence of
individuals or conditions of individuals causes two things, a change and a
plurality in the perception; whereas knowledge of species and genera
does not imply a change, since the knowledge of them is invariable and
they are unified in the knowledge which comprehends them, and
universality and individuality only agree in their forming a plurality.
And his statement that those philosophers who assume one simple
knowledge, which comprehends genera and species without there existing
in it a plurality and diversity which the differentiation and diversity of the
species and genera would imply, will have also to admit one simple
knowledge which will comprehend different individuals and different
conditions of one and the same individual, is like saying that if there is an
intellect which comprehends species and genera, and this intellect is one,
there must be one simple genus which comprehends different individuals;
and this is a sophism, since the term ‘knowledge’ is predicated equivocally
of divine and human knowledge of the universal and the individual. But his
remark that the plurality of species and genera causes a plurality in the
knowledge is true, and the most competent philosophers therefore do not
call God’s knowledge of existents either universal or individual, for
knowledge which implies the concepts of universal and individual is a
passive intellect and an effect, whereas the First Intellect is pure act and a
cause, and His knowledge cannot be compared to human knowledge; for
in so far as God does not think other things as being other than Himself
His essence is not passive knowledge, and in so far as He thinks them as
being identical with His essence, His essence is active knowledge. ‘
And the summary of their doctrine is that, since they ascertained by
proofs that God thinks only Himself, His essence must of necessity be
intellect. And as intellect, in so far as it is intellect, can only be attached to
what exists, not to what does not exist, and it had been proved that there
is no existent but those existents which we think, it was necessary that His
intellect should be attached to them, since it was not possible that it
should be attached to non-existence and there is no other kind of existent

367

to which it might be attached. ‘ And since it was necessary that it should
be attached to the existents, it had to be attached either in the way our
knowledge is attached to it, or in a superior way, and since the former is
impossible, this knowledge must be attached in a superior way and
according to a more perfect existence of existents than the existence of
the existents to which our intellect is attached. For true knowledge is
conformity with the existent, z and if His knowledge is superior to ours and
His knowledge is attached to the existent in a way superior to our
attachment to the existent, then there must be two kinds of existence, a
superior and an inferior, and the superior existence must be the cause of
the inferior.
And this is the meaning of the ancient philosophers, when they say that
God is the totality of the existents which He bestows on us in His bounty
and of which He is the agent. And therefore the chiefs of the Sufis say:
there is no reality besides Him. But all this is the knowledge of those who
are steadfast in their knowledge, and this must not be written down and it
must not be made an obligation of faith, and therefore it is not taught by
the Divine Law. And one who mentions this truth where it should not be
mentioned sins, and one who withholds it from those to whom it should be
told sins too. And that one single thing can have different degrees of
existence can be learned from the different degrees of existence of the
sou1.
Ghazali says:
The second refutation is: ‘What prevents you, according
to your doctrine, from affirming God’s knowledge of
individuals, even if this implies His changing, for why do you
not believe that this kind of change is not impossible in God,
just as Jahm, one of the Mu’tazilites, says that His
knowledge of temporals is temporal’ and the later Karramites
say that God is the substratum of the temporal’? The true
believers refute these theories only by arguing that what
changes cannot be without change, and what cannot be
without change and without temporal occurrences is itself
temporal and not eternal. ‘ For you, however, according to
your doctrine the world is eternal but not without change,

368

and if you acknowledge an eternal which changes, nothing
prevents you from accepting this theory. ‘
If you replied: We only regard this as impossible,
because the temporal knowledge in His essence must either
derive from Himself or from something else; that it should
derive from Himself is impossible, for we have shown that
from the eternal no temporal can proceed and that God
cannot become active after having been at rest, for this
would imply a change, and we have established this in
treating the question of the temporal becoming of the world;
and if it were to arise in His essence from something else,
how could something else influence and change Him so that
His conditions changed as if under the power and necessity
of something different from Him? -we answer: Neither of
these alternatives is impossible, according to your doctrine.
As to your assertion that it is impossible that from the eternal
a temporal being should proceed, we refuted this sufficiently
when we treated this problem. According to you it is
impossible that from the eternal there should proceed a
temporal being which is the first of a series of temporal
beings and it is only impossible that there should be a first
temporal being. ‘ However, these temporal beings have no
infinite number of temporal causes, but by means of the
circular movement they terminate in something eternal which
is the soul and life of the sphere; and the soul of the sphere
is eternal and the circular movement arises temporally from
it and each part of this movement begins and ends, and that
which follows it is surely a new occurrence. Therefore,
according to you the temporal beings arise from the eternal. ‘
However, since the conditions of the eternal are uniform, the
emanation of temporal occurrences from Him will be
eternally uniform, just as the conditions of the movement are
uniform, since they proceed from an eternal being whose
conditions are uniform; and all the philosophical sects
acknowledge that from an eternal being a temporal being
can proceed, when this happens in a proportionate way and

369

eternally. Therefore let the different types of His knowledge
proceed from Him in this way.
And as to the other alternative, that His knowledge
should proceed from another, we answer: Why is that
impossible according to you? There are here only three
difficulties. The first is the changing, but we have already
shown that this is a consequence of your theory.
The second difficulty, that one thing should be the cause
of a change in another, is not impossible according to you;
for let the occurrence of the thing be the cause of the
occurrence of its being known, just as you say that the
appearance of a coloureds figure in front of the pupil of the
eye is the cause of the impression of the image of this figure
on the vitreous humour of the pupil through the medium of
the transparent air between the pupil and the figure seen ;b
and if therefore an inanimate object can be the cause of the
impression of the form on the pupil-and this is the meaning
of sight-why should it be impossible that the occurrence of
temporal beings should cause the First to acquire its
knowledge of them? And just as the potency of seeing is
disposed to perceive, and the appearance of the coloured
figure, when the obstacles are removed, is the cause of the
actualization of the perception, so let according to you the
essence of the First Principle be disposed to receive
knowledge and emerge from potency into act through the
existence of this temporal being. And if this implies a change
in the eternal, a changing eternal is not impossible according
to you. And if you protest that this is impossible in the
necessary existent, you have no other proof for establishing
the necessary existent than the necessity of a termination to
the series of causes and effects, as has been shown
previously, and we have proved that to end this series with
an eternal being which can change is not impossible.
The third difficulty in the problem is that if the Eternal
could change through another, this would be like subjection
and the control of another over Him.

370

But one may say: Why is this impossible according to
you? For it only means that the Eternal is the cause of the
occurrence of the temporal beings through intermediaries,
and that afterwards the occurrence of these temporal beings
becomes the cause of the knowledge which the Eternal has
of them. It is therefore as if Hemere Himself the cause of this
knowledge reaching Him, although it reaches Him through
intermediaries. And if you say that this is like subjection, let it
be so, for this conforms to your doctrine, since you say that
what proceeds from God proceeds in the way of necessity
and nature, and that He has no power not to do it, and this
too resembles a kind of bondage, and indicates that He is as
it were under necessity as to that which proceeds from Him.
And if it is said that this is no constraint, since His entelechy
consists in the fact that He makes everything proceed from
Himself, and that this is no subjection, then we answer that
His entelechy consists in knowing everything, and if it is true
to say that the knowledge which we receive in conjunction
with everything that happens is a perfection for us, , not an
imperfection or subjection, let the same be the case with
respect to God.
I say:
The summary of this first objection against the philosophers, which is a
refutation of their theories, not of the fact itself, is that ‘according to your
principles, philosophers, there exists an eternal being in which temporal
beings inhere, namely the sphere; how can you therefore deny that the
First Eternal is a subject in which temporal beings inhere? ‘ The Ash’arites
deny this only because of their theory that any subject in which temporal
beings inhere is itself a temporal being. And this objection is dialectical, for
there are temporal beings which do not inhere in the eternal, namely the
temporal beings which change the substance in which they inhere; and
there are temporal beings which inhere in the eternal, namely the temporal
beings which do not change the substance of their substratum, like the
local movement of the moving body and transparency and illumination;’
and further there is an eternal in which no movements and no changes
inhere at all, namely the incorporeal eternal; and there is an eternal in

371

which only some movements inhere, namely the eternal which is a body
like the heavenly bodies, and when this distinction, which the philosophers
require, is made, this objection becomes futile, for the discussion is only
concerned with the incorporeal eternal.
Having made this objection against the philosophers, he gives the
answer of the philosophers about this question, and the summary is that
they are only prevented from admitting temporal knowledge in the First,
because temporal knowledge must arise through itself or through another;
and in the former case there would proceed from the eternal a temporal
being, and according to the principles of the philosophers no temporal
being can proceed from the eternal. Then he argues against this assertion
that from the eternal no temporal being can proceed, by showing that they
assume that the sphere is eternal and that they assume that temporal
beings proceed from it.
But their justification of this is that the temporal cannot proceed from an
absolutely eternal being, but only from an eternal being which is eternal in
its substance, but temporal in its movements, namely the celestial body;
and therefore the celestial body is according to them like an intermediary
between the absolutely eternal and the absolutely temporal, for it is in one
way eternal, in another way temporal, and this intermediary is the celestial
circular movement according to the philosophers, and this movement is
according to them eternal in its species, temporal in its parts. And so far
as it is eternal, it proceeds from an eternal, and in so far as its parts are
temporal, there proceed from them infinite temporal beings. And the only
reason that prevented the philosophers from accepting an existence of
temporal beings in the First was that the First is incorporeal and temporal
beings only exist in body, for only in body, according to them, there is
receptivity, and that which is free from matter has no receptivity.
And Ghazali’s objection to the second part of the argument of the
philosophers, namely that the First Cause cannot be an effect, is that it is
possible that God’s knowledge should be like the knowledge of man, that
is that the things known should be the cause of His knowledge and their
occurrence the cause of the fact that He knows them, just as the objects
of sight are the cause of visual perception and the intelligible the cause of
intellectual apprehension; so that in this way God’s producing and creating

372

existents would be the cause of His apprehending them, and it would not
be His knowledge that would be the cause of His creating them.
But it is impossible, according to the philosophers, that God’s knowledge
should be analogous to ours, for our knowledge is the effect of the
existents, whereas God’s knowledge is their cause, and it is not true that
eternal knowledge is of the same form as temporal. He who believes this
makes God an eternal man’ and man a mortal God, and in short, it has
previously been shown that God’s knowledge stands in opposition to
man’s, for it is His knowledge which produces the existents, and it is not
the existents which produce His knowledge.

THE FOURTEENTH DISCUSSION
T’O REFUTE THEIR PROOF THAT HEAVEN IS AN ANIMAL
MOVING IN A CIRCLE IN OBEDIENCE TO GOD
Ghazali says:
The philosophers say also that heaven is an animal and
possesses a soul which has the same relation to the body of
heaven as our souls to our bodies, and just as our bodies
move by will to their ends through the moving power of the
soul, heaven acts. And the aim of the heavens in their
essential movement is to serve the Lord of the world in a
way we shall relate.
Their doctrine in this question is something that cannot
be refuted, and we shall not declare that it is impossible; for
God has the power of creating life in any body, and neither
the size of a body nor its circular shape is a hindrance to its
being animated, for the condition of the existence of life is
not limited to a particular shape, since animals,
notwithstanding their different shapes, all participate in the
reception of life. But we claim their incapacity to reach this
knowledge by rational proof, even if it is true, and only the
prophets through divine revelation or inspiration could
apprehend such a knowledge, but rational argument does
not prove it; indeed, we do not even assert that it is

373

impossible that such a thing should be known by proof, if
there is a proof and this proof is valid, but we must say that
what they have given as a proof has only the value of a
conjecture, but lacks all strictness.
Their device is that they say that heaven is moved, and
this is a premiss given by perception. And every body moved
has a mover, which is a premiss established by reason,
since if body were moved merely by being body, every body
would be in motion. ‘ Every mover receives its impulse either
from the moved itself, like the nature in the stone which falls
and the will in the movement of the animal conjoined with its
power to move, or from an external mover which moves
through constraint, as when a stone is flung upwards.
Everything that is moved by something existing in itself is
either unconscious of its movement (and we call this nature),
like the falling of the stone, or conscious (and we call this
voluntary or animated). This disjunction, that a movement is
either constrained or natural or voluntary, comprises all the
cases completely, so that if a movement does not fall under
two of these divisions it must be of the third type. Now the
movement of heaven cannot be constrained, because the
mover of a movement by constraint is either (i) another body
which is moved by constraint or by will, and in this case we
must finally no doubt arrive at a will as mover, and when in
the heavenly bodies a body moved through will is
established, then our aim is reached, for what use is it to
assume movements through constraint when finally we must
admit a will? or (2) God is the mover of its movement by
constraint without intermediary, and this is impossible; for if it
moves through Him in so far as it is a body and in so far as
He is its creator, then necessarily every body ought to be
moved. ;
This movement, therefore, must be distinguished by a
quality which marks this body off from all other bodies; and
this quality will be its proximate mover, either by will or by
nature. And it cannot be said that God moves it through His

374

will, because His will has the same relation to all bodies, and
why should this body be specially disposed so that God
should move it rather than another? One cannot suppose
this; for it is impossible, as has been shown in the question
about the temporal beginning of the world. When it is
therefore established that this body needs as a principle of
movement a special qualification, the first division, that of the
movement through constraint, is ruled out.
So there remains the possibility that this movement
occurs by nature. But this is not possible, for nature by itself
is not the cause of motion, because the meaning of ‘motion’
is the withdrawal from one place to another place; and a
body does not move from the place in which it is when that
place is its proper place. For this reason a bladder full of air
on the surface of the water does not move, but when it is
immersed it moves towards the surface of the water, and
then it has found its proper place and has come to rest and
its nature is stabilized; when, however, it is transferred to a
place which is not its proper one, it withdraws to its proper
place, just as it withdraws from mid-water to the border of
the air. Now it cannot be imagined that the circular
movement is natural, since it returns to every position and
place which it would be supposed to abandon, and it is not
by nature that a body seeks the place which it abandons,
and therefore the bladder of air does not seek the interior of
the water, nor the stone when it has come to rest on the
earth the air. Thus only the third division remains, that of
movement by will. ‘
I say:
What he lays down in this section, that every thing moved either is
moved by itself or through a body from outside and that it is this which is
called constraint, is self-evident. But that for every thing which is moved by
itself there is no mover but the movedz is not a self-evident proposition; it
is only a common notion, and the philosophers indeed try to prove that
every thing moved by itself has an interior mover different from it, through
the use of other premisses which are self-evident, and of premisses which

375

are the conclusions of other proofs, and this is something which may be
ascertained in their books. And likewise it is not self-evident that every
thing moved by an exterior mover must finally terminate in a thing moved
by itself: what is posed here as a set of self-evident premisses is, as a
matter of fact, a mixture of the two kinds of assertions; that is to say they
are partly conclusions and partly self-evident. Indeed, that what is moved
by itself and not by an external body is moved either by its substance and
nature or by an interior principle, and that it cannot be moved by
something which cannot be seen or touched and which is connected with
it from the outside (or in other words by an incorporeal entity) is selfevident. You can claim to have a proof for this, namely by saying that if
this were not so, upward movement would not be proper to fire rather than
to earth; but it is, indeed, evident in itselfAnd as to that which does not
move by its own substance and nature, this is evident in the things which
are sometimes in motion and sometimes at rest, since that which is by
nature cannot perform both of two opposites;’ for those things, however,
which are perceived to move continually, a proof is necessary.
Again, as to his assertion that what is moved by itself is moved through a
principle in itself, either a principle called ‘nature’ or a principle called ‘soul’
and ‘choice’, this is true, when previously it has been proved that nothing
exists which is moved by itself. As concerns his affirmation that the
principle called nature does not move by itself in space, except when it is
not its proper place (for then it moves to its proper place and stays there),
this is true. And his further remark that what moves in a circle has neither
an improper nor a proper place, so that it could move from the one to the
other either totally or partially, this is nearly self-evident and easy to
uphold, and he has in this section mentioned something of its explanation
and proof; and therefore, when we understand ‘nature’ in the sense he
has established here, circular movement cannot move by nature.
And as to his further remark that, when it does not move by nature, it
moves through soul or through a potency which resembles the soul, it
appears that the term ‘soul’ is predicated only equivocally of the soul in the
celestial bodies, ‘ and the learned for the most part apply the term ‘nature’
to every potency which performs a rational act, namely an act which
conforms to the order and arrangement which exist in rational things; but

376

they exclude heaven from this kind of potency, because according to them
it is heaven which provides this directing power for all existents?
However, the argument of the ancients he relates here has only
dialectical value, partly because much in it which is in reality a conclusion
of a proof is assumed to be self-evident and partly because things are
opposed in it which are not really in opposition. It is also dialectical
because its premisses are probable and common notions. This was
Avicenna’s method of proving that the heavenly body was an animated
body, but for this the ancients have a more efficient and clearer proof.
Ghazali says:
The objection is that we can assume besides your theory
three hypotheses which cannot be proved to be untrue. The
first is that we assume the movement of heaven to take
place through constraint by another body which desires its
movement and makes it turn eternally, and that this body
which sets it in motion is neither a sphere nor a
circumference nor a heaven; their assertion is therefore false
that the movement of heaven is voluntary and that heaven is
animated, and what we have said is possible, and it cannot
be denied except by a presumption of impossibility.
I say:
This is false, for the philosophers have proved that outside heaven there
is no other body, and it cannot be inside heaven; besides, were this body
to set it in motion, it would necessarily have to be moved itself, and we
should have an infinite regress.
Ghazali says:
The second hypothesis is to say: ‘The movement occurs
by constraint and its principle is the will of God, and indeed
we say that the downward movement of a body also occurs
by constraint, through God’s creating this movement in this
body; and the same can be said of all the other movements
of those bodies which are not living. ‘

377

There still remains the fact that the philosophers regard
this as impossible, because they ask why the will should
have distinguished just this body, whereas all other bodies
participate in bodiliness. But we have already explained that
it is of the nature of the eternal Will to differentiate one thing
from a similar one, and that the philosophers are forced to
admit such a quality for the determination of the direction of
the circular movement and for the determination of the place
of the poles and their points, and we shall not repeat this; but
our argument is, in short, that when they deny that a body
can be differentiated for the attachment of the will to it
without a distinctive attribute, this can be turned against
them in regard to this distinctive attribute, for we ask them:
‘Why is the body of heaven distinguished by this attribute,
which sets it apart from all other bodies, although all other
bodies are also bodies; and how can anything occur to it
which does not occur to other bodies? ‘ If this is caused by
another attribute, we must repeat the same question about
this other attribute, and in this way we should get an infinite
series, and they would be forced in the end to acknowledge
an arbitrary judgement of the will and the fact that in the
principles there is something that distinguishes one thing
from a similar one.
I say:
That a stone moves downwards through a quality which has been
created in it, and fire upwards, and that these qualities are opposed -this is
a self-evident fact, and to contradict it is pure folly. But it is still more
foolish to say that the eternal Will causes the movement in these things
everlastingly-without any act He deliberately choseIand that this
movement is not implanted in the nature of the thing, and that this is called
constraint; for if this were true, things would have no nature, no real
essence, no definition at all. For it is selfevident that the natures and
definitions of things only differ through the difference of their acts, just as it
is self-evident that every movement forced on a body comes from a body
outside it. And this argument has no sense whatever.

378

And as to his affirmation ‘that to assume that the act which proceeds
from an existent requires a special attribute makes it necessary to ask
about this attribute also why it characterizes this existent rather than any
other of its kind’, this is like saying that one ought to ask a man who
asserted that earth and fire, which participate in bodiliness, were
distinguished only by an attribute added to their bodiliness, why the
attribute of fire characterizes fire and the attribute of earth, earth, and not
rather the reverse. These, indeed, are the words of a man who does not
assume for the attributes themselves a particular subject, but on the
contrary believes that any attribute can be in any subject. ‘ He who speaks
like this denies also the definition and the differentiation of subjects, and
their characterization through special attributes, which is the first cause of
the specification of existents through particular attributes, and this
assumption belongs to the principles of the Ash’arites who tried thereby to
annul both religious and rational wisdom and, in short, reason itself.
Ghazali says:
The third hypothesis is to admit that heaven is
differentiated by an attribute and that this attribute is the
principle of the movement, in the way they believe this of the
downward movement, although in this case it is not known,
as it is known in the case of the stone.
And their assertion that a thing cannot by its nature
abandon the place sought by its nature rests on a confusion.
For according to them there is here no numerical difference;
on the contrary, the body is one and the circular movement
is one, and neither the body nor the movement has an actual
part; they are only divided by imagination, and this
movement is not there to seek its place or to abandon itindeed, it may well be that God creates a body in the
essence of which there is something which determines a
circular movement. The movement itself will then be
determined by this attribute, not, however, the aiming at the
place, for that would imply that arrival at the place would be
the aim of the movement. And if your assertion that every
movement takes place in seeking a place or abandoning it is
a necessary principle, it is as if. you made the seeking of the

379

place the goal of nature, not the movement itself which will in
this case only be a means. ‘ But we say it is not absurd that
the movement, not the seeking of a place, should be the
goal itself; and why should that be impossible? And it is clear
that, simply because they regard their hypothesis as the
most plausible, we are not obliged to deny any other
hypothesis absolutely; for to assert absolutely that heaven is
a living being is pure presumption, for which there is no
support.
I say:
The assertion of the philosophers that this movement is not a natural
potency resembling the natural movement in earth and fire is true. And
this is clear from their saying that this potency desires the place suitable to
the body which possesses existence through this potency, and that the
heavenly body, since all space is suitable to it, is not moved through such
a potency, and the learned do not call this potency heavy or light. b
Whether this potency depends on perception or not, and if so which kind
of perception, is shown by other arguments.
And the summary of this is to say: The inanity of the first hypothesis,
namely that the mover of heaven might be another body which is not
heaven, is self-evident or nearly so. For this body cannot set the heavenly
body in a circular movement without being moved by itself, as if one were
to say that a man or an angel turned the heavens from east to west. , And
if this were true, this animated body would have to be either outside the
world or inside it; and it is impossible that it should be outside the world,
since outside the world there is neither place nor emptiness, as has been
shown in many passages, and it would also be necessary that when this
body set it in motion it should rest upon a body supporting it, and this latter
body again upon another, and so ad infinitum. But that it should be inside
the world is also impossible, for then it ought to be perceived by the
senses, since any body inside the world can be perceived, and this body,
besides needing a body which would make it turn, would also need a body
to carry it or perhaps the body conveying it and the body setting it in
motion might be identical, and the conveying body would need a body to
convey it, and the number of animated bodies which set things in motion
would have to be equal to the number of heavenly bodies. And one would

380

also have to ask about these bodies whether they were composed of the
four elements, in which case they would be transitory, or whether they
might be simple; and, if they were simple, what their nature was. All this is
impossible, especially for one who has ascertained the natures of the
simple bodies and learned their number and the species of bodies
composed of them, and there is no sense in occupying ourselves with this
matter here, for it has been proved in another place that this movement
does not take place by constraint, since it is the principle of all
movements, and through its intermediary, not only movements, but lifer is
distributed to all beings.
As to the second hypothesis, that God moves the heavens without
having created a potency in them through which they move, this also is a
very reprehensible doctrine, far from man’s understanding. It would mean
that God touches and moves everything which is in this sublunary world,
and that the causes and effects which are perceived are all without
meaning, and that man might be man through another quality than the
quality God has created in him and that the same would be true for all
other things. But such a denial would amount to a denial of the
intelligibles, for the intellect perceives things only through their causes.
This theory resembles the theory of those ancient philosophers, the
Stoics, ? who say that God exists in everything; and we shall engage in a
discussion with them’ when we treat the question of the denial of causes
and effects.
The third objection which assumes a natural movement is to suppose
that the movement of heaven is caused by a natural potency in it and
through an essential attribute, not through a soul. It says that the
argument of the philosophers in denying this is false, in so far as they
build their proof on the following argument. The philosophers, that is, say
that if the movement of heaven occurred by nature, the place sought by its
natural movement would be identical with the place which it abandoned,
because every part of heaven moves to places from which it has moved,
since its movement is circular. The place, however, from which natural
local movement retires is different from the place it aims at, for the place
from which it moves is an accidental place, while the place to which it
moves is its natural place, in which it will come to rest. But, says Ghazali,
this is a false assumption of the philosophers, for although they assume

381

that the parts of heaven have many movements through many movers,
this cannot be correct according to their own principles, for they affirm that
the circular movement is unique, and that the body moved by it is unique,
and therefore heaven is not in search of a place through its circular
movement, and it is thus possible that in heaven there should be
something through which it aims at the movement itself.
But the justification of the philosophers is that they only say this to such
people as believe that the stars change their place through a natural
movement, similar to the change of place found in things moved by
nature. And the true assumption of the philosophers is that through the
circular movement the thing moved is not in search of a place, but only
seeks the circular movement itself, and that things which behave in this
way have of necessity as their mover a soul and not nature. Movement,
that is to say, has existence only in the intellect, since outside the soul
there exists only the thing moved and in it there is only a particular
movement without any lasting existence. ; But what is moved towards
movement in so far as it is movement must of necessity desire this
movement, and what desires movement must of necessity represent it.
And this is one of the arguments through which it is evident that the
heavenly bodies are provided with intellect and desire; and this is clear
also from various other arguments, one of which is that we find that
circular bodies move with two contrary movements at the same time,
towards the east and towards the west; and this cannot happen through
nature, for that which moves through nature moves in one movement
alone. ‘
And we have already spoken of what caused the philosophers to believe
that heaven possesses intellect, and their plainest proof is that, having
understood that the mover of heaven is free from matter, they concluded
that it can only move through being an object of thought and
representation, and therefore the thing moved must be capable of thought
and representation. And this is clear also from the fact that the movement
of the heavens is a condition of the existence and preservation of the
existents in the sublunary world, which cannot take place by accident. But
these things can only be explained here in an informative and persuasive
fashion.

382

THE FIFTEENTH DISCUSSION
TO REFUTE THE THEORY OF THE PHILOSOPHERS ABOUT
THE AIM WHICH MOVES HEAVEN
Ghazali says:
The philosophers have also affirmed that heaven is an
animal which obeys God by movement and by drawing near
Him; for every voluntary movement arises for the sake of an
end, since one cannot imagine that an act and a movement
can proceed from an animal which does not prefer the act to
its omission-indeed, if the act and its omission were to be
equipollent, no act could be imagined.
Further, approach to God does not mean seeking His
grace and guarding oneself from His wrath, since God is too
exalted for wrath and grace; similar words can only be
applied to Him metaphorically, and they are used in a
metaphorical way when one speaks of His will to punish or to
reward. ‘ Approach cannot mean the seeking of an approach
to Him in space, for this is impossible; the only meaning it
can have is of an approach in qualities, for God’s existence
is the most perfect and every other existence is imperfect in
relation to His, and in this imperfection there are degrees
and distinctions. The angels are nearest to Him in quality,
not in place; and this is the meaning of the term ‘the angels
in His proximity’ -namely, the intellectual substances which
neither change nor alter nor pass away, and which know
things as they really are. And the nearer man comes to the
angels in qualities the nearer he comes to God, and the end
of man’s nature lies in assimilation to the angels.
And when it is established that this is the meaning of
‘approach to God’, and that it refers to seeking approach to
Him in qualities, then this consists for man in knowledge of

383

the realities of the existents and in his remaining eternally in
the most perfect condition possible to him; for indeed
permanence in the utmost perfection is God.
As to the angels in His proximity, any perfection that is
possible for them is actual with them in their existence, since
there is no potency in them which could emerge into act, ‘
and therefore they are in the utmost perfection in regard to
everything but God. And by ‘heavenly angels’ is meant the
souls which move the heavens, and in them there is
potency, and their perfections are divided into what is actual,
like their circular shape and their appearance, which exists
always, and what is potential, namely their appearance in a
definite position and place; for any definite position is
possible to them, but they are not actually in all positions, for
to be in all of them at once is impossible. And since they
cannot be at all times in all particular positions at once, they
try to exhaust all these particular positions by being in them
specifically, so that they do not cease to aim at one position
and one place after another; and this potentiality is never
ending, nor do these movements ever end.
But their one aim is to assimilate themselves to the First
Principle, in the acquisition of the utmost perfection within
the bounds of possibility with respect to Him, and this is the
meaning of the obedience of the heavenly angels to God.
And their assimilation is acquired in two ways. First, in
completing every position specifically possible, and this is
aimed at by first intention; secondly, by the order proceeding
from their movement through the diversity of their
configuration in trine and quartile, in conjunction and
opposition, and through the diversity in the ascendant in
relation to the earth, so that the good which is in the
sublunary world can emanate from it, and all that happens
arise from it. And every soul is intellective and longs for the
perfection of its essence.
I say:

384

Everything he says here about the philosophers is a philosophical
doctrine, or its consequence, or can be regarded as a philosophical
doctrine, with one exception, when he says that heaven seeks by its
movement the particular positions which are infinite; however, what is
infinite cannot be sought, since it cannot be attained. Nobody has held this
doctrine but Avicenna, and Ghazali’s objection to it, which we will mention
later, is sufficient, and according to the philosophers it is the movement
itself in so far as it is movement which is aimed at by heavens For the
perfection of an animal, in so far as it is an animal, is movement; in this
sublunary world rest occurs to the transitory animal only by accident, that
is through the necessity of matter, for lassitude and fatigue touch the
animal only because it is in matter. b The whole life and perfection of
those animals which are not affected by tiredness and languor must of
necessity lie in their movement; and their assimilation to their Creator
consists in this, that by their movement they impart life to what exists in
this sublunary world.
This movement, however, does not occur according to the philosophers
in first intention for the sake of this sublunary world; that is, the heavenly
body is not in first intention created for the sake of this sublunary world.
For indeed this movement is the special act for the sake of which heaven
is created, and if this movement occurred in first intention for the sake of
the sublunary world, the body of the heavens would be created only for
the sake of this sublunary world, and it is impossible, according to the
philosophers, that the superior should be created for the sake of the
inferior; on the contrary, out of the superior there follows the existence of
the inferior, just as the perfection of the ruler in relation to his subject does
not lie in his being a ruler, but his being a ruler is only the consequence of
his perfection. In the same way the providence which prevails in this world
is like the care of the ruler for his subjects, who have no salvation and no
existence except in him, and especially in the ruler who for his most
perfect and noble existence does not need to be a ruler, let alone that he
should need his subjects’ existence. ‘
Ghazali says:
The objection to this is that in the premisses of this
argument there are controversial points. We shall not,
however, pay any attention to them, but shall revert at once

385

to the final intention the philosophers had in view and refute
it from two standpoints.
The first is to say: ‘To seek perfection through being in all
possible places may be foolishness rather than obedience; is
it not in some degree like a man, who has no occupation and
who has adequate means to satisfy his wishes and needs,
and who gets up and walks round in a country or in a house,
and declares that by doing so he approaches God and that
he perfects himself by arriving at all possible places, and
says that it is possible for him to be in these places, but not
possible for him to unite all the places numerically, and that
therefore he fulfils this task specifically and that in this there
is perfection and an approach to God? Indeed, it is his
foolishness which makes him do such a stupid thing, and it
may be said that to change positions and pass from place to
place is not a perfection which has any value or which may
be an object of desire.
And there is no difference between what they say and
this.
I say:
It might be thought that the silliness of such an argument either comes
from a very ignorant or from a very wicked man. Ghazali, however, has
neither of these dispositions. But sometimes unwise words come by way
of exception from a man who is not ignorant, and wicked talk from a man
who is not wicked, and it shows the imperfection of people that such
conceits can be addressed to them.
But if we concede to Avicenna that the sphere aims through its
movement at a change of positions, that this change of positions is what
conserves the beings of this sublunary world after giving them their
existence, and that this action is everlasting, can there then exist an
obedience more complete than this? For instance, if a man exerted
himself in guarding a city against the enemy, going round the city day and
night, should we not regard this as a most important act of approach to
God? But if we assumed that he moved round the town for the end which
Ghazali attributes to Avicenna, namely that he only sought to perfect

386

himself through trying to be in an infinite number of places, he would be
declared mad. ‘ And this is the meaning of the Divine Words: ‘Verily thou
canst not cleave the earth, and thou shalt not reach the mountains in
height. ‘2
And his assertion that, since heaven cannot complete the individual
numerical positions or join them, it has to complete them specifically, is a
faulty, incomprehensible expression, unless he means that its movement
has to last in its totality since it cannot be lasting in its parts. For there are
movements which are lasting neither in their parts nor in their totality,
namely the movements of the transitory; and there are movements which
are lasting in their totality, transitory in their parts, but notwithstanding this
such a movement is said to be one in ways which are distinguished in
many passages of the books of the philosophers. And his assertion that,
since heaven cannot complete them numerically, it completes them
specifically, is erroneous, since the movement of heaven is numerically
one, and one can only apply such an expression to the transitory
movements in the sublunary world; for these movements, since they
cannot be numerically one, are specifically one and lasting through the
movement which is numerically one.
Ghazali says:
The second is to say: What you assert of the aim can be
realized through the movement from west to east. Why,
then, is the first movement from east to west, and why are
not all the movements of the universe in the same direction?
And if there is an intention in their diversity, why are they not
different in an opposite way, so that the movement from the
east should become the movement from the west, and the
reverse? Everything you have mentioned of the occurrence
of events like trine and sextile and others through the
diversity of movements would happen just the same through
the reverse. Also, what you have mentioned of the
completion of the positions and places would happen just the
same if the movement were in the opposite direction. Why
then, since the reverse movement is possible for them, do
they not move sometimes in one direction, sometimes in
another, to complete all their possibilities, if it is in the

387

completion of all their possibilities that their perfection lies? It
is therefore shown that all these things are phantasms
without any substance; for the secrets of the heavenly
kingdom cannot be attained through such phantasms. God
alone can manifest them to His prophets and saints through
revelation, not through proof, and therefore the later
philosophers are unable to give the reason for the direction
of the movement of the heavenly bodies and why they have
chosen it.
I say:
This objection is sophistical, for the transference from one question to
another is an act of sophistry. Why does there follow, from their inability to
assign the reason of the diversity in the directions of the movements of
heaven, their inability to give the reason for the movement of heaven or to
say that there is no reason at all for this movement? But this whole
argument is extremely weak and feeble. However, how happy the
theologians are about this problem! They believe that they have refuted
the philosophers over it, since they are ignorant of the different arguments
by which the philosophers have arrived at their reasons and of the many
reasons that are required and must be assigned to every existent, since
the causes differ through the variety in the natures of the existents. For
simple existents have no other cause for what proceeds from them than
their own natures and their forms, , but in composite things there are
found, beside their forms, efficient causes which produce their
composition and the conjunction of their parts. The earth, for instance, has
no other cause for its downward movement than its attribute of earthiness,
and fire has no other cause for its upward movement than its own nature
and its form, and through this nature it is said to be the opposite of earth.
Likewise, for up and down there are no reasons why the one direction
should be higher and the other lower, but this is determined by their
nature. And since the differentiation of directions is determined through
the directions themselves, and the differentiation of the movements
through the differentiation of the directions, no other reason can be
assigned for the variation in the movements than the variation in the
directions of the things moved, and the variation in their natures depends
on the variation of their natures; i. e. some are nobler than others.

388

For instance, when a man sees that animals in walking place one leg in
front of their body before the other and not the reverse, and asks why the
animal does this, there is no sufficient answer except to say that an animal
in its movement must have one leg to put forward and one to support itself
on, and therefore an animal must have two sides, right and left, and the
right is the one which is always put forward first because of its special
potency and the left the one which always, or mostly, follows, because of
its special potency; and it cannot be the reverse, so that the left side
became the right, since the natures of the animal determine this, either
through a determination in a majority of cases, or through a constant
determination.
The same is the case with the heavenly bodies since, if a person asks
why heaven moves in a particular direction, the answer is that it is
because it has a right and a left, and especially because it is evident from
its nature that it is a living being, only it has the peculiarity that the right
side in a part of it is the left side in another part, z and that although it has
only this one organ of locomotion it moves in opposite directions like a left
foot which can also do the work of a right . And just as the answer to the
question whether the animal would not be more perfect if its right were its
left, and why the right has been differentiated to be the right, and the left to
be the left, is that the only reason for this is that the nature of the side
called right has been determined by its essence to be the right and not the
left, and that the left side has been determined by its essence to be the left
and not the right, and the noblest has been attributed to the noblest; in the
same way, when it is asked why the right side has been differentiated for
the movement of the highest sphere to be the right and the left side to be
the left (for the reverse was also possible as the case of the planets
shows), the only answer is that the noblest direction has been attributed to
the noblest body, as upward movement has been attributed to fire,
downward movement to earth. As to the fact that the other heavens move
in two contrary movements’ besides the diurnal, this happens because of
the necessity of this opposition of movements for the sublunary world,
namely the movement of generation and corruption, b and it is not of the
nature of the human intellect that it should apprehend more in such
discussions and in this place than what we have mentioned.

389

Having made this objection against the philosophers and asserted that
they have no answer to it, he mentions an answer which some of the
philosophers give.
Ghazali says:
Some philosophers say that since the perfection occurs
through movement, from whatever side it may be, and the
order of events on earth requires a diversity of movements
and a determination of directions, the motive concerning
them of the principle of movement lies in the approach to
God’ and the motive of the direction of movement in the
diffusion of good over the sublunary world. But we answer:
‘This is false for two reasons. The first is: if one may imagine
such a thing, let us declare that the nature of heaven
demands rest, and must avoid movement and change, for
this is in truth assimilation to God; for God is too exalted to
change, and movement is a change, although God chose
movement for the diffusion of His grace. For through it He is
useful to others and it does not weigh on Him nor tire Him-so
what is the objection to such a supposition?
‘The second is that events are based on the diversity of
the relations which result from the diversity in the directions
of the movements. Now let the first movement be a
movement from the west, and let the others move from the
east, then the same diversity will arise as is needed for the
diversity of the relations. Why then has one direction been
specially chosen, since these varieties require only the
principle of variety and in this sense one direction by itself is
not superior to its contrary? ‘
I say:
This theologian wants to indicate the cause of this from the point of view
of the final cause, not of the efficient, and none of the philosophers doubts
that there is here a final cause in second intention, which is necessary for
the existence of everything in the sublunary world. And although this
cause has not yet been ascertained in detail, nobody doubts that every
movement, every progression or regression of the stars, has an influence

390

on sublunary existence, so that, if these movements differed, the
sublunary world would become disorganized. But many of these causes
are either still completely unknown or become known after a long time and
a long experience, z as it is said that Aristotle asserted in his book On
Astrological Theorems. 3
As to the general questions, it is easier to discover them, and the
astrologers have indeed come to know many of them and in our own time
many of these things have been apprehended which ancient nations, like
the Chaldaeans and others, had already discovered.
And for this reason one cannot doubt that there is a wisdom in the
existents, since it has become clear through induction that everything
which appears in heaven is there through provident wisdom and through a
final cause. And if there are final causes in animals, it is still more
appropriate that there should be final causes in the heavenly bodies. ‘ For
in the case of man and animal about ten thousand signs of providence,
have become known in a period of a thousand years, and it seems not
impossible that in the infinite course of years much of the purpose of the
heavenly bodies will come to light. ‘ And we find that about these things
the ancients give some mysterious indications which the initiated, that is
the most highly reputed of the philosophers, know how to interpret.
As to the two reasons in Ghazali’s argument, the first, that assimilation to
God would determine heaven to be at rest, since God is too exalted for
movement, but that God has chosen movement because through it His
grace can be diffused over transitory things-this is a faulty argument, since
God is neither at rest nor moving, ‘ and the motion of body is nobler for it
than rest, and when an existent assimilates itself to God it assimilates
itself to Him by being in the noblest of its states, which is movement. As to
Ghazali’s second point, it has been answered previously.

THE SIXTEENTH DISCUSSION
TO REFUTE THEIR THEORY THAT THE SOULS OF THE
HEAVENS OBSERVE ALL THE PARTICULAR EVENTS OF
THIS WORLD, AND THAT THE MEANING OF ‘THE
INDELIBLE TABLET ‘IS THE SOULS OF THE HEAVENS, AND

391

THAT THE INSCRIPTION OF THE PARTICULAR EVENTS OF
THE WORLD ON THE TABLET RESEMBLES THE
DELINEATION OF THE FACTS REMEMBERED ON THE
FACULTY OF MEMORY CONTAINED IN THE BRAIN OF
MAN, AND THAT THIS IS NOT A BROAD HARD BODY’ ON
WHICH THINGS ARE WRITTEN AS THINGS ARE WRITTEN
ON A SLATE BY CHILDREN; SINCE THE QUANTITY OF
THIS WRITING DEMANDS A LARGE SURFACE OF
MATERIAL ON WHICH IT IS WRITTEN, AND IF THIS
WRITING IS INFINITE, THE MATERIAL ON WHICH IT IS
WRITTEN MUST BE INFINITE TOO, AND ONE CANNOT
IMAGINE AN INFINITE BODY, NOR INFINITE LINES ON A
BODY, NOR CAN AN UNLIMITED NUMBER OF THINGS BE
DETERMINED BY A FINITE NUMBER OF LINES
Ghazali says:
And they assert that the heavenly angels are the souls of
the heavens, and that the cherubim which are in the
proximity of God are the separate intellects, which are
substances subsisting by themselves which do not fill space
and do not employ bodies, and that from them the individual
forms emanate in the heavenly souls, and that those
separate intellects are superior to the heavenly angels,
because the former bestow and the latter acquire, and
bestowing is superior to acquiring, and therefore the highest
is symbolized by the pen’ and it is said that God knows
through the pen, because He is like the engraver who
bestows as does the pen and the recipient is compared to
the tablet. And this is their doctrine. And the discussion of
this question differs from the preceding one in so far as that
what we mentioned previously is not impossible, because its
conclusion was that heaven is an animal moving for a
purpose, and this is possible; but this doctrine amounts to
the assertion that the created can know the infinite
particulars, which is often regarded as impossible, and in

392

any case, has to be proved, since by itself it is a mere
presumption.
I say:
What he mentions here is, to my knowledge, not said by any
philosophers except Avicenna, namely that the heavenly bodies have
representations, not to speak of the fact that these representations should
be infinite, and Alexander of Aphrodisias explains in his book called The
Principles of the Universe that these bodies have no representations,
because representations exist only in animals because of their
conservation, and these bodies do not fear corruption, and with respect to
them representations would be valueless (and likewise sensations). ‘ If
they had representations they would also have sensations, since
sensations are the condition for representations and every being which
has representations necessarily has sensations, although the reverse is
not true . Therefore to interpret the indelible tablet in the way Ghazali says
that they do is not correct, and the only possible interpretation of the
separate intellects which move the different spheres by means of
subordination is that they are the angels in the proximity of God, s if one
wants to harmonize the conclusions of reason with the statements of the
Holy Law.
Ghazali says:
And they prove this by saying that the circular movement
is voluntary and that the will follows the thing willed, b and
that a universal thing willed can only be intended by a
universal will, and that from the universal will nothing
proceeds. For-so they say-every actual existent is
determined and individual, and the relation of the universal
will to the individual units is one and the same, and no
individual thing proceeds from it. Therefore an individual will
is needed for a definite movement. For every particular
movement from every definite point to another definite point
the sphere has a will, and this sphere no doubt has a
representation of this particular movement through a bodily
potency, since individuals only perceive through bodily
potencies and every will must of necessity represent the

393

thing willed, i. e. must know it, be it an individual or a
universal. And if the sphere has a representation and a
comprehension of the particular movements, it must of
necessity also comprehend what follows from them through
the diversity of their relations to the earth, because some of
the individuals of the sphere are rising, some setting, some
in the middle of the sky for some people and under the earth
for others.
And likewise it must know the consequences of the
diversity of those relations which always arise anew through
the movement, like trine and sextile, opposition and
conjunction, to other such heavenly occurrences; and all
earthly occurrences depend on heavenly occurrences either
directly, or through one intermediary, or through many; and
in short every event has a cause, occurring in a
concatenation which terminates in the eternal heavenly
movement, some parts of which are the causes of others.
Thus the causes and effects ascend in their
concatenation to the particular heavenly movements, and
the sphere representing the movements represents their
consequences
and
the
consequences
of
their
consequences, so as to reach the end of the series. And
therefore the sphere observes everything that occurs and
everything that will occur, and its occurrence is necessary
through its cause, and whenever the cause is realized, the
effect is realized. We only do not know the future events
because all their causes are not known to us; for if we knew
all the causes, we should know all the effects, for when we
know, for instance, that fire will come into contact with cotton
at a certain moment, we know that the cotton will burn, and
when we know that a man will eat, we know that his appetite
will be satisfied, and when we know that a man will walk over
a certain spot lightly covered where a treasure is buried, and
his feet will accidentally touch the treasure and he will
perceive it, ‘ we know that he will be rich because of this
treasure. Only as a matter of fact we do not know these

394

causes. Sometimes we know part of the causes, and then
we guess what may happen, and when we know the more
important or the greater f part of them, we have a sound
opinion about the occurrence of these events; but if we knew
all the causes, then we should know all the effects. However,
the heavenly occurrences are many and, besides, they are
mixed up with earthly events and it is not in human power to
observe the causality of all these. But the souls of the
heavens perceive it through their perception of the First
Cause and through the observation of their consequences
and the consequences of their consequences, to the end of
their concatenation. ‘
And therefore they say that the man who dreams sees in
his dream what will happen in the future through being in
contact with the indelible tablet and observing it. And when
he observes a thing it remains often in his memory as it
really was, but sometimes his imagination hastens to
symbolize it, for it is of the nature of this faculty to represent
things through things which, in some way or another, are
related to them, or to transfer things to their opposites; and
the thing that was perceived is then effaced in his memory,
but the image belonging to his imagination remains there.
Then it is necessary to interpret what his imagination
symbolizes, e. g. a man by means of a tree, a woman by
means of a shoe, a servant by means of some household
vessels, and a man who observes the paying of the legal
alms and the poor-tax by means of linseed oil, for the linseed
in the lamp is the cause of the illumination; it is on this
principle that the interpretation of dreams is based. ;
And they assert that contact with these souls takes place
in a state of languor, since then there is no obstacle; for
when we are awake we are occupied with what the senses
and our passions convey to us, and occupation with those
sensual things keeps us away from this contact, but when in
sleep some of these occupations are obliterated, the
disposition for this contact appears. And they assert that the

395

prophet Muhammad perceived the hidden universe in this
way; however, the spiritual faculty of a prophet has such
power that it cannot be overwhelmed by the external senses,
and therefore he sees in a waking condition what other
people perceive in their sleep. “ But his imagination also
pictures to him what he sees, and although sometimes the
thing he sees remains in his memory exactly as it was,
sometimes only its representation remains, and such an
inspiration is just as much in need of interpretation as such
dreams are. And if all events were not eternally inscribed on
the indelible tablet, the prophets would not know the hidden
world either awake or asleep; but the pen has indelibly fixed
what shall be till the day of resurrection, and the meaning of
this we have explained. And this we wanted to impart to
make their doctrine understood.
I say:
We have already said that we do not know of anyone who holds this
theory but Avicenna. And the proof which Ghazali relates rests on very
weak premisses, although it is persuasive and dialectical. For it is
assumed that every particular effect proceeds from an animate being
through the particular representation of this effect and of the particular
movements through which this effect is realized. To this major premiss a
minor premiss is joined, that heaven is an animate being from which
particular acts proceed. From these premisses it is concluded that the
particular effects, and the particular acts which proceed from heaven,
occur through a particular representation which is called imagination; and
that this is not only apparent from the different sciences, but also from
many animals which perform particular acts, like the bees and the spider. ‘
But the objection to these premisses is that no particular act proceeds
from beings endowed with intellect, except when this act is represented
through a universal representation, and then endless individual things
proceed from it-for instance the form of a cupboard proceeds from a
carpenter only through a universal representation which does not
distinguish one particular cupboard from another. And the same thing
happens when the works of animals proceed by nature’ from them. And
these representations are an intermediary between the universal and the

396

particular perceptions; that is, they are an intermediary between the
definition of a things and its particular representation . But if the heavenly
bodies have representations, then they must have representations that are
of the nature of the universal, not of the nature of the particular
representation which is acquired through the senses. And it is not possible
that our acts should proceed from particular representations, and therefore
the philosophers believe that the represented forms from which the
definite acts of animals proceed are like an intermediary between the
intelligibles and the individual forms represented, e. g. the form by reason
of which non-carnivorous birds flee from birds of prey, and the form by
reason of which bees build their cells. ? The only artisan who needs an
individual sensible image is the one who does not possess this universal
representation, which is necessary for the origination of the individual
things. e
It is this universal image which is the motive power for the universal will
which does not aim at a particular individual; and it is the individual will
which aims at a particular individual of one and the same species-this,
however, does not happen in the heavenly bodies.
And that a universal will should exist for a universal thing in so far as it is
universal is impossible, since the universal does not exist outside the soul
and has no transitory existence. And his primary division of will into a
universal and an individual will is, indeed, not correct; otherwise one must
say that the heavenly bodies move towards the definite limits of things
without the definite limit being accompanied by the representation of an
individual existent, in contrast to what happens with us. And his assertion
that no individual is realized through the universal will is false, if by
‘universal will’ is understood that which does not distinguish one individual
from another, but represents it universally, as is the case with a king who
arranges his armies for battle. ‘ If, however, there is understood by ‘will’ its
being attached to a universal entity itself, then it must be said that such an
attachment is not a will at all, and there does not exist such a will except in
the way we have explained .
And if it followed from the nature of the heavenly bodies that they think
sublunary things by way of imagination, they must do this through
universal imaginations which are the results of definition, not through
particular imaginations which are the results of senseimpressions. And it

397

seems quite clear that they cannot think sublunary things through
individual representations especially when it is said that what proceeds
from them proceeds from them by second intention. However, the doctrine
of the philosophers is that the heavenly bodies think themselves and think
the sublunary world, and whether they think the sublunary world as
something different from themselves is a problem that must be examined
in places specially reserved for this problem; and in general, if the
heavens know, the term ‘knowledge’ is attributed to our knowledge and
theirs in an equivocal way.
As to the theory he gives here about the cause of revelation and dreams,
this is the theory of Avicenna alone, and the opinions of the ancient
philosophers differ from his. For the existence of a knowledge of
individuals actually infinite, in so far as it is an individual knowledge, is
impossible, and I understand by individual knowledge that kind of
apprehension which is called representation. But there is no reason to
introduce here the question of dreams and revelation, for this leads to
much controversy, and such an act is an act of sophistry, not of dialectics.
My statement, however, that the imaginations of the heavenly bodies are
imaginations
intermediary
between
individual
and
universal
representations is a dialectical argument; for what results from the
principle of the philosophers is that the heavenly bodies have no
imagination whatever, for these imaginations, as we have said already,
whether they are universal or particular, aim only at conservation and
protection; and they are also a condition for our intellectual representation,
which therefore is transitory, but the intellectual representation of the
heavenly bodies, since it is not transitory, cannot be accompanied by
imagination, for otherwise it would depend in one way or another on
imagination. Therefore their apprehension is neither universal nor
individual, but these two kinds of knowledge, universal and individual, are
here unified, and because of this they can only be distinguished by their
matters. And in this way knowledge of the occult and of dreams and the
like can be acquired, and this will be explained perfectly in its proper
place.
Ghazali says:
And the answer is for us to ask: How will you refute those
who say that the prophet knows the occult through God, who

398

shows it to him by way of revelation, arid the same is the
case with the man who has visions in his sleep, which he
only sees because God or an angel inspires them in him?
We do riot need any of the things you have related, and you
have not the slightest proof for introducing the Holy Law by
mentioning the Tablet and the Pen; for true believers do not
in the least understand by ‘the Tablet’ and ‘the Pen’ what
you have mentioned, and the way to embrace the religious
dogmas is not to refuse to admit them in the way they must
be understood. ‘ And, although the possibility of what you
have said is granted, so long as you cannot indicate why you
deny the correctness of the sense in which these religious
terms are understood, the reality of what you say- cannot be
known or verified. Indeed, the only way to arrive at
knowledge of such things is through the Holy Law, not by
reason. The rational proofofwhat you have said is primarily
based on many premisses, the refutation of which need not
detain us, but we shall limit ourselves to the discussion of
three propositions.
The first proposition is that you say that the movement of
heaven is voluntary, and we have already settled this
problem and shown the futility of your claim.
If; however, to oblige you the grant you this voluntary
movement, the second proposition is your saying that
heaven needs a particular representation for each particular
movement, and this we do not concede. For according to
you there are no parts in the sphere, which is one single
thing and is only divided in imagination; nor are there
particular movements, for there is only one continuous
movement, and in order to complete all the places possible
for it, it is sufficient for the sphere to desire this one
movement, as you have indicated yourselves, and it will only
need universal representation and a universal will.
Let us give ail example of the universal and the particular
will to make the intention of the philosophers clear. When,
for instance, a man has a universal aim to make the

399

pilgrimage to Mecca, from this universal will no movement
follows, ‘ for the movement occurs as a particular movement,
in a particular direction, and of a particular extent, and the
man does not cease, in directing himself to Mecca, to form
new representations of the place one after another, where
he will go and the direction lie will take, and every particular
representation will be followed by a particular will to move
from the place which lie has reached by his movement. And
this is what they understood by a particular movement which
follows a particular will; and this is granted, for the directions,
when lie takes the road to Mecca, are many, and the
distance is undetermined, and lie must determine place after
place and direction after direction, passing from one
particular will to another.
But the heavenly movement has only one direction, for it
is a sphere and moves oil its axis in its own space, going
neither beyond its own space nor beyond the movement
willed. There is therefore only one direction and one impulse
and one aim, like the downward movement of the stone,
which tends towards the earth in the shortest way, and the
shortest way is the straight line, and the straight line is
determined, ‘ and therefore this movement needs no new
cause besides the universal nature which tends to the centre
of the earth while it changes its distance from the earth, and
arrives at and departs from one definite place after another.
In the same way the universal will suffices for this
movement, and nothing else is required, and the assumption
of this proposition is a mere presumption.
I say:
As to Ghazali’s words:
And the answer is for us to ask: How will you refute those who say . . . .
We do not need any of the things you have related. this answer is based
on tradition, not on reason, and there is no sense in introducing it in this
book. The philosophers examine everything there is in the Holy Law, and,
if it is found to agree with reason, we arrive at a more perfect knowledge;

400

if, however, reason does riot perceive its truth, it becomes known that
human reason cannot attain it, and that only the Holy Law perceives it. ,
Ghazali’s argument against the philosophers about the interpretation of
the Tablet and the Pen does not belong to the problem under discussion,
and there is therefore no sense in introducing it here. And this
interpretation of knowledge of the occult, according to Avicenna, leas no
sense.
The rational objection he adduces against Avicenna over this problem is
well founded. For there are for heaven no particular motions of particular
distances that would require imagination. The animate being which moves
through particular motions in particular spaces imagines, no doubt, these
spaces towards which it moves, and these movements, when it cannot
visually perceive these distances; the circular, however, as Ghazali says,
moves qua circular in one single movement, although from this one
movement there follow many different particular motions in the existents
below it. These spheres, however, are not concerned with those particular
movements, but their only intention is to conserve the species of which
these particulars are the particulars, not to conserve the existence of any
of these particulars in so far as they are particulars, for, if so, heaven
would surely possess imagination.
The question that still needs to be examined is whether the temporal
particulars which proceed from the heavenly movement are intended for
their own sake or only for the preservation of the species. ‘ This question
cannot be treated here, but it certainly seems that there exists a
providence as concerns individuals, as appears from true dreams and the
like, e. g. the prognostication of the future; however, in reality this is a
providence concerning the species.
Ghazali says:
The third proposition-and this indeed is a very bold
presumptionis that they say that, when heaven represents
particular movements, it also represents their results and
consequences. This is pure nonsense, like saying that, when
a man moves himself and knows his movement, he must
also know the consequences of his movement vertically and
horizontally (that is, the bodies which are above and under

401

him and at his side), and when he moves in the sun he must
know the places upon. which his shadow falls and does not
fall, and what happens through the coolness of his shadow
because of the interruption of the rays of the sun there, and
what happens through the compression of the particles of
earth under his foot, and what happens through the
separation of these particles, and what happens to the
humours inside him by their changing through his movement
into warmth, and which parts of him are changed into sweat,
and so on, till he knows all the occurrences inside and
outside his body of which the movement is the cause or the
condition or the disposition or the aptitude. And this is
nonsense which no intelligent man can believe, and by
which none but the ignorant can be beguiled. And this is
what this presumption amounts to.
Besides, we may ask: ‘Are these different particulars
which are known to the soul of the sphere the events which
are occurring at the present moment or are future events
also brought in relation to it? ‘ If you limit its knowledge to
present events you deny its perception of the occult and the
apprehension of future events through it, by the prophets in
the state of wakefulness, by others in their sleep; and then
the point of this proof disappears. For it is indeed
presumption to say that he who knows a thing knows its
consequences and results, so that if we knew all causes we
should also know all future events. For, indeed, the causes
of all events are to be found at present in the heavenly
movement, but it determines the effect either through one
intermediary or through many. And if this knowledge covers
the future also, it will not have an end, and how can the
distinction between particulars in the infinite future be known,
and how can many different particular objects of knowledge,
of an infinite number and without an end to their units, be
collected in a created soul, at one and the same moment
without any sequence? ‘ He whose intellect does not
perceive the impossibility of this may well despair of his
intellect.

402

And if they reverse this against us with respect to God’s
knowledge, God’s knowledge is not attached to its object in
its correspondence with the things known, in the way this
attachment exists in the case of things known by created
beings, but as soon as the soul of the sphere moves round
like the soul of man, ‘ it belongs to the same kind as the soul
of man, and also it participates with the soul of man in the
perception of individuals through an intermediary. , And
although no absolute knowledge can be had about this, it is
most probable that the soul of the sphere is of the same kind
as the human soul; and if this is not most probable, it is
possible, and the possibility destroys the claim to absolute
knowledge they put forward.
And if it is said, ‘It is also proper to the human soul in its
essence to perceive all things, but its preoccupation with the
consequences of passion, anger, greed, resentment, envy,
hunger, pain, and in short the accidents of the body and
what the sensations convey to the body, is so great that,
when the human soul is occupied with one of these things, it
neglects everything else; but the souls of the spheres are
free from these attributes, and nothing occupies them, and
neither care nor pain nor perception overwhelms them, and
therefore they know everything’-we answer: ‘How do you
know that nothing occupies them? Does not their service of
the First and their longing for Him submerge them and keep
them from the representation of particular things? And what
makes it impossible to suppose other impediments than
anger and passion? For these are sensual hindrances, and
how do you know that these hindrances are limited in the
way we experience them? For there are occupations for the
learned through the excellence of their interests and the
desire for leadership which children are unable to imagine,
and which they cannot believe to be occupations and
hindrances. ‘ And how do you know that analogous things
are impossible for the souls of the spheres? ‘

403

This is what we wanted to mention about those sciences
to which they give the name of metaphysical.
I say:
As to his regarding it as impossible that there should exist an immaterial
intellect which thinks things with their consequences, comprising them all,
neither the impossibility nor the necessity of its existence is a self-evident
fact, but the philosophers affirm that they have a proof of its existence. As
to the existence of infinite representations, this cannot be imagined in any
individual, but the philosophers affirm that they have a proof of the
existence of the infinite in the eternal knowledge and an answer to the
question how man can attain knowledge of particular events in the future
through the eternal knowledge, namely that of these things the soul thinks
only the universal which is in the intellect, not the particular which is
particularized in the soul. For individuals are known to the soul because it
is potentially all existents, and what is in potency emerges into act either
through the sensible things or through the nature of the intellect, which is
prior to sensible things in reality (I mean the intellect through which
sensible things become stable intelligibles, not, however, in such a way
that in this knowledge there are representations of an infinite number of
individuals). ‘ In short, the philosophers assert that these two kinds of
knowledge, the universal and the particular, are unified in the knowledge
which is separated from matter; and when this knowledge emanates in the
sublunary world it divides itself into universal and particular, although this
knowledge itself is neither the one nor the other. But the proof of this or its
contrary cannot be given here. And the discussion here about these
questions is like the assumption of geometrical propositions which are not
well enough known to meet with immediate assent and which are not
convincing at first sight. And Ghazali mixes one part with another, i. e. lie
starts objecting to one part of the theory through another, and this is the
worst method of discussion, because in this way assent neither by proof
nor by persuasion can be obtained.
Likewise the problems about the differences between the souls of the
heavenly bodies and the soul of man are all very obscure, and when such
things are discussed in a place not proper to them the discussion
becomes either irrelevant or dialectical and superficial; that is to say, the
conclusions are drawn from possible premisses, like their assertion that

404

the irascible and the concupiscible soul hinder the human soul in the
perception of what is proper to it. It appears from the nature of these and
similar sayings that they are possible and are in need of proofs, and that
they open the way to many conflicting possibilities.
And this closes what we decided to mention of the different assertions
which this book contains about theological problems; this is the most
important part of our book. We shall now speak on physical problems.

ABOUT THE NATURAL SCIENCES
Ghazali says:
The so-called natural sciences are many, and we shall
enumerate their parts, in order to make it known that the
Holy Law does not ask one to contest and refute them,
except in certain points we shall mention. ‘ They are divided
into principal classes and subdivisions The principal classes
are eight. In the first class are treated the divisibility,
movement, and change which affect body in so far as it is
body, and the relations and consequences of movement like
time, space, and void, ‘ and all this is contained in Aristotle’s
Physics. The second treats of the disposition of the parts of
the elements of the world, namely heaven and the four
elements which are within the sphere of the moon, and their
natures and the cause of the disposition of each of them in a
definite place; and this is contained in Aristotle’s De coelo.
The third treats of the conditions of generation and
corruption, of equivocal generation and of sexual generation,
of growth and decay, of transmutations, and how the species
are conserved, whereas the individuals perish through the
two heavenly movements (westwards and eastwards), and
this is contained in De generatione et corruptione. The fourth
treats of the conditions which are found in the four elements
through their mixture, by which there occur meteorological
phenomena like clouds and rain and thunder, lightning, the
halo round the moon, the rainbow, thunderbolts, winds, and

405

earthquakes. The fifth treats of mineralogy, the sixth of
botany. The seventh treats of zoology, which is contained in
the book Historia animalium. The eighth treats of the soul of
animals and the perceptive faculties, and says that the soul
of man does not die through the death of his body but that it
is a spiritual substance for which annihilation is impossible.
The subdivisions are seven: The first is medicine, whose
end is the knowledge of the principles of the human body
and its conditions of health and illness, their causes and
symptoms, so that illness may be expelled and health
preserved. The second, judicial astrology, which conjectures
from the aspects and configuration of the stars the
conditions which will be found in the world and in the State
and the consequences of dates of births and of years. The
third is physiognomy, which infers character from the
external appearance.‘ The fourth is dream-interpretation,
which infers what the soul has witnessed of the world of the
occult from dream images, for the imaginative faculty
imagines this symbolically. The fifth is the telesmatical art,
that is the combination of celestial virtues with some earthly
so as to constitute a power which can perform marvellous
acts in the earthly world . The sixth is the art of incantation,
which is the mixing of the virtues of earthly substances to
produce marvellous things from them. ‘ The seventh is
alchemy, whose aim is to change the properties of minerals
so that finally gold and silver are produced by a kind of
magic. , And there is no need to be opposed to any of these
sciences by reason of the Divine Law; we dissent from the
philosophers in all these sciences in regard to four points
only.
I say:
As to his enumeration of the eight kinds of physical science, this is exact
according to the doctrine of Aristotle. But his enumeration of the
subdivisions is not correct. Medicine is not one of the natural sciences, but
is a practical science which takes its principles from physical science; for
physical science is theoretical and medicine is practical, and when we

406

study a problem common to theoretical science and practical we can
regard it from two points of view; for instance, in our study of health and
illness the student of physics observes health and nature as kinds of
natural existents, whereas the physician studies them with the intention of
preserving the one, health, and keeping down the other, illness. Neither
does judicial astrology belong to physical science; it is only a
prognostication of future events, and is of the same type as augury and
vaticination. Physiognomy is also of the same kind, except that its object is
occult things in the present, not in the future. , The interpretation of
dreams too is a prognosticating science, and this type belongs neither to
the theoretical nor to the practical sciences, although it is reputed to have
a practical value. The telesmatical art is vain, for if we assume the
positions of the spheres to exert a power on artificial products, this power
will remain inside the product and not pass on to things outside it. As to
conjuring, this is the type of thing that produces wonder, but it is certainly
not a theoretical science. Whether alchemy really exists is very dubious; if
it exists, its artificial product cannot be identical with the product of nature;
art can at most become similar to nature but cannot attain nature itself in
reality. ‘ As to the question whether it can produce anything which
resembles the natural product generically, we do not possess sufficient
data to assert categorically its impossibility or possibility, but only
prolonged experiments over a lengthy period can procure the necessary
evidence. We shall treat the four points Ghazali mentions one after the
other.
Ghazali says:
The first point is their assertion that this connexion
observed between causes and effects is of logical necessity,
and that the existence of the cause without the effect or the
effect without the cause is not within the realm of the
contingent and possible. The second point is their assertion
that human souls are substances existing by themselves, ‘
not imprinted on the body, and that the meaning of death is
the end of their attachment to the body and the end of their
direction of the body; and that otherwise the soul would exist
at any time by itself. They affirm that this is known by
demonstrative proof. The third point is their assertion that

407

these souls cannot cease to exist, but that when they exist
they are eternal and their annihilation cannot be conceived. ‘
The fourth point is their assertion that these souls cannot
return to their bodies. ‘
As to the first point, it is necessary to contest it, for on its
negation depends the possibility of affirming the existence of
miracles which interrupt the usual course of nature, 4like the
changing of the rod into a serpents or the resurrection of the
dead or the cleavage of the moon, b and those who consider
the ordinary course of nature a logical necessity regard all
this as impossible. They interpret the resurrection of the
dead in the Qur’an by saying that the cessation of the death
of ignorance is to be understood by it, and the rod which
conceived the arch-deceiver, the serpent, by saying that it
means the clear divine proof in the hands of Moses to refute
the false doctrines of the heretics; and as to the cleavage of
the moon they often deny that it took place and assert. that it
does not rest on a sound tradition; and the philosophers
accept miracles that interrupt the usual course of nature only
in three cases.
First: in respect to the imaginative faculty they say that
when this faculty becomes predominant and strong, and the
senses and perceptions do not submerge it, it observes the
Indelible Tablet, and the forms of particular events which will
happen in the future become imprinted on it; and that this
happens to the prophets in a waking condition and to other
people in sleep, and that this is a peculiar quality of the
imaginative faculty in prophecy.
Secondly: in respect of a property of the rational
speculative faculty i. e. intellectual acuteness, that is rapidity
in passing from one known thing to another; for often when a
problem which has been proved is mentioned to a keensighted man he is at once aware of its proof, and when the
proof is mentioned to him he understands what is proved by
himself, and in general when the middle term occurs to him
he is at once aware of the conclusion, and when the two

408

terms of the conclusion are present in his mind the middle
term which connects the two terms of the conclusion occurs
to him. And in this matter people are different; there are
those who understand by themselves, those who understand
when the slightest hint is given to them, and those who,
being instructed, understand only after much trouble; and
while on the one hand it may be assumed that incapacity to
understand can reach such a degree that a man does not
understand anything at all and has, although instructed, no
disposition whatever to grasp the intelligibles, it may on the
other hand be assumed that his capacity and proficiency
may be so great as to arrive at a comprehension of all the
intelligibles or the majority of them in the shortest and
quickest time. And this difference exists quantitatively over
all or certain problems, and qualitatively so that there is an
excellence in quickness and easiness, and the
understanding of a holy and pure soul may reach through its
acuteness all intelligibles in the shortest time possible; and
this is the soul of a prophet, who possesses a miraculous
speculative faculty and so far as the intelligibles are
concerned is not in need of a teacher; but it is as if he
learned by himself, and he it is who is described by the
words ‘the oil ofwhich would well-nigh give light though no
fire were in contact with it, light upon light’. ‘
Thirdly: in respect to a practical psychological faculty
which can reach such a pitch as to influence and subject the
things of nature: for instance, when our soul imagines
something the limbs and the potencies in these limbs obey it
and move in the required direction which we imagine, so that
when a man imagines something sweet of taste the corners
of his mouth begin to water, and the potency which brings
forth the saliva from the places where it is springs- into
action, and when coitus is imagined the copulative potency
springs into action, and the penis extends;z indeed, when a
man walks on a plank between two walls over an empty
space, his imagination is stirred by the possibility of falling
and his body is impressed by this imagination and in fact he

409

falls, but when this plank is on the earth, he walks over it
without falling. ‘ This happens because the body and the
bodily faculties are created to be subservient and
subordinate to the soul, and there is a difference here
according to the purity and the power o: the souls. And it is
not impossible that the power of the soul should reach such
a degree that also the natural power of things outside a
man’s body obeys it, since the soul of man is not impressed
on his body although there is created in man’s nature a
certain impulse and desire to govern his body. And if it is
possible that the limbs of his body should obey him, it is not
impossible that other things besides his body should obey
him and that his soul should control the blasts of the wind or
the downpour of rain, or the striking of a thunderbolt or the
trembling of the earth, which causes a land to be swallowed
up with its inhabitants. s The same is the case with his
influence in producing cold or warmth or a movement in the
air; this warmth or cold comes about through his soul, b all
these things occur without any apparent physical cause, and
such a thing will be a miracle brought about by a prophet.
But this only happens in matters disposed to receive it, and
cannot attain such a scale that wood could be changed into
an animal or that the moon, which cannot undergo cleavage,
could be cloven. This is their theory of miracles, and we do
not deny anything they have mentioned, and that such things
happen to prophets; we are only opposed to their limiting
themselves to this, and to their denial of the possibility that a
stick might change into a serpent, and of the resurrection of
the dead and other things. We must occupy ourselves with
this question in order to be able to assert the existence of
miracles and for still another reason, namely to give effective
support to the doctrine on which the Muslims base their
belief that God can do anything. And let us now fulfil our
intention.
I say:

410

The ancient philosophers did not discuss the problem of miracles, since
according to them such things must not be examined and questioned; for
they are the principles of the religions, and the man who inquires into them
and doubts them merits punishment, like the man who examines the other
general religious principles, such as whether God exists or blessedness or
the virtues. For the existence of all these cannot be doubted, and the
mode of their existence is something divine which human apprehension
cannot attain. The reason for this is that these are the principles of the
acts through which man becomes virtuous, and that one can only attain
knowledge after the attainment of virtue. ‘ One must not investigate the
principles which cause virtue before the attainment of virtue, and since the
theoretical sciences can only be perfected through assumptions and
axioms which the learner accepts in the first place, this must be still more
the case with the practical sciences.
As to what Ghazali relates of the causes of this as they are according to
the philosophers, I do not know anyone who asserts this but Avicenna.
And if such facts are verified and it is possible that a body could be
changed qualitatively through something which is neither a body nor a
bodily potency, ‘ then the reasons he mentions for this are possible; but
not everything which in its nature is possible’ can be done by man, for
what is possible to man is well known. Most things which are possible in
themselves are impossible for man, and what is true of the prophet, that
he can interrupt the ordinary course of nature, is impossible for man, but
possible in itself; and because of this one need not assume that things
logically impossible are possible for the prophets, and if you observe those
miracles whose existence is confirmed, you will find that they are of this
kind. The clearest of miracles is the Venerable Book of Allah, s the
existence of which is not an interruption of the course of nature assumed
by tradition, like the changing of a rod into a serpent, but its miraculous
nature is established by way of perception and consideration for every
man who has been or who will be till the day of resurrection. And so this
miracle is far superior to all others.
Let this suffice for the man who is not satisfied with passing this problem
over in silence, and may he understand that the argument on which the
learned base their belief in the prophets is another, to which Ghazali
himself has drawn attention in another place , b namely the act which

411

proceeds from that quality through which the prophet is called prophet,
that is the act of making known the mysterious and establishing religious
laws which are in accordance with the truth and which bring about acts
that will determine the happiness of the totality of mankind. I do not know
anyone but Avicenna who has held the theory about dreams Ghazali
mentions. The ancient philosophers assert about revelation and dreams
only that they proceed from God through the intermediation of a spiritual
incorporeal being which is according to them the bestower of the human
intellect, and which is called by the best authors the active intellect and in
the Holy Law angel. We shall now return to Ghazali’s four points.

THE FIRST DISCUSSION
Ghazali says:
According to us the connexion between what is usually
believed to be a cause and what is believed to be an effect is
not a necessary connexion; each of two things has its own
individuality and is not the other, ‘ and neither the affirmation
nor the negation, neither the existence nor the non-existence
of the one is implied in the affirmation, negation, existence,
and non-existence of the other-e. g. the satisfaction of thirst
does not imply drinking, nor satiety eating, nor burning
contact with fire, nor light sunrise, nor decapitation death,
nor recovery the drinking of medicine, nor evacuation the
taking of a purgative, and so on for all the empirical
connexions existing in medicine, astronomy, the sciences,
and the crafts. For the connexion in these things is based on
a prior power of God to create them in a successive order,
though not because this connexion is necessary in itself and
cannot be disjoined-on the contrary, it is in God’s power to
create satiety without eating, and death without decapitation,
and to let life persist notwithstanding the decapitation, and
so on with respect to all connexions. The philosophers,
however, deny this possibility and claim that that is
impossible. To investigate all these innumerable connexions
would take us too long, and so we shall choose one single
example, namely the burning of cotton through contact with

412

fire; for we regard it as possible that the contact might occur
without the burning taking place, and also that the cotton
might be changed into ashes without any contact with fire,
although the philosophers deny this possibility. The
discussion of this matter has three points.
The first is that our opponent claims that the agent of the
burning is the fire exclusively;’ this is a natural, not a
voluntary agent, and cannot abstain from what is in its nature
when it is brought into contact with a receptive substratum.
This we deny, saying: The agent of the burning is God,
through His creating the black in the cotton and the
disconnexion of its parts, and it is God who made the cotton
burn and made it ashes either through the intermediation of
angels or without intermediation. For fire is a dead body
which has no action, and what is the proof that it is the
agent? Indeed, the philosophers have no other proof than
the observation of the occurrence of the burning, when there
is contact with fire, but observation proves only a
simultaneity, ‘ not a causation, and, in reality, there is no
other cause but God . For there is unanimity of opinion about
the fact that the union of the spirit with the perceptive and
moving faculties in the sperm of animals does not originate
in the natures contained in warmth, cold, moistness, and
dryness, and that the father is neither the agent of the
embryo through introducing the sperm into the uterus, nor
the agent of its life, its sight and hearing, and all its other
faculties. And although it is well known that the same
faculties exist in the father, still nobody thinks that these
faculties exist through him; no, their existence is produced
by the First either directly or through the intermediation of
the angels who are in charge of these events. ‘ Of this fact
the philosophers who believe in a creator are quite
convinced, but it is precisely with them that we are in
dispute.
It has been shown that coexistence does not indicate
causation. We shall make this still more clear through an

413

example. Suppose that a man blind from birth, whose eyes
are veiled by a membrane and who has never heard people
talk of the difference between night and day, has the
membrane removed from his eyes by day and sees visible
things, he will surely think then that the actual perception in
his eyes of the forms of visible things is caused by the
opening of his eyelids, and that as long as his sight is sound
and in function, the hindrance removed and the object in
front of him visible, he will, without doubt, be able to see, and
he will never think that he will not see, till, at the moment
when the sun sets and the air darkens, he will understand
that it was the light of the sun which impressed the visible
forms on his sight. And for what other reason do our
opponents believe that in the principles of existences there
are causes and influences from which the events which
coincide with them proceed, than that they are constant, do
not disappear, and are not moving bodies which vanish from
sight? For if they disappeared or vanished we should
observe the disjunction and understand then that behind our
perceptions there exists a cause. And out of this there is no
issue, according to the very conclusions of the philosophers
themselves.
The true philosophers’ were therefore unanimously of the
opinion that these accidents and events which occur when
there is a contact of bodies, or in general a change in their
positions, proceed from the bestower of forms who is an
angel or a plurality of angels, so that they even said that the
impression of the visible forms on the eye occurs through the
bestower of forms, and that the rising of the sun, the
soundness of the pupil, and the existence of the visible
object are only the preparations and dispositions which
enable the substratum to receive the forms; and this theory
they applied to all events. And this refutes the claim of those
who profess that fire is the agent of burning, bread the agent
of satiety, medicine the agent of health, and so on.
I say:

414

To deny the existence of efficient causes which are observed in sensible
things is sophistry, and he who defends this doctrine either denies with his
tongue what is present in his mind or is carried away by a sophistical
doubt which occurs to him concerning this question. For he who denies
this can no longer acknowledge that every act must have an agent. The
question whether these causes by themselves are sufficient to perform the
acts which proceed from them, or need an external cause for the
perfection of their act, whether separate or not, is not self-evident and
requires much investigation and research. And if the theologians had
doubts about the efficient causes which are perceived to cause each
other, because there are also effects whose cause is not perceived, this is
illogical. Those things whose causes are not perceived are still unknown
and must be investigated, precisely because their causes are not
perceived; and since everything whose causes are not perceived is still
unknown by nature and must be investigated, it follows necessarily that
what is not unknown has causes which are perceived. ‘ The man who
reasons like the theologians does not distinguish between what is selfevident and what is unknown, z and everything Ghazali says in this
passage is sophistical.
And further, what do the theologians say about the essential causes, the
understanding of which alone can make a thing understood? For it is selfevident that things have essences and attributes which determine the
special functions of each thing and through which the essences and
names of things are differentiated. If a thing had not its specific nature, it
would not have a special name nor a definition, and all things would be
one-indeed, not even one; for it might be asked whether this one has one
special act or one special passivity or not, and if it had a special act, then
there would indeed exist special acts proceeding from special natures, but
if it had no single special act, then the one would not be one. But if the
nature of oneness is denied, the nature of being is denied, and the
consequence of the denial of being is nothingness.
Further, are the acts which proceed from all things absolutely necessary
for those in whose nature it lies to perform them, or are they only
performed in most cases or in half the cases? I This is a question which
must be investigated, since one single action-and passivity between two
existent things occurs only through one relation out of an infinite number,

415

and it happens often that one relation hinders another. Therefore it is not
absolutely certain that fire acts when it is brought near a sensitive body,
for surely it is not improbable that there should be something which stands
in such a relation to the sensitive thing as to hinder the action of the fire,
as is asserted of talc and other things. But one need not therefore deny
fire its burning power so long as fire keeps its name and definition.
Further, it is self-evident that all events have four causes, agent, form,
matter, and end, and that they are necessary for the existence of the
effects-especially those causes which form a part of the effect, namely
that which is called by the philosophers matter, by the theologians
condition and substratum, and that which is called by the philosophers
form, by the theologians psychological quality . The theologians
acknowledge that there exist conditions which are necessary to the
conditioned, as when they say that life is a condition of knowledge; and
they equally recognize that things have realities and definitions, and that
these are necessary for the existence of the existent, and therefore they
here judge the visible and the invisible according to one and the same
scheme. ‘ And they adopt the same attitude towards the consequences of
a thing’s essence, namely what they call ‘sign’, as for instance when they
say that the harmony in the world indicates that its agent possesses mind
and that the existence of a world having a design indicates that its agent
knows this world? Now intelligence is nothing but the perception of things
with their causes, and in this it distinguishes itself from all the other
faculties of apprehension, and he who denies causes must deny the
intellect. Logic implies the existence of causes and effects, and knowledge
of these effects can only be rendered perfect through knowledge of their
causes. Denial of cause implies the denial of knowledge, and denial of
knowledge implies that nothing in this world can be really known, and that
what is supposed to be known is nothing but opinion, that neither proof nor
definition exist, and that the essential attributes which compose definitions
are void. The man who denies the necessity of any item of knowledge
must admit that even this, his own affirmation, is not necessary
knowledge.
As to those who admit that there exists, besides necessary knowledge,
knowledge which is not necessary, about which the soul forms a
judgement on slight evidence and imagines it to be necessary, whereas it

416

is not necessary, the philosophers do not deny this. And if they call such a
fact ‘habit’ this may be granted, but otherwise I do not know what they
understand by the term ‘habit’-whether they mean that it is the habit of the
agent, the habit of the existing things, or our habit to form a judgement
about such things? ‘ It is, however, impossible that God should have a
habit, for a habit is a custom which the agent acquires and from which a
frequent repetition of his act follows, whereas God says in the Holy Book:
‘Thou shalt not find any alteration in the course of God, and they shall not
find any change in the course of God. ‘If they mean a habit in existing
things, habit can only exist in the animated;; if it exists in something else, it
is really a nature, and it is not possible that a thing should have a nature
which determined it either necessarily or in most cases. If they mean our
habit of forming judgements about things, such a habit is nothing but an
act of the soul which is determined by its nature and through which the
intellect becomes intellect. The philosophers do not deny such a habit; but
‘habit’ is an ambiguous term, and if it is analysed it means only a
hypothetical act; as when we say ‘So-and-so has the habit of acting in
such-and-such a way’, meaning that he will act in that way most of the
time. If this were true, everything would be the case only by supposition,
and there would be no wisdom in the world from which it might be inferred
that its agent was wise.
And, as we said, we need not doubt that some of these existents cause
each other and act through each other, and that in themselves they do not
suffice for their act, but that they are in need of an external agent whose
act is a condition of their act, and not only of their act but even of their
existence. However, about the essence of this agent or of these agents
the philosophers differ in one way, although in another they agree. They
all agree in this, that the First Agent is immaterial and that its act is the
condition of the existence and acts of existents, and that the act of their
agent reaches these existents through the intermediation of an effect of
this agent, which is different from these existents and which, according to
some of them, is exclusively the heavenly sphere, whereas others assume
besides this sphere another immaterial existent which they call the
bestower of forms.
But this is not the place to investigate these theories, and the highest
part of their inquiry is this; and if you are one of those who desire these

417

truths, then follow the right road which leads to them. The reason why the
philosophers differed about the origin of the essential forms and especially
of the forms of the soul is that they could not relate them to the warm,
cold, moist, and dry, which are the causes of all natural things which come
into being and pass away, ‘ whereas the materialists related everything
which does not seem to have an apparent cause to the warm, cold, moist,
and dry, affirming that these things originated through certain mixtures of
those elements, just as colours and other accidents come into existence.
And the philosophers tried to refute them.
Ghazali says:
Our second point is concerned with those who
acknowledge that these events proceed from their principles,
but say that the disposition to receive the forms arises from
their observed and apparent causes. However, according to
them also the events proceed from these principles not by
deliberation and will, but by necessity and nature, as light
does from the sun, and the substrata differ for their reception
only through the differentiations in their disposition. For
instance, a polished body receives the rays of the sun,
reflects them and illuminates another spot with them,
whereas an opaque body does not receive them; the air
does not hinder the penetration of the sun’s light, but a stone
does; certain things become soft through the sun, others
hard;’ certain things, like the garments which the fuller
bleaches, become white through the sun, others like the
fuller’s face become black: the principle is, however, one and
the same, although the effects differ through the differences
of disposition in the substratum. Thus there is no hindrance
or incapacity in the emanation of what emanates from the
principles of existence; the insufficiency lies only in the
receiving substrata. If this is true, and we assume a fire that
has the quality it has, and two similar pieces of cotton in the
same contact with it, how can it be imagined that only one
and not the other will be burned, as there is here no
voluntary act? And from this point of view they deny that
Abraham could fall into the fire and not be burned

418

notwithstanding the fact that the fire remained fire, and they
affirm that this could only be possible through abstracting the
warmth from the fire (through which it would, however, cease
to be fire) or through changing the essence of Abraham and
making him a stone or something on which fire has no
influence, and neither the one nor the other is possible.
I say:
Those philosophers who say that these perceptible existents do not act
on each other, and that their agent is exclusively an external principle,
cannot affirm that their apparent action on each other is totally illusory, but
would say that this action is limited to preparing the disposition to accept
the forms from the external principle. However, I do not know any
philosopher who affirms this absolutely; they assert this only of the
essential forms, not of the forms of accidents. They all agree that warmth
causes warmth, and that all the four qualities act likewise, but in such a
way that through it the elemental fire’ and the warmth which proceeds
from the heavenly bodies are conserved. The theory which Ghazali
ascribes to the philosophers, that the separate principles act by nature,
not by choice, is not held by any important philosophers; on the contrary,
the philosophers affirm that that which possesses knowledge must act by
choice. However, according to the philosophers, in view of the excellence
which exists in the world, there can proceed out of two contraries only the
better, and their choice is not made to perfect their essences-since there
is no imperfection in their essence-but in order that through it those
existents which have an imperfection in their nature may be perfected.
As to the objection which Ghazali ascribes to the philosophers over the
miracle of Abraham, such things are only asserted by heretical Muslims.
The learned among the philosophers do not permit discussion or
disputation about the principles of religion, and he who does such a thing
needs, according to them, a severe lesson. For whereas every science
has its principles, and every student of this science must concede its
principles and may not interfere with them by denying them, this is still
more obligatory in the practical science of religion, for to walk on the path
of the religious virtues is necessary for man’s existence, according to
them, not in so far as he is a man, but in so far as he has knowledge; and
therefore it is necessary for every man to concede the principles of religion

419

and invest with authority the man who lays them down. The denial and
discussion of these principles denies human existence, and therefore
heretics must be killed. Of religious principles it must be said that they are
divine things which surpass human understanding, but must be
acknowledged although their causes are unknown.
Therefore we do not find that any of the ancient philosophers discusses
miracles, although they were known and had appeared all over the world,
for they are the principles on which religion is based and religion is the
principle of the virtues; nor did they discuss any of the things which are
said to happen after death. For if a man grows up according to the
religious virtues he becomes absolutely virtuous, and if time and felicity
are granted to him, so that he becomes one of the deeply learned thinkers
and it happens that he can explain one of the principles of religion, it is
enjoined upon him that he should not divulge this explanation and should
say ‘all these are the terms of religion and the wise’, conforming himself to
the Divine Words, ‘but those who are deeply versed in knowledge say: we
believe in it, it is all from our Lord’. ‘
Ghazali says:
There are two answers to this theory. The first is to say:
‘We do not accept the assertion that the principles do not act
in a voluntary way and that God does not act through His
will, and we have already refuted their claim in treating of the
question of the temporal creation of the world. If it is
established that the Agent creates the burning through His
will when the piece of cotton is brought in contact with the
fire, He can equally well omit to create it when the contact
takes place.
I say:
Ghazali, to confuse his opponent, here regards as established what his
opponent refuses to admit, and says that his opponent has no proof for his
refusal. He says that the First Agent causes the burning without an
intermediary He might have created in order that the burning might take
place through the fire. But such a claim abolishes any perception of the
existence of causes and effects. No philosopher doubts that, for instance,
the fire is the cause of the burning which occurs in the cotton through the

420

fire-not, however, absolutely, but by an external principle which is the
condition of the existence of fire, not to speak of its burning. The
philosophers differ only about the quiddity of this principle-whether it is a
separate principle, or an intermediary between the event and the separate
principle besides the fire.
Ghazali says, on behalf of the philosophers:
But it may be said that such a conception involves
reprehensible impossibilities. For if you deny the necessary
dependence of effects or their causes and relate them to the
will of their Creator, and do not allow even in the will a
particular definite pattern, but regard it as possible that it
may vary and change in type, then it may happen to any of
us that there should be in his presence beasts of prey and
flaming fires and immovable mountains and enemies
equipped with arms, without his seeing them, because God
had not created in him the faculty of seeing them. And a man
who had left a book at home might find it on his return
changed into a youth, handsome, intelligent, and efficient, or
into an animal; or if he left a youth at home, he might find
him turned into a dog; or he might leave ashes and find them
changed into musk; or a stone changed into gold, and gold
changed into stone. And if he were asked about any of these
things, he would answer: ‘I do not know what there is at
present in my house; I only know that I left a book in my
house, but perhaps by now it is a horse which has soiled the
library with its urine and excrement, and I left in my house a
piece of bread which has perhaps changed into an appletree. ‘ For God is able to do’ all these things, and it does not
belong to the necessity of a horse that it should be created
from a sperm, nor is it of the necessity of a tree that it should
be created from a seed; no, there is no necessity that it
should be created out of anything at all. And perhaps God
creates things which never existed before; indeed, when one
sees a man one never saw before and is asked whether this
man has been generated, one should answer hesitantly: ‘It
may be that he was one of the fruits in the market which has

421

been changed into a man, and that this is that man. ‘ For
God can do any possible thing, and this is possible, and one
cannot avoid being perplexed by it; and to this kind of fancy
one may yield ad infinitum, but these examples will do. ‘
But the answer is to say: If it were true that the existence
of the possible implied that there could not be created in
man any knowledge of the non-occurrence of a possible, all
these consequences would follow necessarily. But we are
not at a loss over any of the examples which you have
brought forward. For God has created in us the knowledge
that He will not do all these possible things, and we only
profess that these things are not necessary, but that they are
possible and may or may not happen, and protracted habit
time after time fixes their occurrence in our minds according
to the past habit in a fixed impression. Yes, it is possible that
a prophet should know in such ways as the philosophers
have explained that a certain man will not come tomorrow
from a journey, and although his coming is possible the
prophet knows that this possibility will not be realized. And
often you may observe even ordinary men of whom you
know that they are not aware of anything occult, and can
know the intelligible only through instruction, and still it
cannot be denied that nevertheless their soul and
conjecturing power’ can acquire sufficient strength to
apprehend what the prophets apprehend in so far as they
know the possibility of an event, but know that it will not
happen. And if God interrupts the habitual course by causing
this unusual event to happen this knowledge of the habitual
is at the time of the interruption removed from their hearts
and He no longer creates it. There is, therefore, no objection
to admitting that a thing may be possible for God, but that He
had the previous knowledge that although He might have
done so He would not carry it out during a certain time, and
that He has created in us the knowledge that He would not
do it during that time.
I say:

422

When the theologians admit that the opposite of everything existing is
equally possible, and that it is such in regard to the Agent, and that only
one of these opposites can be differentiated through the will of the Agent,
there is no fixed standard for His will either constantly or for most cases,
according to which things must happen. For this reason the theologians
are open to all the scandalous implications with which they are charged.
For true knowledge is the knowledge of a thing as it is in reality. ‘ And if in
reality there only existed, in regard both to the substratum and to the
Agent, the possibility of the two opposites, ; there would no longer, even
for the twinkling of an eye, be any permanent knowledge of anything,
since we suppose such an agent to rule existents like a tyrannical prince
who has the highest power, for whom nobody in his dominion can
deputize, of whom no standard or custom is known to which reference
might be made. Indeed, the acts of such a prince will undoubtedly be
unknown by nature, and if an act of his comes into existence the
continuance of its existence at any moment will be unknown by nature.
Ghazali’s defence against these difficulties that God created in us the
knowledge that these possibilities would be realized only at special times,
such as at the time of the miracle, is not a true one. For the knowledge
created in us is always in conformity with the nature of the real thing, since
the definition of truth is that a thing is believed to be such as it is in reality.
b If therefore there is knowledge of these possibles, there must be in the
real possibles a condition to which our knowledge refers, either through
these possibles themselves or through the agent, or for both reasons-a
condition which the theologians call habit. ? And since the existence of
this condition which is called habit is impossible in the First Agent, this
condition can only be found in the existents, and this, as we said, is what
the philosophers call nature.
The same congruity exists between God’s knowledge and the existents,
although God’s knowledge of existents is their cause, and these existents
are the consequence of God’s knowledge, and therefore reality conforms
to God’s knowledge . If, for instance, knowledge of Zaid’s coming reaches
the prophet through a communication of God, the reason why the actual
happening is congruous with the knowledge is nothing but the fact that the
nature of the actually existent’, ‘ is a consequence of the eternal
knowledge, for knowledge qua knowledge can only refer to something

423

which has an actualized nature. ‘ I The knowledge of the Creator is the
reason why this nature becomes actual in the existent which is attached to
it. ‘ Our ignorance of these possibles is brought about through our
ignorance of the nature which determines the being or non-being of a
thing. If the opposites in existents were in a condition of equilibrium, both
in themselves and through their efficient causes, it would follow that they
neither existed nor did not exist, or that they existed and did not exist at
the same time, and one of the opposites must therefore have a
preponderance in existence. And it is the knowledge of the existence of
this nature which causes the actualization of one of the opposites. And the
knowledge attached to this nature is either a knowledge prior to it, and this
is the knowledge of which this nature is the effect, namely eternal
knowledge, or the knowledge which is consequent on this nature, namely
non-eternal knowledge. The attainment of the occult is nothing but the
vision of this nature, and our acquisition of this knowledge not preceded
by any proof is what is called in ordinary human beings a dream, and in
prophets inspiration. The eternal will and eternal knowledge are the
causes of this nature in existents. And this is the meaning of the Divine
Words: ‘Say that none in the heavens or on the earth know the occult but
God alone. ‘This nature is sometimes necessary and sometimes what
happens in most cases. ‘ Dreams and inspiration are only, as we said, the
announcement of this nature in possible things, and the sciences which
claim the prognostication of future events possess only rare traces of the
influences of this nature or constitution or whatever you wish to call it,
namely that which is actualized in itself and to which the knowledge
attaches itself.
Ghazali says:
The second answer-and in it is to be found deliverance
from these reprehensible consequencesb-is to agree that in
fire there is created a nature which burns two similar pieces
of cotton which are brought into contact with it and does not
differentiate between them, when they are alike in every
respect. ? But still we regard it as possible that a prophet
should be thrown into the fire and not burn, either through a
change in the quality of the fire or through a change in the
quality of the prophet, and that either through God or through

424

the angels there should arise a quality in the fire which
limited its heat to its own body, so that it did not go beyond it,
but remained confined to it, keeping, however, to the form
and reality of the fire, without its heat and influence
extending beyond it; or that there should arise in the body of
the person an attribute, which did not stop the body from
being flesh and bone, but still defended it against the action
of the fire. For we can see a man rub himself with talc and sit
down in a lighted oven and not suffer from it; and if one had
not seen it, one would deny it, and the denial of our
opponents that it lies in God’s power to confer on the fire or
to the body an attribute which prevents it from being burnt is
like the denial of one who has not seen the talc and its
effect. ‘ For strange and marvellous things are in the power
of God, many of which we have not seen, and “, by should
we deny their possibility and regard them as impossible?
And also the bringing back to life of the dead and the
changing of a stick into a serpent are possible in the
following way: matter can receive any form, and therefore
earth and the other elements can be changed into a plant,
and a plant, when an animal eats it, can be changed into
blood, ‘ then blood can be changed into sperm , and then
sperm can be thrown into the womb and take the character
of an animal. , This, in the habitual course of nature, takes
place over a long space of time, but why does our opponent
declare it impossible that matter should pass through these
different phases in a shorter period than is usual, and when
once a shorter period is allowed there is no limit to its being
shorter and shorter, so that these potencies can always
become quicker in their action and eventually arrive at the
stage of being a miracle of a prophet.
And if it is asked: ‘Does this arise through the soul of the
prophet or through another principle at the instigation of the
prophet? ‘-we answer: ‘Does what you acknowledge may
happen through the power of the prophet’s soul, like the
downpour of rain or the falling of a thunderbolt or

425

earthquakes-does that occur through him or through another
principle? What we say about the facts which we have
mentioned is like what you say about those facts which you
regard as possible. And the best method according to both
you and us is to relate these things to God, either
immediately or through the intermediation of the angels. But
at the time these occurrences become real, the attention of
the prophet turns to such facts, and the order of the good
determines its appearance to ensure the duration of the
order of religion, and this gives a preponderance to the side
of existence. The fact in itself is possible, and the principle in
God is His magnanimity; but such a fact only emanates from
Him when necessity gives a preponderance to its existence
and the good determines it, and the good only determines it
when a prophet needs it to establish his prophetic office for
the promulgation of the good. ‘‘
And all this is in accordance with the theory of the
philosophers and follows from it for them, since they allow to
the prophet a particular characteristic which distinguishes
him from common people. There is no intellectual criterion
for the extent of its possibility, but there is no need to declare
it false when it rests on a good tradition and the religious law
states it to be true. Now, in general, it is only the sperm
which accepts the form of animals-and it receives its animal
potencies only- from the angels, who according to the
philosophers, are the principles of existents -and only a man
can be created from the sperm of a man, and only a horse
from the sperm of a horse, in so far as the actualization of
the sperm through the horse determines the preponderance
of the analogous form of a horse over all other forms, and it
accepts only the form to which in this way the
preponderance is given, and therefore barley never grows
from wheat or an apple from a pear. ‘ Further, we see that
certain kinds of animal are only produced by spontaneous
generation from earth and never are generated by
procreation-e. g. worms, and some which are produced both
spontaneously and by procreation like the mouse, the

426

serpent, and the scorpion, for their generation can come also
from earth. Their disposition to accept forms varies through
causes unknown to us, and it is not in human power to
ascertain them, since those forms do not, according to the
philosophers, emanate from the angels by their good
pleasure or haphazard, ‘ but in every substratum only in
such a way that a form arises for whose acceptance it is
specially determined through its own disposition. These
dispositions differ, and their principles are, according to the
philosophers, the aspects of the stars and the different
relative positions of the heavenly bodies in their movements.
And through this the possibility is open that there may be in
the principles of these dispositions wonderful and marvellous
things, so that those who understand talismans through their
knowledge of the particular qualities of minerals and of the
stars succeed in combining the heavenly potencies with
those mineral peculiarities, and make shapes of these
earthly substances, and seek a special virtue for them and
produce marvellous things in the world through them. And
often they drive serpents and scorpions from a country, and
sometimes bugs, and they do other things which are known
to belong to the science of talismans.
And since there is no fixed criterion for the principles of
these dispositions, and we cannot ascertain their essence or
limit them, how can we know that it is impossible that in
certain bodies dispositions occur to change their phases at a
quicker rhythm, so that such a body would be disposed to
accept a form for the acceptance of which it was not
prepared before, which is claimed to be a miracle? There is
no denying this, except through a lack of understanding and
an unfamiliarity with higher things and oblivion of the secrets
of God in the created world and in nature. And he who has
examined the many wonders of the sciences does not
consider in any way impossible for God’s power what is told
of the wonders of the prophets.

427

Our opponents may say: ‘We agree with you that
everything possible is in the power of God, and you
theologians agree with us that the impossible cannot be
done and that there are things whose impossibility is known
and things which are known to be possible, and that there
are also things about which the understanding is undecided
and which it does not hold to be either impossible or
possible. Now what according to you is the limit of the
impossible? If the impossible includes nothing but the
simultaneous affirmation and negation of the same thing,
then say that of two things the one is not the other, and that
the existence of the one does not demand the existence of
the other. And say then that God can create will without
knowledge of the thing willed, and knowledge without life, ‘
and that He can move the hand of a dead man and make
him sit and write volumes with his hand and engage himself
in sciences while he has his eye open and his looks are fixed
on his work, although he does not see and there is no life in
him and he has no power, and it is God alone who creates
all these ordered actions with the moving of the dead man’s
hand, and the movement comes from God. But by regarding
this as possible the difference between voluntary action and
a reflex action like shivering is destroyed, and a judicious act
will no longer indicate that the agent possesses knowledge
or power It will then be necessary that God should be able to
change genera and transform the substance into an accident
and knowledge into power and black into white and a voice
into an odour, just as He is able to change the inorganic into
an animal and a stone into gold, and it will then follow that
God can also bring about other unlimited impossibilities. ‘
The answer to this is to say that the impossible cannot be
done by God, and the impossible consists in the
simultaneous affirmation and negation of a thing, or the
affirmation of the more particular with the negation of the
more general, or the affirmation of two things with the
negation of one of them, and what does not refer to this is
not impossible and what is not impossible can be done. The

428

identification of black and white is impossible, because by
the affirmation of the form of black in the substratum the
negation of the form of white and of the existence of white is
implied; and since the negation of white is implied by the
affirmation of black, the simultaneous affirmation and
negation of white is impossible. ‘ And the existence of a
person in two places at once is only impossible because we
imply by his being in the house that he cannot be in another
place, and it cannot be understood from the denial that he is
in another place that he can be simultaneously both in
another place and in the house. And in the same way by will
is implied the seeking of something that can be known, and if
we assume a seeking without knowledge there cannot be a
will and we would then deny what we had implied. And it is
impossible that in the inorganic knowledge should be
created, because we understand by inorganic that which
does not perceive, and if in the organic perception was
created it would become impossible to call it inorganic in the
sense in which this word is understood.
As to the transformation of one genus into another, some
theologians affirm that it is in the power of Gods but we say
that for one thing to become another is irrational; for, if for
instance, the black could be transformed into power, the
black would either remain or not, and if it does not exist any
more, it is not changed but simply does not exist any more
and something else exists; and if it remains existent together
with power, it is not changed, but something else is brought
in relation to it, and if the black remains and power does not
exist, then it does not change, but remains as it was before.
And when we say that blood changes into sperm, we mean
by it that this identical matter is divested of one form and
invested with another; and it amounts to this, that one form
becomes nonexistent and another form comes into existence
while the matter remains, and that two forms succeed one
another in it. And when we say that water becomes air
through being heated, we mean by it that the matter which
had received the form of the water is deprived of this form

429

and takes another, and the matter is common to them but
the attribute changes. And it is the same when we say that
the stick is changed into a serpent or earth into an animal.
But there is no matter common to the accident and the
substance, nor to black and to power, nor to the other
categories, and it is impossible for this reason that they
should be changed into each other.
As to God’s moving the hand of a dead man, and raising
this man up in the form of a living one who sits and writes, so
that through the movement of his hand a well-ordered script
is written, this in itself is not impossible as long as we refer
events to the will of a voluntary being, and it is only to be
denied because the habitual course of nature is in opposition
to it. And your affirmation, philosophers, that, if this is so, the
judiciousness of an act no longer indicates that the agent
possesses knowledge is false, for the agent in this case is
God; He determines the act and He performs it. And as to
your assertion that if this is so there is no longer any
difference between shivering and voluntary motion, we
answer that we know this difference only because we
experience in ourselves the difference between these two
conditions, and we find thereby that the differentiating factor
is power, ‘ and know that of the two classes of the possible
the one happens at one time, the other at another; that is to
say, we produce movement with the power to produce it at
one time, and a movement without this power at another.
Now, when we observe other movements than ours and see
many well-ordered movements, we attain knowledge of the
power behind them, and God creates in us all these different
kinds of knowledge through the habitual course of events,
through which one of the two classes of possibility becomes
known, though the impossibility of the second class is not
proved thereby.
I say:
When Ghazali saw that the theory that things have no particular qualities
and forms from which particular acts follow, for every thing is very

430

objectionable, and contrary to common sense, he conceded this in this
last section and replaced it by the denial of two points: first that a thing can
have these qualities but that they need not act on a thing in the way they
usually act on it, e. g. fire can have its warmth but need not burn
something that is brought near to it, even if it is usually burnt when fire is
brought near to it; secondly that the particular forms have not a particular
matter in every object.
The first point can be accepted by the philosophers, for because of
external causes the procession of acts from agents may not be necessary,
‘ and it is not impossible that for instance fire may sometimes be brought
near cotton without burning it, when something is placed with the cotton
that makes it non-inflammable, as Ghazali says in his instance of talc and
a living being.
As to the point that matter is one of the conditions for material things,
this cannot be denied by the theologians, for, as Ghazali says, there is no
difference between our simultaneous negation and affirmation of a thing
and our simultaneous denial of part of it and affirmation of the whole. And
since things consist of two qualities, a general and a particular-and this is
what the philosophers mean by the term ‘definition’, a definition being
composed according to them of a genus and a specific difference-it is
indifferent for the denial of an existent which of its two qualities is denied.
For instance, since man consists of two qualities, one being a general
quality, viz. animality, and the second a particular, viz. rationality, man
remains man just as little when we take away his animality as when we
take away his rationality, for animality is a condition of rationality and when
the condition is removed the conditioned is removed equally.
On this question the theologians and the philosophers agree, except that
the philosophers believe that for particular things the general qualities are
just as much a condition as the particular, and this the theologians do not
believe; for the philosophers, for instance, warmth and moisture are a
condition of life in the transient, because they are more general than life,
just as life is a condition of rationality. But the theologians do not believe
this, and so you hear them say: ‘For us dryness and moisture are not a
condition of life. ‘ For the philosophers shape, too, is one of the particular
conditions of life in an organic being; if not, one of two following cases
might arise: either the special shape of the animal might exist without

431

exercising any function, or this special shape might not exist at all. ‘ For
instance, for the philosophers the hand is the organ of the intellect, and by
means of it man performs his rational acts, like writing and the carrying on
of the other arts; now if intelligence were possible in the inorganic, it would
be possible that intellect might exist without performing its function, and it
would be as if warmth could exist without warming the things that are
normally warmed by it. b Also, according to the philosophers, every
existent has a definite quantity and a definite quality, and also the time
when it comes into existence and during which it persists are determined,
although in all these determinations there is, according to the
philosophers, a certain latitude. ‘
Theologians and philosophers agree that the matter of existents which
participate in one and the same matter sometimes accepts one of two
forms and sometimes its opposite, as happens, according to them, with
the forms of the four elements, fire, air, water, and earth. Only in regard to
the things which have no common matter or which have different matters
do they disagree whether some of them can accept the forms of others-for
instance, whether something which is not known by experience to accept
a certain form except through many intermediaries can also accept this
ultimate form without intermediaries. For instance, the plant comes into
existence through composition out of the elements; it becomes blood and
sperm through being eaten by an animal and from sperm and blood
comes the animal, as is said in the Divine Words: ‘We created man from
an extract of clay, then We made him a clot in a sure depository’’ and so
on till His words ‘and blessed be God, the best of creators’. The
theologians affirm that the soul of man can inhere in earth without the
intermediaries known by experience, whereas the philosophers deny this
and say that, if this were possible, wisdom would consist in the creation of
man without such intermediaries, and a creator who created in such a way
would be the best and most powerful of creators; both parties claim that
what they say is selfevident, and neither has any proof for its theory. And
you, reader, consult your heart; it is your duty to believe what it
announces, and this is what God-who may make us and you into men of
truth and evidence-has ordained for you.
But some of the Muslims have even affirmed that there can be attributed
to God the power to combine the two opposites, and their dubious proof is

432

that the judgement of our intellect that this is impossible is something
which has been impressed on the intellect, whereas if there had been
impressed on it the judgement that this is possible, it would not deny this
possibility, but admit it. For such people it follows as a consequence that
neither intellect nor existents have a well-defined nature, and that the truth
which exists in the intellect does not correspond to the existence of
existing things. The theologians themselves are ashamed of such a
theory, but if they held it, it would be more consistent with their point of
view than the contradictions in which their opponents involve them on this
point. For their opponents try to find out where the difference lies between
what as a matter of fact the theologians affirm on this point and what they
deny, and it is very difficult for them to make this out-indeed they do not
find anything but vague words. We find, therefore, that those most expert
in the art of theological discussion take refuge in denying the necessary
connexion between condition and conditioned, between a thing and its
definition, between a thing and its cause and between a thing and its sign.
All this is full of sophistry and is without sense, and the theologian who did
this was Abu-l-Ma’ali. ‘ The general argument which solves these
difficulties is that existents are divided into opposites and correlates, and if
the latter could be separated, the former might be united, but opposites
are not united and correlates therefore cannot be separated. And this is
the wisdom of God and God’s course in created things, and you will never
find in God’s course any alteration. ‘ And it is through the perception of this
wisdom that the intellect of man becomes intellect, and the existence of
such wisdom in the eternal intellect is the cause of its existence in reality.
The intellect therefore is not a possible entity which might have been
created with other qualities, as Ibn Hazm imagined.

THE SECOND DISCUSSION
THEIR IMPOTENCE TO SHOW BY DEMONSTRATIVE
PROOF THAT THE HUMAN SOUL IS A SPIRITUAL
SUBSTANCE WHICH EXISTS BY ITSELF AND DOES NOT
FILL SPACE, IS NEITHER BODY NOR IMPRESSED ON A
BODY, IS NEITHER CONTINUOUS WITH THE BODY NOR
SEPARATED FROM THE BODY, JUST AS NEITHER GOD

433

NOR THE ANGELS ACCORDING TO THEM IS OUTSIDE OR
INSIDE THE WORLD
Ghazali says:
The discussion of this question demands the exposition
of their theory about the animal and human faculties. s The
animal faculties are divided according to them into motive
and apprehensive, and the apprehensive are of two classes,
the external and the internal. The external are the five
senses, and these faculties are entities impressed on the
bodies. b The internal are three in number. ? The first is the
representative faculty in the foremost part of the brain behind
the faculty of sight; in it the forms of the things seen remain
after the closing of the eye, and in this faculty there is
impressed and collected what the five senses bring to it, and
it is therefore called the common sense. If it did not exist, a
man who saw white honey and perceives its sweetness by
taste could not, when he saw it a second time, apprehend its
sweetness as long as he had not tasted it as he did the first
time, but in the common sense there is something which
judges that this white is the sweetness, and there is in it, no
doubt, a judging element for which both these things, colour
and sweetness, are brought together and which determines
then that when the one is present the other must be there
too. ‘
The second is the estimative faculty which is that which
apprehends the intentions’ whereas the first apprehends the
forms;^ and the meaning of ‘forms’ is ‘that which cannot be
without matter, i. e. body’, whereas the meaning of
‘intentions’ is ‘that which does not require a body for its
existence, although it can happen that it occurs in a body’like enmity and concord. The sheep perceives the colour,
shape, and appearance of the wolf, which are only found in
body, but it perceives also that the wolf is its enemy, and the
lamb perceives the shape and colour of its mother and then
perceives its love and tenderness, and for this reason it flees

434

from the wolf while it walks behind the mother. Discord and
concord need not be in bodies like colour and shape, but it
sometimes happens that they occur in bodies. This faculty
differs from the first, and is located in the posterior ventricle
of the brains
The third faculty is called in animals the imaginative and
in man the cogitative, b and its nature is to combine the
sensible forms and to compose the intentions with the
farms:’ it is located in the middle ventricle between the place
where the forms are kept and that where the intentions are
retained. s Because of this man can imagine a horse that
flies and a being with the head of a man and the body of a
horse, and other combinations, although he has never seen
such things. It is more appropriate, as will be shown, to join
this faculty with the motive faculties than with the
apprehensive. ‘ The places where these faculties are located
are known only through medicine, for if a lesion occurs to
one of these ventricles the faculties become defective.
Further, the philosophers affirm that the faculty on which
the forms of sensible things are impressed through the five
senses retains these forms so that they do not disappear
after their reception, for one thing does not retain another
through the faculty by which it receives it, for water receives
without retaining, while wax receives through its wetness
and retains through its dryness, by contrast with water. “
Through this consideration that which retains is different
from that which receives, and this is called the retentive
faculty. And in the same way intentions are impressed on the
estimative faculty, and a faculty retains them, which is called
the memorative. ‘ Through this consideration, these internal
perceptions, when the imaginative faculty is joined to them,
become five in number, like the external faculties.
The motive faculties’ form two classes, in so far as they
are only stimulating motion or executing motion and acting;
the stimulating motive faculty is the impulsive and appetitive
faculty; this is the faculty which stimulates the acting motive

435

power to move when, in the representative faculty which we
have mentioned, ‘ there is inscribed the form of something to
be sought or avoided. The stimulating faculty has two
branches, one called concupiscent which excites to a
movement, through which there is an approach to the things
represented as necessary or useful in a search for pleasure,
and the irascible which excites to a movement through which
the thing represented as injurious or mischievous is removed
as one seeks to master it. Through this faculty the complete
determination to act is effected, which is called will.
The motive faculty which itself executes movement is a
faculty which is diffused in the nerves and muscles and has
the function of contracting the muscles and drawing the
tendons and ligaments which are in contact with the limbs in
the direction where this faculty resides, or of relaxing and
extending them so that the ligaments and tendons move in
the opposite direction . These are the animal faculties of the
soul as described in a summary way, without the details.
And as regards the soul which thinks things and is called
the rational or discursive soul by the philosophers (and by
‘discursive’ is meant ‘rational’, because discourse is the most
typical external operation of reason and therefore the
intellective soul takes its name from it), it has two faculties, a
knowing and an acting, and both are called intellect, though
equivocally. b And the acting faculty is one which is a
principle moving man’s body towards the well-ordered
human arts, whose order derives from the deliberation
proper to man. The knowing faculty, which is called the
speculative, is one which has the function of perceiving the
real natures of the intelligibles in abstraction from matter,
place, and position; and these are the universal concepts
which the theologians call sometimes conditions and
sometimes modes, ‘ and which the philosophers call abstract
universals.
The soul has therefore two faculties on two sides: the
speculative faculty on the side of the angels, since through it

436

it receives from the angels knowledge of realities (and this
faculty must always be receptive for the things coming from
above); and the practical faculty on the inferior side, which is
the side of the body which it directs and whose morals it
improves. This faculty must rule over all the other bodily
faculties, and all the others must be trained by it and
subjected to it. It must not itself be affected or influenced by
them, but they must be influenced by it, in such a way that
there will not through the bodily attributes occur in the soul
subservient dispositions, called vices, but that this faculty
may remain predominant and arouse in the soul dispositions
called virtues.
This is a summary of the human vital faculties, which
they distinguished and about which they spoke at great
length, and we have omitted the vegetative faculties, since
there is no need to mention them as they are not connected
with our subject. Nothing of what we have mentioned need
be denied on religious grounds, for all these things are
observable facts whose habitual course has been provided
by God. We only want now to refute their claim that the soul
being an essence subsistent by itself, can be known by
demonstrative rational proofs, and we do not seek to refute
those who say that it is impossible that this knowledge
should derive from God’s power or who believe that the
religious law is opposed to this; for perhaps it will be clear at
the dividing on the Day of Judgement that the Holy Law
regards it as true. However, we reject their claim that this
can be known by mere reason and that the religious law is
not necessary for its knowledge, and we shall ask them to
produce their proofs and indeed they have many.
I say:
All this is nothing but an account of the theory of the philosophers about
these faculties and his conception of them; only he followed Avicenna,
who distinguished himself from the rest of the philosophers by assuming in
the animal another faculty than the imaginative; which he calls the
estimative faculty and which replaces the cogitative faculty in man, and he

437

says that the ancients applied the term ‘imaginative faculty’ to the
estimative, and when they do this then the imaginative faculty in the
animal is a substitute for the cogitative faculty in man and will be located in
the middle ventricle of the brain. And when the term ‘imaginative’ is
applied to the faculty which apprehends shape, this is said to reside in the
foremost part of the brain. There is no contradiction in the fact that the
retentive and memorative faculties should both be in the posterior part of
the brain, for retaining and memory are two in function, but one in their
substratum. And what appears from the theory of the ancients is that the
imaginative faculty in the animal is that which determines that the wolf
should be an enemy of the sheep and that the sheep should be a friend of
the lamb, for the imaginative faculty is a perceptive ones and it necessarily
possesses judgement, and there is no need to introduce another faculty.
What Avicenna says would only be possible if the imaginative faculty were
not perceptive; and there is no sense in adding another faculty to the
imaginative in the animal, especially in an animal which possesses many
arts by nature, for its representations are not derived from the senses and
seem to be perceptions intermediary between the intellectual and the
sensible forms, and the question of these forms is concisely treated in De
sensu et sensato, and we shall leave this subject here and return to
Ghazali’s objections against the philosophers.
Ghazali says:
The first proof is that they say that intellectual cognitions
inhere in human souls, and are limited and have units which
cannot be divided, and therefore their substratum must also
be indivisible and every body is divisible, and this proves that
the substratum of the cognitions is something incorporeal. ‘
One can put this into a logical form according to the figures
of logic, but the easiest way is to say that if the substratum of
knowledge is a divisible body, then the knowledge which
inheres in it must be divisible too; but the inherent
knowledge is not divisible, and therefore the substratum is
not a body: and this is a mixed hypothetical syllogism in
which the consequent is denied, from which there follows the
denial of the antecedent in all cases; and there is no doubt
about the validity of this figure of the syllogism, nor again

438

about its premisses, for the major is that everything inherent
in something divisible is necessarily divisible, the divisibility
of its substratum being assumed, and this is a major about
which one cannot have any doubt. The minor is that
knowledge as a unity inheres in man and is not divided, for
its infinite division is impossible, and if it is limited, then it
comprises no doubt units which cannot be divided; and in
short, when we know a thing, we cannot assume that a part
can cease and a part remain, because it has no parts.
The objection rests on two points. It may be said:
‘How will you refute those who say that the substratum of
knowledge is an atom in space which cannot be divided, as
is known from the theory of the theologians? ‘ And then there
remains nothing to be said against it but to question its
possibility, and to ask how all that is known can exist in one
atom, whereas all the atoms which surround this one are
deprived of it although they are near to it. But to question its
possibility has no value, as one can also turn it against the
doctrine of the philosophers, by asking how the soul can be
one single thing which is not in space or outside the body,
either continuous with it or separated from it. However, we
should not stress this first point, for the discussion of the
problem of the atom is lengthy, ‘ and the philosophers have
geometrical proofs against it whose discussion is intricate,
and one of their many arguments is to ask: ‘Does one of the
sides of an atom between two atoms touch the identical spot
the other side touches or not? ‘ The former is impossible,
because its consequence would be that the two sides
coincided, whereas a thing that is in contact with another is
in contact, and the latter implies the affirmation of a plurality
and divisibility, and the solution of this difficulty is long and
we need not go deeper into it and will now turn to the other
point.
Your affirmation that everything which inheres in a body
must be divisible is contradicted by what you say of the
estimative faculty of the sheep where the hostility of the wolf

439

is concerned, for in the judgement of one single thing no
division can be imagined, since hostility has no part, so that
one part of it might be perceived and another neglected. Still,
according to you this perception takes place in a bodily
faculty, and the souls of animals are impressed on their
bodies and do not survive death, and all the philosophers
agree about this. And if it is possible for you to regard as
divisible that which is perceived by the five senses, by the
common sense and by the faculty which retains the forms,
this is not possible for you in the case of those intentions
which are not supposed to be in matter.
And if it be said: ‘Absolute hostility, abstracted from
matter, is not perceived by the sheep, but only the hostility of
the definite individual wolf connected with its bodily
individuality and shape, and only the rational faculty
perceives universal realities abstracted from matter’-we
answer that the sheep perceives, indeed, the colour and
shape of the wolf and then its hostility, and if the colour is
impressed on the faculty of sight and the same happens to
the shape, and it is divided through the division of the
substratum of sight, I ask, ‘through what does the sheep
perceive the hostility? If through a body, hostility is divided,
and I should like to know what this perception is when it is
divided, whether it is a perception of a part of the hostilityand how can it have a part? -or whether every part is a
perception of the hostility and the hostility is known many
times as its perception is fixed in every part of the
substratum. “ And thus this problem is a difficulty for their
proof and must be solved.
And if it is said: ‘This is an argument against the
intelligibles, but the intelligibles cannot be denied, ‘ and as
long as you cannot call in question the premisses that
knowledge cannot be divided and that what cannot be
divided cannot be in a divisible body, you can have no doubt
about the consequence’--the answer is: ‘We have only
written this book to show the incoherence and contradictions

440

in the doctrine of the philosophers, and such a contradiction
arises over this question, since through it either your theory
about the rational soul is refuted or your theory about the
estimative faculty. ‘
Further we say that this contradiction shows that they are
not conscious of the point, which confounds their syllogism,
and it may well be that the origin of their confusion lies in
their statement that knowledge is impressed on a body in the
way colour is impressed on a coloured thing, the colour
being divided with the division of the coloured thing, so that
knowledge must be divided by the division of its substratum.
The mistake lies in the term ‘impression’, since it may well
be that the relation of knowledge to its substratum is not like
that of colour to the coloured object so that it could be
regarded as being spread over it, diffused over its sides and
divisible with it; knowledge might well be related to its
substratum in another way which would not allow its
divisibility although its substratum was divisible; yes, its
relation to it might be like that of perception of the hostility to
the body, ; and the relations of the attributes to their
substrata do not all follow the same pattern and they are not
all known to us with all their details so that we could rely on
our knowledge, and to judge such a question without a
perfect comprehension of all the details of the relation is an
unreliable judgement. In short, we do not deny that what the
philosophers say gives reasonable and predominant reasons
for belief, but we deny that it is known by an evidence which
excludes error and doubt. And it is in this way that a doubt
about it may be raised.
I say:
When the premisses which the philosophers use are taken in an
indefinite way the consequence Ghazali draws is valid. For our assertion
that every attribute inhering in a body which is divisible is divisible through
the divisibility of the body can be understood in two ways. First it may be
meant that the definition of every part of this attribute which inheres in the
particular body is identical with the definition of the whole: for instance the

441

white inhering in the white body, for every part of whiteness which inheres
in the individual body has one and the same definition as the whole of
whiteness in this body. ‘ Secondly, it may be meant that the attribute is
attached to the body without a specific shape, ‘ and this attribute again is
divided through the division of the body not in such a way that the
intension of the definition of the whole is identical with the intension of the
definition of every part-for instance, the faculty of sight which exists in one
who sees-but in such a way that it is subject to a difference in intensity
according to the greater and lesser receptivity of the substratum, and
therefore the power of sight is stronger in the healthy and the young than
in the sick and the old. What is common to those two classes is that they
are composed of individuals, i. e. that they are divided by quantity and not
by quiddity, i. e. that either the uniqueness of the definition and the
quiddity remains or that they are annulled. < Those which can be divided
quantitatively into any particular part are one by definition and quiddity and
those which cannot be divided into any individual part whatevers only
differ from the first class in a degree of intensity, for the action of the part
which has vanished is not identical with that of the part which remains,
since the action of the part which has vanished in weak sight does not act
in the same way as the weak sight. b Those two classes have it in
common that colour also cannot be divided by the division of its
substratum into any particular part whatever and keep its definition
absolutely intact, but the division terminates in a particular part in which
the colour, when it is distributed to it, disappears. ? The only thing which
keeps its distribution always intact is the nature of the continuous in so far
as it is continuous, i. e. the form of continuity.
When this premiss is assumed in this way, namely by holding that
everything which is divisible in either of these two classes has a body as
its substratum, it is self-evident, and the converse, that everything which is
in a body is divisible according to one of these two classes, is evident too;
and when this is verified, then the converse of its opposite is true also,
namely that what is not divisible according to one of these two classes
cannot be in a body. If to these premisses there is added further what is
evident in the case of the universal intelligibles, namely that they are not
divisible in either of the two ways, since they are not individual forms, it is
clear that there follows from this that neither is the substratum of these
intelligibles a body, nor is the faculty which has the power to produce them

442

a faculty in a body; and it follows that their substratum is a spiritual faculty
which perceives itself and other things.
But Ghazali took first the one of these two classes and denied that the
universal intelligibles belong to it, and then made his objection by means
of the second class, which exists in the faculty of sight and in the
imaginative faculty, and in doing this he committed a sophism; but the
science of the soul is too profound and too elevated to be apprehended by
dialectics. ‘
Besides, Ghazali has not adduced the argument in the manner in which
Avicenna brought it out, for Avicenna built his argument only on the
following: If the intelligibles inhered in a body, they would have to be either
in an indivisible part of it, or in a divisible part. Then he refuted the
possibility of their being in an indivisible part of the body, and after this
refutation he denied that, if the intellect inhered in a body, it could inhere in
an indivisible part of it. Then he denied that it could inhere in a divisible
part of it and so he denied that it could inhere in body at all.
And when Ghazali denied one of these two divisions he said it was not
impossible that there might be another form of relation between the
intellect and the body than this, but it is quite clear that if the intellect is
related to the body there can exist only two kinds of relation, either to a
divisible or to an indivisible substratum.
This proof can be completed; by saying that the intellect is not attached
to any animal faculty in the way the form is attached to its substratum, for
the denial of its being attached to the body implies necessarily the denial
of its being attached to any animal faculty which is attached to the body.
For, if the intellect were attached to any of the animal faculties, it would as
Aristotle says be unable to act except through this faculty, but then this
faculty would not perceive the intellect. This is the argument on which
Aristotle himself bases his proof that the intellect is separate. ‘
We shall now mention the second objection which Ghazali raises against
the second proof of the philosophers, but we must first observe that their
proofs, when they are taken out of their context in those sciences to which
they belong, can have at the most the value of dialectical arguments. The
only aim of this book of ours is therefore to ascertain the value of the
arguments in it which are ascribed to the two parties, and to show to which

443

of the two disputants the terms ‘incoherence’ and ‘contradiction’ would be
applied with greater justification.
Ghazali says:
The second proof is that the philosophers say:
‘If the knowledge of one single intellectual notion, i. e. a
notion abstracted from matter, were impressed on matter as
accidents are impressed on bodily substances, their division
would necessarily follow the division of the body, as has
been shown before. And if it is not impressed on matter nor
spread out over it, and the term ‘impression’ is rejected, let
us then use another term and say, ‘Is there a relation
between knowledge and the knower? ‘
It is absurd to deny the relation, for if there did not exist a
relation, why would it be better to know something than not
to know it ? And if there is a relation, this relation can take
place in three ways; either there will be a relation to every
part of the substratum, or to some parts to the exclusion of
others, or to no part whatever. It is false to say that the
notion has no relation to any individual part of the
substratum; for if there is no relation to the units, there can
be no relation to the aggregate, since a collection of
disconnected units is not an aggregate, but itself
disconnected. It is false to say that there might be a relation
to some part, for the part that was not related would have
nothing to do with this notion and therefore would not come
into the present discussion. And it is false to say that every
part of the substratum might be related to it, for if it were
related in all its parts to this notion in its totality, then each
single part of the substratum would possess not a part of the
notion but the notion in its totality, and this notion would
therefore be repeated infinitely in act; on the other hand, if
every part were related to this notion in a special way,
different from the relation of another part, then this notion
would be divided in its content; and we have shown that the
content of a notion, one and the same in every respect, is

444

indivisible; if the relation, however, of each part were related
to another part of the notion, then this notion would clearly
be divided, and this is impossible. And from this it is clear
that the things perceived which are in the five senses are
only images of the particular divided forms, and that the
meaning of perception is the arrival of the image of the thing
perceived in the soul of the perceiver, so that every part of
the image of the thing perceived is related to a part of the
bodily organ.
And the objection against this is what has been said
before. For by replacing the term ‘impression’ by ‘relation’
the difficulty is not removed which arises over the question
what of the hostility of the wolf is impressed on the
estimative faculty of the sheep, as we have mentioned; for
the perception is no doubt related to it, and with this relation
there must occur what you have said, and hostility is not a
measurable thing possessing a measurable quantity, so that
its image could be impressed on a measurable body and its
parts related to the parts of that body, and the fact that the
shape of the wolf is measurable does not remove the
difficulty, for the sheep perceives something else as well as
the shape, namely the adversity, opposition, and hostility,
and this hostility, added to the shape through the hostility,
has no magnitude, and still the sheep perceives it through a
body having magnitude; and that is necessarily a difficulty in
this proof as well as in the first.
And if someone says: ‘Do you not refute these proofs by
asserting that knowledge inheres in a spatial indivisible
body, namely the atom? ‘ we answer: ‘No, for the discussion
of the atom is connected with geometrical questions the
solution and discussion of which is long and arduous.
Further, such a theory would not remove the difficulty, for the
power and the will ought then also to be in this atom. For
man acts, and this acting cannot be imagined without power
and will, which would also be in this atom; and the power to
write resides in the hand and the fingers, but knowledge of it

445

does not reside in the hand, for it does not cease when the
hand is cut off; nor is the will in the hand, for often a man
wants to write, when his hand has withered and he is not
able to do so, not because his will has gone, but because his
power has. “
I say:
This discussion is not an independent one, but only a complement to the
first, for in the first discussion it was merely assumed that knowledge is
not divided by the division of its substratum, and here an attempt is made
to prove this by making use of a division into three categories. And he
repeats the same objection, which presented itself to him because he did
not carry out the division of matter in the two senses in which it can be
taken. For when the philosophers denied that the intellect could be divided
through the division of its substratum in the way in which accidents are
divided through the division of their substratum, and there exists another
way of division in body which must be applied to the bodily functions of
perception, they had a doubt about these faculties. The proof is only
completed by denying that the intellect can be divided in either of these
ways, and by showing that everything which exists in a body is necessarily
divisible in one of them.
For of those things in the body which are divided in this second way, i. e.
which are not by definition divisible through the division of their
substratum’ it was sometimes doubted whether they are separable from
their substratum or not. For we see it happen that most parts of the
substratum decay and still this kind of existence, i. e. the individual
perception, does not decay; and it was thought that it might happen that,
just as the form does not disappear through the disappearance of one or
more parts of its substratum, in the same way the form might not
disappear when the whole was destroyed, and that the decay of the act of
the form through its substratum was similar to the decay of the act of the
artisan through the deterioration of his tools. And therefore Aristotle says
that if an old man had the eye of a young man, he would see as well as
the young one, meaning that it is thought that the decrepitude which
occurs to the sight of the old man does not happen because of the decay
of the faculty but because of the decay of the organs. And he tries to
prove this by the inactivity of the organ or the greater part of it in sleep,

446

fainting, drunkenness, and the illnesses through which the perceptions of
the senses decay, whereas it is quite certain that the faculties are not
destroyed in these conditions. And this is still more evident in those
animals which live when they are cut in two; and most plants have this
peculiarity, although they do not possess the faculty of perceptions
But the discussion of the soul is very obscure, and therefore God has
only given knowledge of it to those who are deeply learned; and therefore
God, answering the question of the masses about this problem, says that
this kind of question is not their concern, saying: ‘They will ask thee of the
spirit. Say: “The spirit comes at the bidding of my Lord, and ye are given
but a little knowledge thereof. “ ‘And the comparison of death with sleep in
this question is an evident proof that the soul survives, since the activity of
the soul ceases in sleep through the inactivity of its organ, but the
existence of the soul does not cease, and therefore it is necessary that its
condition in death should be like its condition in sleep, for the parts follow
the same rule? And this is a proof which all can understand and which is
suitable to be believed by the masses, and will show the learned the way
in which the survival of the soul is ascertained. And this is evident from the
Divine Words: ‘God takes to Himself souls at the time of their death; and
those who do not die in their sleep.
Ghazali says:
The third proof is that they say that, if knowledge resided
in a part of the body, the knower would be this part to the
exclusion of all the other parts of man, but it is said of man
that it is he who knows, and knowledge is an attribute of man
in his totality without reference to any specified place. ‘ But
this is nonsense, for he is spoken of as seeing and hearing
and tasting, and the animals also are described in this way;
but this does not mean that the perception of the senses is
not in the body, it is only a metaphorical expression like the
expression that someone is in Baghdad although he is in a
part of the whole of Baghdad, not in the whole of Baghdad,
the reference however being made to the whole.
I say:

447

When it is conceded that the intellect is not related to one of man’s
organs-and this has already been proved, since it is not self-evident -it
follows that its substratum is not a body, and that our assertion that man
knows is not analogous to our assertion that he sees. For since it is selfevident that he sees through a particular organ, it is clear that when we
refer sight to man absolutely, the expression is allowed according to the
custom of the Arabs and other people. ; And since there is no particular
organ for the intellect, it is clear that, when we say of him that he knows,
this does not mean that a part of him knows. However, how he knows is
not clear by itself, for it does not appear that there is an organ or a special
place in an organ which possesses this special faculty, as is the case with
the imaginative faculty and the cogitative and memorative faculties, the
localization of which in parts of the brain is known.
Ghazali says:
The fourth proof is that, if knowledge inhered for instance
in a part of the heart or the brain, then necessarily
ignorance, its opposite, might reside in another part of the
heart or the brain, and it would then be possible that a man
should both know and not know one and the same thing at
the same time. And since this is impossible, it is proved that
the place of ignorance and the place of knowledge are
identical, and that this place is one single place in which it is
impossible to bring opposites together. But if this place were
divisible, it would not be impossible that ignorance should
reside in one part of it and knowledge in another, for a
thing’s being in one place is not contradicted by its
opposite’s being in another, just as there may be pie
baldness in one and the same horse, and black and white in
a single eye, but in two spots. This, however, does not follow
for the senses, as there is no opposite to their perception;
but sometimes they perceive and sometimes not, and there
exists between them the sole opposition of being and notbeing, and we can surely say that someone perceives
through some parts, for instance the eye and the ear, and
not through the other parts of his body; and there is no
contradiction in this. And you cannot evade this difficulty by

448

saying that knowing is the opposite of not-knowing, and that
judgment is something common to the whole body; for it is
impossible that the judgment should be in any other place
but in the place of its cause, and the knower is the place in
which the knowledge resides; and if the term is applied to
the whole, this is a metaphor, as when we say that a man is
in Baghdad, although he is in a part of it, and when we say
that a man sees although we know with certainty that the
judgment of his sight’ does not reside in his foot and hand
but is peculiar to his eye. The judgments are opposed to
each other in the same way as their causes, and the
judgments are limited to the place where the causes reside.
And one cannot evade the difficulty by saying that the place
disposed to receive the knowledge and the ignorance of man
is one single place in which they can oppose each other, for
according to you theologians every body which possesses
life can receive knowledge and ignorance, and no other
condition but life is imposed, and all the parts of the body are
according to you equivalent so far as the reception of
knowledge is concerned.
The objection to this is that it can be turned against you
philosophers in the matter of desire, longing, and will; these
things exist in animals as well as in men, and are things
impressed on the body, but it is impossible that one should
flee from the object one longs for and that repugnance and
craving in regard to one and the same thing should exist in
him together, the desire being in one place and the
repugnance in another. Still, that does not prove that they do
not inhere in bodies, for these potencies, although they are
many and distributed over different organs, have one thing
that joins them together, namely the sou1, which is common
both to animal and to man; and since this cohesive entity
forms a unity, the mutually contradictory relations enter into
relation with it in turns. This does not prove that the soul is
not impressed upon the body, as is quite clear in the case of
animals.

449

I say:
The only logical consequence of what he says here in the name of the
philosophers is that knowledge does not inhere in the body in the way
colour and in general all accidents do; it does not, however, follow that it
does not inhere in body at all. For the impossibility that the place of
knowledge should receive the knowledge and want of knowledge of a
thing necessarily demonstrates its identity, since opposites cannot inhere
in one and the same place, and this kind of impossibility is common to all
attributes, whether perceptive or nonperceptive. But what is peculiar to the
receptivity of knowledge is that it can perceive opposites together; and this
can only happen through an indivisible apprehension in an indivisible
substratum, for he who judges is of necessity one, and therefore it is said
that knowledge of opposites is one and the same. ‘ And this kind of
receptivity is of necessity proper to the soul alone. What is indeed proved
by the philosophers is that this is the condition of the common sense when
it exercises its judgement over the five senses, and this common sense is
according to the philosophers something bodily. And therefore there is in
this argument no proof that the intellect does not inhere in a body, for we
have already said that there are two kinds of inherence, the inherence of
non-perceptive attributes and that of perceptive.
And the objection Ghazali makes here is true, namely that the appetitive
soul does not tend to opposites at the same time although it resides in the
body. I do not know of any philosopher who has used this argument’ to
establish the survival of the soul, unless he paid no attention to the
philosophical doctrine that it is the characteristic of every perceptive
faculty that in its perception two opposites cannot be joined, just as it is
the peculiarity of contraries outside the soul that they cannot be together
in one and the same substratum; and this is what the perceptive potencies
have in common with the non-perceptive. It is proper to the perceptive
faculties to judge coexisting contraries, one of them being known through
knowledge of the others and it is proper to non-psychical potencies to be
divided through the division of the body so that contraries can be in one
body at the same time, though not in the same part. And since the soul is
a substratum that cannot be divided in this way, contraries cannot be in it
together, i. e. in two parts of the substratum.

450

Such arguments are all arguments of people who have not grasped the
views of the philosophers about this problem. How little does a man
understand, who gives it as a proof of the soul’s survival that it does not
judge two opposites at the same time, for from this it follows only that the
substratum of the soul is one, and not divided in the way the substratum of
the accidents is divided; and it does not follow from the proof that the
substratum is not divided in the way the substratum of the accidents is
divided that the substratum is not divided at all.
Ghazali says:
The fifth proof is: If the intellect perceived the intelligibles
through a bodily organ, it would not know its own self. But
the consequent is impossible; therefore it knows its own self
and the antecedent is impossible. We answer: It is conceded
that from the exclusion of the contrary of the consequent the
contrary of the antecedent follows, ‘ but only when the
consequence of the antecedent has been previously
established, and we say we do not concede the necessity of
the consequence; and what is your proof?
And if it is said that the proof is that, because sight is in
the body, sight does not attach itself to sight, and the seeing
is not seen nor the hearing heard, and so on with respect to
the other senses; and if the intellect, too, could only perceive
through body it could not perceive itself, but the intellect
thinks itself just as it thinks other things, and it thinks that it
thinks itself and that it thinks other things-we answer: What
you assert is wrong on two points. The first is that according
to us sight could be attached to itself, just as one and the
same knowledge can be knowledge of other things and of
itself, only in the usual course of events this does not
happen; but according to us the interruption of the usual
course of events is possible. The second, and this is the
stronger argument, is for us to say that we concede this for
the senses; but why, if this is impossible for some senses, is
it impossible for others, and why is it impossible that there
should be a difference in the behaviour of the senses with
respect to perception although they are all in the body? just

451

as sight differs from touch through the fact that touch, like
taste, can only come to perceive by being in contact with the
object touched, whereas separation from the object is a
condition of sight, so that when the eyelids cover the eye it
does not see the colour of the eyelid, ‘ not being at a
distance from it. , But this difference does not necessitate
that they should differ in their need to be in a body, and it is
not impossible that there should be among the senses
something called intellect that differs from the others in that it
perceives itself.
I say:
The first objection, that the usual course of events might be interrupted
so that sight might see itself, is an argument of the utmost sophistry and
imposture, and we have discussed it already. As to the second objection,
that it is not impossible that a bodily perception should perceive itself, this
has a certain plausibility, but when the motive is known which led the
philosophers to their assertion, then the impossibility of this supposition
becomes clear, for perception is something which exists between the
agent and the patient, and it consists of the perceiver and the perceived. It
is impossible that a sense should be in one and the same respect its own
agent and patient, and the duality of agent and patient in sense arises, as
concerns its act, from the side of the form and, as concerns its passivity,
from the side of the matter. But no composite can think itself, because if
this were so, its essence would be different from that by which it thinks, for
it would think only with a part of its essence; and since intellect and
intelligible are identical, I if the composite thought its essence, the
composite would become a simple, and the whole the part, and all this is
impossible. When this is established here in this way, it is only a dialectical
proof; but in the proper demonstrative order, i. e. preceded by the
conclusions which ought to precede it, it can become a necessary one.
Ghazali says:
The sixth proof is that they say that, if the intellect
perceived through a bodily organ like sight, it would be just
as incapable of perceiving its own organ as the other
senses; but it perceives the brain and the heart and what is

452

claimed to be its organ, so that it is proved that it has no
organ or substratum, for otherwise it would not perceive the
brain and the heart.
We have the same kind of objection against this as
against the preceding proof. We say it is not inconceivable
that sight should perceive its subject, for that it does not
perceive it is only what happens in the usual course of
events. Or shall we rather say it is not impossible that the
senses should differ individually in this respect, although it is
common to them all to be impressed on bodies, as has been
said before? And why do you say that what exists in a body
cannot perceive the body, and how do you know its
impossibility in all cases, since to make an infinite
generalization from a finite number of individual cases has
no logical validity? In logic it is stated, as an example of an
inference made from one particular cause or many particular
causes to all causes, that when we say, after learning it by
induction through observing all the animals, ‘all animals
move the lower jaw in masticating’, the crocodile has been
neglected, since it moves the upper. ‘ The philosophers have
only made the induction from the five senses, and found this
known common feature in them and then judged that all the
senses must be like this. But perhaps the intellect is another
type of sense which stands in regard to the other senses as
the crocodile stands to the other animals, and in this case
there would be some senses which could perceive their
substratum although they were corporeal and divisible, and
other senses which could not do this; just as the senses can
be divided into those which perceive the thing perceived
without contact, like sight, and those which cannot perceive
without contact, like taste and touch. Although, therefore,
what the philosophers affirm creates a certain presumption,
it does not afford reliable evidence.
But it may be said by the philosophers: We do not merely
point to the enumeration of the senses but lay stress on a
proof, and say that if the heart or the brain were the soul of

453

man, he could never be unaware of them, and never for a
moment not think of them, just as he is never unconscious of
himself; for nobody’s self is ever unaware of itself, but it is
always affirming itself in its soul, but as long as man has not
heard any one speaking about the heart and the brain or has
not observed them through the dissection of another man,
he does not perceive them and does not believe in their
existence. But if the intellect inhered in the body, it would
necessarily either think or not think of this body continually;
neither the one nor the other is the case, but it sometimes
thinks of its body and sometimes does not. This can be
proved by the fact that the perception which inheres in the
substratum perceives that substratum either because of a
relation between itself and the substratum-and one cannot
imagine another relation between them than that of
inherence-and then the perception must perceive its
substratum continually, or this relation will not suffice; and in
this case the perception can never perceive its substratum,
since there can never occur another relation between them;
just as because of the fact that it thinks itself, it thinks itself
always and is not sometimes aware, sometimes unaware of
itself.
But we answer: As long as a man is conscious of himself
and aware of his soul, he is also aware of his body; indeed,
the name, form, and shape of the heart are not well defined
for him, but he regards his soul and self as a body to such
an extent that he regards even his clothes and his house as
belonging to his self, ‘ but the soul or the self which the
philosophers mention has no relation to the house or the
clothes. This primary attribution of the soul to the body is
necessary for man, and his unconsciousness of the form and
name of his soul is like his unconsciousness of the seat of
smell, which is two excrescences in the foremost part of the
brain resembling the nipples of the breast; still, everyone
knows that he perceives smell with his body, but he does not
represent the shape of the seat of this perception, nor does
he define this seat, although he perceives that it is nearer to

454

his head than to his heels, and, in relation to the whole of his
head, nearer to the inside of his nose than to the inside of
his ear. Man knows his soul in the same way, and he knows
that the essence through which the soul exists is nearer to
his heart and breast than to his foot, and he supposes that
his soul will persist when he loses his foot, but he does not
regard it as possible that his soul should persist when his
heart is taken away. But what the philosophers say about his
being sometimes aware of his body, sometimes not, is not
true.
I say:
As to his objection against the assertion that a body or a bodily faculty
cannot know itself, because the senses are perceptive faculties in bodies
and do not know themselves, this assertion indeed is based on induction,
and induction does not provide absolute evidence. ; As to Ghazali’s
comparison of this to the induction which establishes that all animals move
their lower jaw, this comparison is only valid in part. For the induction that
all animals move their lower jaw is an imperfect one, because not all
animals have been enumerated; whereas the man who assumes that no
sense perceives itself has certainly made a complete induction, for there
are no other senses than the five. ‘ But the judgement based on the
observation of the senses that no perceptive faculty is in a body
resembles the induction by which it is judged that all animals move their
lower jaw; for, just as in the latter case not all the animals, in the former
not all the perceptive faculties are enumerated?
As to his saying in the name of the philosophers that if the intellect were
in the body, it would, when it perceives, perceive the body in which it is,
this is a silly and inane assertion which is not made by the philosophers. It
would only follow if everyone who perceived a thing had to perceive it
together with its definition; but that is not so, for we perceive the soul and
many other things without perceiving their definition. If, indeed, we
perceived the definition of the soul together with its existence, we should
of necessity know through its definition that it was in the body or that it
was incorporeal; for, if it were in the body, the body would be necessarily
included in its definition, and if it were not in the body, the body would not

455

be included in the definition. And this is what one must believe about this
problem.
As for Ghazali’s objection, that a man knows of his soul that it is in his
body although he cannot specify in which part-this indeed is true, for the
ancients had different opinions about its seat, but our knowledge that the
soul is in the body does not mean that we know that it receives its
existence through being in the body; this is not self-evident, and is a
question about which the philosophers ancient as well as modern differ,
for if the body serves as an instrument for the soul, the soul does not
receive its existence through the body; but if the body is like a substratum
for its accident; then the soul can only exist through the body.
Ghazali says:
The seventh proof. The philosophers say that the
faculties which perceive through the bodily organs become
tired through the long-continued performance of the act of
perception, since the continuation of their action destroys the
mixture of their elements and tires them, and in the same
way excessive stimulation of the perceptive faculties makes
them weak and often even corrupts them, so that afterwards
they are not able to perceive something lighter and more
delicate; so for instance a loud voice and a strong light
hinder or corrupt the perception of a low voice and delicate
objects of sight afterwards; and in fact the man who tastes
something extremely sweet does not afterwards taste
something less sweet. But the intellectual faculty behaves in
the opposite way; a long observation of intelligibles does not
tire it, and the perception of important necessary truths gives
it strength for the perception of easy observations and does
not weaken it, and if sometimes tiredness may befall it, this
happens because it makes use of and gets assistance from
the imaginative faculty, so that the organ of the imaginative
faculty becomes weary and no longer serves the intellect.
Our objection to this follows the same line as before, and
we say that it may well be that the bodily senses differ in
this; and what is true for some of them need not be true for

456

others-yes, it may be that the bodies themselves may differ
and that some of them may grow weak through a certain
type of movement, whereas others may grow strong through
a certain type of movement, not weak, and that when this
type of movement has made an impression on them, it
causes a renewal of strength in them so that they do not
perceive any new impression made on them. And all this is
possible, since a judgement valid for some is not valid for all.
I say:
This is an old proof of the philosophers, and it amounts to this: that when
the intellect perceives a strong intelligible and afterwards turns to the
perception of a slighter, it perceives it more easily, and this shows that it
does not perceive through the body, since we find that the bodily
perceptive faculties are impressed by strong sensations in a way which
lessens their power of perception, so that after strong sensations they
cannot perceive things of slight intensity. The reason is that through every
form which inheres in a body the body receives an impression, because
this form is necessarily mixed with it; for otherwise this form would not be
a form in a body. Now since the philosophers found that the receptacle of
the intelligibles was not impressed by the intelligibles, they decided that
this receptacle was not a body.
And against this there is no objection. For every substratum which is
impressed congruously or incongruously by the inherence of the form in it,
be it little or much, is necessarily corporeal, and the reverse is also true,
namely that everything corporeal is impressed by the form which is
realized in it, and the magnitude of the impression depends on the
magnitude of the mixing of the form and the body. And the cause of this is
that every becoming is the consequence of a change, and if a form could
inhere in a body without a change it might happen that, there could be a
form whose realization did not impress its substratum.
Ghazali says:
The eighth proof is that the philosophers say: ‘All the
faculties of parts of the body become weaker, when they
have reached the end of their growth at forty years and later;
so sight and hearing and the other faculties become weaker,

457

but the intellectual faculty becomes strong in most cases
only after this age. ‘ And the loss of insight in the intelligibles,
through illness in the body and through dotage in old age,
does not argue against this, for as long as it is proved that at
certain times the intellect is strong notwithstanding the
weakness of the body, it is clear that it exists by itself, and its
decline at the time of the declining of the body does not
imply that it exists through the body, for from a negative
consequent alternating with a positive consequent there is
no inference. For we say that, if the intellectual faculty exists
through the body, then the weakness of the body will
weaken it at all times, but the consequent is false and
therefore the antecedent is false; but, when we say the
consequent is true, sometimes it does not follow that the
antecedent is true. Further, the cause of this is that the soul
has an activity through itself, when nothing hinders it and it is
not preoccupied with something. For the soul has two kinds
of action, one in relation to the body, namely to govern and
rule it, and one in relation to its principles and essence, and
this is to perceive the intelligibles, and these two kinds of
action hinder each other and are opposed to each other, and
when it is occupied with the one action, it turns away from
the other and it cannot combine both. And its occupations
through the body are sense-perception and imagination and
the passions, anger, fear, grief, and pain, but when it sets
out to think the intelligible it neglects all these other things.
Yes, sense-perception by itself sometimes hinders the
apprehension and contemplation of the intellect without the
occurrence of any damage to the organ of the intellect or to
the intellect itself, and the reason for this is that the soul is
prevented from one action through being occupied with
another, and therefore during pain, disease, and fear-for this
also is a disease of the brain-intellectual speculation leaves
off. And why should it be impossible that through this
difference in these two kinds of action in the soul they should
hinder each other, since even two acts of the same kind may
impede each other, for fear is stunned by pain and desire by

458

anger and the observation of one intelligible by that of
another? And a sign that the illness which enters the body
does not occur in the substratum of the sciences is that,
when the sick man recovers, he does not need to learn the
sciences anew, but the disposition of his soul becomes the
same as it was before, and those sciences come back to him
exactly as they were without any new learning.
The objection is that we say that there may be
innumerable causes for the increase and the decrease of the
faculties, for some of the faculties increase in power at the
beginning of life, some in middle life, some at the end, and
the same is the case with the intellect and only a topical
proof can be claimed. And it is not impossible that smell and
sight should differ in this, that smell becomes stronger after
forty years and sight weaker, although they both inhere in
the body, just as those faculties differ in animals; for in some
animals smell is stronger, in others hearing and sight
because of the difference in their temperaments, and it is not
possible to ascertain these facts absolutely. Nor is it
impossible that the temperament of the organs also should
differ with individual persons and conditions. One of the
reasons why the decay of sight is earlier than the decay of
the intellect is that sight is earlier, for a man sees when he is
first created, Whereas his intellect is not mature before
fifteen years or more, ‘ according to the different opinions we
find people to have about this problem; and it is even said
that greyness comes earlier to the hair on the head than to
that on the beard, because the hair on the head grows
earlier. If one goes deeper into these causes and does not
simply refer them to the usual course of nature, one cannot
base any sure knowledge thereon, because the possibilities
for certain faculties to become stronger and others weaker
are unlimited, and nothing evident results from this.
I say:
When it is assumed that the substratum of the perceptive faculties is the
natural heat, and that natural heat suffers diminution after forty years, then

459

intellect must behave in the same way in this respect; that is, if its
substratum is natural heat, then it is necessary that the intellect should
become old as the natural heat becomes old. If, however, it is thought that
the substrata for the intellect and the senses are different, then it is not
necessary that both should be similar in their lifetimes.
Ghazali says:
The ninth proof is that the philosophers say: How can
man be attributed to body with its accidents, for those bodies
are continually in dissolution, and nutrition replaces what is
dissolved, so that when we see a child after its separation
from its mother’s womb fall ill a few times and become thin
and then fat again and grow up, we may safely say that after
forty years no particle remains of what was there when his
mother was delivered of it. Indeed, the child began its
existence out of the parts of the sperm alone, but nothing of
the particles of the sperm remains in it; no, all this is
dissolved and has changed into something else, and then
this body has become another. Still we say that the identical
man remains and his notions remain with him from the
beginning of his youth, although all the bodily parts have
changed. And this shows that the soul has an existence
outside the body and that the body is its organ!
The objection is that this is contradicted by what happens
to animals and plants, for when the condition of their being
small is compared to the condition of their being big, their
identity is asserted equally with the identity of man; still, it
does not prove that they have an incorporeal existence. ‘
And what is said about knowledge is refuted by the retention
of imaginative forms, for they remain in the boy from youth to old age, although the particles of his brain change.
I say
None of the ancient philosophers used this proof for the survival of the
soul; they only used it to show that in individuals there is an essence
which remains from birth to death and that things are not in an eternal flux,
as was believed by many ancients who denied necessary knowledge, so

460

that Plato was forced to introduce the forms. There is no sense in
occupying ourselves with this, and the objection of Ghazali against this
proof is valid.
Ghazali says:
The tenth proof is that they say that the intellectual
faculty perceives the general intellectual universals which
the theologians call modes, so that man in general is
apprehended (whereas the senses perceive the individuality
of a definite man), and this universal differs from the man
who is perceived by the senses, for what is perceived by the
senses is in a particular place, and his colour, size, and
position are particular, but the intelligible absolute man is
abstracted from all these things; however, in him there is
everything to which the term ‘man’ is applied, although he
has not the colour, size, position, or place, of the man
perceived by the senses, and even a man who may exist in
the future is subsumed under him; indeed, if man
disappeared there would remain this reality of man in the
intellect, in abstraction from all these particular things.
And in this way, from everything perceived by the senses
as an individual, there results for the intellect a reality,
universal and abstracted from matters and from positions, so
that its attributes can be divided into, what is essential (as,
for example, corporeity for plants and animals, and animality
for man) and into what is accidental (like whiteness and
length for man), and this reality is judged as being essential
or accidental for the genus of man and plant and
ofeverything not apprehended as an individual perceived by
the senses, and so it is shown that the universal, in
abstraction from sensible attachments, is intelligible and
invariable in the mind of man.
This intelligible universal cannot be pointed at, , nor has it
a position or size, and in its abstraction from position and
matter it is either related to its object (which is impossible, for
its object has position and place and size) or to its subject

461

(which is the rational soul), and therefore the soul cannot
have a position or be pointed at or have a size, for if it had all
these things what inheres in it would also possess them. z
And the objection is that the idea of a universal which you
philosophers assume as existing in the intellect is not
accepted by us. ; According to us nothing inheres in the
intellect but what inheres in the senses, only it inheres in the
senses as an aggregate which they cannot separate,
whereas the intellect is able to do so. Further, when it is
separated, the single part separated from its attachments is
just as much an individual in the intellect as the aggregate
with its attachments, only this invariable part’ in the mind is
related to the thing thought oft and to similar things by one
single relation, and in this way it is said to be a universal. For
there is in the intellect the forma of the individual thing
thought of which is first perceived by the senses, and the
relation of this form to all the individuals of this genus which
the senses perceive is one and the same. If, after seeing
one man, someone sees another, no new form occurs to
him, as happens when he sees a horse after seeing a man,
for then two different forms occur in him. A similar thing
happens to the senses themselves, for when a man sees
water, one form occurs in his imagination, and if he sees
blood afterwards, another form occurs, but if he sees
another water, no other form occurs, but the form of the
water which is impressed on his imagination is an image for
all individual stretches of water, and for this reason it is often
thought to be a universal.
And in the same way, when for instance he sees a hand,
there occurs in his imagination and in his intellect the natural
position of its parts, namely the surface of the hand and the
division of the fingers in it and the ending of the fingers in the
nails, and besides this there occur to him the smallness or
bigness of the hand and its colour, and if he sees another
hand which resembles the first in everything, no other new
form occurs to him; no, this second observation, when a new

462

thing occurs, does not produce an impression on his
imagination, just as, when he sees the water after having
previously seen it in one and the same vessel and in the
same quantity, no new impression is produced. And he may
see another hand, different in colour and size, and then
there occurs to him another colour and another size, but
there does not happen to him a new form of hand, for the
small black hand has in common with the big white hand the
position of its parts, differing from it in colour, and of that in
which the second hand agrees with the first no new form is
produced, since both forms are identical, but the form of the
things in which they differ is renewed. And this is the
meaning of the universal both in sensation and in intellect,
for when the intellect apprehends the form of the body of an
animal, then it does not acquire a new form of corporeity
from a plant, just as in imagination the form of two stretches
of water perceived at two different times need not be
renewed; and the same happens with all things that have
something in common.
But this does not permit one to assert the existence of a
universal which has no position whatever, although the
intellect can judge that there exists something that cannot be
pointed at and has no spatial position; for instance, it can
assert the existence of the creator of the universe, with the
understanding, however, that such a creator cannot be
imagined to exist in matter, and in this kind of reality the
abstraction from matter is in the intelligible itself and is not
caused by the intellect and by thinking. But as to the forms
acquired from material things, this happens in the way we
have mentioned.
I say:
The meaning of the philosophical theory he relates is that the intellect
apprehends, in relation to the individuals which have a common species, a
single entity, in which they participate and which is the quiddity of this
species without this entity’s being divided into the things in which the
individuals qua individuals are divided, like space and position and the

463

matters through which they receive their plurality. This entity must be
ingenerable and incorruptible’ and is not destroyed by the disappearance
of one of the individuals in which it exists, and the sciences therefore are
eternal and not corruptible except by accident, that is to say by their
connexion with Zaid and Amr; that is, only through this connexion are they
corruptible, and not in themselves, since if they were transitory in
themselves this connexion would exist in their essence and they could not
constitute an identity. And the philosophers say that, if this is established
for the intellect and the intellect is in the soul, it is necessary that the soul
should not be. divisible in the way in which individuals are divisible, and
that the soul in Amr and in Zaid should be one single entity. And this proof
is strong in the case of the intellect, because in the intellect there is no
individuality whatever; the soul, however, although it is free from the
matters’ through which the individuals receive their plurality, is said by the
most famous philosophers not to abandon the nature of the individual,
although it is an apprehending entity. This is a point which has to be
considered.
As for Ghazali’s objection, it amounts to saying that the intellect is
something individual and that universality is an accident of it, and
therefore Ghazali compares the way in which the intellect observes a
common feature in individuals to the way in which the senses perceive the
same thing many times, since for Ghazali the intelligible is a unity, but not
something universal, and for him the animality of Zaid is numerically
identical with the animality which he observes in Khalid And this is false,
and if it were true, there would be no difference between sense-perception
and the apprehension of the intellect.

The Third Discussion
And after this Ghazali says that the philosophers have two proofs to
demonstrate that the soul after once existing cannot perish. The first is
that if the soul perished this could only be imagined in one of these three
ways: either (1) it perishes simultaneously with the body, or (2) through an
opposite which is found in it, or (3) through the power of God, the
powerful. It is false that it can perish through the corruption of the body, for
it is separated from the body. It is false that it can have an opposite, for a

464

separate substance has no opposite. ‘ And it is false, as has been shown
before, that the power of God can attach itself to non-being.
Now, Ghazali objecting to the philosophers answers: ‘We theologians do
not admit that the soul is external to the body; besides, it is the special
theory of Avicenna that the souls are numerically differentiated through the
differentiation of the bodies, for that there should be one single soul in
every respect and in all people brings about many impossibilities, for
instance that when Zaid knows some. thing Amr should know it too, and
when Amr does not know something Zaid should not know it either; and
many other impossibilities follow from this assumption. ‘And Ghazali
adduces against Avicenna the argument that when it is assumed that the
souls are numerically differentiated through the differentiation of the
bodies, then they are attached to the bodies and must necessarily perish
with their decay.
The philosophers, however, can answer that it is by no means necessary
that, when there exists between two things a relation of attachment and
love, for instance the relation between the lover and the beloved and the
relation between iron and the magnet, the destruction of the one should
cause the destruction of the other. But Avicenna’s opponents may ask his
partisans through what the individuation and numerical plurality of souls
takes place, when they are separated from their matters, for the numerical
plurality of individuals arises only through matter. He who claims the
survival and the numerical plurality of souls should say that they are in a
subtle matter, namely the animal warmth which emanates from the
heavenly bodies, and this is a warmth which is not fire and in which there
is not a principle of fire; in this warmth there are the souls which create the
sublunary bodies and those which inhere in these bodies . And none of
the philosophers is opposed to the theory that in the elements there is
heavenly warmth and that this is the substratum for the potencies which
produce animals and plants, but some of the philosophers call this
potency a natural heavenly potency, whereas Galen calls it the forming
power and sometimes the demiurge, saying that it seems that there exists.
a wise maker of the living being who has created it and that this is
apparent from anatomy, but where this maker is and what His substance
is is too lofty a problem for human understanding. ‘ From this Plato proves
that the soul is separated from the body, for the soul creates and forms

465

the body, and if the body were the condition for the existence of the soul,
the soul would not have created it or formed it. z This creative soul is most
apparent in the animals which do not procreate, but it is also evident in the
animals which do. And just as we know that the soul is something added
to the natural warmth, since it is not of the nature of warmth qua warmth to
produce well-ordered intelligible acts, so we know that the warmth which is
in the seeds does not suffice to create and to form. And the philosophers
do not disagree about the fact that there are in the elements souls creating
each species of animals, plants, and minerals that exists, and that each of
them needs a directing principle and preserving powers for it to come into
existence and remain. And these souls are either like intermediaries
between the souls of the heavenly bodies and the souls in the sensible
bodies of the sublunary world, and then no doubt they have absolute
dominion over these latter souls and these bodies, and from here arises
the belief in the Jinn, ‘ or these souls themselves are attached to the
bodies which they create according to a resemblance which exists
between them, and when the bodies decay they return to their spiritual
matter and to the subtle imperceptible bodies.
And there are none of the old philosophers who do not acknowledge
these souls, and they only disagree as to whether they are identical with
the souls in our bodies or of another kind. And as to those who accept a
bestower of forms, they regard these powers as a separate intellect; but
this theory is not found in any of the old philosophers, but only in some
philosophers of Islam, because it belongs to their principles that the
separate principles do not change their matters by transformation in
respect of substance and primarily, for the cause of change is the opposite
of the thing changed. s This question is one of the most difficult in
philosophy, and the best explanation that can be given of this problem is
that the material intellect thinks an infinite number of things in one single
intelligible, and that it judges these things in a universal judgement, and
that that which forms its essence is absolutely immaterial . b Therefore
Aristotle praises Anaxagoras’ for having made intellect, namely an
immaterial form, the prime mover, and for this reason it does not suffer
any action from anything, for the cause of passivity is matter and in this
respect the passive potencies are in the same position as the active, for it
is the passive potencies possessing matters which accept definite things.

466

The Fourth Discussion
Having finished this question Ghazali begins to say that the philosophers
deny bodily resurrection. This is a problem which is not found in any of the
older philosophers, although resurrection has been mentioned in different
religions for at least a thousand years and the philosophers whose
theories have come to us are of a more recent date. The first to mention
bodily resurrection were the prophets of Israel after Moses, as is evident
from the Psalms and many books attributed to the Israelites. Bodily
resurrection is also affirmed in the New Testament and attributed by
tradition to Jesus. It is a theory of the Sabaeans, whose religion is
according to Ibn Hazm the oldest.
But the philosophers in particular, as is only natural, regard this doctrine
as most important and believe in it most, and the reason is that it is
conducive to an order amongst men on which man’s being, as man,
depends and through which he can attain the greatest happiness proper to
him, for it is a necessity for the existence of the moral and speculative
virtuess and of the practical sciences in men. They hold namely that man
cannot live in this world without the practical sciences, nor in this and the
next world without the speculative virtues, and that neither of these
categories is perfected or completed without the practical virtues, b and
that the practical virtues can only become strong through the knowledge
and adoration of God by the services prescribed by the laws of the
different religions, like offerings and prayers and supplications and other
such utterances by which praise is rendered to God, the angels, and the
prophets.
In short, the philosophers believe that religious laws are necessary
political arts, the principles of which are taken from natural reason and
inspiration, especially in what is common to all religions, although religions
differ here more or less. The philosophers further hold that one must not
object either through a positive or through a negative statement to any of
the general religious principles, for instance whether it is obligatory to
serve God or not, and still more whether God does or does not exist, and
they affirm this also concerning the other religious principles, for instance
bliss in the beyond and its possibility; for all religions agree in the
acceptance of another existence after death, although they differ in the

467

description of this existence, just as they agree about the knowledge,
attributes, and acts of God, although they differ more or less in their
utterances about the essence and the acts of the Principle. All religions
agree also about the acts conducive to bliss in the next world, although
they differ about the determination of these acts.
In short, the religions are, according to the philosophers, obligatory,
since they lead towards wisdom in a way universal to all human beings,
for philosophy only leads a certain number of intelligent people to the
knowledge of happiness, and they therefore have to learn wisdom,
whereas religions seek the instruction of the masses generally.
Notwithstanding this, we do not find any religion which is not attentive to
the special needs of the learned, although it is primarily concerned with
the things in which the masses participate. And since the existence of the
learned class is only perfected and its full happiness attained by
participation with the class of the masses, the general doctrine is also
obligatory for the existence and life of this special class, both at the time of
their youth and growth (and nobody doubts this), and when they pass on
to attain the excellence which is their distinguishing characteristic. For it
belongs to the necessary excellence of a man of learning that he should
not despise the doctrines in which he has been brought up, and that he
should explain them in the fairest way, and that he should understand that
the aim of these doctrines lies in their universal character, not in their
particularity, and that, if he expresses a doubt concerning the religious
principles in which he has been brought up, or explains them in a way
contradictory to the prophets and turns away from their path, he merits
more than anyone else that the term unbeliever should be applied to him,
and he is liable to the penalty for unbelief in the religion in which he has
been brought up.
Further, he is under obligation to choose the best religion of his period,
even when they are all equally true for him, and he must believe that the
best will be abrogated by the introduction of a still better. Therefore the
learned who were instructing the people in Alexandria became Muslims
when Islam reached them, and the learned in the Roman Empire became
Christians when the religion of Jesus was introduced there. And nobody
doubts that among the Israelites there were many learned men, and this is
apparent from the books which are found amongst the Israelites and

468

which are attributed to Solomon. And never has wisdom ceased among
the inspired, i. e. the prophets, and therefore it is the truest of all sayings
that every prophet is a sage, ‘ but not every sage a prophet; the learned,
however, are those of whom it is said that they are the heirs of the
prophets.
And since in the principles of the demonstrative sciences there are
postulates and axioms which are assumed, this must still more be the
case for the religions which take their origin in inspiration and reason.
Every religion exists through inspiration and is blended with reason. And
he who holds that it is possible that there should exist a natural religion
based on reason alone must admit that this religion must be less perfect
than those which spring from reason and inspiration. And all philosophers
agree that the principles of action must be taken on authority, for there is
no demonstration for the necessity of action except through the existence
of virtues which are realized through moral actions and through practice.
And it is clear from this that all the learned hold about religions the opinion
that the principles of the actions and regulations prescribed in every
religion are received from the prophets and lawgivers, who regard those
necessary principles as praiseworthy which most incite the masses to the
performance of virtuous acts; and so nobody doubts that those who are
brought up on those principles are of a more perfect virtue than those who
are brought up on others, for instance that the prayers in our religion hold
men back from ignominy and wickedness, as God’s word certifies, and
that the prayer ordained in our religion fulfils this purpose more truly than
the prayers ordained in others, and this by the conditions imposed on it of
number, time, recitation, purity, and desistance from acts and words
harmful to it. And the same may be said of the doctrine of the beyond in
our religion, which is more conducive to virtuous actions than what is said
in others. Thus to represent the beyond in material images is more
appropriate than purely spiritual representation, as is said in the Divine
Words: ‘The likeness of the Paradise which those who fear God are
promised, beneath it rivers flow. ‘; And the Prophet has said: ‘In it there is
what no eye has seen, no ear has heard, nor ever entered the mind of
man. ‘And Ibn Abbas said: ‘There is no relation in the other world to this
world but the names. ‘ And he meant by this that the beyond is another
creation of a higher order than this world, and another phase superior to

469

our earthly. He need not deny this who believes that we see one single
thing developing itself from one phase to another, for instance the
transformation of the inorganic into beings conscious of their own
essences, i. e. the intellectual forms. Those who are in doubt about this
and object to it and try to explain it are those who seek to destroy the
religious prescriptions and to undo the virtues. They are, as everyone
knows, the heretics and those who believe that the end of man consists
only in sensual enjoyment. When such people have really the power to
destroy religious belief both theologians and philosophers will no doubt kill
them, but when they have no actual power the best arguments that can be
brought against them are those that are contained in the Holy Book. What
Ghazali says against them is right, and in refuting them it must be
admitted that the soul is immortal, as is proved by rational and religious
proofs, and it must be assumed that what arises from the dead is
simulacra’ of these earthly bodies, not these bodies themselves, for that
which has perished does not return individually and a thing can only return
as an image of that which has perished, not -as a being identical with what
has perished, as Ghazali declares. Therefore the doctrine of resurrection
of those theologians who believe that the soul is an accident and that the
bodies which arise are identical with those that perished cannot be true.
For what perished and became anew can only be specifically, not
numerically, one, and this argument is especially valid against those
theologians who hold that an accident does not last two moments.
Ghazali accused the philosophers of heresy on three points. One
concerns this question, and we have already shown what opinion the
philosophers hold about this, and that according to them it is a speculative
problem. The second point is the theory attributed to the philosophers that
God does not know individuals, but here again we have shown that they
do not say this. The third point is their theory of the eternity of the world,
but again we have shown that what they understand by this term has not
the meaning for which they are accused of heresy by the theologians.
Ghazali asserts in this book that no Muslim believes in a purely spiritual
resurrection, and in another book he says that the Sufis hold it. According
to this latter assertion those who believe in a spiritual but not in a
perceptible resurrection are not declared heretics by universal consent,
and this permits belief in a spiritual resurrection. But again in another book
he repeats his accusation of heresy as if it rested on universal consent .

470

And all this, as you see, is confusing. And no doubt this man erred in
religious questions as he erred in rational problems. God is the succourer
for the finding of what is true, and He invests with the truth whomever He
chooses.
I have decided to break off my inquiry about these things here, and I ask
pardon for their discussion, and if it were not an obligation to seek the
truth for those who are entitled to it-and those are, as Galen says, one in a
thousand’-and to prevent from discussion those who have no claim to it, I
would not have treated all this. And God knows every single letter, and
perhaps God will accept my excuse and forgive my stumbling in His
bounty, generosity, munificence and excellence-there is no God but He!

The End

471

Note

This concludes the complete translation of the book.
The translator’s notes which are in a second volume have not been
included.
Al-Ghazali’s original work has been translated by M. Marmura who
mentioned
in his introduction that S. Van Den Bergh has made errors in the
translation
due to his understanding of al-Ghazali’s work that Ibn Rushd quotes
above.

472

