PAKISTAN PHILOSOPHICAL CONGRESS PUBLICATION NO. 3

~ AL-GHAZALI’S |
TAHAFUT AL-FALASIFAH

[INCOHERENCE OF THE PHILOSOPHERS]

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH

by
SABIH AHMAD KAMALI

1963

PAKISTAN PHILOSOPHICAL CONGRESS
CLUB ROAD, LAHORE—3

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

hensive plan for the translation of Islamic classics under

the auspices of the Muslim Educational Conference, Ali-
garh, India. Prof. M. M. Sharif, then the Chairman of the
Philosophy Department, Muslim University, Aligarh, was
appointed as my guide. Soon after, I left Aligarh, and Prof.
Sharif left India. Therefore, I could not submit to him more
than the first few pages (i.e., 1-35) of the translation. Prof.
Sharif’s departure not only deprived_me of his invaluable
guidance, but also left the Muslim Educational Conference
in an uncertain frame of mind. Consequently, I decided to
have our contractual relationship terminated ; but the trans-
lation continued.

When in 1953 I came to study at the Institute of Islamic
Studies, McGill University, Montreal, Canada, the first draft
of this work was complete. The Institute organised a Ghazali
Seminar, at which my readings from that first draft served a
twofold purpose. On the one hand, they enabled the mem-
bers of the Seminar to acquaint themselves with Ghazali’s
chief philosophical work. On the other hand, they enabled
me to revise my translation in the light of the comments
made by the ‘auditors.’ Prof. Fadl al-Rahman of the Uni- |
versity of Durham, England, and Dr. A. G. O’Connor of the
University of Montreal were the two members of the Seminar
who also kindly read (or audited) the revised version, as I
could make it ready for them by slow degrees. It was at
this stage that the Institute obtained for us a proof copy of
Dr. Simon Van den Bergh’s English translation of Ibn
Rushd’s Tahafut al-Tahafut (since published under the aus-
pices of the Gibb Memorial Trust and the International
Commission for the Translation of Great Works: Oxford
University Press, 1954). It gives me very great [pleasure to
acknowledge the use | have made of Dr. Van den Bergh’s
scholarly work (vide the Note on pp. 309-10 which now may
be taken to refer to the published work as well).

When revised and supplied with an Introduction and
Notes, this work was submitted to, and accepted by, the

‎present work began in 1948 as part of a compre-‏ ا

‎McGill University (1945) as my M.A. thesis. That a work

‎Vv

‎4

‎Copyrigth

‎All rights, including those of translation and reproduction
in parts or whole, except for purposes of review, reserved

‎First published, 1958
Second impression, 1963

‎Printed by
Photo offset process at Nawa-i-Waqt Printers
Queen’s Road, Lahore

‎Published by
B. A. Dar, Secretary (Publications)
Pakistan Philosophical Congress, Lahore
CONTENTS
Page

Translator’s Preface ٠ v
Introduction I

Problems

I. Refutation of the philosophers’ belief in the

Eternity of the world 13
II. Refutation of their belief in the everlasting
nature of the world, time and motion 54

111. Of their dishonesty in saying that God is the
agent and the maker of the world which is His
action or product: and the explanation of the
fact that these words have only a metaphorical,

not real, significance to them . 63
IV. To show their inability to prove the existence
of the creator of the world 89

V. Of their inability to prove by rational arguments
that God is one, and that it is not possible to
suppose two necessary beings each of which is

uncaused 96
VI. Refutation of their denial of the Divine Attri-
butes 109

VII. Refutation of their thesis that it is impossible
that something should share a genus with God,
being separated from Him by differentia; and
that the intellectual division into genus and
differentia is inapplicable to Him 125

VIII. Refutation of their thesis that God's is simple
being—i.e., it is pure being, without a quiddity
of essence to which existence would be related—
and that necessary existence is to Him what
quiddity is to any other being 132.

IX. Of their inability to prove by rational arguments
that God is not body 136

X. Of their inability to prove by rational arguments
that there is a cause or creator of the world 140

Vii

Translator’s Preface

originally undertaken outside McGill should have been accept-
ed as a Thesis, or that I should have so compelety revised
it as to make of it quite a new thing, is due to the interest
taken in this work by Prof. W.C. Smith, Director of the
Institute of Islamic Studies. Prof. Smith has also kindly
tried to help me to find a publisher. It is through his good
offices that the work has been accepted for publication by the
Pakistan Philosophical Congress. It is a great honour for
me thus to be connected with, and sponsored by the Congress,
even as the sense in which that organisation has connected
itself with Gahzali does honour to it. Nor is it a mere coin-
cidence that this honour should have been done to me by the
Philosophical Congress of Pakistan upon the recommendation
of its President, Prof. M. M. Sharif, who had been my guide,
and was one of the architects of the great plan once entertain-
ed by the Muslim Educational Conference at Aligrah.

Sabih Ahmad Kamali
Montreal :
March 11, 1958
INTRODUCTION
In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

transcends all limits, and His munificence which
outruns all measures :

To pour upon us the light of guidance, and to remove
from us the darkness of ignorance and wrong-doing ;

To make us like those who saw truth as truth, and
chose to follow it; and those who saw falsehood as false-
hood, and decided to eschew it ;

To bestow upon us the felicity which He has promised
to His saints and prophets; .

To initiate us, on our departure from the House of
Delusion, into that happiness the height of which cannot be
scanned by the understanding, and the extent of which
cannot be conjured up by the imagination ;

To give us, when after deliverance from the horrors
of the Doomsday we approach the bliss of Paradise, ‘‘that
which no eye ever saw, no ear ever heard, and which never
occurred to the heart of man’’; and

To invest with peace and bless our Prophet Muhammad
the Chosen one, the best one of all mankind; and his noble
descendants and pure companions, who were the keys to
guidance, and the lamps lit in darkness.

W BESEECH God, in the name of His greatness which

_ Now, I have observed that there is a class of men who
believe in their superiority to others because of their greater
intelligence and insight. They have abandoned all the
religious duties Islam imposes on its followers. They laugh
at the positive commandments of religion which enjoin the
performance of acts of devotion, and the abstinence from
forbidden things. They defy the injunctions of the Sacred
Law. Not only do they overstep the limits prescribed by
it, but they have renounced the Faith altogether, by having
indulged in diverse speculations, wherein they followed the
example of those people who ‘‘turn men aside from the path
of God, and seek to render it crooked; and who do not
believe in the life to come.’’ The heresy of these people has

I

=m

Page

143

150

153

163
168

172

185

197

221
229

249
251
257
261

Contents

Refutation of those philosophers who hold that
God knows the Other, and that He knows the
species and genera in a universal manner

To show their inability to prove that God knows
Himself either

Refutation of their doctrine that God (may He
be exalted above what they say) does not know
the particulars which are divisible in accordance
with the division of time into ‘will be,’ ‘was,’
and ‘is’

To show their inability to prove that the heaven
is living, and obeys God through its rotatory
motion

Refutation of what they consider to be the
purpose which moves the heaven

Refutation of their theory that the souls of the
heavens are aware of all the particulars which
originate in the world

Refutation of their belief in the impossibility of
a departure from the natural course of events
Of their inability to give a rational demonstration
of their theory that the human soul is a spiri-
tual substance which exists in itself; is not
space-filling ; is not body, or impressed upon
body ; and is neither connected nor disconnected
with body—as God is neither inside the world
nor outside it, or as the angels are

Refutation of their thesis that, having come
into being, the human souls cannot be destroyed ;
and that their everlasting nature makes it im-
possible for us to conceive of their destruction

Problems

XI.

XII.
XIII.

XIV.

XV.
XVI.

XVII.
XVIII.

XIX.

٠ XX. Refutation of their denial of the resurrection of

bodies

Conclusion

Notes

Bibliography

Vili

Index
111006

unaided by independent inquiry? Such a scandalous at-
titude is never taken by the unsophisticated masses of men ;
for they have an instinctive aversion to following the
example of misguided genius. Surely, their simplicity is
nearer to salvation than sterile genius can be, For total
blindness is less dangerous than oblique vision.

When I saw this vein of folly pulsating among these
idiots, I decided to write this book in order to refute the
ancient philosophers. It will expose the incoherence of their
beliefs and the inconsistency of their metaphysical theories.
It will bring to light the flimsiest and the obscurest. elements
of their thought which will provide some amusement for,
and serve as a warning to, the intelligent men. (I mean
those things which they contributed to beliefs and opinions,
and by virtue of which they thought they could be dis-
tinguished from the common men.)

Moreover, this book will set forth the doctrines of the
ancient philosophers as those doctrines really are. This will
serve the purpose of making it clear to the hide-bound
atheists of our day that every piece of knowledge, whether
ancient or modern, is really a corroboration of the faith
in God and in the Last Day. The conflict between faith and
knowledge is related only to the details superadded to these
two fundamental principles, the two recurring themes in the
teachings of all the prophets—i.e., divinely ordained persons
the truth of whose mission is evident from the miracles they
performed. It was only a few persons having irresponsible
views and perverted minds who denied these principles.
But in serious discussions no importance can be attached
to such persons; and no notice ought to be taken of them.
And they must be branded with diabolical perversity and
stupid contumacy, so that their example may be a deterrent
to people who tend to think that a vainglorious conversion
to unoriginal heresy would be an indication of intelligence
and good sense. This book is going to demonstrate that the
ancient philosophers, whose followers the atheists in our day
claim to be, were really untainted with what is imputed
to them. They never denied the validity of the religious
laws. On the contrary, they did believe in God, and did
have faith in His messengers; although in regard to the
minor details, they sometimes faltered and went astray, and
caused others to go astray, from the even path. We propose

3

Tahafut al-Falasifah

its basis only in an uncritical acceptance—like that of the
Jews and the Christians—of whatever one hears from others
or sees all around. They could not avoid it; for they were
born into an un-Islamic atmosphere, and their ancestors had
pursued no better ways. In the second place, such heresy
resuits from theoretical inquiries which are the outcome of
stumbling—sceptically, misguidedly and stupidly—upon
fanciful notions. (A similar case 1S that of the Disputants
who discussed the questions concerning faith and belief
raised by the People of wilful Innovations.) oo
The heretics in our times have heard the awe-inspiring
names of people like Socrates, Hippocrates, Plato, Aristotle,
etc. They have been deceived by the exaggerations made
by the followers of these philosophers —exaggerations to the
effect that the ancient masters possessed extraordinary
intellectual powers: that the principles they have discovered
are unquestionable: that the mathematical, logical, physical
and metaphysical sciences developed by them are the most
profound : that their excellent intelligence justifies their
bold attempts to discover the Hidden Things by deductive
methods : and that with all the subtlety of their intelligence
and the originality of their accomplishments they repudiated
the authority of religious laws: denied the validity of the
positive contents of historical religions, and believed that all
such things are only sanctimonious lies and trivialities.
When such stuff was dinned into their ears, and struck
a responsive chord in their hearts, the heretics in our times
thought that it would be an honour to join the company
of great thinkers for which the renunciation of their faith

learned he
far above the general level of common men. They refused to

be content with the religion followed by their ancestors.
They flattered themselves with the idea that it would do
them honour not to accept even truth uncritically. But
they had actually begun to accept falsehood uncritically.
They failed to see that a change from one kind of intellectual
bondage to another is only a self-deception, 2 stupidity.
What position in this world of God can be baser than that of

one who thinks that it is honourable to renounce the truth ~

which is accepted on authority, and then relapses into an
acceptance of P isehood which is still a matter of blind faith,

2
Introduction

and changes, which have necessitated further commentaries
and interpretations. As a result, the translations are as
much in dispute among the philosophers as the original
works are. However, the most faithful—as Aristotle’s trans-
Jators—and the most original—as his commentators—among
the philosophising Muslims are al-Farabi Abi Nasr, and Ibn
Sina. Therefore, we will confine our attention to what these
two have taken to be the authentic expression of the views
of their mis-leaders. For what they discarded and refused
to follow must undoubtedly have been utterly useless, and
should not call for an elaborate refutation.

Therefore, let it be known that we propose to concen-
trate on the refutation of philosophical thought as it emerges
from the writings of these two persons. For otherwise, the
scattered character of the philosophical theories should have
to be reflected in a proportionately loose arrangement of our
subject-matter.

PREFACE Two

Let it be known that the difference between the philosophers
and others is threefold.

In the first place, the dispute is centred upon a mere
word. Take for instance their use of the word ‘substance’
for God, meaning thereby a being which is not in a subject,
or a self-subsisting being which does not need an external
cause to continue it in existence.

We do not iniend here to undertake the refutation of
this terminology. For if the meaning of self-subsistence is
agreed upon, the applicability of the word ‘substance’ in
this senge will have to be considered from the etymological
point of view. If from that point of view, the application of the
word is justified, it will still be debatable whether the Sacred
Law approves of its use. For the permission to use words
as names (of God) or the injunction against their use is based
on what appears from the letter of the Sacred Law. Perhaps
you will say: ‘‘This word was used by the Mutakalliman
in the discussion of the Divine attributes. In the Sacred
Law, the Jurists never used it. It is, therefore, improper on
your part to confuse the realities of things with matters
of habit and custom (of which Figh treats).’’ But .(this is
inadmissible, because) I know that it amounts 10 discussion’

5

Tahafut al-Falasifah

to show how they slipped into error and falsehood. But our
examination will not obscure their solid achievements which
lie beneath the repulsive facade of their thought. Let God
be the sustainer and the helper in the investigations we have
undertaken.

Now to begin the book, we proceed to the Prefaces
which will presage the general trend of the discussion in
this book.

PREFACE ONE

Let it be known that it would be tedious to dwell at length
upon the differences among the philosophers themselves.
For prolixity is their manner, and their disputes are too
many, and their opinions are scattered, and their ways are
divergent and devious. Therefore, we will confine our atten-
tion to the inconsistencies which are found in the theories of
the premier philosopher who is called the Philosopher, or the
Firsi Teacher, for he systematised their sciences, and refor-
mulated them, eliminating all that was redundant int the
philosophers’ opinions, and retaining only that which was
close to the basic principles and tendencies of philosophical
thought. This is Aristotle, who refuted all his predecessors
— including his own teacher, whom the philosophers call the
divine Plato. Having refuted Plato, Aristotle excused him-
self by saying: ‘‘Plato is dear to us. And truth is dear,
too. Nay, truth is dearer than Plato.” ~

We have related this story in order to show that in their
own view there is nothing fixed and constant in the philo-
sophers’ position. They base their judgments on conjecture
and speculation, unaided by positive inquiry and uncon-
firmed by faith. They try to infer the truth of their meta-
physical theories from the clarity of the arithmetical and
logical sciences. And this method sometimes carries con-
viction with the weak-minded people. But if their meta-
physical theories had been as cogent and definite as their
arithmetical knowledge is, they would not have differed
among themselves on metaphysical questions as they do not
differ on the arithmetical.

As far as the translators of Aristotle’s works into Arabic
are concerned, our problem is even more difficult. For the
translations themselves have been subjected to interpolation

4
Introduction

eclipse is not caused by the death or the life of a man. When

ou see an eclipse, you must seek refuge in the contempla-
tion of God and in prayer.’’ How can this tradition be
reconciled with what the philosophers say ?

we will answer :

There is nothing in this tradition to contradict the philo-
sophers. It only denies that an eclipse has anything to
do with the life or the death of a man. _ Further, it enjoins
prayer at the time of an eclipse. The Sacred Law en-
jos prayer at the time of sunrise or sunset or during
the day ; what is unusual if, with a view to finding greater
favour (with God), it also enjoins prayer at the time of an
eclipse ?

[f it ts said:

At the end of the same tradition, the Prophet said:
“When God reveals Himself to something, it prostrates
itself before Him.’’ Does it not follow from this tradition
that an eclipse is an act of prostration caused by Revelation?

we will answer:

This addition is spurious. We must condemn its author
as a liar. The Prophet’s words are only those which have
been reported above. However, if this addition were authen-
tic, would it not be easier to interpret it than to reject the
evidence (of astronomical and mathematical sciences) which
is conclusive and definite? People have interpreted many a
plain text by rational arguments which never attained to
such clarity and cogency (as the astronomical and mathe-
matical arguments in this case have done).

The atheists would have the greatest satisfaction if the
supporter of religion made a positive assertion that things
of this kind are contrary to religion. For then it would be
easier for them to refute religion which stood or fell with its
opposition to these things. (It is, therefore, necessary for
the supporter of religion not to commit himself on these
questions,) because the fundamental question at issue
between him and the philosophers is only whether the world

7

Tahafut al-Falasifah

on whether it is permissible to use a certain name which
is truly applicable to the bearer of the name. And hence it
is equivalent to a discussion on whether a certain (moral)
action is permissible.

In the second place, there are those things in which
the philosophers believe, and which do not come into conflict
with any religious principle. And, therefore, disagreement
with the philosophers with respect to those things is not a
necessary condition for the faith in the prophets and the
apostles (may God bless them all). An example is their
theory that the lunar eclipse occurs when the light of the
Moon disappears as a consequence of the interposition of the
Earth between the Moon and the Sun. For the Moon derives
its light from the Sun, and the Earth is a round body
surrounded by Heaven on all the sides. Therefore, when the
Moon falls under the shadow of the Earth, the light of
the Sun is cut off from it. Another example is their theory
that the solar eclipse means the interposition of the body
of the Moon between the Sun and the observer, which occurs
when the Sun and the Moon are stationed at the intersection
of their nodes at the same degree.

We are not interested in refuting such theories either ;
for the refutation will serve no purpose. He who thinks
that it is his religious duty to disbelieve such things is really
unjust to religion, and weakens its cause. For these things
have been established by astronomical and mathematical
evidence which leaves no room for doubt. If you tell a
man, who has studied these things—so that he has sifted all
the data relating to them, and is, therefore, in a position to
forecast when a lunar or a solar eclipse will take place:
whether it will be total or partial ; and how long it will last
—that these things are contrary to religion, your assertion
will shake his faith in religion, not in these things. Greater
harm is done to religion by an immethodical helper than by
an enemy whose actions, however hostile, are yet regular.
For, as the proverb goes, a wise enemy is better than an
ignorant friend. -

If someone says :

The Prophet (may God bless him) has said: ‘‘The Sun
and the Moon are two signs among the signs of God. Their

6
Introduction
PREFACE Four

One of the most artful methods employed by the philoso-
phers is that, when in discussion they come up against
a difficulty, they say: ‘‘The science of metaphysics is
extremely subtle. Of all the sciences it is the most difficult
even for a sharp intelligence to grasp.’’ Those who follow
the philosophers employ a similar trick in order to get rid
of their difficulties. When they are unable to explain some-
thing in the work of their masters, they still glorify them
and say : ‘‘Undoubtedly, a solution can be found somewhere
in the sciences developed by theancient masters. Perhaps
our failure is the result of our inability to consult Logic and
Mathematics on this question.’’

To these suggestions, we will reply as follows :

As far as Mathematics is concerned, one of its two
branches, which is an inquiry into discrete quantity—viz.,
Arithmetic—has evidently nothing to do with Metaphysics.
To say that it is not possible to understand Metaphysics
without the help of Arithmetic is nonsense—like saying
that Medicine, or Grammar, or Literature cannot be under-
stood without the help of Arithmetic: or that Arithmetic
cannot be understood without the help of Medicine.

As regards the other branch of Mathematics—viz., Geo-
metry—which is an inquiry into continuous quantity, all
that it tells us is that the heavens and all that is below them
down to the Centre, i.e, the Earth, are round in shape.
Further, it tells us of the number of the strata of these things :
of the planets revolving in the Sphere ; and of the quantity
of their movements. Now, we can grant them all these
things—from conviction, or for the sake of the argument.
They need not adduce scientific evidence to prove them. But
there is nothing in these facts which proves or disproves
metaphysical principles. To say that there is something .
which does so is like saying: ‘‘To know whether this house
is the product of a knowing, willing, powerful and living
builder, it is necessary to discover whether it has six or eight
sides, and what is the number of its beams and bricks.’’
Obviously, such an assertion would be sheer nonsense, It
would be like saying: ‘‘The temporal character of an

9

Tahafut al-Falasifah

is eternal or began in time. If its beginning in time is
proved, it is all the same whether it is a round body, or a
simple thing, or an octagonal or hexagonal figure; and
whether the heavens and all that is below them form—as the
philosophers say—thirteen layers, or more, or less. Investi-
gation into these facts is no more relevant to metaphysi-
cal inquiries than an investigation into the number of the
layers of an onion, or the number of the seeds of a pomegra-
nate, would be. What we are interested in is that the world
is the product of God’s creative action, whatever the manner
of that action may be.

In the third place, there are philosophical theories
which come into violent conflict with the fundamental prin-
ciples of religion, e.g., the religious doctrines of the world’s
beginning in time: of the attributes of the Creator; and of
the resurrection of bodies. All these things have been de-
nied by the philosophers. Therefore, we propose to leave
the rest of the sections (enumerated above) aside, in order to
concentrate on this one, and on questions allied to it, in our
criticism of philosophical theories.

PREFACE THREE

LET it be known that it is our purpose to disillusion those
who think too highly of the philosophers, and consider
them to be infallible. Since I have undertaken to expose
the incoherence and contradiction involved in philosophical
thought, I will approach them in order to attack them, not
to defend something of mine own. I will refute what they
believe, by showing that it is a mixture of diverse elements
which come from such schools as the Mu‘tazilah, the Kar-
ramiyah, the Wagifiyah, etc. My attitude towards these
sects themselves is that, while it is not necessary for me to
defend any one of them, we are all equally opposed to the
philosophers. For we differ among ourselves only in regard
to the details; whereas the philosophers attack the very
basis of our religion. Let us, therefore, unite against the
common enemy ; for at a critica] juncture, we must forget our
private quarrels. ١
Introduction

After the Prefaces, let us give a list of the problems in whose
discussion in this book we will expose the contradiction involved
in the philosophers’ theorses.

And these problems are twenty :

(i) The refutation of their belief in the eternity of
the world. oo. ١

(ii) The refutation of their belief in the everlasting
nature of the world.

(iit) Their dishonest assertion that God is the Creator
of the world, and that the world is His product.

(iv) Demonstration of their inability to affirm the
Creator. 2

(v) Demonstration of their inability to prove the
impossibility of two gods by a rational argument.

(vi) Refutation of their denial of the Divine attri-
butes. .

(vii) Refutation of their theory that the Divine being
is not divisible into genus and differentia. ;

(viii) Refutation of their theory that the First (Prin-
ciple) is a simple unqualified being.

(ix) Demonstration of their inability to show that the
First (Principle) is not body.

(x) The thesis that they are bound to affirm the
eternity of the world, and deny the Creator.

(xi) Demonstration of their inability to maintain that
the First (Principle) knows any one other than
Himself. 7 001

(xii) Demonstration of their inability to maintam
that He knows Himself. ; ;

(xiii) Refutation of their doctrine that the First (Prin-
ciple) does not know the particulars. ;

(xiv) Refutation of their doctrine that the Heaven isa
living being whose movements are voluntary.

(xv) Refutation of their theory of the purpose of the
Heaven’s movement.

(xvi) Refutation of their doctrine that the souls of the
heavens know all the particulars. 000
(xvii) Refutation of their belief in the impossibility of a
departure from the natural course of events.
(xviii) Refutation of their theory that the soul of man

II

Tahafut al-Falasi fah

onion cannot be known, unless the number of its layers be
discovered’’ ; or, ‘‘ The temporal character of this pomegra-
nate cannot be known, unless the number of its seeds be
discovered.’’ This sort of argument simply does not appeal
to an intelligent mind.

As regards their contention that reference to Logic is
unavoidable, it is right. But Logic is not their monopoly.
Fundamentally, it is the same thing as in the Art of Scho-
lastic Reasoning we call the Book of Theoretical Inquiry.
The philosophers have changed its name to Logic to make it
look formidable. We often call it the Book of Disputation,
or the Data of the Intellects. Whe a gullible enthusiast
hears the word ‘Logic,’ he thinks that it is a new subject,
unknown to the Mutakallimun and cultivated by the phi-
losophers alone. In order to remove this misunderstanding,
we propose to discuss the Data of the Intellects in a separate
. work, where we will avoid the phraseology used by the
Mutakallimun and the Jurists, adopting for the time being
the terms used by the Logicians, so that the whole thing
might be cast into a different mould; and the methods of the
Logicians might be followed in the minutest detail. In that
book, we will speak to them in their language—I mean their
logical terminology. We will show there that

neither the conditions for the material validity of Syllo-
gism—laid down by them in the section of Logic devoted
to Demonstration—nor those for its formal validity—in
the Book of Syllogism—nor the postulates which they have
formulated in the Isagoge and Categories, and which form
the parts and preliminaries of Logic

are of any help to them in metaphysical sciences. But it is
necessary to reserve the discussion of the Data of the Intel-
lects for a separate book. For, although an instrument for
the understanding of the purport of this book, it is not indis-
pensable to every reader. Therefore, we are going to post-
pone it; so that he who does not need it may not be bothered
by it here. However, he who fails to understand some of
the terms used here will be well advised to begin with
mastering the contents of our book called The Standard of
Knowledge—viz., the (branch of) knowledge they call Logic.

To
PROBLEM I

REFUTATION OF THEIR BELIEF IN THE ETERNITY
OF THE WORLD

Details of the theory (of the eternity of the world) :

HE philosophers disagree among themselves as to the eter-
T nity of the world. But the majority of the philosophers

—ancient as well as modern—agree upon its eternity,
holding that it always coexisted with God (exalted be He) as
His effect which was concurrent with Him in,time—concur-
rent as an effect is with the cause, e.g., light with the Sun
_-and that God’s priority to the world is the priority of
the cause to the effect—viz., priority in essence and rank,
not in time. Plato is said to have maintained that the
world began in time, But some people put different inter-
pretations on his words, for they would not have him believe
in the origin of the world. From Galen’s book called ‘‘What
Galen Believed’’ it appears that towards the end of his life
he was inclined to be neutral on this question. He said that
he did not know whether the world is eternal or originated.
Often he would argue that the nature of the world could not
be discovered—not because of any deficiency on his part, but
because of the inherent difficulty of the problem which
baffles all minds.

But such instances are few and far between. The con-
sensus of opinion among the philosophers is that as a rule
it is inconceivable that something which has a beginning
in time should proceed from the eternal without there being
any intermediary.

Exposition of their arguments :

If I were to relate all the arguments (advanced by
the philosophers) and the counter-arguments which have
been handed down to us, I should have to devote innumer-
able pages to the problem, But prolixity is no good. Let
us, therefore, omit such of their arguments as tend towards
arbitrary and fanciful reasoning; for any observer will find

. 13

Tahafut al-Falasi fah

is a substance which exists in itself, and which is
_ . heither body nor an accident.
(stx) Refutation of their belief in the impossibility of
the annihilation of the human souls.

(xx) Refutation of their denial of the resurrection of
bodies, which will be followed by feelings of
pleasure and pain produced by physical causes of
these feelings in Paradise and Hell.

So these are questions selected from their metaphysical and
physical sciences wherein we propose to expose the contra-
diction involved in their views. As regards Mathematics,
there is no point in denying or opposing it ; for Mathematics
includes Arithmetic and Geometry, and these two sciences
are not in dispute here. As regards Logic, it is just an
investigation mto the instruments of reflection over the
intelligibles. And as such, it involves no contradictions
which might deserve our consideration. And in the book
called The Standard of Knowledge, we are going to introduce
as much of this subject as may be helpful towards the under-
standing of the conterits of this book.

12
Thetr Belief in the Eterntty of the World

originated) to the lack of means at one stage, and to its
existence at another. The nearest thing to imagine is to
say that He had not willed the world’s existence before.
But from this it follows that one must also say: ‘‘The
world is the result of His having become a willer of its
existence—after not having been a willer.’’ So the will
should have had a beginning in time. But the origination
of the will in the Divine being is impossible; for He is
not subject to temporal events. And the origination of
the will not-in-His-being cannot make Him a willer.

Even if we give up the inquiry concerning the sub-
stratum in which the will originated, does not the difficulty
regarding the very act of origination stand? Whence does
the will originate? Why does it originate now? Why did
it not originate before ? Does it now originate from a source
other than God? If there can be a temporal existent which
has not been brought into existence by anyone, then the
world itself should be such an existent, so as to be in-
dependent of the Creator. For what is the difference be-
tween one temporal existent and another ?

So, if the origin of the world is ascribed to God’s action,
the question remains: Why now, and why not before? Was
it due to the absence of means, or power, or purpose, or
nature? If so, the transition from this stage to that of
existence will revive the difficulty we had to face at the
outset. And if it is said to have been due to the absence
of will, then one act of will will stand in need of another, and
so on ad infinitum. From this it is absolutely clear that the
procession of the temporal from the eternal is impossible,
unless there were a change in the eternal in respect of power,
or means, or time, or nature. And it is impossible to suppose
a change in the states of the eternal. For as a temporal event,
that change would be like any other change (in non-eternal
beings). Therefore (in case of the eternal), change of any
kind whatsoever is impossible. And now that the world has
been proved (always) to have existed, and the impossibility
of its beginning in time has been shown, it follows that the
world is eternal.

This is their most clever argument. Their discussion
of all other metaphysical problems is less substantial than
the discussion of this one. For here they have access to a

15

Prob. I) Taha fut al-Falasifah

it easy to deal with them. Our attention should be confined
to those (arguments) which really appeal to the mind. It is
such arguments which could possibly shake the faith of the
maturest thinkers. As regards weaker minds, their faith
can be shaken by the flimsiest thing.

Now, such arguments (‘‘as really appeal to the mind’)
are three.

(1)
In the first argument, they say :

The procession of a temporal (being) from an eternal
(being) is abselutely impossible. For, if we suppose the
Eternal at a stage when the world had not yet originated
from Him, then the reason why it had not originated must
have been that there was no determinant for its existence,
and that the existence of the world was a possibility only.
So, when later the world comes into existence, we must
choose one of the two alternatives (to explain it)—namely,
either that the determinant has, or that it has not, emerged.
If the determinant did not emerge, the world should still
remain in the state of bare possibility, in which it was
before. But if it has emerged, who is the originator of the
determinant itself? And why does it come into being now,
and did not do so before? Thus, the question regarding
the origin of the determinant stands. In fine, since all the
states of the Eternal are alike, either nothing shall originate
from Him, or whatever originates shall continue to originate
for ever. For it is impossible that the state of leaving off
should differ from the state of taking up.

To elucidate the point, it may be said: Why did He
not originate the world before its origination? It is not
possible to say: ‘‘Because of His inability to bring the
world into existence’’; nor could one say; ‘‘Because of the
impossibility of the world’s coming into being.’’ For this
would mean that He changed from inability to power, or
that the world changed from impossibility to possibility.
And both senses are absurd, Nor can it be said that, before
the time of the origination of the world, there was no pur-
pose, and that a purpose emerged later. Nor is it possible
to ascribe (the non-origination of the world before it actually

14
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World

ceding states in respect of any thing or any factor or any
state or any relation whatsoever ; for all things remain as
they were. If, in spite of all things remaining the same, the
object of will is not produced at first, but comes into being
Jater, the whole affair must be exceedingly contradictory.
And contradiction of this kind arises not only in case of
evident and essential causes and effects, but also in case of
those which are conventional and qualified. For instance,
if a man pronounces divorce to his wife, and if separation is
not the immediate result of the pronouncement, it is incon-
ceivable that it should take effect afterwards. For, in
accordance with convention and legal usage, the pronounce-
ment is made the cause of the judgment. Therefore, the
postponement of the effect is unintelligible, unless the en-
forcement of the divorce should be bound up with, say.
the coming of the next day, or entering into the house. Only
then will the divorce take effect at the time of the coming of
the next day, or the entering into the house, and not
immediately ; for the pronouncement is made a cause of
divorce in relation to something which is yet awaited.
Since the condition, i.e., the morrow or the entry, is not
present at the moment, the effect must be held over until
the absent condition should become present. So the effect,
ie., the enforcement of the divorce, will not appear unless a
new factor, viz., the morrow or the entry, emerges. But if the
man desires—without binding up the effect with the appear-
ance of something which is not present at the moment—to
postpone the effect, it would not be an intelligible thing,
notwithstanding the fact that he has the right to make
the pronouncement, and is at liberty to choose whatever
details he likes. Since it is not possible for us to arrange

these conventional things as we like, and since our capri-

cious determinations are bound to be unintelligible, it follows
that an arbitrary arrangement should be still less intelligible
in the sphere of essential, rational and self-evident causation.

Even in the case of morals, the object of our intention is
not posterior to the intention, if the intention exists, and
there is no hindrance. Therefore, with intention being
coupled with power, and with all obstacles having been
removed, it is unintelligible that the intended thing should
be delayed. Such a thing is conceivable only in the case
of inclination; for inclination by itself is not sufficient to

17

Prob. I Tahafut al-Falasifah

variety of speculations which would not be available to
them in any other problem. This is the reason why we
began with this problem, and presented this their strongest
argument at the very outset.

The foregoing argument is open to objection on two potnts.
Firstly, it may be said :

How will you disprove one who says that the world
came into being because of the eternal will which demanded
its existence at the time at which it actually came into
existence, and which demanded the non-existence (of the
world) to last as long as it lasted, and (demanded) the
existence to begin where it actually began? .So, on this
view, existence of the world was not an object of the eternal
will, before the world actually existed; hence its non-
actualisation. And it was an object of the will at the time
when it actualised. What can prevent us from believing
such a thing, and what is the contradiction involved in it ?

If it 25 said :

The contradiction involved here is self-evident. For
that which originates in time is an effect or a product. And
just as it is impossible for an originated thing to be un-
caused, so it is impossible for the cause to fail to produce its
effect when all the conditions and factors requisite for the
causal operation are complete and nothing else remains to be
awaited, The existence of the effect is necessary, when the
cause is operative, and all causal conditions are complete.
The postponement of the effect is as impossible as the
existence of a temporal but uncaused thing.

Now, before the existence of the world, the Willer
existed : the will existed, and the relation of the will to its
object existed. The Willer did not have to make a new
appearance: nor did the will emerge as a new acquisition,
nor did it acquire a new relation to its object. For anything
of this kind would amount to change. How, then, did the
object of will emerge as something new? And what pre-
vented it from emerging before it actually did? The state
of its new-emergence cannot be distinguished from the pre

16
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World

—i.e., if your method is deductive—you must state what
that term is. But if you claim that this impossibility is
known as a self-evident fact, why do not your opponents
share this knowledge with you? People who believe in the
temporal origin of the world are confined neither to a
number nor within a city. And no one would suspect that,
out of spite for reason, they believe in something which
they know to be untrue. It is, therefore, necessary for you
to prove, in accordance with the rules of Logic, that it is
impossible to ascribe the origin of the world to the eternal
will. All you have said so far only amounts to a suggestion
of improbability, and to a comparison of the Divine will to
our inclination or will. The comparison is false; for the
eternal will does not resemble temporal intentions. And the
mere suggestion of improbability, unsupported by an argu-
ment, is not enough.

If itts said :

We know by rational necessity that, if all the conditions
for causal operation are complete, it is inconceivable that
the cause should fail to produce the effect. He who admits
the possibility of such a thing challenges the necessity of
reason,

we will answer:

But, then, what is the difference between you and your
opponents who said to you :

‘‘We regard it as a self-evident truth that it is impossible
to say that the one Divine being possesses the know-
ledge of all the universals—without this knowledge
necessitating plurality: without its being additional to
His essence ; and without its multiplying in proportion
to the multiplicity of the known things’?

This position, which has been criticised above, is actually
what you believe with respect to Divine knowledge. Now,
if it is judged by what applies to us and to our knowledge,
it will be found to be utterly impossible.. But you say
that eternal knowledge cannot be conceived of on the

19

Prob. I) Taha fut al-Falasi fah

bring about an action. For instance, the mere inclination
to write does not produce writing, unless there emerges an
intention, i.e., an inner agitation which as a new factor
precedes an action.

So if the eternal will is to be likened to our intention, it
is inconceivable that its object should be posterior to it.
Unless there is a hindrance, there cannot be a gap between
the intention and its object. It makes no sense to have
an intention to-day that one would stand up to-morrow.
One may only have an inclination to do so. But if the
eternal will is like our inclination, it shall not by itself
be sufficient to bring about the object of inclination. For
it is indispensable that something else—viz., the inner
agitation that is intention—should emerge to supplement
inclination, so that the object of inclination may be produced.
But the emergence of such a thing means a change in the
Eternal.

And, then, the difficulty remains as it was. Namely,
why does this agitation, or intention, or will, or whatever
you may like to call it, originate now, and why did it not
originate before? Thus, either one must posit a temporal
event which is uncaused, or an infinite regress will follow.

The sum and substance of what has been said (by you)
is this: That the Cause existed; that all the conditions of
its efficiency were complete, so that nothing else remained
to be awaited; that, in spite-of all this, the origination of
the effect was postponed over a length of time, the begin-
ning of which cannot be imagined, and which could not be
measured out even by millenia; and that eventually the
effect made its appearance all of a sudden, without a new
factor coming into operation, or a new condition being
realised. And such a thing is intrinsically impossible.

The answer to the foregoing may be stated as follows :

How do you know the impossibility of ascribing the
origin of something to an eternal will? Is it the self-evident
rational necessity, or theoretical knowledge, which is the
ground of your judgment ? Or, to use the terms employed
by you in Logic, are the two terms in your judgment joined
by means of a middle term, or without a middle term? If
you claim that they are joined by means of a middle term

18
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World

even, the addition of one would make the even odd. How
could it be that that which is infinite lacked just one? If you
say that it is odd, again the addition of one would make the
odd even. How could it be that that which is infinite lacked

_ just one which would have made it even? It follows that

you are bound to hold that the number is neither odd nor
even,

If it is said:

The finite alone is described as odd oreven. That which
s infinite cannot be so described.

we will answer:

It there is totality which is composed of units, and which
—as we saw above—can be divided into one-sixth, one-
tenth, etc.; and if still it cannot be described as odd or
even, then we must call it a self-evident absurdity, to prove
which point we need not advance any rational argument.
How will you answer this criticism ?

If it is sata:

Error lies in your words: ‘‘A totality composed of units.’’
As a matter of fact, the revolutions of the sphere are non-
existent. Those which took place in the past are gone,
while those which will take place in the future are yet to be
produced. The word “Totality’’ points to beings which
are present here and now. But in this case no such being
is to be found.

we will answer:

A number is bound to be either odd or even, It is
impossible that it should fall outside these two categories—
regardless of the fact whether the numbered thing is a being
which exists, or has perished. For instance, if we suppose
3 number of horses, we are bound to believe that it is either
an odd or an even number. It makes no difference whether
we suppose the horses to be existing, or not to be existing.
Or, if the horses perished after having existed, this judgment

21

Prob. I) Tahafut al-Falastf ah

analogy of temporal knowledge.

The impossibilty involved in the above-mentioned theory
was felt by certain people among yourselves. Consequently,
they said that He does not know anything but Himself,
and that, therefore, knowledge, knower and the known
thing are all one—viz., Himself. To this, one might take
an objection as follows:

‘The impossibility of the union of knowledge, the knower
and the known thing is a self-evident truth. It is evident-
ly impossible to suppose a creator who does not know his
creature. And if the Eternal (exalted be He far above
the words of all perverse thinkers) does not know anything
but Himself, He will not know His creature.’’

But now to recur to the criticism of this question, we will say:
How will you disprove your opponents if they say:

‘The eternity of the world is impossible. For it leads to
the affirmation of spherical revolutions which are infinite
in number, and consist of innumerable units. The fact is
that these revolutions can be divided into one-sixth, or
one-fourth, or a half. For instance, the sphere of the Sun
completes one revolution in one year, while that of Saturn
makes one in thirty years. Therefore, the revolutions of
Saturn are one-thirtieth of those of the Sun. And _ the
revolutions of Jupiter are one-twelfth of those of the Sun,
for Jupiter completes one revolution in twelve years’?

You maintain that, in spite of the fact that the revo-
lutions of Saturn are one-thirtieth of the Sun, they are equal-
ly infinite. Nay, you would assert that the revolutions of
the Stellar Sphere, each of which takes thirty-six thousand
years, are as infinite as the East-West movement of the Sun,
which takes only a day and night. If someone says that
this is an impossible thing, and that its impossibility is self-
evident, how will you silence his criticism ?

Even so, one might ask whether the number of these
revolutions is odd or even, or both, or neither. If you say
that it is both odd and even, or that it is neither odd nor even,
it will be an evidently absurd thing. But if you say that it is

20
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World

ed into streams and rivers, and then returns to the ocean.
But how can that which has no quantity be divided ?

The purpose of all this is to show that they cannot
render it untenable for their opponents to believe in the
origination of the world by the eternal will, unless they claim
that such a thing is contrary torational necessity. But when
a similar claim is.made by their critics to refute their own
beliefs, it will not be possible for them to silence that criti-
cism. And this is, therefore, an inescapable position.

If it is said:

This may be turned against you. For, it might be
asked: Did God have the power, before the creation of the
world, to create it one year or.two years earlier than he did?
Since His power is infinite, it appears that He held Himself
in patience, and did not create the world. But when at last
He created it, are we to call the period of not-creating finite,
or infinite? If you say that it was finite, it will follow that
the being of the Creater was at first measurable in terms of
finitude. But if you say that it was infinite, you will have
ignored the fact that this period which contained infinite
possibilities did come to an end.

we will answer:

We believe that periods (of time ) and time ( itself) are
created. However, when we deal with their second argu-
ment, we will show what is the real answer to this (objec-
tion).

If it is said:

How will you disprove one who gives up the argument
from rational necessity, and tries to prove (the eternity of
the world) from another point of view—namely, that all the
moments being equal with respect to the possibility of the
relation of the eternal will to them, there cannot be anything
to distinguish one particular moment from all those before
and after it ? ;

Maybe, it is not impossible for priority or posteriority
to have been an object of will. But how about white and

23

Prob. I) Tahafut al-Falastfah

would not be changed.

Besides, we will say to them: Even according to your
own principles, it is not impossible that there should be
discrete individual existents, who are infinite in number,
and describable each by itself. The souls of men whom
death has separated from the body are such beings. And
they are beings whose number is not described as odd or even.
How will you disprove a man who says that such a thing is
a self-evident absurdity ? How can you show that this criti-
cism is different from your own rejection, on grounds of
rational necessity, of the explanation of the temporal origin
of the world by reference to the eternal will? And this opinion
about the souls is the one adopted by Ibn Sina; and perhaps
it is Aristotle’s view, too.

If it is said:

The true opinion about the souls is the one held by Plato.
Plato thought that the soul is eternal: that, although one
by nature, it gets divided when it is related to bodies ; and
that, after its separation from bodies, it returns to its original
character, and is reunified.

we will answer:

This is even more obnoxious; and there is greater reason
why it should be rejected as contrary to rational necessity.
Let us say : Is the soul of Zayd identical with that of ‘Amr,
or other than it? Ifit is identical, it would be a self-evident
absurdity. For each one of the two is conscious of himself,
knowing that he is not the same as any other. If the souls
were the same, they would be equal in respect of cognitions
which are the essential attributes of the souls, and which
enter into all the relations of the soul. But if you say that the
soul of Zayd is other thanthat of ‘Amr, and that the duality
is the result of the division necessitated by the relation of
the two souls to bodies, we will say: The division of that
which is-one, and which possesses no magnitude or quantity,
is evidently impossible. How can that which is one become
two, nay, a thousand, and then regain its oneness? Such a
thing is conceivable in the case of that which has magnitude
and quantity. For instance, the water of the ocean is divid-

22
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World

an attribute of which the function it is to distinguish
something from its like. 11 it had no such function, then
power would have had to be regarded as an adequate
principle. But since power bears an equal relation to two
opposite things, and since it becomes necessary to posit a
cause which gives one of these two things a special charac-
ter, therefore, it must be said that, over and above power,
the Eternal has an attribute whose function is to distinguish
something from its like. Therefore, if one asks: ‘‘Why
did the will choose one of two like things?’’ it will be like
asking : ‘‘Why does knowledge require the encompassing of the
object of knowledge as such ?’’ As the answer to the last
question is: ‘‘Knowledge is an attribute of which this is
the function,” so the answer to the first question should be :
“Will is an attribute of which the function—rather, nature
—is to distinguish something from its like.’’

If it is said :

It is unintelligible—rather, self-contradictory—to speak
of an attribute of which the function is to distinguish some-
thing from its like. For by likeness is meant that there is no
distinction; and by distinction is meant that there is no
likeness. It is not proper to imagine that two black’things
in two different places are like each other in all respects.
For ‘This’ is in one place, and ‘That’ is in another place;
hence the necessity for the distinction between the two, Nor
can two black things in the same place but at different times
be absolutely like each other. For ‘This’ is separated from
‘That’ in time; how, therefore, can the two be equal in all
respects? When we say: ‘‘Two black things like each other,’’
we mean that they are alike only in respect of the particular
attribute of blackness. We do not mean that they are so in
an unqualified sense. For if that were the meaning, and
if the identity of time and place had left no dissimilarity,
then the two black things would not be intelligible, and ‘their
duality would be absolutely irrational.

- The question will be settled when it is seen that the
word ‘will’ is derived by analogy from our own will. And
our will cannot conceivably distinguish something from its
like. If a thirsty man has before him two glasses of water,
which are equal in all respects as far as his purpose is

25

Prob. I) Tahafut al-Falasi fah
black, or motion and rest? You say that white owes its
origin to the eternal will, and that the substratum which
actually receives whiteness was equally capable of receiving
blackness. Now, why does the eternal will take whiteness,
as set over against blackness? What is there to distinguish
one of the two contingent things from the other, so that it
should be taken by the eternal will ?

We know it as a self-evident fact that nothing can be
distinguished from its like, unless there be something which
gives it a special character. If without such a thing a
distinction between two like things were possible, then it
would follow that in the case of the world, which was

ssible of existence as well as of non-existence, the balance
could be tilted in favour of existence—notwithstanding the
fact that non-existence possessed an equal measure of possi-
bility, and that there was nothing to give existence a special
character. If you say that the will (itself) produced the
special character, the question will be: Why did it acquire
the capacity to produce it? If you say that in the case of
an eternal thing the question: Why? cannot be asked,
then let the world be such an eternal thing. Do not look
for the Creator or the cause of the world; for it is eternal,
and in the case of an eternal thing the question: Why? is
not to be asked.

If it were possible for the Eternal to acquire a special
relation to one of the two contingencies, then it would be
absolutely untenable to say that the world,- which has a
particular shape at present, could possibly have some other
shape instead of the present one. For then one might say:
‘‘ This (shape) has come into being by chance’’ ; even as you
might say that the will makes by chance the choice of only
one moment of time, or of only one shape. If you say that
such a question is irrelevant because it might be asked in
the case of anything willed or determined by Him, we will
say that it must be faced precisely because it arises in any
event, and will necessarily present itself to our opponents,
whatever their supposition may be.

we will answer :

The (eternal) will produced the world as it is, wherever
it is, and whatever it is like. As regards the will, it is

24
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World

tinguish something from its like! As regards the causes of a
special character being possessed by the object of actual
choice—viz., the causes mentioned by you, such as pretti-
ness, or nearness, or handiness—we can suppose their
absence; and still the possibility of one of the two dates
being taken will remain. Here you will have to choose one
of the two things:

(t) Either you can say that the equal relation of a man’s
purpose to the two dates is inconceivable. But
that is nonsense; for the equality can be sup-
posed.

(#4) Or you might say that, the equality having been
supposed, the excited man will keep fondly and
helplessly gazing on for ever, and will not be able
to take either date by mere will or choice which is
devoid of purpose. But this is also impossible;
and the absurdity of such an assumption is self-
evident.

From all this it follows that whoever discusses the nature
of volitional action—whether with reference to empirical
facts, or on theoretical grounds—will have to affirm an attri-
bute of which the function should be to distinguish some-
thing from its like.

In the second place, the objection may be stated as follows :

In your own theories, you have not been able to avoid
the assumption of a distinction between two like things. For
if the world is produced by a cause which necessitates for
it a certain shape as set over against other shapes like it,
the question arises : Why was this particular choice made?
The rule that a distinction between like things is impossible
cannot differ in different cases, e.g., an action, or something
which follows by nature or by rational necessity.

If you say:

The entire system of the world could not have been
produced in any other way than that in which it has been

27

Prob. I) Tahafut al-Falastfah
concerned, he cannot take either of the two, unless he thinks
that one of the two is prettier, or lighter, or nearer to his
right hand (he presumably being a man who habitually uses
his right hand), or has some other cause—apparent or
invisible—which gives it a special character. For otherwise,
the choice of something as distinguished from another
exactly like it would in no event be conceivable.

Objection to this from two points of view:

Firstly, is your assertion that such a thing is inconceiv-
able based on self-evident facts, or on theoretical investi-
gations? In fact, it is not possible for you to make either
claim. Your comparison of the Divine to human will is as
false an analogy as that between the Divine and human
knowledge. The Divine knowledge is different from ours in
respect of things which we have established. Why, there-
fore, should it be improbable for a similar difference to
exist in the case of will? Your assertion is like one’s
saying: ‘‘A being which is neither outside the world nor
inside it : neither connected with it nor disconnected from
it is unintelligible; for if such qualities were attributed
.to us, we would not understand them.’’ To such a person
the answer would be: ‘‘This is the work of your imagina-
tion. Actually, rational proof has compelled the intelligent
to assent to that doctrine.’’ How, therefore, will you disprove
one who says that rational proof also compels one to affirm
an attribute of God (exalted be He) of which the function
is to distinguish something from its like? If the word ‘will’
cannot name this attribute, let us use another name, for
names are not at issue at the moment. We had used the
word ‘will’ on the authority of the Sacred Law. Etymologi-
cally, however, ‘will’ signifies something directed towards
a purpose. In the case of God, we cannot speak of a purpose.

hat, however, we are concerned with is the meaning, and
not the words. oe

Besides, we do not admit that even our will cannot con-
ceivably make a distinction between two like things. Let us
suppose that there are two equal dates before a man who
is fond of them, but who cannot take both of them at once.
So he will take only one of them ; and this, obviously, will
be done—by an attribute of which the function is to dis-

26
Thetr Belief in the Eternity of the World
description :

The heaven is a round body which moves on two poles,
which are, as it were, fixed and constant. And the round
body of the heaven has similar parts, for it is simple.
Particularly so is the highest, i.e., the ninth, sphere
which has no stars. And both these (spheres) move on
two, i.e., the northern and southern, poles.

Now, let us say, out of what they would call an infinite
number of opposite points, any two could conceivably be
the poles. hy, therefore, did the two points in north
and south happen finally to be chosen as the poles? Why
not did the ecliptic pass through some other (two) points,
so that as opposite points on the ecliptic they should have
been the poles? There may be a wisdom latent in the size
or the shape of heaven. But what is it that distinguished
the place of the pole from any other place? What caused
one particular point, as set over against all other points
and parts, to be chosen as the pole? Are not all the
points similar ; are not all the parts of a round body equal?
The philosophers cannot find a way out of this difficulty.

If tt ts said:

Perhaps the position of the point of the poles is distinct
from other points by virtue of a property which is suited
to that point’s being the point of the pole. This property
being permanent, the point of the pole does not depart
from its particular place (or space, or position, or whatever
name may be supposed to be applicable in this case). In the
course of celestial revolutions, all the positions on the sphere,
which determine its relation to the Earth and to other
spheres, are changed ; but the position of the poles is constant.
Presumably, therefore, this position was fitter than any
other position to remain constant.

we will answer:

This amounts to an explicit admission of a dissimilarity
in nature among the parts of the primary round body.
If you would have us believe that all the parts of heaven

29

Prob. I} Tahafut al-Falasifah

produced. If the world were smaller or larger than it is, the
system would not be perfect. The same is true of the
number of the spheres and the stars. You assert that the
Great is opposed to the Small, and the Much to the Little, of
whatever they may be predicated. Therefore, in the case of
the universal system, largeness and smallness would not
be like each other, but different things. It is true that
man’s powers are too weak to comprehend the wisdom which
lies in the quantities and details of the spheres. (In some
cases the wisdom can be discerned—e.g., in the case of the
declination of the Sphere of the Zodiac Signs from the
Equator: or in the case of the Apogee, or in the case of
the eccentric sphere.) But, although in most cases the
secret of these things cannot be discovered, still their differ-
ences are known very well. Therefore, it is not improbable
that something should be distinguished from what is
opposed to it (as an alternative possibility) because of its
relation to the system of things. But the moments of time
are, on the contrary, absolutely similar in respect of the
relation each bears to possibility and to the system of things.

For this reason it is not possible to maintain that, if the ١

creation of the world had been earlier or later by a single
instant than it was, the system of things would not take
shape. And the similarity of the temporal states is a self-
evident truth.

we will answer:

Had we so desired, we could have shown that the
temporal statés can be treated in the same way as space-
filling things. For people have said that He created the
world at a time which was the fittest for creation. But
we will not confine our attention to this comparison. Let
us, therefore, proceed to show that, fundamentally, a dis-
tinction between two like things—i.e., two like positions—
is acceptable to you. Of these two instances, in each of
which absolutely no difference can be supposed to exist
between two like things, one is the difference of the direc-
tion of spherical movement; and the other is the definite

position of the poles in relation to the ecliptic in spherical
movement.

As regards the poles, the philosophers give the following.

28
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World

in others, vice versa—are specifically determined? Obvious-
ly, the similarity of directions is like the similarity of move-
ments. There cannot be any difference between the two
instances.

If itis said :

If the universe revolved in only one direction, it could
not have varied spatial relations, nor would there be the
configurations of the stars which result from their three-fold
or six-fold relations, or from their conjunction. So the uni-
verse would have one and the same (spatial) relation, and
there would be no variety. In point of fact, however, these
configurations of the stars are the principle of events in the
world.

we will answer :

We do not object to the difference in the directions of
movements. What we say is this: The highest sphere
moves from East to West; and the one below it, vice versa.
Now, whatever is the result of the roles of the two spheres
might be obtained even if the roles were reversed—i.e., if the
highest sphere moved frorn West to East, and the one below
it in the opposite manner. So the roles would still remain
dissimilar. The movements of the spheres having been recog-
nised to be rotatory and opposed to each other, the direc-
tions of these movements must be equal. Why, therefore,
was one direction distinguished from another like it ?

[f it is said:
The two directions are opposed to each other as con-
traries. How can they be equal ?

wewtll answer: ‏ع‎

This is like one’s saying : ‘‘Priority and posteriority of
the existence of the world are also opposed to each other as
contraries. How can it be claimed that they are similar ?’’
But the philosophers assert that the similarity of the
moments of time is known by reference to the possibility of

31

Prob. I) Tahafut al-Falasi fah

are not similar, you will contradict your own principles.
For one of the arguments, by which you tried to prove that
the heaven must of necessity be round in shape, was this:

The nature of heaven is simple; for heaven is not hetero-
geneous, but homogeneous. And the simplest shape is
the round shape. For four-sided, or six-sided, etc., figures
require angularity and the difference (of parts), which
requirements cannot be met, unless something should be
added to simple nature.

Now, even at the expense of consistency, this position does
not render our objection invalid. For the question concern-
ing the ‘property’ remains unanswered. Were other parts
also capable of receiving this property, or were they not?
If you say Yes, the next question will be: Why does this
property belong in particular to only a few of many similar
things? But if they say: ‘‘This property can reside only
in this position; other parts of the sphere are incapable
of receiving it,’’ we will say: All the parts of the sphere are,
qua body which receives forms, evidently similar. This
property cannot be claimed by ¢his position, merely because
of the latter’s being body or heaven. For that character is
shared in common by all the parts of heaven. So there can
be only two explanations: Either it was for some arbitrary
reason that a special character was conferred upon this
position, or there had come into operation an attribute
whose function was to distinguish something from its like.
If neither of these two hypotheses is adopted, then, just as
they cling to the theory that all the moments are equally
capable of receiving the occurrence of the world, so will their
opponents cling to the contention that all the parts of heaven
are equally capable of receiving the character which renders
fixity, rather than changeableness, the fittest thing. And
again, the philosophers will not be able to find a way out of
this difficulty.

The second point on which the philosophers’ criticism of the
distinction between like things involves a contradiction:

Why is it that, in spite of the similarity of directions, the
movements of the spheres—in some cases, from East to West;

30
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World

sence of the suitable time and circumstances, or some other
thing of this kind.

we will answer:

That raises a question concerning the acquisition of the
capacity, or the presence of the time, or whatever may be
supposed to have emerged as new in this case. So either
the series will go on to infinity, or it will stop at an eternal
being from which the first temporal being should have
originated.

If itis said:

Matters, which receive forms, accidents and qualities,
are not temporal at all. And the temporal qualities are the
movement of the spheres—i.e., rotatory motion—and the
relative attributes of that movement which emerge in course
of time. (Such attributes are the three-fold, six-fold, four-
fold, etc., relations of some parts of the sphere or the stars
to each otheror to the Earth—e.g., the consequences of
sunrise, or daylight, or the decline of a star from the
highest point of elevation, or its distance from the Earth—
because of its being at the Apogee—or its nearness to the
Earth—because of its being at the Perigee—or its tending
away from some regions—because of its being in north or
south.) So, evidently, these relations inevitably belong to
rotatory motion; for it is that motion itself which necessi-
tates them.

And the temporal things in what is surrounded by the
concave of the sphere of the Moon—i.e., the Elements and
their affections, such as generation and corruption, or mingl-
ing and parting, or transformation from one quality to

' another—they are all traceable one to another in a manner

which it would take one too long to describe. Ultimately,
however, their primary causes are to be found in the
rotatory celestial riotion, and in the relations of the stars to
each other or to the Earth.

The outcome of 211 this is that the perpetual and ever-
lasting rotatory motion is the source of all the temporal
events, And this rotatory motion of the heaven is derived
by the heaven from the souls of heavens. For these souls are

33

Prob. I) Tahafut al-Falasifah

existence, and by reference to any purpose which might
conceivably be served by existence. If the philosophers’
claim of difference in spite of this similarity is a warranted
claim, their opponents’ claim of a difference in the case of
temporal states and stages will be equally warranted.

The Second Objection to the Original Argument:

It may be said : You reject as impossible the procession of
a temporal from an eternal being. But you will haveto admit
its possibility. For there are temporal phenomena in the
world, And some other phenomena are the causes of those
phenomena. Now, it is impossible that one set of temporal
pheriomena should be caused by another, and that the series
should go on ad infinitum. No intelligent person can believe
such a thing. If it had been possible, you would not
have considered it obligatory on your part to introduce
the Creator (into your theories), or affirm the Necessary
Being in Whom all the possible things have their Ground.

So, if there is a limit at which the series of temporal
phenomena stops, let this limit be called the Eternal.

And this proves how the possibility of the procession of
a temporal from an eternal being can be deduced from their
fundamental principles.

If it is said:

We do not say that the procession of a temporal being,
whatever it is, from an eternal being is inadmissible. What
we call inadmissible is the procession of the first temporal
being from the Eternal. For the moment of the appearance
(of the first temporal being) cannot be distinguished from
preceding moments by virtue of a greater aptitude for exis-
tence, which might have been demonstrated through such a
thing as the presence of (suitable) circumstances, or the
acquisition of an instrument or some other condition, or the
development of a certain nature or a purpose, or some other
cause of this kind. If the temporal being which proceeds
from the Eternal is not the first one, then its procession
would be admissible—inasmuch as it had been rendered
possible by the appearance of a new factor, e.g., the (newly
acquired) capacity of the receptive substratum, or the pre-

32
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World

being renewable, then what is the cause of the renewable
character itself? And whatever that cause may be, it will
need another cause, and thereby an infinite regress will
follow.

This concludes our objections, which have by this time
been placed on a secure basis. The philosophers employ
many a clever device in order to get rid of these objections.
But we propose to postpone the consideration of these devices
to some other problems, lest the discussion of this one should
lengthen out, and our attention should be diverted from the
main question to its side-issues. Later on, we propose to
show that rotatory motion is not fit to be the principle of
temporal events, and that, in fact, all the temporal events
have been contrived by God. In that context, we will also
refute the philosophers’ theory that the heaven is a living
thing which moves by choice, and whose movement is psy-
chic like our movements.

(2)

In their second argument on this question, the philosophers
assert :

He who believes that the world is posterior to God,
or that God is prior to the world, is bound to adopt one
of two explanations : (a) He may mean by it that God is
prior in essence, not in time, as one is prior to two. For
one is prior to two by nature, although it is possible that
both should co-exist in time. Or, God’s priority will, on
this view, be like the priority of the cause to the effect—
e.g., the priority of the movement of a person to the move-
ment of the shadow which follows him, or the priority of the
movement of a hand to the movement of the ring on it,
or the priority of the movement of a hand in water to the
movement of the water. Both the movements in each one
of these instances are simultaneous; and yet one is the
cause, while the other is the effect. For it is said that the
shadow moves because of the movement of the person;:
and water, because of the movement of the hand in water.
And, in spite of the fact that the two movements are simul-
taneous, no one says that the person moves because of the
movement of the shadow; or the hand, because of the

35

Fone pe

Prob, I Taha fut al-Falasi fah
living things which play the same part as our souls do in re-
lation to our bodies. And they are eternal. It, therefore,
follows that rotatory motion, which is caused by the souls of
heavens, must be eternal as well. The states of the souls
being similar—because of their eternity—the states of the
movements caused by them are also similar—i-.e , these move-
ments are everlasting.

For these reasons it is inconceivable that a temporal
being should proceed from an eternal being, unless it were
through the intermediacy of the everlasting rotatory motion.
This motion resembles the Eternal in one respect —namely,
that it is perpetual and everlasting. But it resembles a
temporal being in another respect—namely, that every con-
ceivable part of it comes into being after not having been. So,
qua temporal by virtue of its parts and relations, it is the
principle of all temporal phenomena. But, gua everlasting
and having similar states, it is something which proceeds
from the eternal soul(s) (of heavens). This shows that, if
there are temporal events in the world, they must of neces-
sity be connected with rotatory motion. And, since actually
there are temporal events, the everlasting rotatory motion
is thereby proved.

we will say:

These lengthy details will not avail you. For the ques-
tion remains: Is this rotatory motion, which is the source
of temporal events, temporal or eternal ? If eternal, how did
it become the principle of the first temporal being? 11
temporal, it should stand in need of another temporal being,
and therefore an infinite regress should follow. You say
that it resembles the Eternal in one respect, and the tem-
poral in another. That is to say, it is something permanent
which, nevertheless, emerges and re-emerges in course of
time. In other words, it is permanently renewable, or re-
newably permanent. Now, let us ask: Is it the principle
of temporal phenomena by virtue of its being permanent, or
by virtue of its being renewable ? If by virtue of its being
permanent, how was it that something proceeded from a
permanent being, whose states were similar, at a particular
moment, as set over against all other moments? But if (it
is the principle of temporal phenomena) by virtue of its

34
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World
imagination(s).
If tt is 5414 :

If we say that God was and the world was not, there
will be a third thing implied in the statement, besides
the presence of the Divine being and the absence of that
of the world. This can be proved as follows : If we suppose
the future non-existence of the world, the presence of one
being and the absence of another will be established. But in
that case it will not be correct to say : ‘‘God was, and the
world was not.’’ On the contrary, the correct thing to say
will be : ‘God will be, and the world will not ‏“.عط‎ For
“God was, and the world was not’’ can be said only when it
refers to the past. There is a difference between ‘‘Was’’ and
“‘Will be’; and the two words are not interchangeable. So
let us see what this difference amounts to. Undoubtedly,
the two words do not differ in respect of the presence of the
Divine being, and the absence of that of the world. But
there is a third sense in respect of which they do differ. For
since ‘Was’ belongs to the past, if we say : ‘‘God was, and
the world was not” of the future, then it will be pointed out
that our words are inaccurate, for ‘Was’ is said only of
the past. This shows that there is a third thing which is
expressed by the word ‘Was’—namely, the past. And,
viewed in itself, the past is time ; while, by reference to
other things, it is motion, which passes with the passage
of time. Therefore, it is evident that before the existence of
the world there was time, which passed and finally expired
when the existence of the world began.

we will answer :

The original sense of the two words ‘Was’ and ‘Will be’
in this case includes only the existence of one being and the
non-existence of another. The third thing in respect of which
they differ is only a relation, which is, however, necessary
from our point of view. This can be proved as follows:
If we suppose the future non-existence of the world, and
then suppose our own existence as subsequent to it, then
we will be able to say: ‘‘God was, and the world was not.”’
And it will be right to say so, regardless of the fact whether

37

Prob. I) Taha fut al-Falasifah

movement of the water. If this is what God’s priority
to the world means, it will be necessary that both should be
either eternal or temporal. It will be impossible for one to
be eternal, while the other is temporal.

But, if God’s priority means (b) that He is prior to the
world and time in time, not in essence, then it follows that,
before the existence of the world and time, there was a time
when the world did not exist. For in that (pre-existing)
time, the world must have been non-existent, as its non-
existence preceded its existence. And, therefore, God must
have preceded the world during a period which came to an
end, but which had never begun. On this view, accordingly,
there must be an infinite time before time. But that is self-
contradictory. And for,this reason it is impossible to believe
in the origination of time. Finally, the eternity of time
—i.e., the measure of motion--being necessary, it follows
that the eternity of motion is also necessary. And hence the
eternity of that which is in motion, and: the perpetuity of
whose motion inakes time itself perpetual.

Objection may be taken to the foregoing by saying:

Time did have a beginning ; and it was created. And
before time, there was no time whatsoever. When we say:
“God is prior to the world and time,’’ we mean that He was
and the world was not; and that, afterwards, He was
and the world was together with Him. And the meaning of
our words : >“ . . , He was, and the world was not... ,’’ is
limited to the presence of the Creator’s being and the absence
of the world’s being. Similarly, the meaning of our words:
٠ . . . He was, and the world was together with Him,”’
is limited to the presence of two beings. By His priority we
mean that His being was the only being (before the existence
of the world). The world may be compared to a man. Thus,
for instance, if we say: ‘‘God was and Jesus was not; and,
afterwards, God was and Jesus was together with Him,’’ the
statement will signify, first, the presence of one being and
the absence of another; and, in the second stage, (it will
signify) the presence of two beings. In order to understand
this statement, it will not be necessary to suppose any third

thing. If the Imagination does not refrain from supposing ©
any third thing, let no heed be paid to the blunders of the -

36
Thetr Belief in the Eternity of the World

‘after’—and spatial extension—which is described, in terms
of its relations, as ‘above’ and ‘below.’ If it is possible to
have an ‘above’-less ‘above,’ it should also be possible to
have a ‘before’-less ‘before.’ (No doubt, the pre-existing
‘before’ may be, as the ‘above’ unrelated to body is, an
imaginary and unreal thing.) This comparison is inevitable,
and it should be considered carefully; for the philosophers
are all agreed that beyond the world there is neither occu-
pied nor empty space.

If it is said:

This is a devious comparison. For the world has no
‘above’ or ‘below.’ It is a round body, and a round body
has no ‘above’ and ‘below.’ Even so, if you call one direc-
tion—e.g., the one corresponding to your head—‘above,’ and
another—e.g., the one corresponding to your foot—‘below,’
then these will be names applicable to it insofar as it is
related to you. The direction which is ‘below’ in relation
to you is ‘above’ in relation to some other person, whom
you might suppose to be standing on the other side of the
Globe, so that the sole of his foot is opposite the sole of

our foot. The parts of heaven supposed to be above you
in daytime are those very parts which are below the Earth
in night. For that which is below the Earth comes above
it in the course of spherical revolutions. But the begin-
ning of the world’s existence cannot conceivably become
its end. Suppose there is a piece of wood one of whose
ends is thick, while the other is thin. Let us agree to
call the direction of thinness, as far as it may go, the
‘above,’ and call the other the ‘below.’ Now, this will
not bring about an essential difference among the parts of
‘the world. For the names we have applied will differ in
consequence of the difference of the position of that stick.
If, for instance, the stick is turned upside down, the names
will have to be interchanged—and this will not mean that
there has been a change in the world. For ‘above’ and
‘below’ are purely relations to you, whereby the parts and
planes of the world do not become different.

But the non-existence which preceded the existence of
the world, and the original limit of the existence of the
world must be essential entities; and it is inconceivable

39

Prob. I] Tahafut al-Falasifah

we mean thereby the first non-existence (which preceded the

existence of the world), or the second one after it.

_ _So the relative character of the past and the future
is demonstrated by the fact that the future may itself
become the past, and may, consequently, be spoken of in
terms of the past tense. And all this results from the
inability of the Imagination to apprehend the commencement
of a being without supposing something before it. This
‘before,’ which occurs to the Imagination so inevitably, is
assumed to be a veritable existent—viz., time. And the in-
ability of the Imagination in this case is like its inability to
suppose a finite body, say, at the upper level, without some-
thing above its surface. Hence its assumption that beyond
the world there is space—i.e., either a plenum or a void.
When, therefore, it is said that there is nothing above the
surface of the world or beyond its extent, the Imagination
cannot accept such a thing—just as it is unable to accept
the idea that there is nothing in the nature of a verifiable
being before the existence of the world.

_ Now, it is possible to deny the truth of the Imagina-
tion’s supposition of (a) void Space or (b) infinite extension
above the world, by saying that (a) void space is not in
itself meaningful, and (b) that extension follows the body
whose sides are extended. If the body is finite, extension
which follows it must also be finite. And this shows that
occupied or empty space (which is not related to bodies)
can have no meaning. So it is proved that, notwithstand-
ing the Imagination’s inability to accept such an idea,
there #s neither a plenum nor a void beyond the world.

Similarly, it may be said that just as extension in
space follows body, so does extension in time follow motion.
For ¢his is the going-on of motion, just as that is the spread-
ing-out of the sides of body. Just as the demonstration of
the finitude of the sides of body prevents one from affirming
spatial extension beyond it, so should the demonstration of
the finitude of motion in either direction prevent one from
supposing temporal extension beyond it. And one should
be prevented trom making this supposition, although the
Imagination clings to this fantastic supposition, and is
unwilling to give it up.

There is no distinction between temporal extension—
which is described, in terms of its relations, as ‘before’ and

38
Thetr Belief in the Eternity of the World

called its ‘outside,’’’ we will say: In like manner, its
‘before’ is the beginning of its existence whereby it is limited
(in that direction). It has nothing external to it which could
be called its ‘before.’

It remains for us to say that God had an existence,
while the world was not with Him. This much does not
necessitate the affirmation of anything else. What proves
that such an affirmation would be an act of the Imagination
is that it is related to space and time in particular. (Al-
though our opponent believes in the eternity of body, yet
his Imagination is sometimes agreeable to the supposition of
its temporal origin. And although we believe in the tem-
poral origin of body, yet our Imagination is sometimes
agreeable to the supposition of its eternity. But this is
so only in the case of body.) \When we resume the dis-
cussion of time, the opponent is unable to suppose the
beginning of time which had no ‘before, The contrary
of what is believed can be posited in the Imagination,
as a hypothesis or a supposition; but this, like space,
is something which cannot be posited (even) in the Imagi-~
nation. Both he who does and he who does not believe in
the finitude of body are unable to suppose a body beyond
which there is neither a plenum nor a void. Indeed, the
Imagination cannot accept such an idea. But it is said :
“The clear evidence of reason does not disallow demon--
stratively the existence of finite body. Let no heed be
paid to the Imagination.’’ Similarly, therefore, (it may
be said that) the clear evidence of reason does not dis-
allow an existence which opened up, and yet had noth-
ing before it. If the Imagination is unable to suppose
such an existence, let no. heed be paid to the Imagina-
tion. For, in the case of space, the Imagination—having found
no finite body which did not have by its side some other
body or air (which was imagined to be void space)—assum-
ed that the same thing would be true of non-empirical
reality. Similarly, in the case of time, when it sfound
that every event followed another event, it refused to accept’
an Event which had no ‘before’—viz., an existing thing
which might have run its course before that Event.

This, then, is the cause of error. And the comparison
we have drawn here has enabled us to refute the philoso-

phers. ١
41

Prob. I) Tahafut al-Falasifah

that one of them should change so as to become the other.
Nor can the non-existence supposed to follow the annihila-
tion of the world become the one which preceded the exis-
tence of the world: The two limits of the existence of the
world—one of them being the First, and the other the
Last—are essential and immutable limits. Unlike ‘above’
and ‘below,’ these limits cannot be rendered interchange-
able by changing relations. Therefore, it is possible for us
to say that the world has no ‘above’ and ‘below.’ But it
is not possible for you to say that the existence of the world
has no ‘before’ and ‘after.’ And now that ‘before’ and ‘after’
have been proved, time has no other meaning than that it is
what ‘before’ and ‘after’ signify.

we will say:

There is no difference between ‘before’ and ‘after’ on the
one hand, and ‘above’ and ‘below’ on the other. But,
since it will serve no purpose to stick to the words ‘above’
and ‘below,’ let us use such words as ‘beyond’ or ‘outside’
instead. Thus, we will say: The world does have an
inside and an outside. Now, is there any occupied or empty
space outside the world? Their answer will be: ‘‘There
is neither an occupied nor an empty space beyond the world.
If you mean by the ‘outside’ (of the world) the uppermost
surface of the world itself, the world has an ‘outside.’
But if you mean anything else, the world has no ‘outside.’ ’’
Similarly, when we are asked whether the world has a
‘before,’ we may answer: If that means whether the exis-
tence of the world has a beginning—i.e., one of its own
limits at which it began—it has a ‘before.’ And this is
analogous to the theory that the world has an ‘outside,’
if the ‘outside’ is interpreted to mean an uncovered limit
or the boundary of surface. But if you mean by the ‘before’
something else, then the world has no ‘before’—just as it
is said not to have an ‘outside,’ if that means something
over and above its own surface. If you say: ‘‘The com-
mencement of an existence, which had no ‘before’, is un-
-intelligible,’’ the rejoinder will be: The existence of a
finite body, which has no ‘outside,’ is unintelligible. If

ou say: ‘‘Its ‘outside’ is its own surface whereby it is
ounded off. It has nothing external to it which could be

40
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World ©

precede that of the latter by just as much as the creation
of the latter itself will precede that of the first world.
(The first world is called so, because it is the nearest to our
imagination, as in our supposition we ascend from our own
time upwards),”’

then the quantity of one possibility will be double that
of another, And there must be yet another possibility
which is double the whole. And this quantitatively deter-
mined or measurable possibility, some parts of which are
longer than others to an ascertainable extent, can in reality
be nothing other than time. For these hypothetical quan-
tities cannot form an attribute of the Divine essence, which
stands above all quantitative determinations. Nor can they
be an attribute of the non-existence of the world. For non-
existence is Nothing; hence the possibility of any quantita-
tive determination of it. But quantity 25 an attribute,
which presupposes something of which it is the quantity.
This ‘ something’ is motion. And the ‘ quantity ' is time,
which is the measure of motion. Therefore, on your view,
there must have been before the existence of the world
something whose quantities should vary—that is, there
must have been time. So you must believe that there was
time before the existence of the world.

The Objection :

All this is the work of the Imagination. The aptest
way of counteracting it is to compare time and space. So,
we will say : Did God have the power to create the highest
sphere as larger by a cubit than the size He has actually
created? If they say No, that will show God’s inability.

- But if they say Yes, then two cubits will be equally ad-

missible, then three, and an infinite regress ill follow.
And in this, we will say, there is the affirmation of ex-
tension beyond the world which has a quantity, and which
can be measured. For that which is occupied by the larger-
by-two-cubits is not the same thing as that which is
occupied by the larger-by-one. Accordingly, there must
be Quantity beyond the world, And quantity presupposes
something of which it is the quantity—viz., body or empty
space. Therefore, there must be occupied or empty space

43

ات

Prob. I) Tahafut al-Falasifah

The philosophers restate their argument for the necessity of
time’s eternsty in another form. They say:

There is no dovbt that, from your point of view, God
had the power to create the world in a year, or a hundred
years, or a thousand years before He did. Now, these

ypothetical measures differ in quantity. Therefore, it
is necessary for you to affirm something—before the exis-
tence of the world—which had a quantitative or measurable
nature, and some parts of which would be greater in quan-
tity or size than others.

If you say that the word ‘years’ could be applied
only when the sphere and its revolutions had come into
being, then we will give up the word, and restate the
argument in a different form. Thus, we will say : Suppos-
ing that since the beginning of the world till now its sphere
has made one thousand revolutions, did God have the
power to create before this world another world which
would have made eleven hundred revolutions by this time ?
If you say No, then it would mean a change of the Eternal
from inability to power, or a change of the world from
impossibility to possibility. But if you say Yes (which
is an unavoidable answer in this case), the next question
will be: Did He have the power to create a third world
which would have made twelve hundred revolutions by this
time? Again, the answer must be Yes. Now, let us
ask: Could what we call the third world (we call it so
because that is its position in our hypothesis, although
it is the earliest one) be created together with what we
call the second world? And would it still be possible for
the two worlds to have made twelve hundred and eleven
hundred revolutions respectively (they are supposed to have
started at the same time, and to have moved at an equal
speed)? If the answer is Yes, it will be an absurdity ;
for it is impossible for two movements, which have an equal
speed and terminate at the same time, to differ in number.
But if you say :

“The third world, which has made twelve hundred
revolutions, could not have been created together with the
second one which has made eleven hundred revolutions,
Nay, it is necessary that the creation of the former should

42
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World

opponents from confronting it with something similar to it.
For instance, we can say: Before the world came into
being, its existence was not possible. On the contrary, exis-
tence is commensurate with possibility : being neither more,
nor less, thanit. If you say : ‘‘This means that the Eternal
has changed from inability to power,’’ we will say : No,
since existence was not possible, it was beyond power. The
impossibility of realising what is uot possible does not show
inability. If yau say : ‘‘How is it that the existence of the
world, which was impossible, became possible ?’’ we will
answer : Why should it be impossible that something im-
possible in one state be possible in another? If you say:
‘The states are similar,’’ we will answer: Similarly, the
quantities are equal. Why, then, should one quantity be
possible, and another smaller or larger than it by as much as
a nail impossible? If that is not impossible, this cannot be
impossible either. So this is the way to meet their argu-
ments.

Our answers have brought out the truth that the possi-
bilities supposed by the philosophers are meaningless. What
must be taken for granted is that God is eternal and omni-
potent, and that if He wills, no action is impossible for Him,
And this much does not necessitate the affirmation of an
extended time—unless the Imagination in its artful way
should add something (to the meaning of ‘action’).

(3)
Their third argument for the eternity of the world

Seizing (upon the word ‘possibility’), they say: The
existence of the world must have been possible, before

. the world had come into being. For it is impossible

that, having been impossible, it should have become pos-
sible. And this possibility had no beginning—that is, it
never lacked being.- And the existence of the world never
ceased to be possible ; for there was no state when it could be
described as impossible. Since the possibility never ceased
to be, therefore, commensurately with it, that which is
possible never ceased to be. For the meaning of our words:
“Its existence is possible,’’ is that its existence is not impos-
sible. If existence was always possible, it must always have

45

a ys

Prob, I Tahafut al-Falasifah
beyond the world. What is the answer to this ?

Similarly, did God have the power to create the round
body of the world as smaller by a cubit, or two, than the
size He has created? Would there not be a difference be-
tween the two suppositions (of size)—a difference caused by
the elimination of plenitude or place-occupation? For the
occupied space which disappears through the loss of two
cubits is greater than that which disappears through the
loss of only one. Therefore, void space will have to be
regarded as something measurable. But void space is
Nothing ; how can it be measured ?

So our answer to the fantastic supposition by the Imagi-
nation of temporal possibilities before the existence of the
world is the same as your answer to its fantastic supposition
of spatial possibilities beyond the world. There is no differ-
ence.

If it 15 5414 :

We do not believe that anyone has the power to do that
which is impossible. The world’s being smaller or larger
than it is is impossible. Therefore, it is beyond anyone’s
power.

This plea will be invalid for three reasons :

Firstly, it is repugnant to reason. For reason shows
that the supposition of the world’s being larger or smaller by
a cubit than it is is not like the supposition of black and white,
or existence and non-existence, coming together. It is only
the affirmation and denial of the same thing at the same
time which is impossible, and to which all impossible things
can be reduced. The assertion of the impossibility of a
larger or smaller size is an arbitrary, unconvincing and false
assertion.

Secondly, if the world could not have been smaller or
larger than it is, then its present size should be called a
necessary, rather than possible, thing. And a possible thing
needs no cause. Therefore, you must say what the Material-
ists say—viz., rejecting the idea of the Creator, or the Cause
of causes ; although, actually that is not your belief.

Thirdly, this false assertion cannot even prevent your

44
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World.
(4)

Their fourth argument :

In this argument, they say: Every originated thing is
preceded by the Matter in which it is. No originated thing
is independent of Matter ; and Matter itself is not originated.
It is only the Forms, Accidents and Qualities passing
over Matter which are originated. This can be explained as
follows :

Before its origination, every originated thing must have
been either possible, or impossible, or necessary. Now,
it is impossible that it should have been impossible; for
that which is impossible in itself is never brought into being.
Again, it is impossible for it to have been necessary in
itself : for that which is necessary in itself is never deprived
of existence. It follows that it must have been possible
in itself. Therefore, the possibility of its existence was
there before it existed. But the possibility of existence
is a relative attribute which cannot exist in itself. There
must be a substratum to which it could be related.
But there is nothing but Matter to serve as a substratum.
So it was related to Matter. This is like the relation we
mean when we say that Matter receives heat and coldness,
or blackness and whiteness, or motion and rest—that is,
it is possible for Matter that these qualities should originate
(in it), or that such changes should occur (to it). Similarly,
therefore, possibility will be an attribute of Matter. And
for Matter itself there is no (other) Matter. Hence the fact
that it is not originated. If it had been originated,
the possibility of its existence would have preceded its
existence. And in that case, possibility would exist in
itself, unrelated to any (substratum). But possibility being
a relative attribute, its existing in itself is unintelligible.

It is not possible to say that possibility means the
possible thing’s being feasible, and the Eternal’s having
power over it. For we know that something is feasible only
when it is possible. We say that someone has power over
it, because it is possible; or that no one has power over it,
because it is not possible. If by calling something possible
we were to refer to its feasibility, then it would amount to
saying : ‘‘ Someone has power over it, because he has power

47

Prob. I) Tahafut al-Falastfah
been not-impossible. If it had always been impossible, it
would be false for us to say that it was always possible.
And if it were false to say that it was always possible, it
would be false to say that the possibility never ceased to be.
And if # were false to say that the possibility never ceased
to be, it would be true to say that the possibility had a
beginning. And if it were true to say that it had a begin-
ning, it must have been impossible before that (beginning).
And this would lead to the affirmation of a state when the
world was not possible, and God had no_ power over it.

The Objection:

The origination of the world never ceased to be possible.
Undoubtedly, its origination could conceivably take place at
any moment of time. If it is supposed to have existed
for ever, it will not be an originated thing. Accordingly, the
actuality will not be commensurate with the possibility, but
incongruent with it.

And this is like their saying (in the case of space) :

“The supposition of the world as larger than it is, or the
supposition of the creation of Body above the world (and the
creation of a second body above the first one, and so on ad
infinitum) is possible ; for the possibility of making ad-

٠ ditions is unlimited. In spite of this, however, an absolute
and infinite void space is impossible.’

Similarly, an existence whose limits are not determined is
impossible. Nay, as it is said:

‘Body with finite surface is possible. But its quantities—
i.e., the possibilities with respect to bigness or smallness
—cannot be specified,”’

similarly, therefore, the origination of the world is possible.
But the possibilities of the commencement of its existence
being early or late cannot be specified. It is only its being
an originated thing which is specified ; and only that specific
character is, therefore, called a possible thing.

46
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World

neither white nor black would in itself be possible, and
the predicate of possibility would not be applicable to
either of the two, for the possible thing would be the body
to which blackness or whiteness was to be related. Now,
we must ask: What about blackness or whiteness in itself?
Is it possible, or necessary, or impossible? The only ans-
wer to this question is that it is possible. From this it
follows that an intellectual judgment of possibility does
not require the assumption of an existing essence to which
possibility should be related.

Thirdly, they think that the souls of men are self-sub-
sisting substances which are not body, or Matter, or impress-
ed upon Matter. And, according to Ibn Sina and some
other great thinkers, these souls are originated, and are
possible before they have been originated. But before the
existence of these souls, there is no essence or Matter. And
yet their possibility is a relative attribute. Now, if this
attribute cannot be explained in terms of the power of a
powerful being or agent, how then can it be explained at all ?
So this difficulty will arise from their own theories.

If itis said:

It is not possible to reduce possibility to an intellectual
judgment. For intellectual judgment means nothing (in this
case) but the knowledge of possibility. Now, possibility,
gua an object of knowledge, cannot be identical with know-
ledge. For knowledge only encompasses its object, follows
it, and is related to it—whatever the object may be. When
the non-existence of knowledge is supposed, the object of
knowledge does not disappear ; but with the annihilation of
the object of knowledge, knowledge will be annihilated.
For knowledge and its object are two things ; one of which is
the follower, and the other is that which is followed. So,
even if we suppose that all intelligent men have failed to
suppose the possibility, or that they are unaware of it, still
we will say that the possibility—nay, even the possible
things themselves — wil] remain undisturbed. The intellects
may be unaware of the possible things. But, obviously, the
possible things remain, regardless of the fact whether any
intellect is aware or unaware of them. Nay, they will
remain, even if all the intellects and all the intellectual

49

Prob. I) Tahafut al-Falastfah

over it,” or: ‘‘It is beyond power, because it is beyond
power.’’ And that would be the definition of a thing
by referring to that very thing. It is now clear that
the judgment about the possibility of something is a distinct
intellectual judgment, whereby is known another judgment
—viz., the one about its being an object of power.

Again, it is impossible to explain possibility in terms of
the Eternal’s knowledge of the nature of the possible thing.
For knowledge requires the known thing. Therefore, know-
ledge of possibility and possibility itself which is the object
of this knowledge must be different things. Moreover, even
when identified with knowledge, possibility will remain
a relative attribute which must be related to an essence.
But there is nothing but Matter which could serve as such
an essence ; for Matter precedes every originated thing, and
primary Matter itself is unoriginated.

To this, objection may be taken as follows :

The possibility they have mentioned is derived from an
intellectual judgment. True, when the Intellect can sup-
se the existence of something—the supposition not being
inadmissible to reason—we call that thing possible. Or,
if the supposition is inadmissible, we call the thing impos-
sible. Or, if the Intellect cannot suppose the non-existence
of something, ye call that thing necessary. But these
intellectual judgments do not need an existent to which
to be related as attributes. There are three reasons for
this contention.

Firstly, if possibility required an existing thing to
which it might be related, and whose possibility it might be
said to be, then impossibility would likewise require an
existing thing whose impossibility it might be said to be.
But, as a matter of fact, the impossible in itself does not
exist. Nor is there any Matter to which impossibility
occurs and to which it is related as an attribute.

Secondly, in the case of blackness and whiteness, the
intellectual judgment of possibility is made before their
existence. If this possibility were to be related to a body
to which they occur (so that one might say: What the
possibility of blackness or whiteness means is that it is
possible for this body to become white or black), then

48
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World

Matter, yet there is a connection between the two—viz., a
connection arising from the fact that the soul is the director
or the employer of Matter. In this way, therefore, possi-
bility will ultimately be related to Matter.

The Answer:

It is right to reduce possibility, impossibility and
necessity to intellectual judgments. As regards the conten-
tion that intellectual judgment means knowledge which
requires a known thing, we will say : The intellectual judg-
ment of possibility has a known thing—in the sense in which
colouredness or animality or any other universal judgment
is, according to the philosophers themselves, an established
fact for reason. No one can say that known things do not
correspond to these kinds of knowledge. But such ‘things’
do not exist among real objects. This is why the philoso-
phers themselves have explicitly stated that the universals
exist in minds, not in real objects. It is only the objective
particulars which exist in the real things. These particulars
are the data of the senses, not of the Intellect ; but they are
the cause of the Intellect’s drawing from them a rational
judgment by making abstraction of Matter. Hence coloured-
ness is a distinct intellectual judgment independent of the
judgments of blackness and whiteness. In Being, a colour
which is neither black nor white, etc., is inconceivable. But
the unqualified Form of Colouredness is an established fact
for reason. So it is said that this Form is a Form which exists
in minds, not in real objects. If this is not an untenable
position, the position we have taken cannot be untenable
either.

In reply to their assertion that the supposition of the
non-existence or unawareness of intellectual persons will not
annihilate possibility, we will say : Will such a supposition
annihilate the universal judgments, viz., the Genera and
Species? If they say Yes (which is the only answer ; for
indeed the Genera and Species mean intellectual judgments
only), the same will be our answer with respect to possi-
bility. There is no difference between the two kinds of
judgment. If they claim that the Genera and Species will
continue to exist in the Divine knowledge, again the same
thing will be true of possibility. Thus our objection comes to

51

Prob. I) Tahafut al-Falast fah

persons pass away.

As regards the three points you have made, they are not
cogent. For:

(Firstly,) impossibility is a relative attribute which
does not require an existent to which it could be related.
By the impossible is meant the combination of two contra-
ries. If a place is white, it will be impossible for it to
be black and white together. So even in this case, there
must be a designated subject. To this subject an attribute
is attributed ; and as long as the connection lasts, it is said
that the contrary (of this attribute) is impossible for the
subject. In this way, impossibility becomes a relative
attribute existing in, and related to, a subject. As regards
necessity, it is no hidden fact that it is related to the neces-
sary being.

The second point—namely, that blackness in itself is
possible—is wrong. For if blackness is taken in abstraction
of the substratum in which it resides, then it will be impos-
sible, not possible. It becomes possible only when it is
supposed to be a quality in a body. A body is prepared
for the successive occurrence of qualities; and successive
occurrence of qualities is possible to bodies alone. Other-
wise, blackness has no individual self to which possibility
could be attributed.

Now to take the third point—i.e., the soul. There isa
class of philosophers who believe that the soul is eternal,
and that the connection between the soul and bodies is pos-
sible jor the soul. To this class, your objection does not
apply.

As regards those who believe in the temporal origin of
the soul, some of them believe that the soul is impressed
upon Matter, and follows (this) composition. (This seems to
have been Galen’s view in some of his works.) Therefore,
on this view, the soul will be ‏يت‎ Matter, and possibility of
each soul will be related to its Matter.

As regards those philosophers who believe in the tem-
poral origin of the soul, and who do not consider it to have
been impressed upon Matter, the possibility of the soul
would mean to them that it is possible for Matter that the
rational soul should direct it. Thus the possibility of the
soul, which preceded its origination, will be related to
Matter. For, although the soul is not impressed upon

50
Their Belief in the Eternity of the World

agent, although it is not impressed upon him—even as you
related it to a passive body upon which it had not been
impressed. To relate it to an agent is not different from
relating it to a patient: for in neither case does ‘impression’
take place.

If it is said:

In all your objections you have tried to meet difficulties
by raising other difficulties. You have not tried to solve
the difficulties which had been raised by the philosophers.

we will answer ١

After all, this method has exposed the invalidity of the
philosophers’ theories. Nor do the causes of the difficulties
remain unravelled during the process of questioning (their
principles) and reducing (them) to absurdity. However, in
this book we have undertaken only an attack on their
doctrines, and a refutation of their arguments. It is not
our business to support a particular point of view. That is
why we would not go beyond the purpose ofthis book.’ Nor
would we try to find out arguments which might prove the
temporal origin of the world ; for the only thing we intended
to do was to refute the philosophers’ claim that its eternity
is definitely known:

١ But, in order-to affirm the true doctrine, we will—if
Divine help enables us to do so —write a separate book, after
having concluded this one. We will call that book ‘‘The
Principles of Beliefs,’’ and will be concerned therein with.
Affirmation, as in the present one we are concerned with
Destruction. And God knows the best.

53

Prob, I} Taha fut al-Falastfah

tell. And it was our purpose to expose the incoherence of
their thought.

As regards their plea that impossibility is related to
Matter—to which something has been attributed, and for
which the contrary of that thing is, therefore, impossible—it
must be pointed out that all impossible things are not of this
kind. For instance, the existence of a partner of God is
impossible. But in this case there is no Matter to which
the impossibility could be related. If they assert that the
meaning of the impossibility of a partner of God is that God’s
singular being or His unity is necessary, and that singu-
larity is related to Him, we will say: No, the world exists
with Him; His being is, therefore, not singular. If they
assert that His singularity—insofar as it precludes a rival—
is necessary, and that, impossibility being the term contradic-
tory to necessity, impossibility is related to Him, we will
say: We mean that God’s singularity—insofar as it pre-
cludes a rival—is not a singularity which precludes the co-
existence of the contingent creatures with Him. For in the
former sense, His singularity is necessary ; in the latter, it is
not. Now, we will make use of this distinction to concoct a
relation between Him and the possibility (which the philoso-
pliers would have us relate to a substratum), even as they
have concocted a relation between Him and impossibility —
by shifting the discussion from impossibility to necessity, and
then relating singularity to Him through (His) attribute of
necessity.

. As regards the plea that blackness or whiteness has no
self or individual essence, it is true if it means that this is
so.in Being. But it is not true if it means that this is so
for the Intellect as well. For the Intellect does apprehend
universal blackness, judging that it is possible in itself.

Finally, the plea concerning the originated souls is
invalid. For they have individual essences as well as a
possibility which precedes their origination. And there is
nothing to which this possibility can be related. The philoso-
phers’ statement that it is possible for Matter that the soul
should direct it gives only a remote relation. If such a thing
can satisfy you, then it would not be improbable if one said:
The meaning of the possibility of the existence of an originat-
ed thing is that it was possible for a powerful agent to
originate it. In this way, possibility will be related to an

52
Everlasting Nature of the World, Time and Motion

into existence, either concurrently or successively ; while the
past has entered into existence successively, although not by
concurrence. Since now it is clear that we do not find from
the rational point of view any impossibility in the supposition
of the everlasting existence of the world, and that, on the
contrary, we consider its perpetuation as possible as its
annihilation, the knowledge as to which one of the two
possibilities will actually happen is to be derived from
the Sacred Law, for it has nothing to do with theoretical
investigation. ]

Their fourth argument is allied to the third one which we
considered above. For they say : When the world passes
away, the ssibility of the existence must still remain,
for that which is possible can never become impossible.
But possibility is a relative attribute. And (they claim)
everything which is in time needs a preceding Matter ; hence
everything which passes away must also need a Matter out of
which to pass away. This shows that the Matters and
the Roots do not perish; it is only the Forms and the
Accidents subsisting in them which perish.

The reply to all this has been stated earlier. However,
we put this problem in a separate place, because they
have two new arguments.

(x)

The first argument is the one adopted by Galen. Said
he: If the Sun were liable to annihilation, signs of decay in
it would be visible in course of time. But the astronomical
observation of its size has for thousands of years revealed the
same quantity. If, therefore, it has not decayed through
these long ages, it follows that it is incorruptible.

Objection to this argument from several points :
The syllogistic form of this argument would be:
(i) If the Sun were corruptible, decay should befall it.
(ii) But the consequent is impossible.
(iii) Therefore, the antecedent is impossible.

This is what they call a hypothetical conjunctive syllogism.
55

PROBLEM II

REFUTATION OF THEIR BELIEF IN THE EVER-
LASTING NATURE OF THE WORLD,
TIME AND MOTION

ET it be known that this problem is a corollary of the
preceding one. For as the philosophers consider the
world to be eternal—i.e., without a beginning in time—

so do they consider it to be everlasting—i.e., never coming to
an end. (They say that) its corruption or annihilation is
impossible ; and that it always was, and ever will be, as it is.

The four arguments they advanced to prove the eternity
of the world apply to its everlasing nature as well. And
the same objections will be taken to them as have been
taken before.

They say that the world, as an effect whose Cause is
eternal and everlasting, must be together with the Cause;
and that since the Cause is unchangeable, the effect cannot
change either. This is the basis for their denial of a begin-
ning (of the world); and this very argument is applicable
to the end (of the world). This is the first line of thought
they take in this problem.

In the second place, they say that if the world passes
away, its non-being will be after its being. Thus it will
have an ‘after’; wherein lies the affirmation of time.

In the third place, they say that the possibility of
existence never ceases. Therefore, it is proper that the
possible being should be (unceasing) in agreement with
the possibility. [But this ar ument is not cogent. For
we consider the eternity of the world to be impossible;
but not its everlasting nature—if God (exalted be He) grants
it an everlasing existence. It is not necessary for something
which has a beginning in time to have an end; while it
is necessary for an action to be originated and have a begin-
ning in time. No one, except Abu Hudhay] al-‘Allaf, has
laid it down as a necessary condition that the world should
come to an end. Said he: As an infinite number of spheri-
cal revolutions in the past is impossible, so is it in future.
But this is wrong ; for the whole of the future does not enter

54
Everlasting Nature of the World, Time and Motion
solve the doubts raised by them.
(2)

In their second argument for the impossibility of the annihila-
tion of the world, the philosophers say:

The substances in the world are imperishable. For no
cause of their annihilation will be intelligible. If that which
has not been non-existent becomes so there must be a cause
of this change. Such a cause

will either be the will of the Eternal. But this is impos-
sible, For if not having been the Willer of the non-
existence of the world, He becomes one, He undergoes a
change. Or it will lead to the conclusion that the Eternal and
His will continue uniform in all states, but the object of
the will nevertheless changes—first from non-existence to
existence, and then from existence to non-existence.

Thus, the argument we had advanced to prove the impos-
sibility of the origination of something in time because of the
eternal will also proves the impossibility of its passing into
non-existence.

Besides, there is another difficulty which is even more
formidable. Namely, the object of the will is obviously the
action of the willer. Now, even if he who was not an agent,
but became one later, does not change in himself, yet it
is necessary that his action should become an existent after
not having been one. For if the agent remains as he was at
the time when he had not effected an action—viz., even if at
present he has no action—then he will have done nothing.
And non-existence is Nothing. How, then, can it be an
action? .Suppose He annihilates the world, whereby an
action which had not been done before emerges. What can
this action be? Is it the existence of the world? Impossible,
for existence has come to an end. Is it the non-existence
of the world? No, for non-existence is Nothing; hence
it cannot be an action. To be an existent is the least degree
of an action. But the non-existence of the world is no
existent ; hence it cannot be said to be effected by an agent,
or produced by a producer.

37

bree

cena

Prob. IT) Taha fut al-Falastfah
Here the conclusion does not follow ; for the antecedent is not
true—unless a new condition were added to it, viz., the
assertion that if the Sun were corruptible, decay would
be inevitable. So this consequent does not follow from this
antecedent, without the addition of a condition, such as the
assertion that if the Sun were liable to corruption-bv-decay,
then decay would be inevitable, or it must be shown that decay
is the ‘only way in which corruption takes place. For only
then would the consequent necessarily follow from the
antecedent. And we do not admit that decay is the only way
in which things are corrupted. On the other hand, decay is
one of the ways in which corruption takes place. And it is not
improbable that even in the state of perfection something
should be overtaken by corruption all of a sudden.

Secondly, even if it is granted that there is no corruption
without decay, how did Galen know that decay has not
befallen the Sun? His reference to astronomical observation
is absurd. For quantities discovered by astronomical ob-
servation are only approximate. If the Sun, which is
said to be one hundred and seventy times as big as the
Earth, or any other thing of the same size as the Sun loses as
much as a range of hills, the loss cannot be apparent to the
senses. So it may be assumed that the Sun is in decay, and

that so far it has lost as much as a range of hills, or a little.

more; and that the human senses cannot perceive this loss,
for in sciences which depend on observation quantities are
known only approximately.. This may be illustrated. The
philosophers tell us that gold and sapphire are composed
of elements and are, therefore, liable tocorruption. But ifa
sapphire is kept for a hundred years, the senses will not
be able to perceive the diminution it has suffered. Therefore,
the loss suffered by the Sun during the entire history of
as. unomical observation may be compared to that suffer-
ed by a sapphire in a century. In neither case is the loss or
decay apparent to the senses. Hence the utter unsoundness
of Galen’s argument.

We have ignored many other arguments of this kind ;
for intelligent people laugh at such things. This one was
mentioned here only to serve as an example of what we have
passed over. And this is the reason why we proposed to con-
fine our attention to the four arguments which, as already
has been seen, require some ingenuity in order that we may

56
Everlasting Nature of the World, Time and Motion

power. To affirm any thing else besides will, power and the
being to which power extends—viz., the world —is unintel-
ligible. The same is true of destruction.

(c) The Ash‘ariyah say: The Accidents perish by them-
selves, and their immortality is inconceivable. For if it were
conceivable, their annihilation would be inconceivable in that
sense. As regards the Substances, they are not immortal in
themselves, but because of an immortality which is additional
to their being. So when God does not create immortality for
them, the Substances will perish because of the absence of
that which would make them immortal.

This is also false : because it comes into conflict with the
sensible facts, inasmuch as it implies that blackness or
whiteness does not survive and continue, but has its being
renewed ever and anon. The Intellect rejects this assertion,
as it would reject the assertion that body has its being
renewed ever and anon. For the Intellect, which judges that
the hair on the head of a man today is the same hair as,
and not merely similar to, the hair which was. there
yesterday, makes the same judgment in regard to the black-
ness of the hair.

There is yet another difficulty in this theory. For if
that which survives does so because of a (derived) immor-
tality, it follows that the Divine attributes should likewise
continue because of a (derived) immortality: that this
immortality should need another immortality to immortalise
it, and that, therefore, an infinite regress should follow.

(d) Another section of the Ash‘ariyah say: The Acci-
dents perish themselves: but the Substances perish when
God would not create in them motion or rest, etc. When
it has nothing of the sort, it perishes.

It appears that both the groups among the Ash‘ar:yah
incline towards the view that destruction is not an action,
but a refraining from action: for they do not find it intelli-
gible to regard non-existence as an action.

Since all these methods of explaining the destruction of
the world have been found to be invalid, there is no ground
left for anyone to believe in the possibility of the destruction
of the world. ~

This criticism applies when the world is admitted to have
originated in time. For, although they admit the temporal

59

nm Ste ene ‏ا‎

Prob. IT] Tahafut al-Falasifah

This difficulty (claim the philosophers) has divided the
Mutakallimun into four groups, each attempting the impos-
sible by trying to solve it:

(a) The Mu‘tazilah say: The action which proceeds
from Him is an existent—viz., Annihilation, which is created
by Him not in a_ substratum. So the whole world will
perish all of a sudden. And the created Annihilation itself
will perish, so that there will be no need for another Annihila-
tion, which would start an infinite regress.

But this is false for several reasons. Firstly, Annihila-
ticn is no intelligible existent whose creation could be sup-
posed. Secondly, if it were an existent, it would not perish
by itself, without any cause of annihilation. Thirdly, even on
this assumption the world does not perish. For if Annihila-
tion is supposed to be created within the world itself, the
whole supposition will be absurd. For the substratum and
that which subsists in it come into contact. and, therefore,
coexist—though only for an instant. If, therefore, the world
and Annihilation could be supposed to coexist, they would
not be mutually exclusive: and then the world would not be
annihilated. But if Annihilation is created neither within the
world nor in any other substratum, how then can the exis-
tence of the one exclude that of the other?

Further, this view is obnoxious for another reason.
It implies that God has not the power to annihilate some
of the substances of the world, and allow others to survive.
Nay, it is implied here that He has not the power to do any
thing, except to create Annihilation which is to annihilate the
whole world at once—for not being in a particular sub-
stratum, it is brought to bear upon the whole simultaneously
and indiscriminately.

(b) The Karramiyah say: Destruction is an action of
God, which (action) signifies an existent originated within
the Divine essence (may He be exalted above what is said of
Him). Thus, the world becomes non-existent through this
action. Similarly, existence is the result of an act of pro-
duction which occurs in His assence, and because of which
the existent becomes an existent.

This is also false. In the first place, it makes the
Eternal subject to temporal phenomena. Further, it goes
outside the scope of intelligible reality, for by production
is understood a being which can be ascribed to will and

58
Everlasting Nuture of the World, Time and Motion
we will answer:

Being nothing, how did it happen at.all? Its proceed-
ing from God only means that that which happens is to
be related to His power. If its happening is intelligible, -
why should its retation to power not be intelligible? And
what is the difference between them and one who absolutely
denies the occurrence of non-existence to Accidents and
Forms, saying that since non-existence is nothing, it cannot
occur, and occurrence and emergence cannot be predicated
of it? For our part, we never doubt that the occurrence
of non-existence to Accidents is conceivable. Therefore, that
of which the occurrence can be predicated can also intelli-
gibly happen, regardless of whether it is called a thing, or
not. And, finally, the relation of this intelligible occurrent to
the power of the Omnipotent is also intelligible. ,

If it is said:

This objection may be taken to the position of a man
who thinks that the non-existence of a thing after its exis-
tence is possible, Such an one might be called upon to
explain what it is that occurs. But in our view it 1s
impossible that any existent should cease to exist. To us,
the non-existence of Accidents means the occurrence of their
contraries, which are themselves existents, It does not
mean the occurrence of abstract non-existence which is
Nothing. How can occurrence be predicated of that which
is nothing? If the hair whitens, it is whiteness which
occurs. And that is all. And whiteness is an existent.
We would not say that that which has occurred is the non-
existence of blackness.

This is false for two reasons :

Firstly, does the occurrence of whiteness include the
‘non-existence of blackness, or not? If they say No, they
will be opposed to intelligible reality. If they say Yes,
is that which includes other than that which is included,
or identical with it? If they say that it is identical, it
will be a self-contradiction : for nothing includes itself. But
if they say that it is other, then is this ‘other’ intelligible,

61

Seen ‏بجو سم أ‎ magi gmt

Prob. II] Taha fut al-Falasi fah

origin of the human souls, still they assert the im ibili
of their destruction, basing the argument on the amend
ciples as we have related above. In short, the position taken
by them is: The annihilation of anything—whether eternal
or originated in time—which exists in itself, not in a sub-
stratum, is impossible. If one says to then: ‘‘When fire
burns under water, water is destroyed,” they will answer:
It is not destroyed. It only changes into steam. Later on
steam will change into water once again. Matter, i.e., the
Hayuli, persists in Air. It is the same Matter as was there
beneath the Form of water. Now the Hayuli has put on the
. Form of Air, having divested itself of the Form of water.
When the air is cooled, it will condense, and water will re-
appear. Matter does not emerge anew (during these changes).
On the contrary, the Matters are common to all the Ele-

ments. It is only the Forms passing over them in succession
which change.

The answer:

We might possibly defend all the classes of the Mutakalli-
mun mentioned by you, and demonstrate that inasmuch as
your fundamental postulates include much like what is to
be found there, it is unjust on your part to criticise them.
But we prefer brevity, and will confine our attention to
only one of these classes. Thus, we will say: How can you
disprove one who says that production and destruction are
the effects of the will of the Omnipotent? So when God
wills, He produces: and when He wills, He destroys. And
this is what His being the Omnipotent par excellence means.
And in the course of all these activities He Himself never
changes: it is only the action which changes. As regards
your objection: ‘‘It is necessary that an action should pro-
ceed from an agent. What proceeds from God?”’ we will
reply that that which proceeds from Him is what has newly
emerged, viz., non-existence. For there was no non-exis-

tence before the action. Since it newly emer it i
which proceeds from Him. y emerges, it is that

If you say:

Non-existence is nothing. How can it proceed ?
60
PROBLEM III

EIR DISHONESTY IN SAYING THAT GOD IS
OF HE AGENT AND THE MAKER OF THE WORLD
WHICH IS HIS ACTION OR PRODUCT: AND
THE EXPLANATION OF THE FACT
THAT THESE WORDS HAVE ONLY A
METAPHORICAL, NOT REAL,
SIGNIFICANCE TO THEM

inc the Atheists, all the philosophers are agreed
B tree the world has a maker : that God is the Maker or
the Agent of the world, and that the world is His action
or product. But this is a dishonest distortion of their prin
ciples. There are three reasons why, according to ner
principles, the world’s being the action or the product 0
God is inconceivable. One of these reasons 5 to be found in
the nature of the agent: another in the nature of the action,
and the third one in the relationship between the action an

the:agent.

The reason to be found in the nature of the agent Is that
it is necessary for an agent to have the will for the action :
to have free choice, and to know what he wills. But, accor -
ing to the philosophers, God has no will. Nay, He has
no attribute at all. Whatever proceeds from Him 15 a

equence. a
Meee cecondly, the reason found in the nature of the action Is
that an action must have a beginning In time. But the
philosophers consider the world to be eternal, bet

Thirdly, the reason found in the relationship be ween
the action and the agent is that, according to them, poe
is one in all respects, and only one proceeds from one. Bu
the world is composed of different things. How can it pro-
ceed from Him ?

Let us investigate each one of these three reasons, and
see how fallacious their reasoning is, when they endeavour to
defend their position.

63

ee

Prob. IT) Tahafut al-Falasifah
or not? If they say No, we will answer: How, then, do you
know that it is included? The judgment about its being
included is an admission of its being intelligible. But if they
say Yes, then is this intelligible included one—namely, the
non-existence of blackness—eternal, or originated in time ?
If they call it eternal, it will be absurd. But if they call
it originated, how can that of which a temporal origin is
affirmed not be intelligible? 1f they say that it is neither
eternal nor originated in time, it will be absurd. For if
before the occurrence of whiteness it were to be said that
blackness is non-existent, it would be false. If after the
occurrence of whiteness it is said to be non-existent, it is
true. So, obviously, it has occurred. And this occurrent is
intelligible. | Therefore, it is reasonable to ascribe it to the
power of the Omnipotent.

Secondly, there are some accidents which, even accord-
ing to them, perish not-by-their-contraries. Thus, motion
has no contrary. The antithesis between motion and rest is
the antithesis between possession, and non-possession, i.e.,
being and non-being. Rest means the non-existence of
motion, So when motion is non-existent, it is not a contrary,
viz., rest, which has occurred, but pure non-existence.
The same is true of attributes which are to be classed
as perfection, e.g , the impression of the image of sensible
objects on the vitreous humour of the eye : or the impression
of the Form of the intelligibles on the soul. All these
represent the commencement of a being, without the dis-
appearance of a contrary. And their becoming non-existent
means the loss of a being to which no contrary succeeds.
So their disappearance does mean pure non-existence. Hence
non-existence comes to occur. And the happening of this
occurrent non-existence is intelligible. And that of which the
occurrence is in itself intelligible can intelligibly be related to
the power of the Omnipotent, even if it were not a ‘thing.’

From this it is clear that if the happening of any
thing because of the eternal will is conceivable, it makes no
difference whether that which happens is existence or non-
existence.

62
Their Saying that God is the Agent & the Maker of the World

is a genus divisible into those actions which occur by nature,
and those which occur by free choice. The argument to
prove our contention is this: When we say ‘action by
nature,’ the words ‘by nature’ are not contradictory to, or
imcompatible with, the word ‘action.’ On the contrary,
they just describe a species of action: as our words ‘action
without an instrument’ will not be contradictory to, or in-
compatible with, each other, but will be only a description or
a specification. Again, when we say ‘action by free choice,’ it
is not a tautology, as the words ‘animal man’ would be: on
the contrary, it is only the description of a species of action,
like the words: ‘action by instrument.’ If the word ‘action’
were to include will, and if will were essential to action, qua
Action, then the words ‘action by nature’ would be contra-
dictory, even as the words ‘action’ and ‘non-action’ are.

we will answer:

This terminology is false. It is not proper to call every
cause an agent, and every effect an agendum. Ii it were

‘proper to do so, it would not be right to say that the in-

organic Matter has no action, and that an action belongs to an
animal alone. But this proposition is one of the most
widely accepted and, therefore, true dicta. If sometimes,
inorganic Matter is called an agent, it is purely metaphori-
cal. For instance, inorganic Matter is called an aspirant, or
willer, e.g., a stone is said to incline, because it desires or
seeks the Centre. But will or seeking is,something which
is inconceivable, if not accompanied by the knowledge of the
object willed or sought. And, therefore, :t cannot conceiv-
ably be applied in case of any thing other than an animal.
Your assertion that action is a general thing which can
be divided into actions by nature and actions by will is in-
admissible. It is like one’s saying that will is a general
thing which can be divided into cases in which will is accom-
panied by the knowledge of the object willed and those in
which it is not. That is false, for will must needs include
the knowledge of the object willed. Similarly, action must
needs include will. As regards your statement that the
words ‘action by nature’ are not contradictory to the first
term; i.e., ‘action,’ this is not so. They are contradictory,
as far as reality is concerned. But the contradiction does

65

Prob. IIT] Tahafut al-Falasifah

(x)
We say:

An agent is he from whom an action proceeds because of
the will for action: by way of free choice, and alongside of the
knowledge of what is willed. But in your view the world bears
the same relation to God as an effect toits cause. So it follows
from Him by way of necessary causation. And, therefore, it -
is not conceivable that God should have been able to avoid
His action, even as the shadow is unavoidable to a person, or
light tothe Sun. Now, this has nothing to do with an action.
He who says that the lamp ‘does’ the light, or that a person
‘does’ the shadow, will be extending the sense of the word
beyond its definition. He will be borrowing a word used
in a different context, having been too easily contended with
the relation ketween the two things in respect of only one
attribute—namely, that an agent is on the whole a cause, and
the lamp is the cause of illumination, and the Sun is the
cause of light. But the agent is not called the agent merely
because of his being a cause, but because he is a cause in
a special manner, viz., in the manner of will and free choice.
Thus, it is that when one says that the wall is no agent: the
stone is no agent: the inorganic Matter is no agent for an
action exclusively belongs to an animal, then this statement
will not be disputed, and his words will not be untrue. But
in their view, the stone does have an action—namely, the
inclination, or the gravitation, or the tending towards the
Centre—and so does fire have an action—viz., production of
heat. And they believe that that which proceeds from God
is like all these things. But this is absurd.

If it ts sata:

‎We call every existent which is not a necessary being‏ ران
‎in itself, but owes its existence to another, an agendum: and‏
‎call its cause the agent. We do not care whether the cause‏
‎is an agent by nature, or by will—just as you would not‏
‎care whether an agent is an agent by an instrument, or‏
‎without an instrument. An action is a genus divisible into‏
‎those actions which occur with the help of an instrument‏

‎and those without the help of an instrument. Similarly, it

‎64
Their Saying that God is the Agent © the Maker of the World

contention. Suppose an event which, in order to happen,
depends on two things—one volitional, and the other non-
volitional. Here reason will attribute the action to the
volitional factor. And the same position will be taken by
language. For he who throws a man into fire, where-
upon that man dies, is called the murderer : but fire is not.
And this is so completely true that no objection is taken
to one who says: ‘No one, except this man, is the murderer.’
If the word ‘agent’ could be applied to the willing and the
non-willing cause in the same way (not in the sense that the
one was originally, while the other was metaphorically, so),
then language, convention and reason would not all be at
éne in attributing the responsibility for the murder to the
willing cause—notwithstanding the fact that the fire was the
nearer cause of murder, and that the man who threw the
victim into the fire did nothing besides putting the victim
and fire together. Seeing that the volitional action which
consists in putting together the victim and the involuntary
influence of fire, is held responsible for the murder, and fire.
is not called the murderer, except in a metaphorical sense,
it follows that the agent is he from whose will an action
proceeds. And since, in their view, God has neither will
nor free choice of action, they can call Him an agent or a
maker only in a metaphorical sense.

If it is said: il

What we mean by God’s being the Agent is that He is
the Cause of the existence of every other being: that He
sustains the world: that if He had not been, the existence
of the world would have been inconceivable; and that if His
non-existence could be supposed, the world should cease
to exist, as with the supposition of the non-existence of
the Sun, light should cease to exist. So this is what we
mean by His being the agent. If the opponent refuses to use
the word ‘action’ in this case, let there be no dispute

١ over words, once the meaning has been made clear.

we will answer:

It is our purpose to show that this meaning cannot be
called an action or a product. What an action or a product

67

Prob. IIT] Tahafut al-Falastfah
not strike the understanding : nor is the heart’s aversion to
it very great, for after all in a metaphorical sense it remains
true. This is so, because a cause, whatever its nature may
be, is at least metaphorically called an agent, for an agent is
also a cause. And the words ‘action by free choice’ are
certainly redundant, like saying’: ‘He willed, and had the
knowledge of what he willed.’ But because it is not un-
usual to speak of an action which is only metaphorical, and
another which is real, the mind is not averse to hearing of
an ‘action by free choice.’ What, however, it means is that
the action is real, not metaphorical. One might say : ‘He
spoke with his tongue, and saw with his eye,’ for it is per-
missible to speak of seeing in case of the heart, and of speak-
ing in case of the movements of the head and hand. Thus,
metaphorically, it is said : ‘He said by his head, i.e., nodded,
Yes.’ And this is the reason why he who says: ‘He spoke
with his tongue, and saw with his eyes,’ will not be taken
to task. And the meaning of this expression will be a denial
of the metaphorical import of the words. This is the
stumbling block. A warning must be given here, for this is
the place where these idiots have fallen into error.

Lf it ts said:

To call an agent an agent is something the knowledge of
which can be derived from language. And even if language
were not hopeful, it could be made clear by reason that a cause
may be either a willing, or an unwilling cause. Our dispute
turns on the question whether action is in reality the word for
(the result of) the two kinds of causes. Now, the applicabil-
ity of the word ‘action’ cannot be denied, since the Arabs
say: ‘Fire burns’: ‘A sword cuts’ : ‘Ice cools’: ‘Scammony
loosens the bowels’ : ‘Bread satisfies hunger’: ‘Water quen-
ches thirst,’ etc. When we say: ‘strikes,’ we mean: ‘does
strike’: and by: ‘burns,’ we mean: ‘does burn,’ by: ‘cuts,’
‘does cut,’ etc. If you say that all these actions are meta-
phorical, you make an arbitrary and groundless assumption.

The answer:

All these actions are metaphorical: for the real action
depends on will. Following is an argument to prove this

66
Their Saying that God is the Agent & the Maker of the World

istence can bear a relation to him. If the existence
ie supposed to be everlasting, its relation to the agent must
also be supposed to be everlasting. And if this relation is
everlasting, then—inasmuch as non-existence has never been
related to the agent—he to whom the relation is sustaine
will be all the more efficient, and his influence will be all the
nduring. ;
‏كد‎ remains to say that that which proceeds from the
agent is related to the agent by virtue of its having an
origin in time, But its having an origin in time only means
that it exists after non-being. But non-being has never
borne a relation to the agent. If the precedence of non
being is made an attribute of being, and if it is said that wha
is related to the agent is a particular existence—viz., an
existence preceded by non-existence—not all existence,
then the answer would be: Its being preceded by non-
existence is not the action of any agent, or the work of any
maker. If this existence cannot proceed from the agent,
unless it were preceded by non-being, and seeing that the
recedence of non-being is not the action of any agent, it
ollows'that the character (of this existence) of being preced-
ed by non-existence is not the action of the agent, an 8
therefore, bears no relation to him. — So if the precedence 0
non-being is regarded as a condition required to be ul
filled in order for existence to be actualised, then this
means the imposition of a condition over which the agent has
6 . ٠.
n iVour statement that the production of an existent is
not possible is true, if you mean that no existence which has
been preceded by non-existence begins to run its course.
But if you mean that in the state of being an existent, it
cannot be the object of production, then it must be borne in
mind, as has been shown by us, that it +s produced in the
state of being an existent, not in that of being a non-existent.
For something is produced, when the agent is able to pro-
duce, not in the state of the non-existence of the object of
production, but in the state of its existence (because of the
agent). Production is coincident with the agent’s being
able to produce, and the object’s being able to be produce.
For production is only the relationship between the producer
and the object of production. And all this is together with
existence, not before it. Thus, it is clear that nothing but

69

Prob, 111] Taha fut al-Falasi fah

means is something which really proceeds from will. You
have denied the reality of the meaning of an action, retaining
the word itself in order to find favour with the Muslims.
But religious obligations cannot be fulfilled merely by
applying words which are devoid of meaning. Therefore,
do assert that God has no action, thus making it clear that
your belief is opposed to that of the Muslims. Do not dis-
honestly say that God is the maker of the world, and that
the world is His Product. For you have not discarded this
word, yet you have denied its reality. And the purpose of
this problem was to expose this dishonesty.

(2)

The second reason—why on the philosophers’ principles,
it is self-contradictory to believe that the world is an action
of God—is to be found in a condition for an action. Namely,
an action must have a beginning in time. But in their view,
the world is eternal, not temporal. An action means causing
something to come out of non-existence into existence, by
giving it a temporal origin. This is inconceivable in the case
of aneternal thing. For that which eternally exists cannot be
produced by being given a temporal origin. So a temporal
origin is an indispensable condition for an action. And the
consider the world to be eternal. How, therefore, can it be
an action of God?

If it ts 5414 :

Temporal existence means being after non-being. Now,
let us ask: When the agent caused forth a being in time,
was that which proceeded from him—and which, therefore,
bore a relation to him—pure existence, or pure non-existence,
or both? It is false to say that the preceding non-existence
could bear a relation to him. For no agent has influence
over non-existence, Also, it is false to say that both could
be related to him. For it has been seen that non-existence
can never be related to him, and non-existence, gua non-
existence, does not stand in need of an agent at all. It,
therefore, remains to say that that which proceeds from the
agent is related to him by virtue of its being an existent :
that pure existence proceeds from him: and that nothing

68
Their Saying that God is the Agent & the Maker of the World

power and the will and the knowledge of an agent is each a
condition for his action to be an action; but none of these
things is effected by the agent himself. Even so, an action
is intelligible only when it is performed by an existent.
Therefore, like his will and power and knowledge, the exis-
tence of an agent is also a condition for his efficiency ; regard-
less of whether it is an effect of his efficiency, or not.

If it is said:

If you admit the rule that it is proper for the action
to be together with, not posterior to, the agent, then it will
follow that the action must be temporal if the agent is
temporal, and eternal if the agent is eternal. If you lay
down the condition that the action must be posterior to
the agent in time, then it will be an impossible condition.
If you move your hand inside a basin full of water, the
water will move together with, not before or after, the
movement of your hand. If the water were to move after
the movement of the hand, then the moving hand and the
water-at-rest—i.e., before its being stirred—would be to-
gether in the same place. If it were to move before the
movement of the hand, then the movement of the water
would again be separate from that of the hand. But this
would be incompatible with the one’s being an effect of
the other: an action resulting from the other. So if we
suppose the hand moving in water to be eternal, the move-
ment of the water will also be perpetual. And, in spite of its
perpetuity, the movement of the water will still be an effect.
For being an effect is not incompatible with the supposition
of perpetuity. This is how the world is related to God.

we will answer:

We do not find it impossible that the action be together
with the agent—a/fter having originated in time. For in-
stance, the movement of water is a temporal event arising
out of non-existence: it can properly be an action, and it
is immaterial whether it is posterior to the agent’s being, or
coexistent with it. But we cannot concede the possibility
of an eternal action. For that which has not arisen out
of non-existence cannot be called an action—except in a

71

—

Prob. IIT] Tahafut al-Falasifah
an existent can be the object of production, if production
means the relation by which the agent is able to produce,
and the object able to be produced. Therefore, (they add)
we have judged that the world is an action of God from eter-
nity to eternity, and that there is no state in which He is not
the agent of the world ; for that which is related to the agent
is existence. If this relation is perpetual, the existence will
also be perpetual: if the relation is severed, existence will
cease. This is not the same thing as you imagine it to ‏سعط‎
‎namely, that the world can remain even when the Creator is
supposed not to exist. To you, He is like the builder in
relation to the building: the latter remains even when the
former has perished. The continuity of the building is not
owing to the builder ; it is the result of the structural system
which holds all the components of the building together.
If such a power of cohesion—e.g., that provided by water—
is not there, mere action of an agent will not be successful
in keeping any edifice intact. -

The answer:

The action is related to the agent by virtue of its being
a temporal event, not by virtue of the non-existence which
preceded it, nor by virtue of its merely being an existent.
So it is not related to the agent in what we could call the
second state of its existence—i.e., when (even at the time of
the action) it was an existent. On thecontrary, it is related
to the agent in the state of its temporal origination. And it
is so related, because it is a temporal phenomenon, a transi-
tion from non-existence. If its temporal character is denied,
its being an action will be unintelligible, and it will bear no
relation to the agent. As regards your statement that its
being a temporal event ultimately means its being preceded
by non-existence, and that its being preceded by non-exis-
tence is no action of an agent: no work of a maker, there is
no doubt that this is so. But this being preceded by non-
existence (which itself is no action of an agent) is a condition
for an action to become an action of an agent. For, existence
which is not ‘preceded by non-existence is not fit to be
the action ofan agent. Not every thing, which is a condition
for an action to be what it is, is necessarily owing to the
efficiency of an agent. For instance, the essence and the

7O
Their Saying that God is the Agent & the Maker o f the World
we wll answer :

The only purpose of this problem is to show that you
pretend to believe in these names for the sake of the merit
acquired by one who believes in them. But you do not
think that in reality any thing corresponds to them. To you,
God is not an agent in the real sense of the word ; nor is the
world His action in reality. The use of the word ‘action’ in
your theories is only a piece of metaphorical language,
having no basis in reality. So our purpose has been achieved
inasmuch as this subterfuge has been exposed.

(3)

In the relationship between the agent and the action
is to be found the third reason why on principle the world’s
being an action of God is impossible in the philosopher’s
view. They say that only one proceeds from one. But the
Principle is one in all respects ; while the world is composed
of different things. Therefore, according to their fundamen-
tal principles, it is inconceivable that the world should be an
action of God.

If 1115 sata:

The world as a whole does not proceed from God with-
out intermediaries. What proceeds from Him is one, it
is the first creature which is a pure intelligence: a self-
subsisting substance which is unextended: knows itself:
knows its Principle, and in theological language is called
an angel. From it proceeds the second intelligence ; from
the second, the third: from the third, the fourth: and
thus through intermediaries, the beings multiply. Now,
the difference and multiplicity in an action may result from :

(i) the difference of efficient faculties. For instance, by
the faculty of desire we do something which is different
from what we do by the faculty of anger.

(ii) or from the difference of Matters. For instance,
the Sun whitens the washed clothes, but blackens the
face of a man; and melts some substances, but hardens
others.

73

Prob. III) Tahafut al-Falasifah

metaphorical sense, having no basis in reality. As regards
the relation between the cause and the effect, it is possible
that both should be eternal, or both temporal. For in-
stance, it is said that the eternal knowledge is the cause
of the Eternal’s being a knower. This is indisputable. But
what is to be disputed is that which is called an action.
The effect of a cause is not called the action of that cause—
except in a metaphorical sense. For it is a condition for an
action to have arisen out of non-existence. If someone
ventures to call an eternal and everlasting being an action of
some other being, he will be using unwarranted metaphori-
cal language. Your assertion that if the movement of a
finger together with the movement of water is supposed
to be eternal, still the movement of the water will not cease
to be an action, is a deliberate attempt at creating confusion.
For the finger has no action. Action belongs to him who-has
the finger, And he is the willing agent. If he is supposed to
be eternal, still the movement of the fingers will be his
action-——inasmuch as each unit in this movement is a tem-
poral event which arises out of non-existence. So in this
sense, it will be an action. As regards the movement of
water, we would not say that it is the action of the person
who moved his hand in water. On the contrary, it is an
action of God—whatever may be the description of this
relation. And its being an action is determined by its
having had a beginning in time—not by the perpetuity
of the process of the origination of the units of which it
is composed. It is an action only because it begins in
time.

If it is said:

If you admit that the relation between the action and the
agent, which is based on the former’s being an existent,
is like the relation between the effect and its cause, then
you will have conceded the idea of the perpetuity of causal
relation. We do not mean by the world’s being an action
any thing other than that it is an effect which bears an
everlasting relation to its cause, i.e., God (exalted be He).
If you do not call such a thing an action, we will not have
a dispute over the application of names whose meaning
has been made clear,

72
Their Saying that God is the Agent & the Maker of the World

sarily meets the simple. The Principle is simple; whereas
the effects are characterised by composition. And this is
inconceivable, unless the simple and the composite were to
meet. And whenever such meeting occurs, their assertion
that from one only one proceeds will be refuted.

If itis said:

The difficulty will be removed when our theory is under-
stood. All beings can be divided into: (a) those which are in
substrata—e.g., Accidents and Forms—and (b) those which
are not in substrata. These latter can be divided into: (c)
those which are substrata for others—e.g., bodies—and (d)
those which are not. To (d) belong such beings as are self-
subsisting substances. These substances can be divided
into: (e) those which influence bodies—let us call such sub-
stances ‘souls’—and (f) those which influence souls, not
bodies—let us call such substances ‘pure intelligences.’ The
beings which subsist in substrata—e.g., Accidents—have a
temporal origin, and their causes are also temporal. The
series of their causes and the causes of the causes comes to
an end with a principle which is temporal in one respect, and
everlasting in another. This principle is rotatory motion ;
and it is an indisputable principle. It is, however, the self-
subsisting Roots with which we are here concerned. They
are three;

(a) Bodies, which occupy the lowest rank.

(b) Pure intelligences, which are not connected with
bodies at all—neither by the relation of efficient causality,
nor by being impressed upon bodies. Hence theirs is the
highest rank.

(c) Souls, which stand midway between the two ex-
tremes. They are related to bodies, inasmuch as they
influence and activate them. Standing midway in the
order of worth, they receive influences from the intelli-
gences, and impart influences to bodies.

Bodies are ten in number : the nine heavens, and Matter which
is the stuff filling the concave of the sphere of the Moon. The
nine heavens are living beings, composed of bodies and souls.
Let us now describe the order of existence among them.

75

ce eae

ima PS any manent pm

Prob. IIT] Tahafut al-Falasifah
(iii) or from the difference of instruments. For instance,
the same carpenter saws with the saw, hews with the axe,
and bores with the awl.
(iv) or the multiplicity in action may result from the
multiplicity of intermediaries. Something is done; it
gives rise to another ; and thus the action multiplies.

All these kinds are inapplicable to the first Principle. As
we will see in the arguments for Divine unity, there is neither
difference, nor duality, nor multiplicity in His being. Nor
is there any difference of Matters in the first Principle; we
have yet to discuss the origin of the first effect—i.e., let us
say, Prime Matter. Nor is there any difference of instru-
ments; for there is no being together with God and in the
same position as He has: and we are yet to discuss the origin
of the first instrument. The only thing which remains is,
therefore, that multiplicity in the world proceeds from God
through intermediation, as we have shown earlier.

we will answer:

From this it would follow that there is in the world not
a single thing which is composed of individuals, but that all
the beings are units, each of which is an effect of some other
unit above it, as it is the cause of some other unit below it,
and so on, till the series comes to an end with an effectless
effect at the bottom, and a causeless cause at the top. But
in fact this is not so. For the philosophers say that body is

composed of Form and Matter, both of which combine to:

make one thing. Similarly, man is composed of body and
soul, neither of which owes its existence to the other, for
both depend for their existence on some other cause. The
same is true of the spheres. For they too are composed of
body and soul; and the soul has not originated from the
body, nor the body from the soul, but both have emanated
from external causes. How, then, do all these composite
things come into existence? Does each one have only one
cause? If the answer is in the affirmative, it will refute
.their assertion that only one proceeds from one. Or, does a
composite thing have a composite cause? In that case, the
inquiry will be directed to the composite character of the
cause, until the point is reached where the composite neces-

74
Their Saying that God is the Agent & the Maker of the World

proceeds from it, because it knows itself; and the body of a
sphere proceeds from it, because it is possible in itself. We
must now ask : What is the source of threefoldness in the
first effect whose Principle is one? The anwer is: From the
first Principle only one proceeds—i.e., the essence of the first
intelligence by which it knows itself. Now, its knowledge of
its principle is, evidently, necessary, although the necessity
is not derived from the Principle. Again, being possible in
itself, the first intelligence owes its possible character to
itself, not to the first Principle. To us, it is not improbable
that, while only one should proceed from one, the first effect
may still acquire—not from the first Principle—some evident-
ly necessary things, which express some relation, or no rela-
tion, and which give rise to plurality. This will make it the
principle of plurality. And in this way will it be possible for

_ the simple to meet the composite. There is no escape from

such a conjunction: and only in this way can it take place.
Hence the necessity to adopt this view. (This much is
necessary in order to expound their theory.)

we shall answer:

All you have said here is arbitrary reasoning. To bemore
exact, it is darkness piled upon darkness. If someone says
that he saw things of this kind’ in a dream, it will be in-
ferred that he was suffering from some disease. Or if such
things are introduced in the discussion of the problems
of Figh—the only place where conjecture is the ultimate
end—it will be said that these things are wild guess-work
which does not raise even a presumption as to its validity.

The points from which objection can be taken to these
things are innumerable. Let us, however, be content with
only a few of the reasons for which we find this theory to be
unsatisfactory.

A. We will say: You have asserted that one of the
meanings of plurality in the first effect is that it is pos-
sible. Now, let us ask: Is its being possible identical with its
being, or other than it? If it is identical, no plurality
will arise from it. If it is other than its being, then why do
you not say that there is plurality in the first Principle?

For He is a being, and at the same time He is necessary.
77

Prob. IIT) Tahafut al-Falasifah

From the being of the first Principle emanated the first
intelligence. It is a being existing in itself, neither body
nor impressed upon bodies. It knows itself as well as its
Principle. We have called it the first intelligence: but it
makes no difference whether it is called an angel, or an intelli-
gence, or whatever one likes. From the being of this intelli-
gence three things followed: another intelligence, the soul
of the highest sphere which is the ninth heaven, and the body
of that sphere. From the second intelligence followed the
third intelligence, the soul of the stellar sphere, and the body
of that sphere. From the third intelligence followed the
fourth intelligence, the soul of the sphere of Saturn, and the
body of that sphere. From the fourth intelligence followed
the fifth intelligence, the soul of the sphere of Jupiter, and
the body of that sphere. And soon, till there was an intelli-
gence from which followed the last intelligence, the soul of
the sphere of the Moon, and the body of that sphere. This
last intelligence is called the Agent Intellect. From it follow-
ed the stuff of the sphere of the Moon—viz., the Matter
which receives generation and corruption—and the consti-
tutions of the spheres. The Matters combine, because of the
movement of stars, into different combinations which produce
minerals, vegetables, and animals. It is not necessary that
from each intelligence follows another intelligence, and that
the series thus become infinite. For the intelligences have
specific differences : what is true of one does not necessarily
hold of others.

It must have been seen that, apart from the first Principle,
the intelligences are ten in number. And the spheres are
nine. The total of these noble principles, apart from the first
Principle, comes to nineteen. Also, it must be clear that
each intelligence has under it three things: an intelligence,
the soul of a sphere, and the body of that sphere. Obviously,
there must be ground for threefoldness in its principle. Now,
plurality in the first effect is inconceivable. But there is an
exception to the rule. The first effect knows its principle,
knows itself, and is possible in itself—inasmuch as it derives
the necessity of its existence from someone other than itself.
These are three different meanings. It is proper that the
noblest meaning should belong to the noblest of all the three
aspects of the first effect. Thus, an intelligence proceeds
from it, because it knows its principle: the soul of a sphere

76
Their Saying that God is the Agent & the Maker 0 f the World

t’s knowledge of its Principle identical with its existence
oe with its knowledge of itself, or other than the two?
it is identical, then there will be no plurality in its na tures
except insofar as its nature itself is to be interpret dn
terms of plurality. But if it is other than the two. nen
such a plurality also exists in the first Principle, for He too
knows Himself as well as what 1s other than Himself.

If they assert :

ws . : : He
His self-knowledge 1s identical with His essence. | 1
cannot know Himself 8 unless He knew that He is the Po
le of other beings. His knowledge being coincident wit the
object of knowledge, the whole thing is resolved into His being.

we will anwer :

imi the first effect’s self-knowledge is identical
with ite ilariy. fe For by its substance, it is an intelligence ;
hence its self-knowledge. And in its case, too, the knower.
the knowledge and the object of knowledge form a unity. 5
self-knowledge being identical with its essence, it snows
itself as the effect of its cause. Therefore, knowledge eing
coincident with the object of knowledge, the whole thing can
be resolved into its being. Paranal that heart ther can pe

ity at all; or if it is there,
first rable as well. And from Him, therefore, the beings
characterised by diversity and plurality will directly procees .
Let us give up the doctrine of His unity-in-all-respects,
if unity is adversely affected by this kind of plurality.

If it is said:

inci i than
The first Principle does not know anything other

Himself. His self-knowledge is the same thing as His essence.
So the knowledge, the knower and the object of knowledge are
all one. And He does not know anyone other than himself.

The answer from two points :

. : . : dall
Firstly, this tenet is so obnoxious that Ibn Sina an
other great thinkers of later times have actually repudiated

79

San

acca

Prob. IIT) Tahafut al-Falasifah

The necessity of being is other than being itself. Therefore,

this plurality in the first Principle can make it possible
for different things to proceed from Him, [If it is said
that necessity of being does not mean any thing other
than being itself, it will be said that the possibility of being
in like raanner does not mean any thing other than being
itself. If you say that we can know its possible character,
and that this shows that possibility is other than being,
then the same holds of the Necessary. For in His case,
too, it is possible to know of existence, while the necessity of
existence is not known (unless a different argument should be
used); and, therefore, His being necessary is other than
His existence itself. In fine, being is a general thing which
can be divided into necessary and possible being. If the
differentia of one of the two divisions is additional to the
generic character, so will the differentia of the other be.
The two cases cannot differ.

If it ts said:

The possibility of being springs from the nature of
the possible: whereas it owes its existence to someone other
than itself How, then, can the two things—one of which is
natural, while the other is external—be the same?

we will answer :

But, then, how can the necessity of being be iden-
tical with existence either? It is possible to deny the neces-
sity of being, affirming existence at the same time. The
absolutely true one does not admit of the affirmation and the
denial of the same thing at the same time. It is not possible
to say that it is being and non-being : or that it is necessary
and not-necessary. But one might say that it is a being, and
that it is not necessary—just as one could say that some-
thing is a being, and that it is not possible. This is how
oneness is determined. And the supposition of such a thing
in the case of the first Principle is invalid, if, as they have
maintained, it is true that the possibility of existence is not
identical with the existence of the possible,

B. The second objection: we will say: Is the first
78
Their Saying that God is the Agent & the Maker of the World

who claim that in matters of intellectual inquiry they are
under no obligation to follow the prophets.

It is but natural that they have found themselves constrain-
ed to admit—as the sum and substance of their intellectual
investigations—something which would surprise one who
came to hear of it even in a dream.

The second objection :

He who would say that the first Principle does not know
any thing except Himself does thereby succeed in avoiding
plurality. (For, if he were to believe in His knowledge
of other beings, it would follow that self-knowledge is not
identical with the knowledge of other beings—in the case
of the first Principle, as in that of the first effect.) But
then the first effect must not be considered to have know-
ledge of any thing other than itself; for if it were to have
the knowledge of the first Principle or of any thing other
than itself, such knowledge would not be identical with
itself, and therefore would need a cause other than the
cause of itsown being. Since there is no cause other than the
cause of its being—viz., the first Principle—it follows that the
first effect cannot know any thing other thanitself. And thus
the plurality made possible from this point of view stands
rebutted.

If it is satd:

Once the first effect comes into being, and comes to
know itself, it necessarily follows that it should know its
Principle.

we will answer:

Is it by a cause, or without one, that such a thing
necessarily follows? If it needs a cause, there is no cause
other than the first Principle—who is one. It is inconceiv-
able that from the One more than one thing should proceed.
Since the being of the first effect is the one thing which has
already proceeded, how can any other do so? If, however,
no cause is needed for the knowledge of the Principle to be a

81

eT TE RE ‏ام عضي‎ oe gt ee nna 2

three ene ae Seren errr

Prob. [11] Tahafut al-Falasifah

it. They say :

The first Principle does know Himself as the Principle
of the emanation of all that emanates from Him. He
knows all the beings—in all their species—by a knowledge
which is not particular, but universal.

They were led to this position, for they had recoiled in
horror from the theory that:

From the first Principle only an intelligence proceeds. He
does not know what proceeds from Him. From His effect,
which is the first intelligence, proceed another intelligence,
the soul of a sphere, and the body of that sphere. The
effect knows itself, its three effects, and its cause or
principle. So the effect is nobler than the Cause—inas-
much as from the Cause only one proceeds, while from the
effect three things proceed: and the Cause does not
know anything other than Himself, while the effect knows
itself, its cause, and its three effects.

He, who is content with making his conception of God imply
only this much of glory, actually makes Him lower than any
other being which knows itself as well as what is other than
itself. For that which knows Him as well as itself will be
nobler than He is with only self-knowledge to His credit.

The final result of all their investigations into Divine
Glory is that they have destroyed all that Glory signifies.
They have made His condition comparable to that of a dead
man who has no awareness of ‘what goes on in the world—
the only difference between Him and a dead man being that
He knows Himself. This is how God confounds those :

who diverge from His path:

who try to subvert the ways of right guidance :

who call into question the truth of His words: ‘‘ I did
not call them to witness the creation of Heavens and the
Earth, or their own creation ’’:

who entertain ignoble thoughts about God :

who fancy that man has the power to grasp Divine
things :
who have a misguided faith in their intellects ; and

80
Their Saying that God ts the Agent & the Maker of the World

That will give us a fivefold character as the principle of
the explanation of plurality. And from this it should be
clear how idle the speculations of these philosophers are.

The fourth objection :

The threefold character of the first effect is not enough
for the explanation of plurality. Take for example the
body of the first heaven. They would ascribe its procession
to one aspect of the essence of its Principle. But there is
a threefold composition in it—namely :

Firstly, it is composed of Form and Matter—as, accord-
ing to them, all bodies are. Now, Form and Matter must
have different principles, because they are so dissimilar to
each other. And the philosophers deny that either Form or
Matter can be a permanent cause of the other in such a way
that no additional cause transcending them would be needed.

Secondly, the body of the uppermost sphere has a defi-
nite size. The adoption of this definite size, as distinguished
from all other sizes and quantities, is additional to its own
being; for its being larger or smaller than the actual size
was possible. It is, therefore, necessary that there must
have been a cause of the adoption of this particular size,
and that the cause must be additional to the simple thing
which necessitated the existence of the body of the first
heaven. The existence of the body of the first heaven
cannot be like the existence of its Principle, which is an
intelligence pure and simple. An intelligence does not adopt
a particular quantity as set over against all other quanti-
ties. Hence it is properly said that an intelligence depends
on only a simple cause.

If it ts satd :
The cause of the adoption of a particular size is that if
the body of the first heaven were larger, it would exceed the

requirements of the universal system : and if it were smaller,
it would not be fit for the desired system.

we will answer :

Is the definite character of the system sufficient reason
83

Prob. III] Taha fut al-Falasi fah

concomitant of the first effect’s being and self-knowledge,
then we are inevitably led to the conclusion that a plurality
of uncaused beings somehow follows from the being of the
first Principle, and that, therefore, a multiplicity of beings—
as set over against the One Being—is the cause of the plurali-
ty in the world. If such an explanation of plurality be
rejected —on the ground that the necessary being is one, and
that an addition to one is a contingency, which needs a
cause—then the same thing will be applicable to the
first effect. For if the knowledge possessed by the first
effect is necessary per se, that will refute their dictum
that the necessary being is only one. If, however, it is
possible, it must have a cause. Since no cause of it can be
discovered, it must haveacause. Evidently, such knowledge
isnot a necessity of the possible nature of the first effect.
Possibility of existence is a self-evident element of the
nature of any effect. But its being cognisant of its cause is
not a self-evident element of its nature, even as the knowledge
by a cause of its effect is no self-evident element of the nature
of a cause. Nay, the necessity of the knowledge possessed
by a cause of its effect is more clear than the necessity of the
knowledge by an effect of its cause. So it has now been
shown that the plurality derived from the knowledge by the
first effect of its Principle is impossible, because there is no
principle to explain it, nor is it a necessity of the nature of
the effect. And this is an inescapable conclusion.

The third objection :

Is the self-knowledge possessed by the first effect iden-
tical with its essence, or other than it? It is impossible to say
that it is identical, for knowledge cannot be the same thing
as that which is known. But if it is other than the essence,
the same difference should obtain in case of the first Princi-
ple. From Him, therefore, will plurality follow.

Moreover, there is not only a threefold but a fourfold
character (by reference to which the procession of many
things from the first effect can be explained). Thus, (i)
it has being: (ii) knows itself: (iii) knows its Principle,
and (iv) is possible in itself. Nay, to these four aspects
yet another can be added—namely, that it is a necessary
being whose necessity is derived from an external source.

82
Their Saying that God is the Agent & the Maker of the World

multiplicity—which run in thousands — directly proceed
from the first effect. You need not confine the procession
from the first effect to the body and the soul of the first
sphere. It must be considered possible that there should
emanate from it all the heavenly and the human souls as well
as all the terrestrial and celestial bodies. And the multipli-
city of all these souls and bodies should be of such a kind as
has not been discovered with the first effect.

And thence it will follow as a necessary consequence
that the first Cause can also be dispensed with. For if you
admit the appearance of plurality—which is said to follow
without a cause, and yet is not a self-evident element of the
nature of the first effect—you can also admit that such
plurality can exist together with the first Cause, its own
existence being uncaused. And it will be said that it neces-
sarily follows, and that its number cannot be known. If it
is possible to imagine the uncaused existence of such plu-
rality in case of one, it will be equally possible to imagine it
in case of the other. Nay, even the words ‘one’ and the ‘other’
have no meaning; for they are not separated in time or
space. So, that which does not cause the first cause and
first effect to be separated in space or time, and which can
possibly exist without a cause, does not belong to either of
the two in particular.

If tt ts said:

The plurality of things exceeds thousands. But it is
improbable that plurality in the first effect should go to that
extent. Therefore, we have increased the number of the
intermediaries.

we will answer:

To say that it is improbable is only guess-work, which
cannot form the basis of an intellectual judgment. You
should have said that it is impossible. But then we would
ask: Why is it impossible? When unity has been exceed-
ed, and we have come to believe that two or three things may
possibly be the inseparable accidents of the first effect--not
resulting from the first Cause— then how can we retreat, and
what will be our criterion? What is there to prevent us

85

Prob. IIT] Tahafut al-Falasifah

for the existence of that which constitutes the system
does it need a cause to produce it? If you think ‘hat it ‘s
sufficient, you will have dispensed with all causal explana-
tions. And then you must say that the system immanent
in universal being demanded, by itself and independently of
any additional cause, the existence of universal being. But
if you say that the definite character of the system is not
a sufficient reason for the existence of that which constitutes
the system, then you must also admit that it will be equally
insufficient for the adoption of one of many similar quan-
tities, and that we will need, not only a cause of the adop-
tion of one of the quantities, but also a cause of the composi-
tion of Form and. Matter in the body of the first heaven.

Thirdly, the highest sphere has two points which are the

two Poles. These Poles are fixed, and never depart from
their positions. But other parts of the Zone have different
Positions. Now, only one of the two hypotheses can be adopt-
3 d. In the first place, it may be said that all the parts of the

ighest sphere are similar. But then how was it that only
two points were chosen, in preference to all others, to be the
Poles? Or, alternatively, it may be said that the parts of
the sphere are different. This means that some of these parts
have properties which are not possessed by others. Now
what is the principle of these differences, if the first sphere
has proceeded from one simple thing? The simple can only
give rise to a simple and homogeneous shape, i.e., a circle.
And such a shape is bound to be free from varied properties.
This is, therefore, a dilemma which cannot be resolved.

If it is said:

Perhaps the first effect, as the principle of other
has within itself a certain kind of plurality ane nomen
does not come to it from the first Principle. We have been
able to know only three or four kinds of plurality, any others
still being hidden from us. But our failure to know them
does not shake our belief that there must be plurality within
the principle itself, for out of the One the many do not come.

we will answer:

If you admit this, do say that all the beings in all their
84
Their Saying that God is the Agent & the Maker of the World

he knew that any non-existent man could possibly exist, and
have self-knowledge and the knowledge of his Creator, there-
fore it might be inferred that from his being possible would
follow the existence of the body of a sphere, and from his
self-knowledge and the knowledge of the Creator would follow
the two other things? To such an assumption the answer
would be: What is the connection between being possible
and body of a sphere? If such a thing will be laughed at
when spoken of a man, it must be laughed at when it is
spoken of any other being. For the possibility of existence
is a judgment which does not differ, whether the possible
being is a man or an angel or a sphere. I wish I could
see how even an insane person could rest satisfied with such
postulates, let alone these intellectual thinkers who take
pride in their hair-splitting theorising.

If one were to say:

Now that you have refuted the theories of the philoso-
phers, what do you yourself say ? Do you assert that from
the absolutely One two different things may proceed? If so,
you will be opposed to the intelligible reality. Ordo you say
that there is plurality in the first Principle? That will be a
renunciation of the doctrine of Divine unity. Or do you say that
there is no plurality in the world? That will be a denial of
sensible fact. Or do you say that plurality follows from the
first Principle through intermediaries? That will perforce
bring you round to the position the philosophers had taken.

we would answer :

Ours was not the point of view of a system-builder. On
the contrary, we only intended to throw their theories into
confusion. And that purpose has been achieved. Neverthe-
less, we would say: He who thinks that a belief in the
procession of two from one is opposition to the intelligible
reality, or that thesupposition of some eternal and everlasting
attributes of the first Principle is repugnant to the Divine
unity, must bear in mind that both these assertions are
groundless. The philosophers have not been able to prove
these propositions. The impossibility of the procession of two
froin one is not as evident a fact as is the impossibility of the

87

Prob. III] Tahafut al-Falasifah

from extending the number to four, or five, or even to a
thousand? He who has exceeded the unity, and yet posits
one particular number as the limit, must bear in mind that
the retreat has been cut off. And this is a fatal objection.

Moreover, we will say, this explanation breaks down in
the case of the second effect. For it is the stellar sphere
which is said to proceed from this effect. And that sphere
has about twelve hundred stars which are different in respect
of size, shape, position, colour, influence, and good or evil
fortune. Some of them have the form of a ram, or a bull or
a lion, while others have the form of a man. Even in the
same place in the terrestrial world, the influence of these
Stars differs—in respect of heat or cold, or good or evil
fortune. And their quantities are fundamentally different
from each other. So it is not possible to say that all these
stars form a single species, in spite of the differences among
them. If such a thing were possible, it would be in like
manner possible to say that all the bodies in the world
form a single species characterised by corporeality and ade-
quately governed by one cause. But in fact it is clear that
the difference of attributes, of substances, and of constitu-
tions among the bodies proves that the bodies are different
from each other. Similarly, the stars are different from each
other. And each one of them needs a separate cause—for its
Form: its Matter: its definite and distinct adaptation to a
hot or cold nature, or an auspicious or inauspicious nature:
its definite position ; and its definite adaptation to the figures
of different animals. If such a plurality can conceivably
have its origin in the second effect, it can also do so in the
first effect. And thus the hypothetical value of either of
these two disappears.

The fifth objection :

We will say: Even if we allow these idle postulates and
arbitrary assumptions, why are you not ashamed of saying
that the possible nature of the first effect demanded the
procession from it of the body of the highest sphere: that
its self knowledge demanded the procession from it of the
soul of that sphere, and that its knowledge of the first
Principle demanded the procession of an intelligence? What
is the difference between this and one’s saying that, since

86
PROBLEM IV

TO SHOW THEIR INABILITY TO PROVE THE EXIST-
ENCE OF THE CREATOR OF THE WORLD

E SAY:
All men can be divided into two classes :

(i) the class of the people of the truth. They hold that
the world began in time; and they know by rational neces-
sity that nothing which originates in time originates by itself,
and that, therefore, it needs a creator. Therefore, their belief
in the Creator is understandable.

(ii) the Materialists. They believe that the world, as it
is, has always been. Therefore, they do not ascribe it to
a creator. Their belief, too, is intelligible—although rational
arguinents may be advanced to refute it.

But the philosophers believe that the world is eternal.
And still they would ascribe it to a creator. This theory is,
therefore, even in its original formulation, self-contradictory.

There is no need for a refutation of it.

If it is said :

When we say that the world has a creator, we do not
mean thereby an agent who acts voluntarily, after not
having acted, as we observe to be the case with so many ~
kinds of agents, e.g., 2 tailor, or a weaver, or a builder. On
the contrary, we mean thereby the cause of the world,
whom we call the First Principle, in the sense that His own
being is uncaused, while He is the cause of all other beings.
So it is only in this sense that we call the First Principle the
Creator. As regards the fact of the uncaused being of such
an existent, it can presently be proved by a conclusive
argument. The world, we will say, and all the beings
therein are either uncaused, or have a cause. If they have a
cause, this cause itself will either have a cause, or will be
uncaused. And the same will be true of the cause of the

89

Prob. ITI] Taha fut al-Falastfah

presence of one person in two places at the sa i
general, it is known neither as : self-evident truth eas
matter of inferential knowledge. So what is there to prevent
one from believing that the first Principle is an omnipotent
anda willing agent : that He does what He wills, and ordains
as He likes, and that He creates the similar and dissimilar
things alike, whenever and in whatever manner He wills?
The impossibility of such a belief is neither a self-evident
truth, nor a matter of inferential knowledge. On the contra-
ty, the prophets, whose strength lay in their miracles, have
lent their authority to it. Hence it is obligatory on us to
believe them. As regards the inquiry into the manner in
which the world proceeded from God's will, it is an idle
and aimless venture. Those who sought to discover the
connection between that which proceeds and its principle
have only been able to sum up their investigations by sayin
that from the possible nature of the first effect proceeds the
body of sphere, and from its self-knowledge proceeds the
at sphere. But that i i 1
explanation ofa connection. ‏ها‎ 8 stupid thing, not the
erefore, let us accept the authority of th i
regard to the fundamentals of these things. ‘Let usteubeait
to that authority ; for reason has not been able to contradict
it. Let us give up the inquiry concerning the ‘Why?’ and
and ‘How much?’ and ‘What?’. For these are things beyond
the power of man. e's is the reason why the Law-giver
: ink over the produ , i ivity :
Ferri ‏العو‎ produ ct of God’s creative activity :

88
Their Inability to Prove the Existence of the Creator

infinitum. It does not behove you to say that an infinite
regress of causes is impossible. For, we will say, do you
know it as a matter of immediate inference necessitated
by reason, or through some deductive argument? Now, an
argument from rational necessity is not available in this
case. And methods of theoretical inquiry were betrayed by
you when you admitted the possibility of temporal pheno-
mena which had no beginning. If it is possible that some-
thing infinite should come into existence, why should it not
be equally possible for it to have some of its parts working
as the causes of others, so that on the lower side the
series terminates into an effectless effect, without, however,
terminating on the upper side into an uncaused cause? This
will be like the Past, which reaches its terin in the fleeting
‘Now,’ but had no beginning. If you assert that the past
events are existing neither at present nor in any other state,
and that the non-existent cannot be described as limited
or unlimited, then you will have to take a similar view
of the human souls which have departed from bodies. For,
according to you, they do not perish. And the number
of the souls existing after their separation fram the body
is infinite. A sperm is continually generated from a man,
and a man from a sperm, and so on indefinitely. Then, the
soul of every man who is dead has survived. And this soul
is by number different from the soul of those who died
before, or after, or together with, this man. If all the souls
were by species one, then, according to you, there would
exist at any time an unlimited number of souls.

If it is said:

Among the souls, there is no connection of one part
to another. Nor do they have an order—by nature, or by
position, We believe in the impossibility of an unlimited
number of beings which have an order, either by position
—e.g., bodies, some of which are arranged above others
—or by nature—e.g., causes and effects. But this is not so
in the case of the souls.

we will answer:

This judgment about (the order by) position cannot
gt

Prob. IV] Tahafut al-Falasifah
cause. Therefore, (a) either the series will go on ad
infinitum (which is impossible): or (b) it will come to an end
at length. So the ultimate term will be the first cause,
whose own being will be uncaused. Let us call this cause
the F isst Principle.

If, however, the world itself is supposed to be uncaused,
we already will have found the First Principle. For we
do not mean by such Principle any thing other than an
uncaused being. And on our hypothesis, such a being will be
a necessarily recognisable fact.

Undoubtedly, it is not possible to consider the heavens
as the First Principle. For they form a numerous group.
And the proof of Divine unity prevents number from being
attributed to the First Principle. So the falsehood of the
view that the heavens may be the First Principle will be seen
from an inquiry into the qualities of the First Principle.

Nor is it possible to say that any one heaven, or any
one body, or the Sun, or some other thing of the kind is the
First Principle. For all these things are bodies ; and a body
is composed of Form and Matter. It is not possible that the
First Principle should be so composed. And this is known
through another inquiry (besides the one into the qualities of
the First Principle).

Thus, what we wanted to show was that the existence
of an uncaused being is an established fact—established by
rational necessity and by general acceptance. It is only with
respect to the attributes of such a being that opinions vary.

So this is what we mean by the First Principle.

The answer from two points :

Firstly, it follows as a necessary consequence from the
general drift of your thought that the bodies in the world are
eternal and uncaused. Your statement that this conse-
quence can be avoided through a ‘second inquiry’ will be
refuted, when we come to the problems of Divine unity and
the Divine attributes.

Secondly,—more especially to this problem—it may be
said: According to the hypothesis under consideration,
it has been established that all the beings in the world have
a cause. Now, let the cause itself have a cause, and the
cause of the cause have yet another cause, and so on ad

go
Their Inability to Prove the Existence of the Creator

come back to the point, and say that each individual cause
is possible in the sense that it has another cause which is
additional to itself, and that the Whole is not possible—i.e.,
it has no cause additional or external to itself. If the word
‘possible’ means any thing other than the sense we have given
to it, that meaning cannot be recognised.

If it is said:

This leads to the conclusion that a necessary being can
be made of possible things. But the conclusion is absurd.

we will answer:

If by ‘possible’ and ‘necessary’ you mean what we have
suggested, then this conclusion 5 exactly what we seek.
And we do not admit that it is absurd. To call it absurd is
like one’s saying that something eternal made up of tempo-
ral events is impossible. To the philosophers, Time 4s eter-
nal; whereas individual spherical revolutions are temporal.
And each individual revolution has a beginning ; whereas the
aggregate of those revolutions has no beginning. Therefore,
that which has no beginning is made of those which have.
And the predicate of having a beginning in time is truly appli-
cable to individual revolutions, but not to their aggregate.
Similarly, therefore, (in the case of the causes and their
aggregate) it will be said that each cause has a cause, but
the aggregate of these causes has no cause. For all that can
be truly said of the individuals cannot similarly be said of
their aggregate. For instance, of each individual it can be
said that it is one (of many), or that it is a fraction, or a
part (ofa whole). But nosuch thing can be said of the agere-
gate. Any spot we can specify on the Earth is brightened by
the Sun in daytime, and becomes dark by night. And every
temporal event originates after not having been—i.e., it hasa.
beginningintime. But the philosophers would not admit that
the aggregate of temporal events can have a beginning.

From this it will be seen that if one admits the possi-
bility of originated things—viz., the forms of the four
elements and the changeable things—which have no beginning,
then it does not behove one to say that an infinite series of
causes is impossible, And this further shows that because

93

Prob. IV] Taha fut al-Falasi fah

be elaborated with any greater validity than its contrar
would have been. Why do you believe 3 the impossibility
of one kind of beings infinite in number, and not in that
of the other? What is the argument to prove this dis-
tinction? And how will you disprove one who says:

‘‘These souls which are infinite in number do sti
an order. For the existence of some of them ‘pelore
that of others. For the number of the past days and nights
is infinite. And if we suppose the existence of a soul in
each day and night in the past, the total by this time would
exceed all limits, and would still be arranged in order of
existence—i.e., one soul having existed after another.’’?

As regards the cause, all that can be said is that it i
pefore the effect by nature, as it is said to be above the effort
y essence, not inspace, If this is not impossible in the case
of the real temporal ‘before,’ it should not be any more im-
possible in the case of the essential natural ‘before.’ What
has happened to these philosophers who deny, on the one
hand, the possibility of bodies arranged above one another
in space ad infinitum: but admit, on the other hand, the
possibility of beings existing before one another in time ad

tnfinitum | Is not this an arbitrar 10
vincing position ? y, groundless and uncon-

If tt 4s satd:

_ . The conclusive demonstration of the im ibili

infinite regress of causes is this: Each Oe aT inal
causes is either possible in itself, or necessary. If necessary
it will not need a cause. If possible, the Whole (of which it
is a, rt) must be describable in terms of possibility. Now
‏ال‎ possible depends on a cause additional to itself.

, 5
itself (and that is impossible). on a cause external to

we will answer :
The words ‘possible’ and ‘necessary’ are vague terms—

unless ‘necessary’ is used for an uncaused bei i
: eing, and‘ ,
for one which has a cause. If this is the meaning. we vii

02
Their Inability to Prove the Existence of the Creator

urd answer; but if they say Yes, we will say:
it we oppose that every day such an im rishable thing
came into existence to last for ever, obviously, byt is ime,
there should have accumulated an infinite number o “cue
beings. For even if a circular movement were transit ory,
still the appearance in it of an everlasting being shou (
be impossible. So by this supposition the difficu ty is re
enforced. It is irrelevant here whether this everlas ing
thing is the soul of a man, or a jin, 01 a devil, or an angel:
or any other being you may suppose. For the di cu ty it
arise, whatever point of view they may have taken. And it
will arise because they have posited spherical revolutio

which are infinite in number.

95

Prob. IV) Tahafut al-Falasifah

of this difficulty the philosophers cannot find their way to
affirming the First Principle ; and that, therefore, their con-
ception of Him is bound to be an arbitrary notion.

If it is 5414 :

The revolutions of the sphere do not (all) exist at pre-
sent. Nor do the forms of the elements so exist. What
actually exists is only one form. And that which has no
existence cannot be called finite or infinite—unless its exis-
tence should be supposed in the Imagination. That which
is supposed in the Imagination is not impossible, even though
some of the supposed things are causes of others. For man
often supposes these things in his imagination. But here it
is the thing existing in reality, not in mind, which we are
discussing.

What remains now of the difficulty we had to face is the
souls of the dead. Some philosophers have held that, before
their connection with the bodies, all the souls are one from
eternity, and that, after their separation from the bodies,
their unity is restored. So there is no number : Jet alone the
possibility of calling them finite or infinite. Some other
philosophers believed that the soul follows the constitution
of the body : that death means the non-existence of the soul ;
and that by its substance the soul has no character. There-
fore, on this view, existence is not attributed to the souls,
unless they are the souls of living persons. And the living
persons are the actual beings whose number is limited, and
to whom finitude is not inapplicable. Those who are non-
existent cannot be described at all in terms of finitude or its
contrary—except in the Imagination, if they are supposed to
exist (there).

The answer :

We present this difficulty to Ibn Sina and Farabi and
other thinkers who postulate that the soul is a substance
which exists in itself. That is also the position adopted by
Aristotle and some other authorities in the ancient world.
However, to him who would not adhere to this position, we
will say : Is it conceivable that something which is imperish-
able should have come into being? If they say No, it will

94
Their Inability to prove that God ts One
We will say:

Your statement, that the species ‘necessity of existence’
is either essential or derived from a cause, is a fundamentally
wrong division. We have shown that the word ‘necessity’
is ambiguous, unless it be used to show the absence of a
cause. Using it in that sense, we will say: Why is it
impossible that there should be two beings which are un-
caused and do not cause each other? Your statement that
that which is uncaused 15 uncaused 267 se or per causam is a
wrong division. One does not seek a cause of the absence of
or of the freedom of a being from a cause. What mean-
ing can be conveyed by the words that the uncaused thing is
uncaused per se or per causam? When we say that some-
thing has no cause, the meaning is a pure negation; and
pure negation itself has no cause, and one cannot ask whether
it is per se or per causam.

If, however, you mean by the necessity of existence an
ascertainable and positive attribute of the necessary being—
over and above the uncaused existence of that existent—then
that meaning will not be intelligible in itself. The meaning
which emerges from the denial of the cause of being, and
which is a pure negation, cannot itself be called caused or
uncaused. And, therefore, no purpose can be served by the
division of necessary beings on this ground. Indeed, the
conclusion at which we have arrived is that such a division
is a foolish and groundless way of arguing,

What we mean by a necessary being is that there is
no cause of its existence, and of its uncaused character. Its
being uncaused is not the effect of any cause whatsoever.
One can only say that its existence is uncaused, and so is its
uncausedness uncaused. The division of attributes into those
which are derived from some causes, and those which are
essential cannot be applied to positive attributes, let alone
those which are negative. One cannot say :

Is blackness a colour per se, or per causam? If per se, then
redness cannot properly be called a colour. For this
species, i.e., colouredness, should exclusively belong to the
essence of blackness. But if blackness is q colour through
a cause which makes it a colour, then it will follow that it

97

PROBLEM V

OF THEIR INABILITY TO PROBE BY RATIONAL
ARGUMENTS THAT GOD IS ONE, AND THAT
IT IS NOT POSSIBLE TO SUPPOSE TWO
NECESSARY BEINGS EACH OF WHICH
IS UNCAUSED

TT argue this point in two ways : |
(1)
I the first place, they say :

If there were two gods, each would be called necessary.
Now, a being is called necessary in one of the following
senses :

Either the necessity of its existence is essential to it.
But such necessity cannot belong to anyone else.

Or there may bea cause for the necessity of its existence.
So the essence of the necessary being will be the effect of a
cause, which demanded the necessity of its existence. But by
the necessary being we do not mean any thing whose existence
is connected with a cause in any manner.

(And they further assert) :

_ The species ‘man’ is predicated of Zaid and ‘Amr. Zaid
isnot aman perse. For if he were, ‘Amr could not be a man.
On the contrary, Zaid is a man through a cause which made
him, as well as ’Amr, aman. Thus humanity multiplies with
the multiplication of the Matter bearing it. And its relation
to that Matter is the effect of a cause: for this relation is not
essential to humanity.

The same is true of the necessity of existence which
belongs toa necessary being. For if it is essential to a
necessary being, no one else can have it. But if it were the
effect of a cause, the necessary being would itself be a caused
thing, and would therefore cease to be necessary. From this
it is clear that the necessary being must be one.

96
Their Inability to prove that God is One

them. For in that case, neither existence, nor the necessity
of existence, no reach one’s being a self-subsisting entity
independent of a subject, will be common to them.

But if something is common to them, while they differ
in respect of something else, then that which is common
to them will not be identical with that which distinguishes
them. This means that there will be composition in the
necessary bejngs, and that their definitory formula will
be analysable into several parts. But there can be no
composition in the necessary being. Neither is it divisible
in quantity, nor can its definitory formula consist of divisi-
ble parts. The essence of the necessary being is not com-
posed of those things whose multiplicity is indicated by the
(divisibility of the parts of the) definitory formula, For in-
stance, ‘animal’ and ‘rational’ express what constitutes the
quiddity of man. For man is an animal, and he is also
rational. What in a man corresponds to the word ‘animal’
is different from what (in him) corresponds to the word
‘rational.’ Therefore, man is composed of parts which are
joined together in the definition of man by the words mean-
ing those parts. And the name ‘man’ is applied to the Whole
(of those parts). But this is inconceivable in the case of the
necessary being. And without this duality is inconceivable.

The answer:

Granted that duality is inconceivable, unless there be
distinction between two things in respect of something ; and
that there is no distinction between two things which are
alike in all respects. But your assertion that this kind of
composition is impossible in the case of the First Principle is
an arbitrary assumption. What is the argument to prove it ?

(Let us consider this question in detail. For it is the
philosophers’ well-known position that the First Principle
cannot be analysed through the definitory formula, even as
quantitative division is inapplicable to Him. And it is on this
assertion that they base their own doctrine of Divine unity.)

Even so, they assert:
The belief in Divine unity is imperfect, unless it is.
| 99

Prob. V] Tahafut al-Falasifah

١ is reasonable to have a blackness which is not a colour—i.e.
the cause of colouredness has not made it a colour. For if
that which exists together with the essence has been
added to the essence by an external cause, it is possible in
the Imagination to suppose the non-existence of such
an additional thing, even though the supposed non-exis-
tence may not be observed in experience.

The answer to this would be: This division is fundamentally
wrong. When it is said that blackness is a colour fer se, the
statement does not imply that nothing else can possess this
attribute. Similarly, when it is said that a certain being is
necessary, i.e., uncaused, in itself, the statement will not

imply that nothing else can possibly possess the attribute of
necessity.

(2)
In the second place, they say:

__ If we suppose two necessary beings, they can be either
alike in all respects, or different from each other. If they are
alike in all respects, then numerical dissimilarity or duality
will not be intelligible. For two black things are two, only
when they are in two different places, or in the same place
but at different times. Or blackness and motion in the same
place and at the same time are two things—because of their
different natures. But if the nature does not differ—e.g., in
the case of two black things—and if time and place are the
same, numerical dissimilarity is not intelligible. If it were
possible to speak of two black things in the same place and
at the same time, it would be possible to say that each
person is two persons, and that the distinction between the
two is generally overlooked for it is not very striking,

__ Now, similarity (of two.necessary beings) in all respects
being impossible, it follows that some difference must be
taken for granted. This difference cannot be that of time or
place. What, therefore, remains is the difference of nature.

Again, if the two necessary beings differ in something
the difference can take one of two forms: Either the two
will have nothing common to them: or they will have. It is
impossible that there should be nothing which is common to
Their Inability to prove that God ts One

man is composed of a genus and a difference ; and this is
plurality of another kind. And this, too, (they assert) ought
to be denied of the First Principle.

Fifthly, plurality follows from the supposition of a quid-
dity and, then, the supposition of the existence of that quid-
dity. For instance, man hasa quiddity prior to his existence.
And his existence is related to, and explained in terms of,
his quiddity. Similarly, a triangle has a quiddity—viz.,
that it is a figure enclosed by three sides. And the existence
of a triangle is no part of the essence of its quiddity; nor
does existence constitute the quiddity. For this reason, it is

ssible for a man to know the quiddity of a man or a
triangle, without knowing whether it does or does not exist
in reality. If existence were to constitute the quiddity of a
triangle, the existence of the quiddity in the Intellect, before
its actualisation, would be inconceivable.

So existence is related to the quiddity, regardless of
the fact whether the quiddity is always in existence—e.g.,
in the case of the Heaven—or comes into existence after
not having been—e.g., the quiddity, i.e., humanity, in Zaid
and ‘Amr, or the quiddity of accidents and temporal forms.
(And they assert :) This kind of plurality is again to be
denied of the First Principle. It must be said that in
His case there is no quiddity to which existence should be
related : for His necessary existence is to Him what quid-
dity is to any other being. So His necessary existence is a
quiddity : a universal reality, or a real nature, just as man-
ness, or tree-ness, or heaven-ness is a quiddity. If we were
to affirm His quiddity as separate from His existence,
then necessary existence would have to be regarded as a con-
sequence, not as a constitutive principle, of that quiddity.
And a consequence is a subordinate, or an effect. Therefore,
necessary existence would in that case be an effect ; and that
would be contradictory to necessity.

(In spite of this explanation, the philosophers say that the
Creator is (a) principle: (the) First: (a) being: (a) sub-
stance : (the) One: (the) Eternal : (the) Everlasting: (a) knower ;
(an) intelligence: (an) intelligent : (an) intelligible: (an)
agent : (a) creator : (a) willer : powerful : living: (a) lover:
(a) beloved (one): pleasant : pleased: generous, and pure
Good, And they assert that all these words mean one and the
same thing wherein there is no plurality. This is a strange

ror

Prob. V} Tahafut al-Falastfah

affirmed that the Divine being i i
١ I g is one in all respects.
an aA respects is affirmed by denying plurality in 7
thing a ‏حمست‎ ity is introduced into the essence of
‘irstly, by division in fact, or in the Imaginati i
for this reason that a body is not absolutely one.” A body isone
in virtue of its continuity which exists in the body, and which
is liable to decrease. Therefore, a body can be divided in
the Imagination with respect to its quantity. And such divi-
sion o,mpossible in the case of the First Principle.
ondly, by a non-quantitative division ing i
the Intellect into two different concepts—e.g. Otte devisies of
body into Form and Matter. For, although neither Form
nor Matter can conceivably exist without the other, still they
are two different things, by definition and in reality. This
too, ought to be denied in the case of God. Forit is not proper
that the Creator should be either a Form in a body, or Matter
in a body, or the combination of the two. There are two
reasons why He cannot be a combination of Form and Matter
In the first place, such a combination is divisible—actually or
in the Imagination—as it is analysed into different parts
Secondly, this combination is also divisible conceptual] into
Form and Matter. Next, God cannot be Matter: for Matter
depends on Form. And the necessary being is independent
in all an eass and it is nat possible to connect its existence
ond itself. Fi ;
ia Form depends on Mieco inally, God cannot be Form;
irdly, plurality comes in by way of attributes :
when knowledge, power and will are supposed to be the atte.
utes of God. If these attributes are supposed to be neces-
rary, necessity of existence would be common to them and to
N e (Divine) essence. In this way, plurality would arise in the
ecessary Being, and unity would consequently disappear
_Fourthly, there is plurality which results from the com-
position of genus and species. For instance, a black thing
1S black’ and ‘colour.’ And to the Intellect, blackness is
not identical with colouredness. On the contrary, coloured-
ness is a genus, and blackness a difference. Therefore, a black
thing is composed of a genus and a difference. Similarl
animality is not identical with humanity—from the Intellect’s
point of view. So man is an animal and a rational being :
and ‘animal’ being the genus and ‘rational’ the difference,

100
Their Inability to prove that God is One

other than itself. So this, i.e., being free from Matter, is an
attribute of the Divine being. Therefore, He is an intelligence.
And being an intelligence and being free from Matter both
mean the same thing. .

To call Him an intelligent means that He, being an
intelligence, has an object of intelligence, or an intelligible,
which is His own essence. For He is conscious of Himself,
and knows Himself. So His essence is the Intelligible, the
Intelligent, and the Intelligence. And all these three are
really one; for: 00 ١ oy

He is also called the Intelligible—inasmuch as His quid-
dity, which is divested of Matter, is not obscure to, or hidden
from, His essence which is intelligence in the sense that it is
a non-material quiddity from which nothing is hidden, and
to which nothing is obscure. Himself being known to Him-
self, He is the Intelligible. And His self-knowledge not being
additional to His essence, He is the Intelligence. And it is
not impossible that an intelligent and his intelligence and
the intelligible should be one. For when an intelligent person
knows himself as an intelligent person, he does so because of
his being an intelligent person. And thus the intelligent and
the intelligible become one ‏ج‎ whatever the manner of that
union may be. Undeniably, this union will be different in
the case of God. For the object of Divine intelligence 5
perpetually actual: whereas ours is sometimes potential,
sometimes actual.

To call Him a maker, or an agent, or a creator, or any
other thing which possesses the attribute of action means
that His existence is the noble existence from which unti-
versal being proceeds—in the manner of inevitable pro-
cession ; and that the existence of all other beings is derived
from, and subordinate to, His existence—like the relation
of light to the Sun, or that of heat to fire. But the only
comparison between the relation of the world to Him and
the relation of light to the Sun is with respect to the fact
that the world as well as light is an effect. Apart from this
fact, there is no comparison. For the Sun is not conscious
of the emanation of light from itself; nor is fire conscious
of the emanation of the heat. For the emanation in either
case is pure nature. But, on the contrary, God knows Him-
self; and knows that His being is the Principle of the
existence of all other beings. Thus, the emanation of that

103

Prob. V] Tahafut al-Falasifah

notion. Before we take objection to it, let us elucidate this
doctrine further, so that it may be understood. ‘For before
complete understanding is gained, an objection to a doctrine
is like an arrow shot in the dark. |

The best way to understand their doctrine is to consider
the explanation, wherein they say :

The essenceof the First Principle isone. But a plurality
of names for this one essence arises either from the relation of
things to it, or from its own relation to things, or from the
negation of things as its predicates. The negation of some-
thing as a predicate does not necessitate plurality in the
subject. Nor does a relation indicate any plurality. (So
they do not deny the plurality of negations and relations ;
but the contribution to this problem they would make consists
in the attempt to explain all the attributes in terms of nega-
tion and relation.)

They say:

To call Him the First is to show His relation to all the
beings after Him.

To call Him a principle is to point out that all other
beings derive from Him, and that He is the cause of their
existence. So this is-a relation to His effects.

To call Him a being has a meaning which is obvious.

To call Him a substance means an existence of which the
subsistence in a subject is denied. So this is a negation.

To call Him the Eternal means the negation of a preced-
ing non-existence in His case.

To call Him the Everlasting denies a non-existence which
in the case of other beings would follow existence at last.
‘ The Eternal ’ and ‘ the Everlasting,’ taken together, mean
an existence which is neither preceded by non-existence, nor
will be followed by it.

To call Him the Necessary Being means that His existence
is uncaused, and is the cause of the existence of all other
beings. Here we have a combination of negation and rela-
tion ; the former being represented by uncausedness, and the
latter by the character of being the cause of others.

To call Him an intelligence means that He is a non-
material being. Every such being is an intelligence, i.e., it
has self-knowledge and self-consciousness, and knows what is

102
Their Inability to prove that God is One

And He who likes his effects can also be called the willing
one. Thus, the Divine will is identical with Omnipotence.
And Omnipotence is identical with Divine knowledge. And
the Divine knowledge is the Divine essence. Therefore, all
the Divine attributes are ultimately to be identified with the
Divine essence. And this is so, because of His knowledge of
things is not derived from things. For ifit had been, God
would have had to be regarded as the recipient of a benefit,
or an attribute, or some perfection, from other beings. And
that is impossible in the case of the Necessary Being.

Even our knowledge is of two kinds. In the first place,
there is the knowledge of a thing which (knowledge) is derived
from the form of that thing—e.g., our knowledge of the form
of the Heaven or the Earth. In the second place, there is a
knowledge which we spontaneously acquire—e.g., the know-
ledge of a thing whose form we have never observed, but to
which we gave a form in our souls, so that it was originated
by us. In this case, the existence of the form is derived
from knowledge, not knowledge from the existence of the
form. And the Divine knowledge is of this kind. For the
ideal representation of the System in His essence is the cause
of the emanation of the System from His essence.

Undoubtedly, if the mere appearance of the form of a
line or a letter in our soul were sufficient for the production
of that form, our knowledge too would be identical with
power, and, therefore, with will. But because of our imper-
fection, our giving a form to something in our soul is not
sufficient for the production of the form of that thing.
Accordingly, together with knowledge, we need an act of will
which appears as a new factor. This originates from the
faculty of desire. Asa result of it, there comes into operation
the faculty which causes the movement of the muscles and
the tendons in the outer limbs. So with the movement of
the muscles and the tendons, the hand or some other limb
begins to move. With the movement of the hand arises the
movement of a pen, or whatever external instrument there
may be. With the movement of the pen arises the movement
of Matter—e.g., the ink in this case, or some other thing.
And then comes into being the form of the thing to which we
had given a form in our souls. And this is the reason why
the mere existence of a form in our souls is neither power nor
will, On the contrary, our power is with the principle

105

Prob. V] Tahafut al-Falasifak

which emanates from Him is known to Him; and He is not
unaware of what proceeds from Him. Further, He is not
like any one of us, who stands between a sick man and
the Sun, thus causing the heat of the Sun to be cut off from
the sick man—against his choice and liking. On the
contrary, God knows His effects, and does not dislike them.
In the case of the man who casts the shadow, the agent of
the shadow is his body; while it must be his soul, not his
body, which knows the falling of the shadow, and likes it.
This cannot be so in the case of God. For the doer in Him is
also the knower and the liker—i.e., the not-disliker. He
knows that His perfection consists in that other beings
should emanate from Him. Even if it were possible to
suppose that the body which casts the shadow is itself
the knower of the falling shadow and the liker of it, still
there would be no parallel between this case and the Divine
action. For God is not only the knower and the doer, but
His knowledge is the principle of His action. For His self-
knowledge, i.e., the knowledge that He is the Principle
of the Universe, is the cause of the emanation of the
Universe. Thus, the existing System follows the intelligible
system, in the sense that it occurs because of the latter. So
God’s being the Agent is not additional to His being the
Knower of the Universe. His knowledge of the Universe
is the cause of the emanation of the Universe from Him.
And His being the knower of the Universe is not additional
to His self-knowledge. For He does not know Himself with-
out knowing that He is the Principle of the Universe. By
His first intention, His own essence is the object of His
knowledge. By His second intention, the Universe is known
to Him. And this is what His being an agent means.

To call Him the Omnipotent means His being an agent
—in the manner we have determined. That is, His is the
being from which emanate all those things to which Omni-
potence extends, and by whose emanation the order of the
Universe is shaped forth in such a way that the possibilities
of perfection and beauty are realised in the highest degree.

To caJl Him a willer means nothing but that He is
not unaware of, or displeased with, whatever proceeds from
Him. He knows that His perfection consists in the emana-
tion of the Universe from Him. In this sense, therefore, it
is permissible to say that He likes what emanates from Him.

104
Their Inability to prove that God is One

bearing this particular relation.

To call Him the Necessary Being means the Divine being
—denying a cause of it, and affirming the impossibility of
non-existence before or after it.

To call Him a lover and a beloved one: and pleasant and
pleased means that all beauty and grandeur and perfection
is dear and lovely to the Perfect (and Beautiful and Grand)
One. And pleasure means nothing but an agreeable cor-
sciousness of perfection. He who is aware of his perfection—
perfection which flows from his comprehension of all know-
able things (suppose that he does comprehend them): from
the beauty of his form : from the greatness of his power : from
the strength of his physique; in short from his conscious-
ness of being the possessor of every possible cause of great-
ness (suppose that all these things could conceivably belong
to one man)—will certainly love his perfection, and derive
pleasure from it. But the pleasure of man is imperfect,
because the non-existence or the loss of his perfection is an
inevitable fact ; and the causes of pleasure or delight do not
include those things which are liable to decrease, and whose
loss can always be foreseen. But the First Principle has
perfect grandeur and the completest beauty ; for every per-
fection which is possible for Him is actually present. And
His consciousness of this perfection is safe from the possibility
of decrease and loss. And the perfection which He always
actually enjoys is superior to any other perfection. It
follows that His love for, and interest in, this perfection are
superior to all other cases wherein love is felt for, or interest

_is taken in, perfection. And the pleasure He derives from it

is greater than the pleasure anyone else may derive from
perfection. Nay, there isno comparison between our pleasures
and His. Words like ‘delight,’ “ joy’ and ‘bliss’ are too coarse
to describe His pleasures. But there being no adequate
words we might use for the Divine meanings, it becomes
inevitable to use even the remotest metaphor—as we meta-
phorically use words like ‘a willer’ or ‘a free agent’ for Him,
thus unwarrantably cutting short the distance between His
will and power and knowledge and ours. It is, therefore,
likely that the word ‘pleasure’ should not be approved of.
In that case, some other word might be used instead of it.
However, what is intended here is to show that His state is
nobler—and, therefore, much more enjoyable—than that of

107

Prob. 17 Tahafut al-Falastfah

which moves the muscles. So the form moves another
mover—i.e., the principle of our power. And this cannot be
true of the Necessary Being; for He is not composed of
bodies within whose limits powers are diffused. His power
and will and knowledge are one and the same as His essence.

To call Him a living being means that He is a knower in
such a way that from His knowledge emanates the being
which is called His action. A living being is an agent and a
knower in the highest degree. Therefore, what is meant by
calling Him a Living being is His essence—in relation to His
actions (the relation to be explained in the manner we have
stated). His life is not like ours which needs for its comple.
tion the two different powers which are manifested through
our knowledge and actions. On the contrary, His life, too,
is identical with His essence.

To call Him generous means that the Universe emanates
from Him—not because of a purpose He might have in view.
Generosity includes two things. Firstly it is necessary that
he who receives a gift should be able to profit by it. To give
something to one who does not need it cannot be called
generosity. Secondly, the generous person should not: have
an ulterior need to be fulfilled by his generosity. He should
perform an act of generosity, as if it were the fulfilment of
its own need. He who is generous in order to be praised and
extolled, or in order to avoid blame, is a bargainer, not a
generous person. And God’s generdsity is the true generosity ;
for He does not seek through. it to avoid blame, or to gain the
perfection which is the result of praise. Thus the word
‘generous’ is an expression for His being—in relation to the
action, i.e, generosity, and in privation of a purpose. Hence
it does not mean any plurality in His essence.

To call Him the pure Good may mean that His being is
free from imperfection and the possibility of non-existence.
Evil, which has no being, means either (a) the non-existence
of a substance, or (b) the non-existence of the fitness ot the
condition of a substance. Existence, gua existence, is good.
Therefore, when the word ‘good’ is used, it means the priva-
tion of the possibility of imperfection and evil.

Alternatively, good may be used as the name of some-
thing which is the cause of the system of things. The First
Principle is the Principle of the system of every thing. There-
fore, He is gcod ; and the name signifies the Divine being as

106
PROBLEM VI

(REFUTATION OF THEIR DENIAL OF THE
DIVINE ATTRIBUTES)

IKE the Mu‘tazilah, the philosovhers agree in rejecting as
impossible the affirmation of knowledge, power and will
of the First Principle. They assert:

These names have been used by the Sacred Law, and
their application is etymologically defensible. Nevertheless,
they all mean—as has been shown above—the same thing,
viz., the one essence. It is not right to affirm attributes
which are additional to the Divine essence, as our knowledge
or power is an attribute additional to our essence. For (they
assert) such a thing necessitates plurality.

If our attributes had occurred to us, we should have
known that they are additional to our essence—insofar as
they had subsequently emerged. Therefore, even if they are
supposed to be coextensive with, and not posterior to, our
being, still their coexistence will not change their character
of being additional to the essence. For of any two things, if
one occurs to the other, and if it is known that This is not
That: nor can That be This, then—notwithstanding their co-
existence—their being two different things will remain an
intelligible fact. So the Divine attributes, even if coexistent
with the Divine essence, will not cease to be additional to the
essence. And this will necessitate plurality in the Necessary
Being. But that plurality is impossible. Hence the (unani-
mous) denial (by the philosophers) of the Attributes.

It should be said to them:

How do you know that plurality of this kind is impos-
sible? You are opposed to all the Muslims, except the
Mu‘tazilah. What is the argument to prove that this oppo-
sition is justified? If one says that the essence (which
would bear the attributes) being one, plurality in the
Necessary Being is impossible, then all he means is that
plurality of attributes is impossible. And that is the point
at issue. For such impossibility is not known by rational

109

we eg

Prob. Vj Tahafut al-Falasifah

the angels. And the state of the angels is nobler than ours. If
the satisfaction of physical and sexual appetite were the only
cause of pleasure, the condition of an ass or a pig could be nobler
than that of the angels. For the angels—i.e. the Principles or
the beings divested of Matter —have noother pleasure than that
of a joyful consciousness of the perfection and beauty which
specially belongs to them, and which is not liable to decrease.

That which belongs to the First Principle is superior to
that which belongs to the angels. For the existence of the
angels, who are pure intelligences, is possible in itself, and
necessary by virtue of something other than itself. And
possibility of non-existence is a kind of evil or imperfection.
No one except the First Principle being absolutely free from
all evil, He alone is the pure Good, and His alone is the per-
fect beauty and grandeur. Further, He is a beloved one,
regardless of whether anyone loves Him, or not—as He is
the Intelligent and the Intelligible, regardless of whether any
other intellect knows Him, or not. And all these meanings
are resolved into His essence, and into His self-consciousness
and self-knowledge. For His self-knowledge is identical with
His essence. He being a pure intelligence, all the names (we
have given to Him) mean one and the same thing.

(So this is the way to expound their doctrine. N
these things can be divided inte: 9

(a) those which may be believed. With respect to such
things, we will show that they are not compatible with
the philosophers’ fundamental principles.

(b) those which cannot be believed. With respect ‏0غ‎

such things, we will criticise the philosophers.

And we will recur to the five categories of plurality. Criti-
cising the philosophers’ rejection of each category (as applied
to God), we will show how they fail to adduce rational argu-
ments to prove their contention. Let us, therefore, consider
each category in detail.]

108
Their Denial of the Divine Attributes

It remains for them to say:

That which depends on someone else cannot be a neces-
sary being.

To this, the answer should be:

Why do you say so, if by the necessary being you mean
a being which has no efficient cause? Why should it be
impossible to say that, just as the essence of the Necessary
Being is eternal and independent of an efficient cause, so are
His attributes eternal and independent ofan efficient cause? If
by the necessary being you mean a being without a receptive
cause, then the attributes are not necessary in that sense.
Nonetheless, they are eternal and have no efficient cause.
What is the contradiction involved in this view ?

If it is said:

An absolutely necessary being has neither an effi-
cient nor a receptive cause. If you admit that the attri-
butes have a receptive cause, you admit that they are caused
things.

we will answer :

To call the essence which receives the attributes a recep-
tive cause is your terminology. Rational arguments do not
prove the existence of a necessary being to which these terms
of yours could be applied. What they prove 1s only that
there must be a limit at which the series of causes and effects
comes to anend. Nothing beyond this can be proved. And
the series of causes and effects can be brought to an end by
the One who has eternal attributes, and whose attributes and
essence are both independent of an efficient cause. Although
eternal, His attributes reside in His essence. Let the word
‘necessary being’ be discarded, for it is likely to create
confusion. Rational arguments only prove that a series
must stop. Nothing beyond this can be proved. There-
fore, the claim of any thing beyond this is an arbitrary
claim.

rrr

Prob. VI] Tahafut al-Falasifah
necessity. An argument must be produced to prove it.

And they argue the point in two ways.

(x)
Firstly, they say :

Following is an argument to prove our point: Of the
two things—viz., an attribute and. its subject—This is not
Thal, and That is not This. Now, (a) either the existence
of each of the two will be independent of the other ; or (b)
each will need the other; or (c) one will be independent,
while the othe: is not. If each is supposed to be indepen-
dent, both will be necessary. That amounts to absolute
Duality, which is impossible. But if each of the two needs
the other, neither will be a necessary being. For a necessary
being means one which subsists by itself, as independent of
other beings. So that which needs another being has its
cause in that being ; for if the latter were to disappear, its
own existence would be impossible. That is, its existence is
not derived from itself, but from another being. Finally, if
only one of the two depends on the other, then that which
depends will be a caused being, and the other a necessary
being. As a caused being, the dependent one will have an
external cause. And this will lead to the conclusion that a
dependent being comes to be connected with a necessary
being by an external cause.

Objection to this may be taken as follows :

Of these three alternatives, the last one must be chosen.
But even in regard to the first one—viz., Duality—we have
shown (in the preceding problem) that your rejection of it is
not supported by an argument. For the rejection of duality
can only be based on a denial of plurality—i.e., the subject
of this problem, and the following one. So, that which 1s a
corollary of this problem cannot be the basis of this problem.
However, the alternative to be chosen here is that in its
constitution the essence does not depend on the attributes,
while the Divine attributes—as well as ours—depend on their
subject. ١

IIo
Their Denial of the Divine Aliributes |

such attributes were affirmed of the First Principle, they
would not enter into the quiddity of His essence either,
but remain mere accidents related to His essence—maybe,
for ever. Many an accident is inseparable—i.e., it belongs to
the quiddity inevitably. But that does not make it a
constituent of the essence. Being an accident, it is always
subordinate to the essence, which is, therefore, a cause of it.
This makes an accident a caused thing. How, then, can
you call an accident—i.e,, an attribute—a necessary being ?

(This is the same thing as the first argument changed in
words.)

We will answer:

If by its being subordinate to the essence, and by
the latter’s being a cause of it you mean that the essence is
an efficient cause of it, and that it is an effect of the essence,
then this sense is not true. And such a’thing is not necessary
even in the case of our knowledge, as related to our essence
For our essence is not an efficient cause of our knowledge.
But if you mean that the essence is a substratum, and
that the attributes cannot exist in themselves (if they do not
exist in this substratum), then that sense has already been
granted, and there is no reason why it should be called impos-
sible. Whether the attribute is called a subordinate, or an
accident, or an effect, or whatever one likes to call it, the
meaning cannot be changed. For these words will not mean
anything, if they do not mean that the Divine attributes
exist in the Divine essence—in the manner in which all attri-
butes exist in their subjects. And there is no reason why
it should be regarded as impossible that the attributes
exist in the essence, and still be eternal and independent
of an efficient cause.

All the arguments advanced by the philosophers aim at
scaring us by using (for the Divine attributes) such words as
‘possible,’ ‘contingent,’ ‘subordinate,’ ‘inseparable acci-
dents,’ ‘effects,’ etc., and by suggesting that these words are
undesirable. It must be said to them: If the meaning is that
the attributes have an efficient cause, then that meaning is
unacceptable. But if the meaning is that the attributes have,
not an efficient cause, but a substratum in which they exist,
then—whatever words one may choose to express this mean-

113

Prob. VI) Taha fut al-Falasifah
If itis said:

Just as the series of efficient causes must stop some-
. where, so must the series of receptive causes stop, For if
every being needs a substratum in which to exist, and if the
substratum itself were to need another substratum, an infinite
regress would follow—as would be the case if every being need-
ed an efficient cause, and the cause itself needed another.

we will say:

This is true. But we did bring the series to an end by
saying that the Divine attributes are in the Divine essence,
and that the Divine essence does not depend on any thing
else. And this is like the position of our own attributes.
For instance, the substratum of our knowledge is our essence,
but our essence itself is not in another substratum. So in the
Divine essence the series of the efficient causes of the attri-
butes reaches its end ; for neither the essence nor the attri-
butes have an efficient cause. And the uncaused essence as
well as its uncaused attributes never ceased to exist. As re-
gards the series of receptive causes, it does reach its end in the
essence. Whence does it follow that, in order to deny a cause,
a substratum should be denied? Rational arguments do
not compel one to believe any thing but that a series must
stop. Every method through which a series can be cut
short is faithful to the judgment on which the rational de-
monstration of a necessary being is based. If, however, by
the rational being you mean something other than a being
which is independent of an efficient cause, and in which the
series of efficient causes reaches its end, we will not concede
that such a being is necessary at all. Finally, if reason
admits the idea of an eternal being which is uncaused, it will
also admit the idea of an eternal possessor of attributes
whose attributes and essence are both uncaused.

(2)
Secondly, they say :

Our knowledge or power does not enter into the quid-
dity of our essence; for it is only an accident. Therefore, if

112
Their Denial of the Divine Attributes

causes being. To that assertion the rejoinder will be: The
First Principle is a being which is eternal, uncaused and
independent of ‘one who causes being.’ Similarly, therefore,
it should be said: The First Principle is a possessor of
attributes who is eternal and uncaused, and whose (a)
essence ; (b) attributes, and (c) the subsistence of the attri-
butes in the essence are all uncaused, each existing from
eternity to eternity.

As far as body is concerned, it cannot be the First
Principle, for it has a temporal character. And it has a
temporal character, for it is never free from changes. But he
who does not believe in the temporal character of body
is bound—as we will show later—to admit the possibility
that the First Cause should be body.

It must be clear now that all the methods of demonstra-
tion adopted by the philosophers are fantastic.

Moreover, they have failed to show how all the positive
statements they make about God can be reduced to His
essence. For instance, they affirm that He isa knower. But
they must admit that being a knower is additional to exis-
tence. One should ask them: Do you admit that the First
Principle knows any thing but Himself? To this, they make
different answers. Some admit this; whereas others say
that He knows Himself only.

The position that God knows what is other than Himself
was adopted by Ibn Sina. He said that God knows all the
things in a universal manner which does not fall under Time.
He argued that the particulars are not known to God, for the
knowledge of particulars necessitates change in the essence
of the knower, ٠.

Taking objection to this theory, we will say:

Is God’s knowledge of all the Species and Gonera,
whose number is unlimited, identical with His self-know- -
ledge, or not? If you say that it is not identical, you will
break the rule by affirming plurality. But if you say that
it is identical, why should you not have yourself classed with
one who claims that man’s knowledge of what is other than
himself is identioal with his self-knowledge and with his
essence? And he who makes this statement must be a fool.

115

Prob. VI) Tahafut al-Falastfah

ing—there is no impossibility involved in it.

Sometimes, the philosophers try to scare us by using
repulsive words of another kind. Thus, they say :

This leads to the conclusion that the First Principle
needs the attributes. Consequently, He will not be the
absolutely Unneedy. For the absolutely Unneedy does not
need any thing which is external to Himself.

This is the most unconvincing literal-mindedness. The
attributes of perfection cannot be separated from the essence
of the perfect one, so as to occasion one’s saying that the per-
fect one needs something which is external to him. If God
has never ceased to be, nor will ever cease to be, perfect by
virtue of His knowledge, power and life, how can it be said
that He has a need for them? How Can one read‘a need

into the perfection which is an inseparable accompaniment ? |

The philosophers’ assertion is like one’s saying :

The perfect one is he who needs perfection. And he who needs
—even the attribute of perfection—is essentially imperfect.

To this the answer would be: What is meant by one’s being
perfect is nothing but the actual existence of perfection
in relation to his essence. Similarly, therefore, what God’s
being unneedy means is the actual existence of those attri-
butes which preclude all wants and needs in relation to His
essence. How, therefore, can you deny—through such
verbal niceties—those attributes of perfection whereby the
Divine realises itself?

If it ss sata:

If you affirm (a) an essence; (b) an attribute, and
(c) the subsistence of the attribute in the essence, then
you introduce composition. And wherever there is composi-
tion, there must be one who produces composition. This
was the reason why we did not find it permissible to call the
First Principle a body, which is subject to composition.

we will answer:

To say that all composition needs one who produces .

composition is like saying that every being needs one who

114
Their Denial of the Divine Altributes
The answer from several points:

Firstly, your statement that He knows Himself as the
Principle of the Universe isan arbitrary assumption. It would
be proper that He knew just the existence of His essence.
The knowledge of His being the Principle is additional to the
knowledge of existence. For being a principle is a relation
of the essence. It is possible for one to know his essence,
without knowing its relations. If the state of being a princi-
ple were not a relation, the essence would be multiple—i.e.,
there would be existence and the state of being a principle.
For existence and the state of being a principle are two
different things. As it is possible for a man to know himself,
without knowing that he is an effect (for that knowledge
depends on his knowledge that being an effect is a relation he
bears to his cause), so God’s being the Cause is a relation He
bears to His effects. Even if the effects are left aside, the
objection to their statement, that He knows Himself as 2
principle, stands. For the statement means the knowledge
of essence and the knowledge of being a principle. Being a
principle is a relation of the essence. A relation of the
essence is not identical with the essence. Therefore, the
knowledge of the relation cannot be identical with the know-
ledge of the essence. Our argument for this conclusion has
already been given—namely, that, on the one hand, it is
possible to imagine the knowledge of essence, without 1m-
agining the knowledge of its being a principle; and that, on
the other hand, it is not possible to imagine the knowledge
of essence, without imagining the knowledge of essence (for
essence is one).

Secondly, their statement that the Universe is known to
Him by a second intention is rational. For if His knowledge
encompasses the Other, as it encompasses His own essence,
then there will be two distinct objects of His knowledge.
And the number and distinction of known things will neces-
sitate the numerical increase of knowledge. Since it is
possible in the Imagination to keep the objects of knowledge
apart from each other, the knowledge of one cannot be identi-
cal with the knowledge of another. If it were not, it would
not be possible to suppose the the existence of one without the
other. If all the cognitions were one, there would be no
‘other’: and variation in phraseology—by using the words

2117

Prob. VI} Tahafut al-Falasifah

To him it will be said: The definition of ‘one’ thing is that it
is impossible—even in the Imagination—to suppose the
combination of Affirmation and Denial in it. The knowledge
of ‘one’ thing being one, it is impossible to imagine it to
exist and not to exist at the same time. Since it is not
impossible to suppose—in the Imagination—a man’s self-
knowledge, without supposing his knowledge of things other
than himself, it is said that his self-knowledge is not identical
with his knowledge of things other than himself. If the two
cognitions were identical, the denial of one would deny the
other, and the affirmation of one would affirm the other. It
is impossible that Zaid should be and not be at the same
time. But such a thing is not true of the two cognitions—
viz., self-knowledge and the knowledge of the other. Simi-
larly, God's self-knowledge and the knowledge of the Other
cannot be identical. For it is possible to imagine the exis-
tence of one of them, without imagining the existence of the
other. They are two different things. It is not possible to
imagine the existence of His essence, without imagining the
existence of His essence. If the self-sameness of His essence
were like the alleged identity of the two cognitions, this
imagining would be impossible. Therefore, any philosopher,
who claims that God knows any thing other than Himself,
thereby affirms plurality.

If it is said:

He does not know the Other by primary intention.
But He knows Himself as the Principle of the Universe.
From this knowledge follows—by second intention—the
knowledge of the Universe. It is impossible that He should
know Himself, without knowing that He is the Principle
of the Universe. For being the Principle of the Universe
is the reality of His essence. And it is not possible that
He should know Himself as the Principle of that which
is other than Himself, without the Other entering into
His knowledge—by way of implication or necessary conse-
quence. There is no reason why His essence should not
have necessary consequences. Nor does the having of neces-
sary consequences necessitate plurality in the quiddity of
essence. What is impossible is only that there should be
plurality in the essence itself.

116
Thetr Denial of the Divine Attributes

by way of relation, the knowledge of the thing to which
a relation is borne must be one. For he who knows ‘son’
knows him by ‘one’ knowledge which is also—by implication
~-the knowledge of ‘father,’ ‘fatherhood’ and ‘sonship.’
Thus, in spite of the multiplicity of the objects of knowledge,
knowledge remains one. Similarly, God knows Himself
as the Principle of the Other; and, in spite of the multiplicity
of the objects of knowledge, knowledge remains one. And
since such a thing is intelligible in the case of one effect
and its relation to God, and seeing that it does not neces-
sitate plurality, it follows that increase in the number of
that which is not generically a cause of plurality will not
necessitate plurality either.

The same thing happens when one who knows a thing also
knows the knowledge of that thing. He knows his knowledge
of the thing by knowing the thing ; for every knowledge is
the knowledge of itself, as of its object. Therefore, the objects
of knowledge multiply ; but knowledge remains one.

Another- proof of our thesis is thefact that you believe
that, although the objects of God’s knowledge are infinite in
number, yet His knowledge is one. You do not say that He
has a correspondingly unlimited number of cognitions. If
the multiplicity of the objects of knowledge necessitated
numerical increase in knowledge itself, there would be an
unlimited number of cognitions in the Divine essence—which
is impossible.

we will answer:

Whenever knowledge is one in all respects, its relation to
two objects is inconceivable. The relation of knowledge
to more than one object demands plurality, if the postulates
laid down by the philosophers in their theory of plurality.
are to be followed. For they have exaggerated (the sense of
plurality) by saying that, if God had a quiddity as the
possessor of the attribute of existence, plurality would arise.
They have claimed that ‘ one’ thing which has a reality, and
to which existence is then attributed, is unintelligible. They
have asserted that, if existence is related to a reality, the
two would be different things, whence plurality will arise. So
on thss ground, it is impossible to suppose the relation of one
knowledge to many objects—without thence arising a kind

119

ae, J

Prob. VI] Tahafut al-Falasifah

‘a second intention ’—would not create any difference.
I wish I could understand how one who says :

‘Nothing—not even as much as a particle of dust, in the
heavens or on the earth—is hidden from His knowledge.’
But He knows things in a universal manner. The univer-
sals which can be known are infinite in number. But in
spite of the multiplicity of, and the differences among,
the objects of knowledge, His knowledge of these objects
is one in all respects.

dares to deny plurality. And Ibn Sina is opposed on this
point to other philosophers, who, in order to avoid plurality,
adopted the view that God does not know any thing other
than Himself. How can Ibn Sina agree with these philoso-
phers in denying plurality, and disagree with them in
affirming God’s knowledge of the Other. He would be
ashamed of saying :

God does not know any thing in this world, or in the
Hereafter. He knows Himself only. But every other
being knows (a) God; (b) itself, and (c) what is other
than itself. So all other beings are nobler than God,
so far as knowledge is concerned.

So he rejected this doctrine, for he was disgusted with it.
But then, he was not ashamed of insisting on the denial of plu-
rality in all respects. He asserted that God’s self-knowledge
and His knowledge of any—rather, every—thing other than
Himself are precisely the same as His essence. This is the
contradiction—detectable at the first sight—of which all
other philosophers would be ashamed. And thus we arrive
at the conclusion that both Ibn Sina and those with whom
he disagreed end by saying things which are disgraceful.
And this is how God confounds those who go astray from
His path, thinking that their reason or imagination can help
them to grapple with the Divine things.

If it ts said:

If it is established that He knows Himself as a principle
118
Their Denial of the Divine Attributes
to reply to your objection.
If it is 5414 :

_ We do not mean that you must adopt a definite poin

view—e.g., the position of a particular Sect. Buta ‏تم‎
‎which presents itself to all mankind, and which is equally
baffling to all, should not be dismissed by you. The difficulty
we have raised is such a difficulty. Therefore, neither you
nor any other Sect, can ignore it.

we will say:

0 No, our purpose is only to show your inabilit
justify your claim to the knowledge of the realities of things
by conclusive arguments. We wanted to shake your faith in
your own claims. Now that your inability has been shown
let it be borne in mind that there are some people who
believe that the realities of the Divine things cannot be dis-
covered through intellectual investigations, and that, on the
contrary, it is beyond man’s power to discover them. For this
reason, the Law-giver has said: ‘‘Think over the product of
God’s creative activity; do not think over His essence.”
How will you disprove the people

who believe in the truth of the Apostles, regarding the
miracles performed by them as their arguments: _

who refrain from expressing an intellectual judgment
concerning Him who sent the Apostles :
_ who refrain from attempting intellectual investigations
into the Divine attributes :

who assent to whatever the Law-giver has told them with
respect to God’s attributes : ;
5 who follow the Law giver s example in using words like

e knowing One’: ‘the willing One’: ‘th i ,
etc., about Cod : 8 © Omnipotent,

who refuse ‘to apply to Him words which have not been
recommended to them ; and

who confess that they are unable to understand these
things with the help of reason?

You disagree with these people, because you think that
121

Prod. VI) Tahafut al-Falasifah

of plurality which is more clear and distinct than the plura-
lity following from the supposition of an existence related to
quiddity.

As regards the knowledge of ‘son,’ or any other relative

term, there és plurality init. For the knowledge of ‘son’ and |

the knowledge of ‘father’ are two different cognitions. And
there is a third knowledge, viz., that of the relation between
thetwo. This third knowledge is implied in the first two cog-
nitions ; for they are its conditions, and provide its necessity.
Without knowing the things which are related, you cannot
know the relation. So all these cognitions are numerically
distinct ; and some of the:n are conditioned by others,

Therefore, if God knows Himself as related to the Genera
and Species by virtue of His being their Principle, this know-
ledge will require that He should know (a) Himself; (b) the
Genera and Species, one by one, and (c) His relation to the
Genera and Species—by virtue of His being the Principle of
the Genera and Species. Otherwise, it would be unintelli-
gible to say that the relation is an object of His knowledge.

As regards their statement that he who knows some-
thing knows his knowledge by this very knowledge (whieh
shows how, in spite of the multiplicity of the objects of
knowledge, knowledge remains one), it is not true. One who
knows his knowledge of something, knows it by another
knowledge (and knows the second knowledge by a third
knowledge), and so on, till the series comes to an end at 2
knowledge to which he is inattentive, and which is, there-
fore, not known to him. So he is (ultimately) inattentive to
knowledge, but not to the object of knowledge. For in-
stance, when one knows a black thing, his soul is at the time
of knowing absorbed into this object; and, therefore, he
is inattentive to, or unaware of, his knowledge of this object.
For if he were to be aware of his knowledge, it would require
another knowledge-- whereby his awareness would cease.

As regards their statement that our objection may turn
against us in the case of the objects of Divine knowledge
(which we consider to be infinite in number, although Divine

knowledge is one), we will say : In this book, ours is not the:

point of view of (system-) builders, but only that of those who
destroy things, or criticise them. For this reason, we have
called the book The Destruction Of The Philosophers, not
“An Introduction To Truth.” Therefore, we are not bound

120
Thetr Dental of the Divine Attributes

self-knowledge, can be the difference between Him and a
dead person? What is the point in calling His self-know-
ledge a perfection, if He is ignorant of what is other than
Himself? This doctrine is so evidently disgraceful that
no detailed description is required to prove the fact. Finally,
it must be said to the philosophers: In spite of steeping
yourselves into these disgraceful things, you have not been
able to get rid of plurality. We must ask you: Is His self-
knowledge identical with, or other than, Himself? If you
say that it is other than Himself, plurality comes in. But if
you say that it is identical, what will be the difference
between you and him who says that man’s self-knowledge is
identical with himself? To such a statement, our answer will
be: This is nonsense. The existence of the essence of a man is
intelligible—even at a time when he is inattentive to him-
self. When his inattention ceases, he awakens to himself.
This again shows that his self-consciousness is other than
himself.

If you say:

Man is sometimes devoid of self-knowledge, which, how-
ever, occurs to him afterwards. It follows that self-know-
ledge is other than himself.

we will answer :

Otherness is not determined by occurrence or coexis-
tence, The identity of a thing does not occur to it. And that
which is other than something does not become that thing—
i.e., it does not cease to be other than that thing —because of
coexistence with it. Therefore, if God has never ceased to
be a knower of Himself, it does not follow that His self-
knowledge is His essence. The Imagination admits the
supposition of an essence, and then the occurrence of con-
sciousness. If consciousness were identical with the essence,
this imagining would not be possible.

If tt is said :

His essence is intelligence and knowledge. There is no
such thing as : ‘‘Essence : then knowledge existing in essence.”’

123

Prob. VI} Tahafut al-Falast fah

they are ignorant of the methods of rational demonstration,
and cannot arrange their premises in the form of syllogisms.
And you claim to have discovered the realities of the Divine
things by your rational methods. But your helplessness has
been shown; the incoherence of your methods has been
exposed ; and your claim to definite knowledge has been re-
duced to absurdity. And this is what we aimed at in
this discussion. Where is he who claimed that metaphysical
arguments are as conclusive as mathematical arguments ?

If tt ts said:

This difficulty should be presented to Ibn 5122 who
asserted that God knows what is other than Himself. The
‘masters’ among the philosophers agree that He does not
know any thing but Himself. So the difficulty raised by you
is removed,

we will answer:

Beware this infamous doctrine! If it were not ex-
tremely obnoxious, the latter philosophers would not refuse
to support it. Let us explain what makes it so disgraceful.
It implies that the effects of God are worthier than God.
For an angel, or a man, or any intelligent being, knows
(a) itself; (b) its principle; and (c) other beings. If God
does not know any thing other than Himself, He must be
imperfect—in comparison with man (not to speak of the
angels), or even the beasts (who, in addition to self-con-
sciousness, know many other things). Obviously, knowledge
is a cause of worth, and its absence is an imperfection.
Where is now the philosophers’ assertion that He is a lover
and a beloved one, for perfect grandeur and the completest
beauty belongs to Him? What beauty can belong to a
simple being which has no quiddity or reality, and which
does not know what goes on in the world, or what necessarily
follows or proceeds from it? What imperfection in the
world of God can bemoreimperfect than this? All intelligent
people must be surprised to see that the philosophers, who
claim a profound knowledge of the intelligibles, end by saying
that the Supreme Deity, the Cause of all causes has no know-
ledge of what goes on in the world. What, apart from His

122
PROBLEM VII

REFUTATION OF THEIR THESIS THAT IT IS
IMPOSSIBLE THAT SOMETHING SHOULD
SHARE AGENUS WITH GOD, BEING SEPA-
RATED FROM HIM BY DIFFEREN-

TIA; AND THAT THE INTELLEC-

TUAL DIVISION INTO GENUS
AND DIFFERENTIA IS IN
APPLICABLE TO HIM

HEY have agreed on this point, and based on it the con- -
tention that, since nothing shares with Him a generic
factor, nothing can be different from Him by virtue ofa

differential one. Hence He cannot be defined. For definition
consists of genus and differentia ; and that wherein there
is no composition cannot be defined, as this is a kind of
composition.

And they assert.:

One’s saying: ‘‘He is comparable to the first effect
in respect of His being an existent; a-substance, and a
cause of others; whereas, obviously, He is distinguished
from the first effect in respect of something else’’ does not
show a cosharing in genus, but only in a common inseparable
accident. As Logic shows, the difference between a genus
and an inseparable accident has a basis in reality, even
though the two may not differ in regard to inseparable-
ness. For the essential genus is that common property
which is given in answer to the question: What is it?
It enters into the quiddity of the defined thing, and is a
constituent of its being. For instance, man’s being a
living being enters into man’s quiddity—i.e., animality :
hence it is the genus, On the other hand, his being a
born or a created thing is an inseparable relation which
never leaves him, but which does not enter into his quiddity
—even though it is an inseparable accident common to all
men. The way in which these things are known in Logic is
indisputable.

125

Prob. VI] Tahafut al-Falasifah

we will say:

This is evidently stupid. Knowledge is an attribute or
an accident which requires a subject. To say that in Him-
self, He is intelligence or knowledge is like saying that He is
power or will. The latter statement will amount to saying
that power or will exists in itself. And if it is seriously
maintained, it will be like saying that blackness, or white-
ness, or Quantity, or threefoldness, or fourfoldness, or any
other accident exists in itself, The argument which proves
the impossibility of attributes existing, not in bodies (which
ate other than the attributes), but in themselves, is also the
argument to prove that the attributes of living beings —e.g.,
knowledge, life, power, will, etc.—exist, not in themselves,
but in an essence. For instance, life exists in an essence,
whose life it is. And the same holds of all other attributes.

The philosophers are not content with denying all the
attributes of God, nor with denying His reality and quiddity ;
they go further to deny His self-subsistence—by reducing
Him to the nature of accidents and qualities which cannot
exist in themselves. But we intend to show (in some other
problems in this book) that they are unable to prove (by
tational arguments) that He even knows—Himself, or that
which is other than He.

124
Impossible that Something should share a Genus with God

the cosharing of genus, which consequently requires distinc-
tion by virtue of differentia. And God has not quiddity other
than necessary existence. Hence necessary existence is the
real nature, the quiddity-in-itself which belongs to Him, and
tonooneelse. And because necessity of existence belongs to
Him alone and to no one else, no one can be cosharer with
Him. Therefore, no one can be differentiated from Him by
a specific difference. Therefore, He is indefinable. ١
(This much was necessary by way of the exposition of
their doctrine. Now, we proceed to criticise it from two
points of view: first that of a questioner, and the second that
of one who refutes.)

In the questioning, it may be 544 :

This, then, is the summary of the doctrine. Now, how
do you know the impossibility of this, in regard to God —so
as to base upon it the denial of duality (cf. your position that
the second necessary being must coshare with Him som ething,
being differentiated in respect of another; and that he who
has one thing to be shared and another not to be shared is
composite, whereas the composite—as an attribute of God—
is impossible) ?

Let us say:

Whence comes to you the knowledge that this kind of
composition is impossible? There is no proof of it, except
what you were reported to say in denial of the attributes—
namely, that the composition of genus and differentia pro-
duces an aggregate of parts: that if the existence of a part
or the whole is valid independently of the other, then it will
be necessary of existence, as set over against the other ; and
that if the existence of the parts is not valid independently
of the aggregate, nor that of the aggregate independently of
the parts, then each will be an effect or a dependent.

We have considered this argument in connection with
the attributes, and have shown—in connection with the
question of the termination of the series of causes—that this
is not impossible. What can be rationally proved is only
the termination of regress. As regards those grand things
which have been invented by them so as to form inseparable

127

Prob. VIT] Taha fut al-Falasif ah
Further, they assert:

Existence never enters into the quiddity of things, but
is related to quiddity—either as an inseparable accident which
never leaves the thing (e.g., the existence of heaven), or as
something which happens after it had not been (e.g., the exis-
tence of things which have a beginning in time). Therefore,
cosharing in existence is not cosharing in genus.

As regards His sharing with other causes in the charac-
ter of being the cause of other things, it is again the coshar-
ing of a relation which, however inseparable, does not enter
into quiddity. Neither principleness, nor existence, consti-
tutes His being; but each is inseparably related to it after
the constitution of being by the parts of quiddity. If either
is coshared, it will be but the cosharing of an inseparable
accident whose inseparableness is subordinate to being. It
will not be the cosharing of genus. This is the reason why
things can be defined only by reference to their constituents.
If they are defined by reference to their inseparable accidents,
it is only a description in order to mark something off, not to
depict itsreality. For instance, in the definition of a triangle
it 15 not said that all its angles are equal to two right angles,
although it is an accident inseparably related to every tri-
angle. On the contrary, it is said that a triangle is a figure
enclosed by three sides.

: The same holds of the cosharing of the state of being a
substance. What being a substance means is that something
is an existent not-in-subject. An existent is not a genus.
Nor by the relation of something negative —i.e., not-in-sub-
ject—does it become a constituting genus. Nay, even if the
positive aspect is related to it—i.e., when it is called an exis-
tent in a subject—it will not become a genus fer accidens.
This is so, because he who knows substance through its defi-
nition (viz., that it is an existent not in subject), which
serves the purpose of a description of it, does not know any-
thing about its being, except that it may, or may not, be in
a subject. When in order to describe substance we say that
it is an existent not-in-subject, the meaning is that it is a
reality which, when found, is found not-in-subject. We do
not mean that actually it is an existent at the time of
definition It follows that cosharing of it is not cosharing of
genus. Only the cosharing of the constituents of quiddity is

126
Impossible that Something should share a Genus with God

not a condition, then, insofar as necessary exi

) » then, nla xistence can do
without all that is no condition for the necessity of existence
necessity of existence will be completed without it. —_

we will answer:

__ This is the same as what you had to say in connecti
with the attributes. We have already dealt with it. ‏سن‎
‎this the source of confusion is the term ‘ necessary being.’
This term should, therefore, be discarded. We do not con-
cede that rational arguments prove the necessary being—it
the term does not mean an eternal existent who has no
efficient cause. But if this meaning is adopted, then the
term ‘ necessary being ’ should be dismissed, and you must
prove that in an existent which has no cause or agent, number
or composition is impossible. But that just cannot be proved.
; There remains their question whether the necessary
being’s uncausedness is conditioned by that which is sup-
posed to be common to the two necessary beings. This is
silly, for we have shown that something which is uncaused
is not caused to be so, wherefore its condition should be
sought out. It is like one’s asking whether blackness is a
condition for colour’s being colour: and, if it were, why
should redness be colour, To this question, the answer will
be: As regards its reality—viz., the reality of colouredness
as realised in the Intellect—neither blackness nor redness is
a condition. But as far as its existence is concerned, each one
may be a condition, although not the only one. That is, no
genus can possibly exist without some difference. Similar-
ly, therefore, he who affirms two causes, thereby putting an
end to the causal series, might say: They are distinguish-
able from each other by differences one of which is of neces-
sity a condition for existence—not in an exhaustive way.

If itis sata:

_ This is possible in the case of colour, for colour has an
existence related to quiddity or additional to it. But it is
not applicable to the necessary being; for such being has
nothing but the necessity of existence. There is no quiddity
to which existence could be related. . As the differentia of
blackness or redness is no condition for colouredness, qua

129

Prob. VII) Tahafut al-Falasifah

attributes of the necessary being, there is no argument for
them. Ifnecessary being means what they explain it to be—
namely, that there is no composition in it, and that, there-
fore, it does not depend on anyone other than itself for its
constitution — then there is no argument to prove necessary
being. What there is an argument for is only the termina-
tion of regress. With this (argument) we have already dealt
in connection with the attributes.

Our contention is all the more valid in this section. For
to divide something into genus and differentia is not like
dividing a bearer of attributes into essence and attribute.
An attribute is other than the essence, and the essence is
other than the attribute. But the species is not other
than the genus in all respects. When we speak of the
species, we only mean the genus plus an additional factor.
Thus, when we speak of Man, we mean Animal plus the
additional factor of rationality. To ask whether man-ness
can be independent of animality is like asking whether man-
ness can be independent of itself, when something else is
added to it. It is, therefore, further removed from plurality
than an attribute aud its bearer can be.

Why should it be impossible for the series of causes and
effects to stop at two causes—one being the cause of the
heavens, and the other that of the elements: or one the
cause of the heavens, and the other. that of all bodies? Why
should it be impossible for the two causes conceptually to
be separate and distinct —as, for instance, between redness

and heat even in the same place there 1s conceptual distinc-

tion without our supposing any genus-differentia composi- ©

tion in redness so as to make it analysable? Nay, if there
is plurality in it, this sort of plurality will not be repugnant
to the unity of essence. So what is the reason why this
should be impossible in the case of causes? And this shows
how they fail to defend their denial of the possibility of two

gods or creators.
If it is satd:

This is impossible, because that wherein the two beings
differ must be present in each necessary being—if it is a
condition for the necessity of existence. But then there will
be no difference between the two. On the contrary, if it is

128
Impossible that Something should share a Genus with God

and the intelligences their common character of being intelli-
gent. And the cosharing of this character will be the co-
sharing of the generic reality. For, according to those who
believe in God’s knowledge of what is other than Himself,
God has self-knowledge and the knowledge of the Other—
by virtue of His being intelligence divested of Matter. And
the first effect—viz., the first inteJligence, whom God has
already caused forth—does share this character with God.
The argument for this is that the intelligences, which are
the primary effects, are different species sharing the charac-
ter of being intelligences, but separated from each other by
certain differentiae. And God will share with all of them
the character of being an intelligence. So here the philoso-
phers have two alternatives: either the rule laid down by
them will be broken, or they should revert to the position
that being an intelligence does not constitute the essence of
God. And for them each alternative is impossible.

13

Prob. VII} Tahafut al-Falasifah
colouredness, but only a condition for the existence of
colouredness which is caused, similarly it is proper that
the differentia of the necessary being should not be a condi-
tion for the necessity of existence. For necessary existence
is to the Necessary Being what colouredness is to colour—
unlike the existence of a coloured thing which is related to
colouredness.

we will say:

This cannot be allowed. The necessary being must have
a reality to which existence is attributed. The point will be
explained in the next problem. The philosophers’ assertion
that the necessary being has no quiddity but existence is un-
intelligible. The upshot of the whole iscussion is that they
base the denial of quality on that of genus-differentia compo-
sition. And this they base on the denial of quiddity as set
over against existence. So when we have destroyed the last
one, which is the foundation of foundation, the whole struc-
ture will collapse. For verily, it isa shaky structure like the
spider’s web.

The Second Method : Objection :

We say: Even if existence, substantiality, or being a
principle is no genus (for none is given in answer to the
question: What is it?), still you consider God to be a pure
intelligence, as all other intelligences (who are the secondary
principles of existence, and whom the philosophers also call
Angels—i.e., the effects of the First Cause) are pure intelli-
gences divested of Matter. Sothis reality will include God and
His first effect. For the first effect, too, is simple, having no
composition in it, except by way of its inseparable accidents.
The two will, therefore, stand on par, inasmuch as each is
intelligence divested of Matter. And this is a generic real-
ity, for being pure intelligence is not one of the inseparable
accidents of being, but the very quiddity. So this quiddity
will be common to God and all the intelligences. Now, if
God is not distinguished from the intelligences by something
else, you will have conceived a duality without mutual dis-
tinction. But if He is distinguishable, then that which
causes distinction must be other than that which gives God

130
Their Thests that God’s is Simple Being

if any other meaning is assigned to them, that meaning will
be allowed, and no contradiction will be involved in it. For
rational demonstration has not proved anything besides the
termination of the series of causes and effects. And it is
possible to terminate the series by an existent essence, a well-
defined quiddity. The termination does not require that the
quiddity be explained away.

If tt is 44 :

From this it follows that the quiddity is the cause of
existence, which, being subordinate to quiddity, will be only
an effect or an agendum of it.

we will answer:

Even the quiddity of the originated things is not the
cause of their being. How can it be the cause of the Eternal
being—if cause means an agent? If, however, by cause
they mean something else (e.g., something which cannot be
dispensed with), then the quiddity may be the cause of exis-
tence, without involving any impossibility. What actually
involves impossibility is an infinite regress of causes. When
this is cut short, the impossibility is obviated. It is not
clear why anything else should be impossible. He who claims
that impossibility has not been obviated even after the
termination of the causal series must give an argument
to prove the point. And all the arguments advanced by the
philosophers are only arbitrary assumptions based : (a) upon
the use of the words ‘necessary being’ in a sense from which
certain consequences are drawn by them, and (b) upon the
assumption that rational demonstration has proved the
Necessary Being in accordance with their own description of
it. But—as shown above—this is not so.

_ _AInshort, this argument of the philosophers has its basis
in their arguments against the attributes and against the
genus-differentia division. It is even obscurer and weaker,
for the plurality attacked hereexists only in words. Actually,
the supposition of quiddity which is ‘one’ existent is intellec-
tually admissible. If they say: ‘Every quiddity which is
an existent has already received plurality, since there is
existence in addition to quiddity,’’ they only show their

133

PROBLEM VIII

REFUTATION OF THEIR THESIS THAT GOD'S IS
SIMPLE BEING—1.£., IT IS PURE BEING, WITH-
OUT A QUIDDITY OR ESSENCE TO WHICH
EXISTENCE WOULD BE RELATED—AND
THAT NECESSARY EXISTENCE IS TO
HIM WHAT QUIDDITY IS TO ANY
OTHER BEING

W E WILL criticise this from two points of view :

Firstly, demand for an argument : let it be satd to them:

How do you know this—as a self-evident fact, or by
theoretical investigation? It is not a self-evident fact. There-
fore, you must set forth the theoretical grounds of it.

If itis said:

If He had a quiddity, His existence would be a relation
or a subordinate or an inseparable accident of quiddity.
But the subordinate is only an effect. Consequently, neces-
sary existence would be an effect. But that is a contradic-
tion in terms.

we will answer:

By using the words ‘necessary being,’ you are reverting
to the source of confusion. We say that He has an essence
or a quiddity: that the essence is an existent—in the sense
that it is not a non-entity or a negation—and that exis-
tence is related to the essence. If they love to call such
existence an inseparable accident or a subordinate, names
will not matter very much—if it is recognised that such
existence had no agent, but continued from eternity without
any efficient cause. If by the words ‘subordinate’ and
‘efiect’ they understand something which has an efficient
cause, these words will be inapplicable to His existence. But

132
Their Thesis that God’s is Simple Being
we will answer:

‘Necessary’ only means the denial of cause. And that is
a negation which cannot constitute the reality of a being.
Moreover, the denial of the cause of reality is a property of
reality. There must be an intelligible essence to which
uncausedness might be related. It follows that the non-
existence of reality is inconceivable—since necessity has no
other sense than that of being uncaused.

Besides, if necessity is additional to existence, plurality
comes in. If it is not additional, how can it be the quiddity ?
Existence is not quiddity. Therefore, that which is not
identical with existence cannot be so either.

135

Prob, VIII) Taha fut al-Falasifah
utmost ignorance. For in any case, the ‘one’ existent is
intelligible, and there is no existent without an essence,
but the existence of the essence is not incompatible with
oneness.

The Second Method: we will say:

Existence without quiddity or essence is unintelligible.
As we do not understand non-existence which is not related
to a being whose non-existence it should be, so we cannot
understand unqualified existence which is not related to a
definite essence. Specially, when existence is particularised
into one essence, how can it have that particular oneness
which will be the conceptual basis for its distinction from
anyone else—unless it had a reality? To deny quiddity is
to deny reality. And if the reality of a being is denied, its
existence will be unintelligible. What the philosophers say
is like saying : ‘Existence, but no existent.’ And that is a
contradiction in terms. To prove the point, if existence
without an existent were intelligible, existence without
reality could be found among the effects as well. Such exis-
tence would be a cosharer with God in the character of
having no reality or quiddity ; and would be distinguishable
from Him in that it had a cause while God had none. Now,
why is not such a thing among the effects conceivable? Is
there any other reason for its being inconceivable than that
in itself it is unintelligible? That which is in itself unintelli-
gible does not become intelligible, if its cause is denied. And
that which is intelligible does not cease to be so, if it is
supposed to depend on a cause.

By going to this extent, the philosophers show how
miserably they grope in the dark. They thought that they
had arrived at a pure idea of God ; but, in fact, the ultimate
result of their investigations is pure negation. The denial of
quiddity is the denial of reality. When reality is denied,
nothing remains but the word ‘existence,’ to which no object
corresponds, unless it be related to quiddity.

If it is said:

His reality is that He is necessary. So this is the quid-
dity.
134
Thetr Inability to Prove that God is not Body

your denial of quiddity—which is the ultimate basis of your
theory —and shown how arbitrary your assumptions are.

If it ts satd:

If body is not connected with soul, it will not be an
efficient cause. But if it is connected with soul, then soul will
be its cause. Therefore, body cannot be the First Cause.

we will answer:

Our soul is not the cause of our body. Nor (according to
you) is the soul of the sphere by itself the cause of the body
of thesphere. In either case, body is produced by an external
cause. And if it can be eternal, it will have no cause at all.

If it is said:
But then how did combination of soul and body happen ?
we will answer :

This question is like one’s asking: How did the Prime
Being happen? To that question, the answer will be: This
question is to be asked concerning an originated thing. ‘How
did it happen?’ cannot be asked concerning a being which
never ceased toexist. Similarly, therefore, if neither the soul
nor the body ever ceased to be, why should it be impossible
that body be the Creator ? ,

If tt ts said:

The reason is that body, gua body, cannot create any
other being. And the soul which is connected with body
acts only through the intermediacy of body. And body
cannot be an intermediary for the soul for the purpose of:
(a) the creation of other bodies; (b) the production of other
souls, and (c) the production of things uncongenial to bodies.

we will answer:

Why is it not possible that, among the souls, there be a
137

PROBLEM IX

OF THEIR INABILITY TO PROVE BY RATIONAL
ARGUMENTS THAT GOD IS NOT BODY

W’ WILL SAY:

One who believes that body is originated in time (for
it is never free from changes and all changes need one who
originates them in time) can consistently maintain that
God is not body. But you accord intellectual assent to
the idea of an eternal body which never began, but which,
nevertheless, is always subject to changes. Why, therefore,
should it be impossible for you to believe that the First
Principle is body—e.g., the Sun, or the-highest sphere, etc.?

If it is said:

The reason is that body is bound to be composed. It
can be divided: (a) quantitatively, into two parts ; (b) con-
ceptually, into Form and Matter, and (c) into those qualities
which specially belong to a body—so as to distinguish it
from other bodies from which, gua body, it is, however, not
different. But the Necessary Being is one, and indivisible
with respect to all these things.

we will answer:

We have refuted this argument of yours, and shown that
the only thing you can prove is that, if some parts of an
aggregate need others, then the aggregate must be a caus-
et thing. We have considered this point, and shown that, if
it is not untenable to suppose a being which is independent of
‘one who causes its being,’ it will not be any more untenable
to suppose : (a) a compound which is independent of ‘one who
causes its composition’; or (b) many beings which are in-
dependent of ‘one who causes their being.’ You base your
denial of number and duality on the denial of composition ;
and the denial of composition is based on the denial of a
quiddity—as set over against existence. We have refuted

136
Their Inability to Prove that God ts not Body

according to them, the cause of the body of the first sphere)
—e.g., the affirmation of will. Just as they have put the
question to Muslims (who relate all things to the eternal will),

. 50 can they be asked: Why did the first effect will this

quantity, as set over against all others? (In fact, we have
turned their objections against them in the discussion of the
specific direction of the movement of the Heaven, and in the
discussion of the two specific points which are the Poles.)
Since itis now clear that they are bound to admit the
ssibility of a caused distinction of something from another
ike it, it follows that the admission of a caused distinction of
this kind is like the admission of an uncausedone. For it makes
no difference whether the question is about something which
has a special quantit y—viz. , Why does it have it? or about
the cause—viz., Why did it give something a special quanti-
ty? If the latter question—i.e., the one about the cause-—
can be answered by saying that this quantity is not
like any other quantity (for it has a connection with the
system which connection other quantities do not have), then
the former question—i.e., the one about the thing itself
which has a special quantity—can be answered in the
same way, without there being any need for an external
cause. And this is an inescapable position. For, if a parti-
cular quantity, which has actually happened, is like the one
which has not happened, then the question will be : How is
something distinguished from another like it? (And the
question is particularly relevant to their principles, for they
reject the will as a cause of distinction). But if a specific quan-
tity, which has happened, is not like the one which has not
happened, then the possibility of the non-existent quantity
will not be established. And then it will be said to them
that,. just as they consider the Eternal Cause to have ‘hap-

. pened,’ so did the body (which, in order to refute them, we

have assumed to be the First Cause) ‘happen’ eternally.

(In this discussion, he who argues with the philosophers
must make use of the objections raised by them to the eter-
nal will, and the counter-objections we raised to their theory
of the Pole, and of the direction of spherical movement.)

And this shows that he who does not believe in the tem-
poral origin of bodies cannot prove by rational arguments
that the First Principle is absolutely incorporeal.

139

Prob. 1X] Tahafut al-Falastfah

soul which is enabled by a special property possessed by it to
be the source for the production of bodies and other things
from it? Such an impossibility is not a self-evident fact.
Nor can it be proved by theoretical arguments. No doubt,
we have not observed such a thing in the case of empirical
bodies. But non-observation does not prove impossibility.
For instance, the philosophers attribute many things to the
Prime Being, which (things) cannot be attributed toa being
at all, and have not been observed in the case of any other be-
ing. But the fact that they have not been observed in the
case of other beings does not prove their npossipility in His
case. The same may, therefore, be true of soul and y:

If it ts said:

' The body of the highest sphere, or the Sun, or whatever
other body is supposed, must possess a certain quantity the

increase or decrease of which must have been possible. .

Hence the special choice of a contingent quantity for the
body will require a cause of that special choice. And, there-
fore, the body will not be the First Cause.

we will answer :
How will you disprove one who says:

“It is necessary— because of the universal system—that
this body should possess the quantity it does possess.
It could not have a bigger or a smaller quantity than the
present one. This is like your own explanation. You
have said : ‘The body of the highest sphere emanated from
the first effect. This body possesses a certain quantity. In
relation to the first effect, all the quantities are equal.
But one of them has been specified—by virtue of its relation
to the universal system—to be the quantity of the body
of the first sphere. Therefore, the quantity which actually
exists is necessary, and any thing different from it is
rejected.’ So the same explanation may be extended to
that which is not an effect.’’?

Nay, the question is not settled even by their affirmation
of a principle of special choice in the first effect (which is,

138
Inability to Prove that there is a Cause or Creator of the World
stated the reason why body cannot be a necessary being.

we will answer :

And we have exposed the invalidity of what you claim
to be the attributes of a necessary being. It has been shown
that rational demonstration dces not prove anything but the
impossibility of an infinite regress. And the Materialist cuts
short—at the very outset—an infinite regress by saying that :

The bodies have no cause. As regards the Forms and
Accidents, some of them are causes of others, till at last
the series comes to an end at rotatory motion.

And, as the philosophers themselves believe (the Materialist
admits that) some of the rotatory movements are causes of
others, but that the causal series reaches its end in rotatory
motion.

So he who reflects over the points we have mentioned
will see the inability of all those who believe in the eternity
of bodies to claim that they have a cause. These people are

‘in consistency bound to accept Materialism and Atheism—

as some thinkers, who gave clear expression to the presupposi-
tions of the philosophers’ theory—have actually done.

If it ts said :

Our argument is this: If these bodies are supposed to be
necessary, it will be absurd. If they are supposed to be pos-
sible, all that is possible needs a cause.

we will answer:

The words ‘necessary’ and ‘possible’ are meaningless.
All the confusion created by the philosophers has its source
in these two words. We prefer substituting for them their
sense—i.e., the denial of a cause, and its affirmation respec-
tively. This would result in the philosophers’ saying that
these bodies may, or may not, have a cause. The Materialist
will say that they do not have a cause. Why should the
philosophers find fault with him? And possibility meaning
what it does, we will say that body is necessary, not possible.

141

PROBLEM X

OF THEIR INABILITY TO PROVE BY RATIONAL
ARGUMENTS THAT THERE IS A CAUSE OR
CREATOR OF THE WORLD

E WILL say:

He who believes that all body is originated (for it is
never free from changes) has an intelligible position, if he
claims that body requires a cause or a creator. But what

prevents the philosophers from saying—as the Materialists
say—that :

‘‘From eternity, the world has been as it is. It has no
cause or creator. A cause is required by that which
originates in time. No one of the bodies in the world
originates in time; nor does it perish. It is only the
Forms and Accidents which originate in time. The bodies
—i.e., the heavens—are eternal. And the four ele-
ments, which are the stuff of the sphere of the Moon, and
their bodies and Matter(s) are eternal. On these pass in
succession the Forms resulting from combination and
transformation. Further, the human soul and the vegeta-
tive soul originate in time. And the series of the causes
of all those things which originate in time comes to an end
at rotatory motion. And rotatory motion is eternal, its
source being the eternal soul of the sphere. All this shows

' that the world has no cause, and that the bodies in the
world have no creator, The world is as it has always
been. Similarly, the bodies in the world are, and have
been, eternally uncaused.’’?

What do the philosophers mean by saying that the eternal
bodies in the world have a cause ?

If it is said:

That which is uncaused is a necessary being. In con-
nection with the attributes of a necessary being, we have

140
PROBLEM XI

REFUTATION OF THOSE PHILOSOPHERS WHO
HOLD THAT GOD KNOWS THE OTHER, AND
THAT HE KNOWS THE SPECIES AND
GENERA IN A UNIVERSAL MANNER

E SAY:

To Muslims, the division of Being into temporal and
eternal being is an exhaustive division. And in their view,
nothing is eternal, except God and His attributes ; for every-
thing else has a beginning in time—under the influence of
God, and because of His will. From these opinions, belief in
God’s knowledge follows as what they consider to be a
necessary conclusion. For the object of will is of necessity
known to the willer. From this they further conclude that
the Universe is known to Him: for it is willed by Him, and
owes its origin to His will. All that is, originates from His
will. And once it is proved that He is the willer and the knower
of what he wills, it is evident that He must also be called the
Living. And every living being who knows the Other must ©

_fortiort have self-knowledge. Thus, the Universe becomes—in

the Muslims’ view—an object of God’s knowledge. And it is
possible for them to adopt this theory since they have clearly
seen that God is the willer of the origin of the world in time.

But you have asserted that the world is eternal, and
that it never originated because of God’s will. How, there-
fore, do you know that He has knowledge of what is other than
Himself? You must produce an argument to prove the point.

(The gist of Ibn Stna’s elaborate treatment of this prob-
lem, as set forth in various parts of his philosophy, can be
reduced to the two following theses :)

(z)
In the first place, he says:

God is a being not-in-Matter. Every being not-in-Matter
is pure intelligence. Every pure intelligence has all intelligibles

143

Prob. X] Tahafut al-Falasifah ©

If they say that it is not possible for body to be necessary,
they make a groundless and arbitrary assumption.

If it is said:

_, No one can deny that body has parts: that parts con-
stitute the whole; and that essentially they take precedence
over the whole.

we will answer: -

_ Let it be so. Let the whole subsist by the parts and
their combination. Let, however, the parts as well as their
combination be uncaused, eternal and. independent of an
efficient cause. The Philosophers cannot prove the im possi-
bility of these assumptions, unless they use the argument
which they advanced to prove the impossibility of plurality
in the case of the Prime Being. e have refuted that

argument. And the philosophers have nothing else whereby

to defend themselves,

_ This makes it clear that he who does not believe in the
origination of bodies has no basis on which his belief in the
Creator may be founded.

142
Refutation of Philosophers who hold that God knows the Other

is the only impediment. Their syllogism, which is a hypo-
thetical syllogism, can be stated as follows:

If this were in Matter, it could not know things.
But it is not in Matter.
Therefore, it knows things.

This is an interpellation of the contrary of the antecedent,
from which (it is agreed on all hands) the conclusion does not
follow necessarily. It is like one’s saying :

11 this were a man, he would be an animal.
But this is not a man.
Therefore, he is not an animal,

Here the conclusion does not follow; for if not a man, he
might yet be a horse—and, therefore, an animal. Doubt-
less, the contrary of the consequent follows as a necessary
conclusion from the interpellation of the contrary of the
antecedent, when a certain condition mentioned in Logic is
fulfilled—i.e., when it is proved that the consequent and
the antecedent are mutually convertible. And this will be
possible only when between themselves they exhaust all the
alternatives. For instance, the philosophers say :

If the Sun had risen, it would be daytime.
But the Sun has not risen.
Therefore, it is not daytime.

Here the conclusion is valid; for sunrise is the only cause
of daytime. So the consequent and the antecedent are
mutually convertible. (Explanation of these technical terms
will be found in the book Standard of Knowledge, which we
have written as a supplement to this book.)

(2)
(Ibn Sina’s second thesis may be stated as follows :(

Although we do not say that God is the willer of the
origin of the world, or that the universe originated in time,
yet we do say that the universe is His action, and that it

145

Prob. 71[ —S Taha fut al-Falasif ah

laid bare unto it; for it is the relation to Matter, and the occu-
pation with it, which is the impediment in the way of the appre-
hension of things. Man’s soul is occupied with the direction of
Matter—i,e., body. When death brings its occupation to an
end, and if it has not been contaminated by carnal appetites
andignoble attributes (which might come to it like an infection
from the physical things), the realities of all the intelligibles are
laid bare unto it as well. For the same reason, it is so decreed
that all the angels know all the intelligibles, without a single ex-
ception; because they also are pure intelligences not-in-Matter.

We will say:

If by saying that God is a being not-in-Matter you mean
that He is neither body, nor impressed upon body, but
subsists by Himself, without location or a definite dimension,
all this is indisputable. But there remains your assertion
that he who has this attribute is a pure intelligence. Now,
what do you mean by intelligence? If you mean something
which knows all things, that is the very point at issue
between us. How did you include it among the premises
of the syllogism which would give you the desired conclusion ?
If, however, you mean something else (e.g., that, as an
intelligence, He knows Himself), then that will be a position
which your brethren among the philosophers might concede
to you. But the conclusion at which you aim is that he
who. knows himself also knows the Other. So it will be
said to you: ‘‘Why do you make this assertion? It is not
a self-evident truth. Of all the philosophers, Ibn Sina alone
holds this view.’’ How, therefore, can you claim that it
is a self-evident fact? If, however, it is a matter of theo-
retical knowledge, what is the argument to prove it ?

If it ts sata:
Pure intelligence has knowledge of things, because Matter

is the impediment in the way of the apprehension of things,
Therefore, where there is no Matter, there is no impediment.

we will answer:

We agree that Matter is an impediment, but not that it
144
Refutation of Philosophers who hold that God knows the Other

be produced—which is not true of the emanation of light
from the Sun.

we will answer:

On this point, your brethren disagree with you. They
say that the existence of the universe necessarily follows
from His essence in an order which is determined by nature
and constraint, and which does not require that He be a
knower. What absurdity do you find in this position? If
you agree with the other philosophers in denying will, and
if you do not say that the Sun’s knowledge of light should be a
condition for the emanation of light from the Sun (asserting,
on the contrary, that light necessarily follows from the Sun),
then the same explanation must be extended to God’s know-
ledge. For nothing can prevent you from doing so.

Secondly, even if it is granted that the procession of
something from an agent requires the knowledge by him
of that which proceeds, yet God’s action is, according to the
philosophers, one—viz., the first effect. which is a simple
intelligence. It follows that He should not know any thing
except it. Similarly, the first effect should know only that
which proceeds from it. The universe has not been produced
by God all at once. On the contrary, it came through
intermediaries and indirectly connected developments and
consequences. Therefore, that which proceeds from some-
thing which proceeds from God may not necessarily be known
to Him. And from Him only one proceeds !

Knowledge is not necessary in the case of the indirect
consequences of volitional action; how can it be so in the
case of the indirect consequences of natural action? For in-
stance, the movement of a stone from the top of a hill, which
often has a volitional cause, necessitates the knowledge of the
original movement ; but it cannot necessitate the knowledge
of the after-effects of that movement—i.e. developments for
which the movement served as an intermediary, e.g,, the
stone’s falling upon other things, and breaking them.

And to this, the philosophers have no answer.

If tt ts said:
Were we to judge that He knows nothing but Himself, it
147

Prob. XI) Taha fut al-Falast fah

was produced by Him. The only point we wish to emphasise
is that He never ceased to possess the quality which charac-
terises agents. So He never ceased to be an agent. But
beyond this much, we do not disagree with others. And as
far as the fundamental question (whether the world is an action
of God) is concerned, there is absolutely no disagreement.
Since it is agreed on all hands that an agent must have know-
ledge of his action (we believe in God’s knowledge of the uni-
verse), for we do consider the universe as His action.

The answer from two points:

Firstly, action is of two kinds: (i) voluntary action—
viz., the action of a living being ; and (ii) natural action—e.g.,
the radiating action of the Sun; the heating action of fire;
and the cooling action of water. Now, knowledge of the ac-
tion is necessary in the case of voluntary action only. (For
instance, it is necessary in the arts of man.) But it ts not
necessary in the caseof naturalaction. But according to you:

The world is an action of God, following as a necessary
consequence from His essence—by nature, or through con-
straint: not by way of will and choice. So the universe
necessarily proceeds from His essence, as light necessarily
proceeds from the Sun. And as the Sun has no power to
withhold the light, or as fire has no power to withhold the
heat, so God has no power to withhold His actions.

(May He be exalted far above what the philosophers say
of Him!) Even if it is found permissible to call this sort
of thing an action, still it will not require any knowledge
on the part of its ‘agent.’

If tt ts said:

Between the two things, there 25 a difference. The uni-
verse proceeds from His essence, because of His knowledge of
the universe. The ideal representation of the universal system
is the cause of the emanation of the universe. The principle
of the universe is His knowledge of the universe. And His
knowledge of the universe is identical with Himself. If He did
not have the knowledge of the universe, the universe could not

146
Refutation of Philosophers who hold that God knows the Other

part, it follows that the knowledge of the intelligible universals
should also be affirmed only in the case of other beings than
the Divine. And His freedom from the knowledge of the
intelligible universals would prove no imperfection any more
than the absence of the knowledge of the particulars did.
And there is no way out of this difficulty.

149

Prob. XT} Taha fut al-Falastfah

would be extremely disgraceful. For the Other knows itself
and God and other things. Therefore, it would stand above
Him in order of nobility. But how can the effect be nobler
than the cause?

we will answer:

This disgraceful element is a necessary consequence of the
trend of philosophy—i.e., the trend towards the denial of the
Divine will, and the denial of the beginning of the world.
Therefore, you must adhere to it, as all other philosophers
have done. Otherwise, it would be necessary for you to give
up philosophy, admitting that the world owes its origin to the
Divine will.

Further, it must be said to Ibn Sina: How would you
disprove those philosophers who said that greater knowledge
does not indicate greater nobility? Since man is by nature
imperfect, he needs knowledge in order to be perfected by it.
He ennobles himself by the knowledge of the intelligibles—
either to discover what is salutary for him in this world or the
Hereafter ; or to perfect his dark and imperfect nature. The
same is true of all other creatures. But the Divine being
needs no effort for perfection. If we can suppose that He will
derive perfection from knowledge, we shall make His essence,
qua essence, imperfect. And this is like what you have said
concerning hearing, seeing and the knowledge of the parti-
culars which fall under Time. You agree with all other
philosophers in saying that God is free from these things:
that the changeable things (which fall under Time, and which
are divided into ‘Was’ and ‘Will be’) are not known to
Him; and that the knowledge of the changeable things—if
it were possible in His case—would necessitate mutability
and receptivity in Him. Now, the denial of this in His case
does not prove imperfection, but perfection. Imperfection
lies only in the senses, and in theneed for them. If man were
not imperfect, he would not need the senses in order to guard
himself against what makes him amenable to changes. Simi-
larly, you assert, the knowledge of particular temporal
events indicates imperfection. So if we know all the temporal
events, and perceive all the sensible things, while God knows
no particulars, and perceives no sensible things, and if His
not knowing the particulars proves no imperfection on His

148
Thetr Inability to Prove that God knows Himself Either

There is no difference between you and one who would say : (a)
that everyone who has no volitional action; no power ; no
choice, and who does not hear and see, is dead ; and (b) that
he who does not know what is other than himself is dead.
If it were possible to consider God as devojd of all these
attributes, why need it be supposed that He could know
Himself either?

If they revert to the position that all that is divest-
ed of Matter is essentially intelligence, and thus knows itself,
we have made it clear that this is an arbitrary assumption
for which no argument is available.

If it is said:

The argument is as follows: Beings are divided into
the living and the dead. The living are worthier and nobler
than thedead. God, Who is the Worthiest and the Noblest,
must therefore be living, And every living one has self-
consciousness. It is impossible that there should be living
ones among His effects, while He Himself should not be living.

we will answer :

These are arbitrary assumptions. Why, let us say, is it
impossible that from one who does not know himself should
proceed another who knows himself—through many inter-
mediaries, or through none? If the impossibility arises from
the fact that (on this view) the effect will be nobler than the
Cause, why is it impossible for the effect to be nobler than
the Cause? Such an impossibility is not axiomatic.

Then, how will you disprove one’s saying that God’s
nobleness consists, not in His knowledge, but in the fact
that universal being is subordinate to His being? This can
be proved as follows: The Other knows things besides him-
self, and sees, and hears ; whereas God does not see or hear. If
somebody were to say :

Beings are divided into the seeing and the blind; and the
knowing and the ignorant, And those who see or know
are worthier,

then it would follow that God can also see, as He knows

151

PROBLEM XII

TO SHOW THEIR INABILITY TO PROVE THAT
GOD KNOWS HIMSELF EITHER

E SAY:

Having recognised the origin of the world because of
God’s will, the Muslims proceed to infer knowledge from
will, and life from knowledge and power. From life they
further infer that, since all living beings are self-conscious,
God Who is the Living must also know Himself. This is
a position which is intelligible and sound. But you deny the
Will and the Creation; and assert that whatever emanates
from Him emanates of necessity and by way of nature.
Therefore, what is the difficulty for you in believing that
His being is a being which had the function of causing forth
the first effect only: that from the first effect necessarily
followed the second effect, and so on down to the end of
the Order of Being; and that, in'spite of all this, the First
Cause does not know Himself—as fire (from which heat
necessarily follows) and the Sun (from which light neces-
sarily follows) do not know themselves or any thing else?

He who knows himself knows what emanates from him;
thus he knows what is other than himself. And we have
shown that, according to the philosophers’ principles, God
cannot know what is other than Himself. To those who would
not agree with the generally held opinion, we have made such
opinion inescapably binding, in accordance with their basic
postulates. And when God is not to know the Other, it is not
difficult to believe that He should not know Himself either.

If tt is said:

Everyone who does not know himself is dead. How can
God be like the dead ?

we will answer :

This is what necessarily follows from your basic thought.
150
PROBLEM XIII

REFUTATION OF THEIR DOCTRINE THAT GOD (MAY
HE BE EXALTED ABOVE WHAT THEY SAY)
DOES NOT KNOW THE PARTICULARS WHICH
ARE DIVISIBLE IN ACCORDANCE WITH
THE DIVISION OF TIME INTO ‘WILL
BE,’ ‘WAS,’ AND ‘IS’

HEY are.all agreed on this, Those who believe that God
knows nothing but Himself are obviously committed to
it. But even those who hold that He knows the

Other—the position adopted by Ibn Sina—assert that He
knows things by a universal knowledge which does not fall
under Time, and which does not change through the Past, the
Present, and the Future. And in spite of this, it is asserted
(by Ibn Sina who represents the latter) that ‘‘nothing—not
even as much as a particle of dust, in the heavens, or on the
earth—is hidden from His knowledge’ only that He knows
the particulars in a universal manner !

First of all, we must understand their position ; and then

we will proceed to criticise it.

This position can be explained by an illustration. When
the Sun is, after it had not been, eclipsed, and when later
its brightness re-emerges, it has passed through three states :
(i) There was a state when the eclipse did not exist, but
its existence might be anticipated—i.e., one might say:
‘It will be.’ (ii). In the second state, it was actually
existing—i.e., one might say: ‘It is.’ (iii) In the third
state, it is again non-existent ; but a short while ago, it had
been—i.e., ‘Was.’ Now, corresponding to these three states,
we have three different cognitions. For at first, we knew
that the eclipse does not exist, but that its existence might
be expected. Then, we knew that it is. And, finally, we
know that it was, although at present it is not. Now, a
Succession (in the same place) of these three different and
multiple cognitions necessitates a change in the cognisant
being. For if, after the re-emergence of the Sun, one were to
say that the eclipse is existing at present, this would not

153

Prob. XI1Tj Tahafut al-Falasifah

things. But you would reject such a conclusion, saying that
worth or nobleness does not consist in seeing or knowing
things, but in being able to do without sight and knowledge,
and in being of such a character as to produce the universe
wherein there might be many who could see and know.

Similarly, therefore, worth and nobleness may not consist
in self-knowledge, but in being the principle of other beings
gifted with knowledge. And such nobleness is to be consider-
ed as peculiar to Him.

Thus, perforce, will the philosophers be driven to deny
God’s self-knowledge, since self-knowledge can only be infer-
red from will, and will can only be inferred from the temporal
origin of the world. If there is error in regard to the
question of the origin of the world, all the rest is bound to be
erroneous—on the part of those who would understand things
by means of theoretical investigations. ,

Thus, all that the philosophers have to say—to prove
some of the Divine attributes, or to disprove others—has
for its basis, not any cogent arguments, but sheer conjecture
and surmises—-too wild to be admitted even by the Jurists
in their avowedly conjectural work. No wonder if the In-
tellect is confounded in its inquiries concerning the Divine
attributes. The wonder is that the philosophers are so
proud of their arguments, and flatter themselves with the idea
that they know these things with certainty—whereas, in fact,
their knowledge is vitiated by conceit and frivolity.

152
Thetr Doctrine that God does not Know the Particulars

He knows that they are the effects of certain causes, and that
the causes have some other causes, and so on, till the series
stops at the rotatory motion of the Heaven. And He knows
that the cause of celestial movement is the Soul of Heaven, the
cause of whose movement is the desire for assimilation with
God and with the Favourite-Angels. Thus, All is known to
Him—i.e., is laid bare to Him—in a single discovery which is
homogeneous, and uninfluenced by Time. However, at the
time of an eclipse, it cannot be said that He knows that it
exists now. Nor, after the eclipse, can it be said that He
knows that now it has cleared away. For nothing which is
necessarily defined in relation to Time can conceivably be
known to Him, for such knowledge would necessitate a change
in the knower.

This much in regard to what is divisible into periods of
Time. The same line of thought is taken by them in regard
to what is divisible into Matter and Space—e.g., indivi-
dual men or animals. They say that he does not know
the accidents of Zaid or ‘Amr or Khalid; but knows the
Man-in-general, and his accidents and properties—by a
universal knowledge. Thus, He knows that Man should
have a body comprising various organs which are used to
grasp, or walk, or apprehend, etc., and some of which are
single, while others are in pairs—and that his faculties
should be distributed among his physical parts, and so on,
and so forth, to every attribute inside man: everything
which belongs to his appurtenances, qualities, and inseparable
accidents. So nothing is hidden from His knowledge, and
He knows every thing universally. As far as the person of
Zaid is concerned, it is distinguishable from that of ‘Amr
only for the senses, not for the Intellect. For the basis of
distinction is the designation of a particular dimension ;
whereas the Intellect apprehends only the absolute and the
universal dimension, or the universal space. When we say :
‘This, and this,’ we allude to a relation which is possessed
by the perceptible object vis-a-vis the percipient because of its
being near to, or far from, him, or being situated in a parti-
cular direction. And this is impossible in the case of God.

This, then, is the basic principle in which they believe—
and by which they have contrived the total destruction of
religious laws. It implies that, for instance, whether Zaid
obeys God or disobeys Him; God cannot know his newly

155

Prob. XIIT) Tahafut al-Falastfah

be an act of knowledge, but of ignorance. Similarly, at the
time of the existence of an eclipse, it would be ignorance to
say that it is non-existent. This shows that no one of these
cognitions can be substituted for another.

Now, (they assert) God can have no different states
corresponding to these three states ; for that would amount to
change. He whose state does not differ cannot conceivably
know these three aspects. Knowledge follows the object of
knowledge. When the object of knowledge changes, knowledge
changes as well And when knowledge changes, the knower
must also change. But change is impossible in the case of God.

In spite of this, however, it is asserted by them that
God knows the eclipse, and all its attributes and accidents by
a knowledge which characterises Him from eternity to eter-
nity, and which never changes. For instance, He knows:

that the Sun and- the Moon exist (for both have emanat-
ed from Him by the intermediation of angels whom the
philosophers call pure intelligences) :

that the Sun and the Moon make revolutions : :

that their spheres intersect at two points—viz., the Head
and the Tail:

that sometimes the two are simultaneously stationed in
their nodes; and

that, as aresult, the Sun is eclipsed—i.e., the body of the
Moon comes between the Sun and the (terrestrial) observers,
thus hiding the Sun from their eyes.

Also, He knows:
that, when the Sun has passed beyond the node by a
certain amount—say, one year—it will be eclipsed again;
that the eclipse will cover the whole body of the Sun, or
one-half, or one-third of it:
_ that the eclipse will last an hour or two ; and so on, and
so forth.‘ to all the conditions and accidents of an eclipse.

For nothing is hidden from His knowledge. But His know-
ledge of these things remains the same before an eclipse, or
during it, or after itsexpiration. And since it does not differ,
it necessitates no change in His essence.

The same holds of His knowledge of all tempcral events.

154
Their Doctrine that God does not Know the Particulars
They re-enforce this thesis by saying that:

The states are of three kinds: (i) There is a state
which is purely a relation, like your being on the left or
the right side, This, being purely a relation, can by no
means be termed an essential attribute. If something on
your right is shifted to the left, it is only your relation,
not your essence, which changes thereby. It is but the
removal of one relation from the essence, to be succeeded
by another—not the replacement of the essence itself
by something else. (ii) Comparable to the first is the
second state. If you have the power to move certain
bodies which lie at hand, then the disappearance of all
or some of those bodies will not change your vital energy
or your power. For your power is the power to move,
primarily, body-in-general ; and, only secondarily, to move
a particular body, insofar as it is body. Hence the rela-
tion of power to a particular body is not an essential
attribute, but purely a relation. Therefore, the disappear-
ance of bodies will necessitate only the severance of the
relation, not a change in the state of the powerful one.
(iii) The third state is one wherein the essence does
undergo a change. This happens when, for instance, one
who did not know becomes a knower, or one who had no
power becomes powerful. This amounts to change. And
a change in the object of knowledge necessitates a change
in knowledge itself. For the reality of a particular
knowledge consists in its relation to a particular object
of knowledge as such. The relation to that object in a
different way, evidently, forms a different knowledge.
And the succession of such cognitions necessitates a differ-
ence in the knower’s state. It is not possible to say that
the essence has one knowledge which becomes the know-
ledge of ‘Is’ after having been the knowledge of ‘Will be’;
and which will become the knowledge of ‘Was’ after
having been the knowledge of ‘Is.’ Knowledge is one,
and all its states are similar. If its relations are replaced,
then—because, in the case of knowledge, relations form
the reality of its essence—their replacement _necessi-
tates the replacement of the essence of knowledge as
well. Hence follows change—which is impossible in the
case of God.

157

Prob. XIII Tahafut al-Falasifah

emerging states, since He does not know Zaid as an indivi-
dual—i-e., as a person whose actions come to be after they
had not been. So if He does not know the person, He
cannot know his states and actions. Nor can He know of
Zaid’s infidelity or Islam, since He knows only the infidelity
or Islam of Man-in-general in the absolute and universal
manner, not in specific relation to individuals. Even so,
they are bound to say that Muhammad (may God bless him
and grant him peace) proclaimed his prophecy, while God
did not know that he had done so. And the same will be
true of every other prophet, for God only knows that among
men there are some who proclaim prophecy, and that such and
such are their attributes; but He cannot know a particular
prophet as an individual, for that is to be known by the senses
alone. Nor can He know the circumstances arising out of an
individual’s particular character. For such circumstances
are divisible in Time which measures his particular person.
And the apprehension of those circumstances in all their
diversity necessitates change in the cognisant being.

So this is what we intended to mention firstly to intro-
duce their doctrine; secondly, to elucidate it ; and thirdly,
to point out its repulsive consequences. Now we will ex-
pose the fallacies involved in it, and show how they can be
refuted.

Their fallacy lies in the assertion that :

These three states are different. And when different
things pass in succession over the same thing, a change
in that thing is the necessary result. If at the time of
an eclipse, it were to be said that it ‘will be’ (as ought to
be said before the eclipse), then he who makes this asser-
tion must be an ignorant man, not a knower. But if he
knows that it ‘is,’ while before it, he knew that it ‘is not’
but ‘will be,’ then his knowledge—and, consequently, his
states—must have differed. Hence change necessarily fol-
lows; for change means nothing but a difference in
the knower. He who did not know something, and then
comes to know it, does undergo a change. He who had no
knowledge that the eclipse ‘is,’ and then (at the time of
an eclipse) acquires that knowledge, has undergone a
change.

156
Their Doctrine that God does not Know the Particulars

God does not know any thing other than Himself. His
self-knowledge is identical with His essence. Should He
know the Man-in-general; the Animal-in-general ; or the
(inorganic) Matter-in-general—which are, obviously, diverse
things—then the relations to these things would be differ-
ent relations. Therefore, it would not be fit for the one
knowledge to be the knowledge of different things. For
that which is related being different, the relation must
be different. The relation to the object of knowledge be-
ing essential to knowledge, there necessarily follows mul-
tiplicity and difference—not mere multiplicity with quali-
tative similarity. Of the qualitatively similar things,
one may be substituted for another. But the knowledge
of Animal cannot be substituted for that of (inorganic)
Matter ; nor the knowledge of whiteness for that of black-
ness. For the two cognitions are different things.

Besides, these Species and Genera, and the universal Acci-
dents, whose number is unlimited, are different things. How
can the different cognitions of these different things be com-
pressed into one knowledge? And how can that one know-
ledge be identical with the essence of the Knower, without any
thing being added to it ?

Would that I could understand how any intelligent person
can allow himself to disbelieve the oneness of the knowledge
of a thing whose states are divisible into the Past, the Pre-
sent, and the Future; while he would not disbelieve the one-
ness of knowledge which relates to all the different Genera
and Species. Verily, the difference and the disparity among
the diverse Genera and Species is more marked than the
difference which may actually be found to exist among the
states of a thing divisible in accordance with the division of
time. If that difference does not necessitate multiplicity and
difference, how can this do so either? ° Since it can be proved
by a rational argument that the difference of the periods of
Time is less significant than the difference of the Genera and
Species and because it has been maintained that the difference
of the Genera and Species does not necessitate multiplicity
and difference, it must be recognised that the difference of
the periods of Time cannot do so either. And since it does
not necessitate difference, it follows that All can be encom-
passed by His knowledge which is one and runs from eter-

159

Prob. XIIT] Taha fut al-Falasifah
Objection from two points of view:
Firstly, how will you disprove one who says:

‘God has only one knowledge of an eclipse at a parti-
cular time. Before the eclipse, this knowledge is the
knowledge of ‘Will Be’; at the time of the eclipse, this
very knowledge is the khowledge of ‘Is’; and after the
clearance, it is the knowledge of the expiry of the eclipse.
All these differences can be considered as relations which
do not replace the essence of knowledge ; and which, there-
fore, do not necessitate a change in the cognisant being. For
such differences must be ranked as pure relations. If a
person on your right comes in front of you, and then to the
left, it is the relations which pass over you in succession ;
and he who changes accordingly is the moving person,
not you. The same is true of Divine knowlege.’’?

We doadmit that He knows things by a knowledge which is one
from eternity to eternity ; and that His state is unchange-
able. The philosophers only desire to reject change ; and to
that extent, everyone will agree with them. But their state-
ment that change is necessarily inferred from the affirmation
of the knowledge of ‘Is’ at present, and of expiry after is not
indisputable. Whence came to them this idea? Nay, if God
creates for us a knowledge about Zaid’s coming here tomor-
row at sunrise, and then this knowledge is prolonged (so that
neither another knowledge nor the lapse of this one is created)
still at the time of the sunrise we will know—by the original
knowledge—of Zaid’s coming ‘now,’ and afterwards of his
having come. And this one continued knowledge will be
sufficient for the encompassing of the ‘three states.’
There remains the position that :

The relation to a particular object of knowledge enters
into the reality of knowledge. With the difference of the
relations, the thing to which a relation was essential be-
comes different. And change results from the eventuation
of difference and its successive occurrence.

Now, we will say: If this is true, you must follow in the foot-
١ steps of your brethren among the philosophers who say that:

158
Thetr Doctrine that God does not Know the Particulars

Say so, since it is the first originated thing alone whose
emanation is impossible in your view? The ground of
impossibility is an originated thing’s being the first thing of
its kind. Otherwise, the temporal events have no temporal
causes in an endless series, but there is an end—through
the intermediacy of rotatory motion—at something which is
eternal—viz., the soul of heaven, and its life. So the
heavenly soul is eternal, and rotatory motion originates
from it. And each one of the parts of motion originates
and expires, and is therefore obviously renewed afterwards.
Hence in your view, temporal events do proceed from the
Eternal. But, it is stipulated, the states of the Eternal
being similar, the perpetual flow of temporals from it has
likewise similar states. So the states of motion are similar
inasmuch as it proceeds from the Eternal. This shows that
if the procession is recognised to be homogeneous and
perpetual, everyone among the philosophers can admit the
possibility of the procession of the temporal from the Eternal.
Let God’s temporal cognitions be of this kind.

As regards the procession of God’s knowledge from the
Other, we say: Why do you consider it to be impossible? It
has only the following three (unexceptionable) implications :

Firstly, change. We have shown that it does follow from
your principles.

Secondly, one’s being the cause of change in another,
This, too, is not impossible—in your view. So the origination
of a thing may be the cause of the origination of God's
knowledge about it—as, according to you, the appearance
of the form of a coloured object within the range of vision is
the cause of the impression of that form upon the vitreous
humour by means of the air which intervenes between the seer
and the pupil of the eye. If it is possible for inorganic Matter
to be the cause of the impression of forms upon the eye—in
other words, the cause of seeing—why should it be impossible
for the appearance of the temporal phenomena to be the cause
of God’s knowledge about them? Just as the faculty of
vision is prepared to perceive, and the appearance of a coloured
object and the raising of the eyelids is the cause of the actual
perception, so—you might say-- the First Principle is prepar-
ed to receive knowledge, and there is transition from potentia-
lity into actuality when the temporal object of knowledge
comes into being. If this results in a change in the Eternal,

161

Prob, XIIT] Taha fut al-Falastfah

nity to eternity, and whose relation to its objects does not
necessitate a change in the Knower’s essence.

The second objection may be stated as follows :

What in principle prevents you from believing that God
knows the particular things, even if that introduces change?
Have you not held that this sort of change is not impossible
in His case? Jahm the Mu‘tazili believed that His know-
ledge of the temporals is in Time. And some of the later
Karramtyah believed that He is subject to temporal events.
Now, the only reason why the generality of the People of
Truth reject this view is that, once change occurs, the subject
can never be free from changes. And that which is never
free from changes is not eternal. But you believe that the
world is eternal; and that, at the same time, it is subject
to changes! So if you can lend credence to the changeable-
ness of the eternal, nothing should prevent you from believ-
ing that the Divine knowledge does produce change in God.

If tt is said:

We find this impossible, because God’s knowledge, if in
itself originated, will either originate from God, or from
someone else. It is false to say that it can originate from
Him. For we have shown that from the Eternal nothing
which is temporal can proceed, and that he does not become
an agent after not having been one (for that would necessi-
tate change). (This we have conclusively shown in the prob-
lem of the creation of the world.) But if knowledge origi-
nates in Him from someone else, how can the Other be the
cause of influence over Him or change within Him? If we
admit such a thing, His states will change under compulsion
or constraint emanating from the Other.

we will answer:

On your principles neither. of the two positions is impos-
sible:

As regards the opinion that it is impossible for an ori-
ginated thing to proceed from the Eternal, we have refuted
it in the problem of the creation of the world. Why do you

160
PROBLEM XIV

TO SHOW THEIR INABILITY TO PROVE THAT THE
HEAVEN IS LIVING, AND OBEYS GOD THROUGH
ITS ROTATORY MOTION

TT SAY ;:

The Heaven is living, and has a soul which is related
to the heavenly body in the same way as our souls are related
to our bodies, Just as our bodies move by will towards our
purposes under the motive influence of our souls, so does the
Heaven—the purpose of its rotatory motion being the worship
of the Lord of the Universe—in a way to be described later.

(Their views on this question belong to a class whose
possibility cannot be denied. For God does have the power
to create life in any body. Neither the size of a body,
nor its being round will preclude life. For no particular
shape is an indispensable condition for life. Tn spite of their
different shapes, all the animals are alike recipients of life.
What, however, we do assert is that the philosophers are
unable to know these things by rational demonstration. 11
these things were true, the prophets would know them
through inspiration or revelation; but rational arguments
cannot prove them. Or perhaps rational arguments can
prove these things—if and when a suitable argument is
available. But what the philosophers use as an argument
is not fit to produce certainty ; it only gives a probability.)

In their unconvincing theory, the philosophers say:

The Heaven moves. Thisisanempirical premiss. Every
body which moves has a mover. This is a rational premiss.
If a body were to move because of being body, then every
body should move. Now, every mover either :

(i) resides in the moved body—e.g., nature which brings
about the downward movement of a stone; or will which
causes the movement of an animal ; or

(ii) lies outside the moved body, but moves it by con-

163

Prob. XII) Tahaf ut al-Falastfah

then a changeable eternal is not from your point of view
impossible. If you assert that it is impossible in the case of
the Necessary Being, then you will have no argument to prove
such a being. As has been shown, all you can prove is that
the series of causes and effects must stop somewhere. And
it can stop at an eternal who is changeable.

Thirdly, the implication is that of the Eternal’s changing
under the influence of the Other, and the comparability of
such a thing to constraint and external compulsion. Again,
we will say: Why do you consider it to be impossible? You
may believe that God is through intermediaries the cause of
the appearance of temporal events ; that the appearance of the
temporal events is the cause of the appearance of His know-
ledge of them—or, in short, that He is the cause of His own
acquisition of knowledge—but through intermediaries.

If you think that this looks like subjugation or external
influence, then let it beso. For it does fit into the framework
of your theories, since you have asserted that whatever
proceeds from God does so by way of necessity and through
nature, and that He has no power not to do it. This looks
like subjugation or external influence, and points to the
conclusion that in regard to what proceeds from Him, He is
under compulsion.

If tt ts said:

This is no compulsion. For His perfection consists in
His being the source of the procession of all things.

we will answer:

Then there is no compulsion in the former case either.
For His perfection consists in that He knows all the things.
Should we have a knowledge of all temporal phenomena,
it would be a sign of perfection, not of deficiency or sub-
jugation, on our part. The same may be true of God.

162
Their Inability to Prove that the Heaven is Living

ment. Movement means the running away from one place,
and the seeking after another. If the place in which a body
is agreeable, the: body will not move. This is the reason
why a wine-skin filled with air and floating on the surface of
water does not move. If it is dipped into the water, it will
move upwards to the surface of water. For when it finds an
agreeable place, it comes to rest, and naturestands still. When
it is transferred to a disagreeable place, it runs away from it
to an agreeable one, as it did from the heart of water to the
sphere of the air. Now, it is inconceivable that rotatory
motion should be natural. For any site or position from which
a body in rotatory motion may be supposed to run away will
be returning to it. And that from which it runs away by
nature cannot be the object of its seeking. This is why the
wine-skin filled with air does not return to water, and why the
stone which has reached the ground does not return to the air.

Therefore, the only alternative to be chosen is the third
kind of movement—viz., volitional movement.

The objection to the foregoing may be stated as follows :

In addition to your theory, we can lay down three hypo-
theses which you will find no argument to disprove :

Firstly, the movement of Heaven may be supposed to be
the result of the constraint exercised by another body which
wills its movement, and causes it to revolve perpetually. This
motive body may be neither a round body nor a circumference.
So it will not be a heavenly body at-all. This will refute the
philosophers’ dictum that heavenly movement is volitional,
and that the Heaven is living. This suggestion of ours ¢s
possible ; and nothing but the mere assumption of improba-
bility can be brought against it.

Secondly, it might be said that heavenly movement is
constrained, and that God’s will is its principle. We do
say that the downward movement of a stone is also con-
strained, which originates when God creates movement in the
stone. And the same holds of the movements of all other
inanimate bodies.

There remains their assumption of improbability with
respect to the special relation of the will to the heavenly
body, while all other bodies shared corporeality in common.
We have shown that the eternal will has the function of

165

Prob. XIV] Tahafut al-Falasifah
straint—e.g., in the case of the upward movement of a stone.
If a body is moved by something within itself, then either :

(i) it will not be conscious of the movement. We call
the mover in this case ‘nature’—e.g., in the case of the down-
ward movement of a stone; or

(ii) it will be conscious of the movement. We call such
movement volitional and psychic.

From this exhaustive division, which revolves between
affirmation and negation, weobtain three kinds of movement:
constrained, natural, and volitional. If in any case two of
them are inapplicable, the third must be applicable.

Now, it is impossible that the movement of Heaven
should be constrained. For the constrainer which causes
the movement must itself be another body caused to move
either by constraint or by will, In any case, therefore, the
series must stop at will. And if it is proved that somewhere
among the heavenly bodies there is movement by will, what
is the use of positing constrained movements anywhere?
Ultimately, it will be just impossible to do without will. It
is impossible to say that the Heaven is caused to move by
constraint, and that God is its immediate mover. For if it
were to be moved because of its being body, it would be
necessary that every other body should be moved by the
Creator in the same way. Consequently, in order to prove
its distinction from other bodies, it must be assumed special-
ly to have been invested with a distinguishing quality. And
then this quality would be—either by will or by nature—the
nearest cause of its movement. Nor is it possible to say
that God causes the Heaven to move by His will. For His
will is related to all the bodies in the same way. How can
the body of the Heaven in particular get prepared specially to
have its movement willed, while others were not? A special
character is not acquired in vain. For that is impossible—as
shown in the problem of the creation of the world. So when
it is proved that it is proper for this body to have a quality
which will be the principle of its movement, the first kind of
movement-—viz., constrained movement—is excluded.

__. There remains the natural movement. This is impos-
sible, for nature by its bare self is never the cause of move-

164
Their Inability to Prove that the Heaven is Living

means to it. And we say that it is not improbable for
movement itself to be the end, and not merely a means to
the place supposed to be sought. What is there to disprove
hh an assumption ?.
sme Therefore, it is clear that the position adopted by the
philosophers—even if it is supposed to be more probable than
any other hypothesis—does not definitely exclude the alter-
native hypotheses. If follows that their assertion that the
Heaven is living is an arbitrary and groundless assumption.

167

Prob. XIV} Tahafut al-Falasi fah

distinguishing something from its like. And the philosophers
themselves had perforce to posit an attribute with such a
function, when they specified the direction of rotatory motion
and the position of the Pole. That we will not repeat here.
To clinch the issue, it may be pointed out that their assump-
tion of improbability with respect to the special determina-
tion of a body to which the will is related, but which has no
attribute to distinguish it, recoils upon them when they in-
troduce an attribute to makedistinction. Tobemore explicit,
we will say: Why did the heavenly body come to possess a
distinguishing attribute because of which it is differentiated
from other bodies? All other bodies are also bodies. Why
did this one come to have what they do not? If the cause of
this is found in another attribute, the inquiry will be direct-
ed to that ‘another attribute,’ and so on, until at last the
philosophers will be forced to regard the will as self-explana-

tory—admitting that among the Principles there is something

which singles out one thing, so as to invest it exclusively wit
a distinguishing attribute.

Thirdly, it may be granted that the Heaven is
specifically determined to have an attribute which is the
principle of its movement, as they believe with respect to
the downward tendency of a stone. But, then, possibly,
like the stone, the Heaven will not be conscious of the
movement. The philosophers’ statement that that which is
sought by nature cannot be that which is avoided for the
same reason is a deliberate misrepresentation. For there are
no numerically disparate places, even according to them.
On the contrary, the body is one, and its rotatory motion is
one. Neither the body nor its movements actually have
parts it is only in the Imagination that it can be divided.

o this movement is neither a seeking after a place, nora
running away from another. Itis possible that there should
be created a body which has within itself an aptitude which
demands circular motion. So the movement itself will fulfil
the requirement— not that the aptitude will demand the seek-
ing after a place to attain which movement is to be made.

en you say that every movement is made either
because a place is sought, or another avoided, and if you
think that this relation is necessary, then you make the
‘seeking after’ the end of nature, and make movement itself
a secondary factor which is desired not in itself, but as a

166
The Purpose which Moves the Heaven

which is possible for him. Remaining in the state of the
highest state of perfection is possible only forGod. As regards
the Favourite Angels, all the perfection possible for them is
actually present for them—insofar as there is nothing poten-
tial in them which should advance towards actuality. There-
fore, among beings other than the Divine, the angels have
the highest perfection.

By the heavenly angels are meant the souls which move
the heavens, and which are in the heavens—not merely
potentially. The perfections of the heavenly souls are divided
into those which are actual—e.g., the round shape and appear-
ance which is present—and those which are potential—e.g.,
the appearance.in any position or place. Thereis noascertain-
able position, but it is possible for the Heaven to encompass
it. Actually, all the positions are not occupied at once ; for
the simultaneous occupation of so many of them is im-
possible. However, the complete and incessant occupation
of individual positions being impossible, the Heaven aims at
occupying them by species. So it goes on incessantly seeking
one position after another position: one place after another
place. This possibility never comes toanend. Therefore,
the heavenly movements never come to anend. What the
Heaven aims at is the assimilation of itself to the First
Principle by attaining the highest perfection which it possibly
can. And that is what the obedience of the celestial angels
to God means. The assimilation is achieved in two ways:

Firstly, by complete occupation by species of all the
positions which are possible for it. That is the object of
its primary intention.

Secondly, the cumulative effect of the movements of
the Heaven (which includes difference of relations—e.g.,
three-sided or four-sided formations, or conjunction or op-
position—and the difference of celestial aspects in rela-
tion to the Earth) is the overflow of Good towards things
under the sphere of the Moon. Thence originate all the
temporal events. So this is the way how the heavenly soul
derives perfection; for every intelligent soul is by nature
interested in having perfection. :

Objection to this:

Even in the premises of this theory there is something to
169

PROBLEM XV

REFUTATION OF WHAT THEY CONSIDER TO BE
THE PURPOSE WHICH MOVES THE HEAVEN

HEY SAY:

Through its movement, the Heaven obeys God, and
seeks to be nearer to Him. For all volitional movement is
directed towards a purpose. It is inconceivable that an
action or a movement should proceed from a living being,
unless doing it be better than not doing it. If to do some-
thing is the same as not to do it, no action will conceivably
take place.

‘Seeking to be nearer to God’ does not mean the
winning of His favour, or the avoidance of His displeasure.
For in His holiness, He is above favour and displeasure.
Whenever such words are used, they have a metaphorical
significance, designating the will to grant rewards or the
will to inflict punishment.

Nor is it possible that the ‘seeking to be nearer’ should
express itself through an effort for proximity in space.
Such a thing is impossible.

The only explanation which remains is the explana-
tion in terms of an effort for closer relationship in respect of
attributes. For His being is the perfect being in contrast
to which all other beings are imperfect. And this imperfec-
tion has within itself differences of degrees. The angels are
the nearest to Him in respect of attributes—not in space. So
the term ‘Favourite Angels’ (close to God) means those intel-
lectual substances which are unchangeable, imperishable and
immutable ; and which know things as they are. When man
comes closer (in respect of the attributes) to the angels, he
comes closer to God. The highest limit to which man can
attain is similarity to angels.

So it has been established what the ‘seeking to be
nearer to God’ means. It has been shown that it envisages a
close relationship only in respect of attributes, and that
it is possible in the case of man, if he knows the realities
of things, and remains for ever in the most perfect state

168
The Purpose which Moves the Heaven

mere speculation which leads nowhere. The secrets of the
kingdom of Heaven cannot be discovered through such specu-
lations. Only the prophets and the saints discover these
secrets by inspired wisdom, not by rational methods. This
is why the philosophers, who take up the discussion where
the prophets left it, have been unable to explain the direc-
tions of movement, and to show the cause of the choice of par-
ticular directions.

Some of the philosophers said:

The Heaven could not derive perfection from indefinite
movements in any direction. The systematic character of the
terrestrial phenomena requires the difference of movements
and the definiteness of directions. That which impels the
Heaven towards movement as such is the desire to be nearer
to God; but that which impels it towards movement in a
certain direction is its desire for the overflow of Good to the
lower world.

[But this is false for two reasons :

Firstly, if such a thing can be imagined, it will have to
be maintained that by its nature the Heaven should seek
rest, and avoid motion and change. For, as a matter of
fact, seeking rest would be the cause of its assimilation to _
God, who is not susceptible to change. And motion is
change. But He selects motion for the Heaven in order
that Good may overflow. This would benefit all other
beings ; while motion—however repugnant to His nature—
cannot be burdensome or tiring toHim. What can prevent
you from taking this view?

Secondly, no doubt, the terrestrial phenomena originate
from the difference of relations (which results from the differ-
ence of the directions of movement). But then let the first
movement be Westward, and let the subsequent movements be
Eastward. That, too, can produce difference whereby different
relations would be established. _ Why should one particular
direction have been specified? What these different relations

١ require is that there should be difference of directions as

such. But as far as this purpose is concerned, no direction
can be shown to be preferable to the opposite direction. ]

1171

Prob. XV] Tahafut al-Falastfah

which objection may be taken. But we would not linger
over them, Let us pass on to the purpose by reference to
which you concluded the whole thing. We can disprove it
in two ways : ١ 0001

Firstly, the desire to gain perfection by being in all
the places may be regarded as an indication of stupidity,
rather than devotion. For one might compare it to the
behaviour of a man who, having nothing to do and with
all his needs having been satisfied, stands up and begins
to turn round and round in his house or in the city, thinking
that this will bring him nearer to God. Will he be on the
way to perfection, since he is trying to be in all the places
possible for him? If he says:

Being in all the places is possible for me; but 1 cannot
combine all of them by number. So I am taking them all
by species. For in any event that is the way to perfec-
tion and to nearness to God.

then such an assertion will be attributed to stupidity. The
rejoinder to him will be: Movement from one place to
another is no perfection worth comtending for. And there
is no difference between this case and the situation described
by the philosophers. ;

Secondly, we will say: The purpose you have mentioned
could be achieved by a Westward moment. Why, then, is
the first movement Eastward? Are not the movements of the
universe in one direction? If there is a purpose behind their
difference among themselves, could not the same purpose be
achieved by reversing the course taken by the difference?
Thus, if the Eastward movement were Westward, and vice
versa, the reversal could still produce all those effects which
have been mentioned by them—namely, the phenomena re-
sulting from the difference of movements, such as three-
sided or four-sided formations, etc. The same applies to the
complete occupation of all the places and positions. For all
that is possible for the Heaven is that it should move from
one place to another. What, then, has happened to it to
prevent it from moving now from one side, now from another
(so that it could uitilise all that is possible—if the utilisation of
all that is possible were an index of perfection) ? ١

All this points to the conclusion that such theories are

170
The 501415 of the Heavens are Aware of all the Particulars

reason of a purpose. Now, that thesis is possible. But this
one tends to affirm that a creature can have the knowledge
of infinite particulars. Such a thing has actually been held
to be impossible. Therefore, we demand that they prove it ;
for in itself it is but a claim.)

And they try to prove tt by saying:

It has been proved that the rotatory motion of heaven is
volitional. And will follows the thing willed. And a uni-
versal will can be directed towards an object of will that is
universal. But from the universal will nothing proceeds.
For every actual existent is definite and particular ; while the
universal will bears the same relation to all individual parti-
culars. Therefore, nothing can proceed from it. It is
necessary that there should be a particular will for a definite
movement, Hence the sphere, in a definite and particular
movement from one point to another definite point, has got to
have a particular will for that movement. It follows that it
has an imaginative representation of particular movements
by means of a bodily faculty. For particular things are per-
ceived by bodily faculties alone. And every will does of neces-
sity depend on an imaginative representation—i.e., know-
ledge of the willed thing, be it particular or universal.

Since the sphere has an imaginative representation or
comprehension of particular movements, it must by conse-
quence comprehend all that necessarily follows from those
movements—namely, the variety of its relations to the
Earth, which result from the fact that some of its parts are
rising, while others are setting; some are in the middle of
the sky for some people, and down below for others. Simi-
larly, the sphere knows the consequences of the difference of
its relations which emerge anew from the movement, such as
the six-sided or four-sided formations, or conjunction or
opposition, and so on to all the celestial phenomena. And
all the terrestrial phenomena are to be traced back to the
celestial phenomena, either without any intermediary, or
with one or more than one intermediary. In short, every
thing which exists in time has a temporal cause, and so
on, until in the ascending order the series comes to an end
with the everlasting movements of the heavens, some of
which movements are caused by others.

173

PROBLEM XVI

REFUTATION OF THEIR THEORY THAT THE SOULS
OF THE HEAVENS ARE AWARE OF ALL THE PAR-
TICULARS WHICH ORIGINATE IN THE WORLD

FYNAEY say:

The Preserved Tablet means the souls, of the heavens.
- The impression of the particulars of the world upon the souls
of the heavens is like the impression of the memorables upon
the faculty of memory, which is located inside the brain of
man. In neither of these two cases is that which receives
impressions like a hard and broad body upon which writing
is inscribed, as children write upon a slate. For the multi-
plicity of this writing requires something extended on which
to be written. And if the writing is infinite, the material
bearing it will be likewise infinite. But an infinite body is
inconceivable; and infinite lines on a single body are not
possible. And an infinite number of things cannot be deline-
ated by a finite number of lines.

They assert that:

The heavenly angels are the souls of the heavens. The
cherubim—i.e., the Favourite (or drawn-near) Angels—are
the immaterial intelligences, i.e., self-subsisting substances,
which do not exist in space, and which do not act upon bodies.
It is from these intelligences that particular forms descend
upon the heavenly souls. The intelligences are nobler than
the heavenly souls. For the former give, while the latter
receive. He who gives is nobler than he who receives. There-
fore, the nobler of the two is symbolically called the Pen.
Says God (exalted be He) : ‘He taught by the Pen.’ The Pen
is like the engraver which gives: like a teacher—whereas he
who receives is comparable to a tablet.

(This is their thesis. Our criticism of it is to be different
from the criticism of their thesis in the preceding problem.
For what they said there is not impossible. It only purports
to show that the heaven is a living being which moves by

172
The Souls of the Heavens are Aware of all the Particulars

forms it into a symbol; for it is the nature of that faculty
to transform things into symbols, which may bear some rela-
tion to the original, or may have been changed to their oppo-
sites. Thus the real percept disappears from the memory,
leaving behind an imaginary form. Consequently, there is
need for the interpretation of what has been represented by
the Imagination through a symbol. For instance, a man is
symbolically represented by a tree; a woman by a scck; a
servant by some household utensil, and a custodian of charit-
able funds by linseed oil. The linseed oil is the cause of
the lamp, which is the cause of light. From this principle,
therefore, the science of the interpretation of dreams
branches out.

And they assert:

Contact with the souls of the heavens is vouchsafed,
when there is no obstruction. In our waking life, we are
preoccupied with what the senses and the passions bring
to us. Our interest in sensuous things prevents us from
achieving that contact. But when in sleep our sensuous
preoccupations are partially abated, the capacity for contact
with the souls of the heavens is restored to us.

And they assert:

In this way, a prophet has a glimpse into the Hidden
World. The psychic powers of a prophet are so high that
the outward senses do not submerge them. It is for this
reason that he sees in waking life what others see only in
dreams. Even in the case of the prophet, the imagina-
tive faculty represents through symbols what is seen. Some-
times, the actual thing remains in his memory; at others, it
is a symbol of it which remains. Therefore, this kind of
inspiration requires to be interpreted, even as dreams re-
quire interpretation. If all that is to be did not exist in the
Preserved Tablet, the prophets could not know the Hidden
Things in dreams or in waking life. But the Pen ‘has dried
over what is going to be till the Day of Judgment.’ What
this means we have described.

(So this much we desired to reproduce to make their
theory understandable.)

175

Prob, XVI} Taha fut al-Falast fah

Thus the series of causes and effects reaches its upper
limit in particular celestial movements. And that which has
an imaginative representation of the movements must also
have the representation of the consequences of those move-
ments, and of the consquences of the consequences, and so on
to the end of the series. Therefore, the sphere knows what
will take place in the future; for the occurrence of all that
is likely to take place becomes necessary by virtue of its
cause, when the cause is realised. We do not know what
will happen in the future ; for we do not know all the causes
of such happenings. We could know the effects, if we had
the knowledge of the causes. For instance, if we knew that
fire will come into contact with a piece of cotton at a parti-
cular time, we would know of the burning of that piece
of cotton. Or when we know that a certain person will eat,
we know that his hunger will be satisfied. Or when we
know that a certain person will tread over a certain spot
where a treasure lies hidden—beneath something so
fragile that when someone walks. over it, he is bound to
stumble upon the treasure—we know that this man will
become rich on account of the treasure. But we do not know
these causes. Sometimes, a few of these causes are known
to us; consequently, we have an intuitive anticipation of the
occurrence of the effect. If we could know most of the
causes, or the most powerful among them, we could have a
clear presumption about the occurrence of the effects. And
if we could know all the causes, we certainly would have the
kt.owledge of all the effects. But the celestial things are
many ; and they have a way of mixing with the terrestrial
phenomena. Therefore, it is not in man’s power to be aware
of them, On the contrary, the souls of the heavens know
them, because they know the primary causes, their effects,
the nevessary effects of those effects, and so on to,the end of
the senses.

For this reason, they assert:

In sleep one sees what will happen in the future. This
is so, because of his contact with the Preserved Tablet, and
the perusal of it. Sometimes, that which he discovers at
that time sticks to his memory in its original form. But
sometimes, the faculty of the Imagination quickly trans-

174
The Souls of the Heavens are Aware of all the Particulars

will to make it clear what the philosophers mean. If aman
has a general intention of going on pilgrimage to the House of
God, his is a universal will from which no movement will-
proceed. For movement occurs as a particular thing, in.a
definite dir ction, and toa certain extent, If the man directs
himself to the House, he will have incessantly renewed repre-
sentations—e.g., of the place he treads along, of the direction
he takes, etc. Each particular representation follows a parti-
cular will for movement from the place to which a preceding
movement has brought him, So this is what they mean by
a particular will which is said to follow a particular represen-
tation. This meaning is indisputable. For there are different
directions leading to Mecca, and the distance is not definite.
Hence the man on Pilgrimage needs the specification of one
place after another place, and one direction after another direc-
tion, by advancing from one particular will to another.

But in the case of the celestial movement, there is only
one direction ; for a spherical body is self-revolving and moves
within space beyond which it never goes. It is just movement
which is willed in this case. There is only one direction, only
one style, and only one pattern of movement. Therefore, it
is like the downward tendency of a stone. The stone seeks
the Earth by the nearest way—viz., the straight line. As
far as the determination of the straight line is concerned, the
stone does not need the renewed emergence—renewed as new
conditions of being near to the End, or distant from it, or of
having attained toit, or departed from it, arise—of an extra-
ordinary cause, over and above its universal nature which
seeks the Centre. Similarly, therefore, in the case of the
celestial movement, a universal will for movement will suffice,
and no additional factor will be required. If the philosophers
assume that an additional factor will be required, they make
an arbitrary assumption.

Thirdly, what is an utterly arbitrary assumption is
their assertion that when the sphere has the representation of
particular movements, it also has the representation of
the subordinates and the consequences of those movements.
Such a thing is sheer nonsense. It is like one’s saying :

Since a man moves, and knows his movement, he should
also know whatever necessarily follows from his movement
—e.g., the parallel or unparallel positions, i.e., his relation

177

Prob. XVI] Tahafut al-Falasifah
The answer:

We will say: How will you disprove one who says
that God enables the prophet to know the Hidden Things, and
that, therefore, he knows them, without any preparation
having been made by him? Similarly, it may be said, he who
has a dream comes to know the hidden things, because God,
or one of the angels, enables him to know them, Therefore,
all that you have described is superfluous; there is no
argument to prove it. Nor can you advance an argument to
prove things like the Preserved Tablet and the Pen which
have been mentioned in the Holy Law. The meaning you
have given to these things is not recognised by the followers
of the Sacred Law. Since it is not open to you to approach
these things from the point of view of that Law, all that
remains for you to do is to take the rational point of view.
But even if the possibility of all that you have mentioned is
taken for granted (it can be taken for granted inasmuch
as the denial of the finitude of the known things is not a
necessary condition for it), still its existence cannot be
known, and its reality cannot be verified, The source of the
knowledge of these things is the Sacred Law, not Reason.

The rational argument you advanced to begin with is
based on many premises. We will not go to the length of
refuting all of them. However, we will take up three of them
for criticism.

The first is your assertion that the movement of the
Heaven is volitional. We have already considered this
question, and shown how your claim can be refuted.

Secondly, even ifin the spirit of compromise this argument
is taken for granted, still your assertion that this volitional
movement of the Heaven requires particular representation
corresponding to particular movements will be objectionable.
Indeed, you would not admit that there are parts in the
celestial body. For this body is one, and its division is
possible only in the Imagination. Still less divisible is its
movement, for that is a continuous whole. Therefore, it
may suffice for the sphere to have a desire for the complete
utilisation of all the places possible for it—as they themselves
have maintained. And for that purpose, a universal will and
a universal representation will suffice.

Let us give an example of the universal and the particular

176
The Souls of the Heavens are Aware of all the Particulars

If they try to take the same stand against our dcctrine
of Divine knowledge, let it be known that it is agreed-on all
hands that the relation of Divine knowledge to its object
cannot be compared to that between a creature’s knowledge
and its object. Whenever the soul of the sphere performs
the same function as the soul of man, it follows that the two
souls belong to the same kind: for being a percipient of par-
ticulars—through intermediaries—is their common charac-
teristic. The validity of this comparison may not be con-
clusively proved : but there is strong probability for it. And
even if this strong probability were not there, the comparison.
would at least be possible. And mere possibility would refute
their claim that the evidence to the contrary is conclusive.

If tt is said:

By its substance, the human soul, too, has the right to
perceive all things. But its preoccupation with the results
of desire, anger, greed, malice, envy, hunger, pain, and in
short the accidents of the body and the results of sensuous
functions diverts its attention. For when the human soul
attends to one thing, it ignores another. But the celestial
souls are free from these qualities. No distraction befalls
them ; and no care or sensation can engross them, There-
fore, they know all things,

we will answer:

How do you know that there is no distraction in their
case? Is not their worship of the First Principle, and their
longing for Him a distraction or preoccupation, which might
prevent them from having the representation of ‘the analys-
able particulars’? Again, what is there to prevent one from
supposing that there can be some other impediments besides
anger, desire, or the sensuous impediments in general?
How do you know that impediments are confined to that
which we observe in our own case? In the case of men with
mature minds, high aspirations or the desire for prominence
isa preoccupation, which, however, can neither be imagined
by children, nor recognised by them as a preoccupation or
impediment. How, then, can one know the impossibility of
something which is in this sense a preoccupation or impedi-

179

Prob. XVI] Tahafut al-Falastfah

to bodies which are above him, or below him, or on his
sides. And when he walks in the sun, he should know the
spots on which his shadow falls, and the spots on which
it does not fall; the cooling effects of the interception of the
rays of the Sun from those spots; the contraction of the
parts of the Earth under his foot, and the separation of some
other parts ; the effects on his internal humours which have
developed some warmth through the movement; the trans-
formation of his bodily parts into sweat, and so on to all
other events inside his body, or outside it, for which the

١ movement is a cause, or a condition, or a preparatory or
a stimulating principle.

This is nonsense, which cannot occur to any intelligent person,
and by which only the ignorant can be taken in. And this is
what thearbitrary assumption of the philosophers amounts to.

Moreover, we will say: Do these analysable particulars
which are known to the soul of the sphere exist at present,
or would you include among them such things also as are
expected to happen in the future?

If you confine them to the present, it will contradict the
awareness—on the part of the sphere—of the Hidden Things,
and the awareness—on the part of the prophets, in their
waking life: and on the part of the rest of mankind, only in
dreams—of that which will be in the future through the
intermediacy of the sphere. In that case, the purpose of
your argument will be defeated : for the argument is based
on the assumption—which is arbitrary—that he who knows
something knows its subordinates and consequences, so much
so that if we could know all the causes of things, we would
know all future events. The causes of all the events may
be present now, i.e., they may be contained in the celestial
movement : yet this motion leads to its effect only through
one or more than one intermediary.

_ But if the ‘analysable particulars known to the soul of
the sphere’ extend to the future, which is infinite, how can
the soul of the sphere know in detail the particulars of an in-
finite future? How can the soul of a creature contain, at
one time wherein there are no successive states, infinite and
innumerable detailed and particular cognitions? He whose
intellect does not testify to the impossibility of such cognitions
has cause to lament the desperate condition of his intellect.

178
The Souls of the Heavens are Aware of all the Particulars

these conditions, and their symptoms—so that disease may
be prevented, and health may be preserved. (il) Astro-
logy. It is an estimate, based on the figures and constella-
tions of stars, as to what will happen to the world and
to people ; how new-born babes will fare, and how the years
will progress. (iii) Physiognomy. It infers moral character
from physical appearance. (iv) Interpretation of dreams,
which is an elucidation, derived from dream-images, of what
the soul has observed of the Hidden World, and the imagi-
native faculty has represented through a different symbol.
(v) The talismanic art, which combines celestial forces with
those of some terrestrial bodies, so as to produce from the
combination another. force which will work wonders in the
world. (vi) The art of magic, which combines earthly sub-
stances to produce strange things from them. (vii) Alchemy,
which aims at changing the properties of mineral substances,
so that finally gold and silver may be produced through
some controlled device.

The Sacred Law is not necessarily opposed to any one of
these sciences. However, we shall select from them four
points on which we have to criticise the philosophers:

(i) Their postulate that the connection observed to exist
between causes and effects is a necessary connection, and
that it is not possible or feasible to produce a cause which is
not followed by its effect, or to bring into existence an effect
independently of the cause. _

(ii) Their assertion that human souls are self-subsisting
substances which are not impressed upon bodies, and that
death means the severance of their connection with the
bodies, when their directive function ceases. For, they
argue, the soul exists in itself inanyevent. And, they assert,
this is known by a rational argument. _ ;

(iii) Their assertion that the extinction of these souls is
impossible ; and that once having been produced, they have
an everlasting existence whose annihilation is impossible.

(iv) Their assertion that the return of the souls to the
bodies is impossible.

Criticism of the philosophers on the first point is neces-
sary, for on that criticism is to be built the affirmation of the
miracles which mark a departure from the usual course of
events—e.g., the Rod turning into a serpent ; the revivi-

181

Prob. XVI} Tahafut al-Falasifah
ment to the heavenly souls ?

This much we intended to take up for discussion out
of the sciences called by the Philosophers ‘Metaphysical.’

(The Physical Sciences)

The sciences called by them ‘physical’ are many. We
will mention some of them, so that it may be seen that the
Sacred Law does not require a dispute over them, except on
a few points which we have mentioned. _

ese sciences are divided into principal and subsidiary
sciences. The principal sciences are eight: (i) The discus-
sion of all that relates to body, ‏عيبو‎ body (i.e., division,
motion, and change) ; and all that appertains to movement,
or follows from it (i.e., Time, Space, and the Void). This is
the subject-matter of the book called Physics. (ii) The in-
quiry concerning the various kinds of the component parts of
the world (e.g., the heavens, and all that is in the hollow of
the sphere of the Moon—viz., the four elements); the
nature of these things, and the cause of the location of each
one of these in a definite place. This is discussed in the
book called De coelo. (iii) The inquiry concerning the laws
of generation and corruption: development and reproduction
and growth and decay ; transformations ; and the manner of
the preservation of species, in spite of the corruption which
overtakes individuals because of the two—i.e., Eastward
and Westward—celestial movements. This is discussed in the
book called De generatione et corruptione. (iv) The inquiry con-
cerning the accidental conditions of the four elements whose
mixture results in meteorological phenomena—e.g., clouds,
rain, thunder, lightning, the halo, the rainbow, thunderbolts,
winds, and earthquakes. (v) The study of the mineral sub-
stances. (vi) The science of botany. (vii) The study of
animals. It forms the subject of the book called Historia ani-
malium, (viii) The study of the animal soul, and the faculties
of perception, showing that the soul of man does not die
because of the death of the body, but that it is a spiritual
substance whose annihilation is impossible.

The subsidiary sciences are seven: (i) Medicine. It aims
at discovering the principles governing the human body ; its
various conditions (e.g., health and disease); the causes of

180
The Souls of the Heavens are Aware of all the Particulars

classes in respect of this power. There are those whose

awakening is self-determined. Then there are those who

need some stimulus, however slight, in order to awaken.

Finally, there are those who will not awaken, in spite of a

stimulus, until they have taken considerable pains. Since
it is possible that the side of deficiency should have its ex-

treme end in those who have no intuition at all (so that, in
spite of all stimuli, they are incapable of understanding the
intelligibles), it is also possible for the side of possession or
potency to have its extreme end in one who will awaken to
all the intelligibles, or to most of them, in the shortest and
the quickest time. And the difference is quantitative as
well as qualitative—according as the awakening extends
to some problems or to all of them, and according as
it is more or less quick and immediate. Therefore, many
a pure and holy soul has an intuitive understanding of all
the intelligibles, which (understanding) is continuous and
takes the shortest time. Such an one is the prophet, whose
theoretical faculty is a miracle. He need not be taught
the intelligibles ; for, as it were, he learns by himself. And
that is the quality mentioned in the Verse: ‘Its oil would
well-nigh give light though no fire were in contact with it,
light upon light.’

(iii) In regard to the practical faculty of the soul. Say
the philosophers :

This faculty develops to such an extent that physical
things can be influenced and controlled by it. For exam-
ple, when our soul imagines something, the limbs and
their faculties serve it, moving towards the direction ima-
gined to be desirable. Thus, when a man imagines some-
thing sweet, his mouth waters, and the salivary faculty,
which causes saliva to flow from its sources, comes into
action. Similarly, when a man imagines sexual inter-
course, a certain faculty comes into action, and the (geni-
١ tal) organ becomes excited. Or, when aman walks over a
plank which is elevated, with its two sides supported on
two walls, he has the possibility of falling overwhelmingly
presented to his imagination. Consequently, his body be-
comes passive to the imagination; and he falls. If the
plank rested on ground, he would walk over it, and would

183

Prob. XVI} Tahafut al-Falasi fah

fication of the dead ; and the splitting of the Moon
thinks that the natural course of events is necessary wn
unchangeable calls all these miracles impossible. Thus, the
philosophers interpret the Quranic references to the revivifi-
cation of the dead, saying that it means the supersession of
the Death arising-from-ignorance by the Life-resulting-from-
knowledge. Or, they interpret the Rod’s devouring the
magic of the magicians, by saying that it means the refuta-
tion of the doubts of the disbelievers by the Divine proof
which was manifested at the hands of Moses. As regards the
spli tting of the Moon, they often deny the fact, and assert
that the transmission of the Tradition has not been conti-
nuous STS thy.
nd it 15 only on three points that the phi
afin extraordinary miracles pe philosophers
fi) In regard to the facu imaginati
assert 6 Ity of imagination. They

When this faculty becomes mature and strong, and if
Sensuous preoccupations do not distract it, it catches a
glimpse into the Preserved Tablet. Thereupon, the forms
of particulars which will take place in the future are im-
pressed upon it. This happens in waking life in the case of
the prophets ; and only in sleep in the case of all other
men. This, then, is the prophetic property of the faculty
of imagination.

(ii) In regard to a property of the faculty of theoretical
reason. Say the philosophers > y “orev

This property actually amounts to an intuitive power
——viz., the quickness of transition from one object of
knowledge to another. A man who has a sharp intelli-
gence awakens to the proof, when only that which has been
proved is mentioned to him; or when only the proof is
mentioned to him, he awakens to that which has thereby
been proved. In other words, he discovers it out of
himself. Generally, when the middle term occurs to him,
he awakens to the conclusion ; or when only the two terms
which occur in the conclusion are presented to his mind,
the middle term which joins the terms of the conclusion
arises in his mind. And people are divided into different

182
PROBLEM XVII

REFUTATION OF THEIR BELIEF IN THE IMPOS-
SIBILITY OF A DEPARTURE FROM THE NATURAL
COURSE OF EVENTS

N OUR view, the connection between what are believed to be
the cause and the effect is not necessary. Take any two
things. This is not That; nor can That be This. The

affirmation of one does not imply the affirmation of the other ;

nor does its denial imply the denial of the other. The exis-
tence of one is not necessitated by the existence of the other;
nor its non-existence by the non-existence of the other.

. Take for instance any two things, such as the quenching of

thirst and drinking; satisfaction of hunger and eating ;
burning and contact with fire ; light and the rise of the Sun;
death and the severance of the head from the trunk ; healing
and the use of medicine; the loosening of bowels and the use
of a purgative, or any other set of events observed to be
connected together in Medicine, or Astronomy, or Arts, or
Crafts. They are connected as the result of the Decree of
God (holy be His name), which preceded their existence. If
one follows the other, it is because He has created them in
that fashion, not because the connection in itself is necessary
and indissoluble. He has the power to create the satisfaction
of hunger without eating, or death without the severance of
the head, or even the survival of life when the head has been
cut off, or any other thing from among the connected things
(independently of what is supposed to be its cause).

The philosophers deny this possibility ; indeed, they
assert its impossibility. Since the inquiry concerning these
things (which are innumerable) may go to an indefinite
length, let us consider only one example—viz., the burning
of a piece of cotton at the time of its contact with fire. We
admit the possibility of a contact between the two which will
not result in burning, as also we admit the possibility of the
transformation of cotton into ashes without coming into con-
tact with fire. And they reject this possibility.

There are three points from which the discussion of the
question can be started :

185

Prob. XVI] Tahafut al-Falass fah

not fall. And this is so, because the bodies and the bodi-
ly faculties are created to be the servants and the subordi-
nates of the soul. And the service differs according as the
soul is more or less pure and powerful. Therefore, it is not
improbable that the power of a soul should be so great
that the physical forces outside its own body should have
to serve it. For the soul is not impressed upon body ; it

has only a certain inclination towards, or interest in,’

directing it, the inclination or the interest having been
created to be part of its nature. If, therefore, the physi-
cal parts of its own body can obey the soul, it will not be
impossible for such parts outside the body to do the same.
This is the reason why

when a man’s soul contemplates the blowing of winds ; the
falling of rains; the gat ering of thunderbolts, or the
trembling of the Earth (in order to swallow up a people)
—which are all natural phenomena whose occurrence de-
pends on the appearance of Heat or Cold or Motion in
the Air—

then such Heat or Cold appears in the soul, and these
phenomena arise therefrom, although no perceptible physi-
cal cause is present. This is the miracle ofa prophet. But
such a thing is bound to occur in the Air which is pre-
pared to receive it. It is not possible for the miracle to go
to such an extent as to transform a piece of wood into an ani-
mal, or to split the Moon which is incapable of being split,

(So this is their opinion about the miracles. We do not
deny anything mentioned by them here; for such things do
belong to the prophets. But we must criticise them for stop-
ping just where they do, and for denying the transformation
of the Rod into a serpent, or the revivification of thedead, etc.
Therefore, this question necessitates an inquiry for two
reasons. Firstly, in order to prove the miracles. Secondly,
in order to uphold a doctrine on which all the Muslims are
agreed—namely, that God has power over everything. Let
us, therefore, pass on to the intended inquiry.

184
Impossibility of a Departure from Natural Course of Events

upon his sight. Therefore, how can our opponent safely
ignore the possibility that :

(a) among the Principles of Being there should be causes
from which flow the temporal events which are observed to
be connected with each other ;

(b) unlike bodies in motion, such temporal events should
not be liable to destruction or leimination by us, and

(c) that if they were so liable, only then could we appre-
hend their separability from each other, and would consequent-
ly understand that their cause lies beyond what we observe ?

If true to their principles, the philosophers cannot avoid
such a hypothesis. And this is why the masters among them
have agreed that these accidents and events which occur at
the time of contact between bodies—or, in general, at the

_ time of varying relations between bodies—in fact emanate

from the Giver of Forms—who is an angel or angels. Even
so, they say, the impression upon the eye of the forms of
colours emanates from the Giver of Forms, sunrise and the
sound eye and the coloured object being only preparatory and
contributory factors in order to make the subject receive a
form. And they have extended this explanation to every
temporal event. Hence stands refuted he who would assert
that fire is the agent of burning: or bread is the agent of the
satisfaction of hunger: or medicine is the agent of health,
and so on to all other causes.

In the second place, we can take issue with one who ad-
mits that the temporal phenomena emanate from the P rinci-
ples of the Temporals, but belseves that:

The capacity to receive the forms is derived from these
causes which are observed, and which exist here. .Emana-
tion from the Principles themselves takes place by way of
necessity and nature. It is like the emanation of light from
the Sun which is involuntary and inevitable. And the re-
ceptive subjects are distinguished from one another by their
different capacities. For instance, a polished body receives
the rays of the Sun and reflects them, so that some other
place shines by the reflected light. But a tarnished body
does not receive the rays. Or the air does not prevent light
from spreading; whereas a stone does prevent it. Or one
thing softens under the Sun, while another hardens. Or the
Sun whitens one thing (e.g., the washerman’s clothes), but
blackens another (e.g., the washerman’s face). So the prin-

187

Prob. XVIT] Tahafut al-Falassfah

Firstly, the opponent may claim that fire alone is the
agent of burning, and that being an agent by nature (not by
choice), it cannot refrain from doing what it is its nature to
do—after it comes into contact with a subject which is
receptive to it.

This is what we deny. We say that it is God who—
through the intermediacy of angels, or directly—is the agent
of the creation of blackness in cotton; of the disintegration
of its parts, and of their transformation into a smouldering
heap or ashes. Fire, which is an inanimate thing, has no
action. How can one prove that it is an agent? The only
argument is from the observation of the fact of burning at the
time ofcontact with fire. But observation only shows that one
is with the other, not that it is by it and has no other cause than
it. To take another example, it cannot be contradicted that
the advent of the spirit and of the motive and cognitive facul-
ties into the sperm of animals is not a development out of the
natures which are pent up in heat and cold and moisture
and dryness. “By the act of procreation, the father is not the
agent of the son; or of the son’s life, vision, and hearing, or
of any other thing hemay have. Obviously, all these things
are observed to exist with some other conditions. But we
cannot say that they exist by them. On the contrary, the
derive their existence from God—either directly, or throug
the intermediacy of angels to whom these temporal events
are entrusted. (This argument is valid against the philoso-
phers who believe in God; and it is they whom we address
here.) So it is clear that existence with a thing does not prove
being by it.

; Let us illustrate. Suppose there is a blind man whose

eyes are diseased, and who has not heard from anyone of the
difference between night and day. If one day his disease is
cured, and he can consequently see colours, he will guess
that the agent of the perception of the forms of colours which
has now been acquired by his eyes is the opening of the eyes.
This will not be absolutely untrue, inasmuch as given the
soundness of the eyes : and their being open : and the obstruc-
tion being removed : and the object before him having colour,
it follows that he must be able to see, and it would be un-
intelligible if he were not. But when the Sun is set, and the
atmosphere is dark, he will acquire the knowledge that the
light of the Sun was the cause of the impression of colours

186
Impossibility of a Departure from Natural Course of Events

God has not created for him the sight of them,

(b) One who left a book in his house might return to
find it transformed into a slave-boy intelligent and resource-
ful; or intoan animal, Or having left a slave-boy in the
house, one may return to find him transformed into a dog.
Or having left ashes, one may find musk in their place. Or
one may find stone transformed into gold, or gold into stone,
And when asked concerning the change, hemay say : ‘‘Idonot
know what is now in the house. All I know is that I left a
book there. Perhaps it has turned into a horse, defiling
my library with its excrement.’’ Or he might say: ‘I
left a jar of water in the house. Perhaps it has changed
into an apple tree.’’ ;

And all this should be perfectly intelligible, since God
is omnipotent, and it may not be necessary for a horse to be
procreated, or for a tree to grow from a seed ! Nay, it may
not be necessary for either to grow from any thing. Per-
haps God would create things which had never before
existed. So one who sees a man whom he had not seen
until now might hesitate to guess whether that man was
born at all. He might say: ‘‘Maybe, this man was one of
the fruits sold in the market. But now the fruit has been
transformed into a man, because God has power over every
thing, and all such transformations are therefore possible.
Hence my hesitation.’’ 00

In visualising possibilities of this kind one might go to
any length. However, let this much suffice here.

In reply to the foregoing, we will say:

If you could prove that in regard to things which ‘can
exist’ there cannot be created for man a knowledge that
they ‘do not exist,’ then these absurdities would be ines-
capable. We have no doubt in regard to the situations
described by you. For God has created for us the know-
ledge that He would not do these things, although they are
possible. We never asserted that they are necessary. They
are only possible—i.e., they may, or may not, happen. It
is. only when something possible is repeated over and over
again (so as to form the Norm), that its pursuance of a uni-
form course in accordance with the Norm in the past is
indelibly impressed upon our minds.

189

Prob. XVII] Taha fut al-Falasi Sah

ciple is one; but its effects are diverse, because of different
capacities in the receptive subjects. Similarly, the Princi-
ples of Being give unsparingly and ungrudgingly whatever

This being so, whenever we suppose fire with all its
qualities, and suppose two similar pieces of cotton which are
exposed to fire in the same way, how can we conceive that
one of them should burn, and the other should not? There
is no alternative for the other piece.

(From this idea, they come to disbelieve the story that
when Abraham was thrown into fire, burning did not hap-
pen, although fire continued to be fire. They assert that this
cannot happen, unless fire should be devoid of heat (which
would put an end to its being fire), or unless Abraham’s
Person or body should turn into a stone or something else
which might resist the influence of fire. . And, they add,
neither thts nor that is possible.)

To this, our answer is twofold :

In the first place, we will say : We do not agree that the
Principles do not act b choice, or that God does not act by
will. The refutation of this assertion of the philosophers has
already engaged our attention in the problem of the creation
of the world. And once it is proved that the Agent creates by
His will the burning of a piece of cotton at the time of its con-
tact with fire, Reason will consider it to be possible that He
may not create the burning while the contact has taken place.

If it is said:

This might lead one to entertain the most egregious
absurdities. Once it is denied that effects necessarily follow
from causes, and if it is maintained that an effect is to
be ascribed to the will of the Creator, and that the will itself
has no particular well-defined course, but that its manifesta-
tions may be varied and arbitrary, then each one might
persuade himself to believe that :

(a) In front of him, there are ferocious beasts; wide-
Spread conflagration ; lofty mountains, and hostile forces
equipped with arms; and that he fails to see them, because

188
Impossibility of a Departure from Natural Course of Events

We see that one who covers himself with asbestos sits
down in a blazing furnace, and remains unaffected by it.
He who has not observed such a thing will disbelieve it.
Therefore, our opponents’ disbelief in God’s power to invest
fire or a person’s body with a certain attribute which will
prevent it from burning, is like disbelief on the part of
a man who has not observed asbestos and its effect. Things
to which God’s power extends include mysterious and wonder-
ful facts. We have not observed all those mysteries and won-
ders. How, then, can it be proper on our part to deny their
possibility, or positively to assert their impossibility? __

Also in this way can be seen the possibility for recalling
the dead to life, or changing a rod into a serpent. That is,
Matter can receive every accident. Dust and all other ele-
ments are transformed into plants. Having been eaten by
animals, plants are transformed into blood. Blood becomes
sperm. Sperm fertilises the womb, and develops into a
living being. This is the usual course of events extending
over a long time. Why should the opponent refuse to be-
lieve that God may have the power to rotate Matter through
all these phases in a shorter time than is usually taken? And
if a shorter time is admissible, there is no bar against the
shortest one.

So this is how the action of the natural processes can be
accelerated to produce what is called a prophet’s miracle.

If tt ts said:

Does this proceed from the prophet himself, or from one
of the Principles of Being—at the prophet’s instance?

we will answer:

When you admitted the possibility of the occurrence of
rains, thunder, and earthquake by the power of the prophet’s
soul, did you mean that they proceed from the prophet him-
self, or from some other principle? We will reply to your
question as you do to ours. It behoves both of us to relate
this to God—whether immediately, or through the inter-
mediacy of the angels. However, let us add, the time quali-
fied for the occurrence of a miracle comes only when the
prophet’s resolution is directed to it, and when, as a means

101

Prob. XVII} Tahafut al-Falasifah

It is possible for a prophet to know—after the manner
described by the philosophers—that a certain traveller will
not return tomorrow. Although the return is possible, still
the fact that it is not to happen can be known. Or look at
a common man. It is known that he does not know any-
thing of the Hidden World, and that without learning he
cannot know the intelligibles. In spite of this, say the
philosophers, he can know exactly what a prophet knows, if

his soul and intuition acquire sufficient strength. But ‏عط‎

philosophers know that this possibility has never happened.
Now, if in extraordinay times, God breaks the Norm by
causing such a thing to happen, then our cognitions (that 5
certain possible thing ‘does not happen’) will slip out of our
hearts and will not be recreated by Him. Therefore, there
is nothing 10 prevent us from believing that :

(a) something may be possible, and may be one of those
things to which God’s power extends ;

(b) in spite of its being possible, it might have been
known as a rule in the past that God would not do it ; and

(c) God may create for us a knowledge that He would
not do it in ¢k#s particular instance.

So the philosophers’ criticism is nothing but obstinate
fault-finding. .

Our second answer, which will enable us to get rid of
the philosophers’ captious criticism, is as follows :

We agree that fire is so created that when it finds two
pieces of cotton which are similar, it will burn both of
them, as it cannot discriminate between two similar things.
At the same time, however, we can believe that when a cer-
tain prophet was thrown into the fire, he was not burnt—
either because the attributes of fire had changed, or because

the attributes of the prophet’s person had changed. Thus,

there might have originated—from God, or from the angels
——a new attribute in the fire which confined its heat to it-
self, so that the heat was not communicated to the prophet.
Hence, although the fire retained its heat, its form and its
reality, still the effect of its heat did not pass onwards. Or
there might have originated a new attribute in the prophet’s
body which enabled it to resist the influence of fire, although
it had not ceased to be composed of flesh and bones.

190
Impossibility of a Departure from Natural Course of Events

forms do not come to them from the angels in mere frivolity or
caprice. On the contrary, only that form comes to the sub-
ject to which the subject is specifically receptive because of its
own preparation. And the preparations are different and
multiple, and—according to the philosophers—their princi-
ples are to be found in the configurations of stars, and in the
different relations of celestial bodies in course of their move-
ment, it is plain that the principles of preparations have
within them mysterious and wonderful things. For this rea-
son, those versed in talismanic arts can use their knowledge
of the properties of mineral substances and of the stars to
procure combinations of celestial powers with mineral proper-
ties. Thus, they take some of the terrestrial figures, and by
seeking out a particular horoscope for them, they can pro-
duce mysterious and wonderful things in the world. For in-
stance, they often drive away snakes or scorpions or bugs from
a city, or do some other thing of the kind which their talisma-
nic science may have enabled them to do.

Seeing that the principles of preparations are innumer-
able, and that we cannot discover their secret or exhaust
their number, whence can we know that it is impossible that
there should be certain preparations in some bodies which
(bodies) might pass through all the phases of transformation
in the shortest time, so as to receive the form for which they
were prepared—thus giving rise toa miracle? Disbelief in
such a thing betrays a lack of spirit on the disbeliever’s part,
and his unfamiliarity with the High Beings, and unawareness
of the Secrets of God (glory to Him) in the world of created
beingsandin Nature. He who observes the wonders which are
revealed by sciences will never hesitate to admit the possibility
of God’s power extending to those things which have been re-
lated as prophets’ miracles.

If it ts said:

We agree with you that God’s power extends to all that
is possible. And you agree with us that no power extends to
that which is impossible. Now, things are divided into
three kinds: (i) those whose impossibility is definitely
known; (ii) those whose possibility is definitely known;
and (iii) those in regard to which the Intellect is hesitant,
affirming neither their possibility nor impossibility. What

193

Prob. XVII] Tuhafut al-Falasif ah

of strengthening the system of the Sacred Law, its appear-
ance becomes a specific condition for the establishment of
the System of Good. This, therefore, is the determinant in
favour of existence. In itself, the thing is possible: and the
Principle is generous and bountiful. Nevertheless, the ema-
nation from Him does not take place, until the need for the
existence of the emanant operates as the determinant, and it
becomes a specific condition for the establishment of the
System of Good. And it cannot be such a condition, unless
a prophet stands in need of it to prove his prophecy in order
to bring about the propagation of Good.

All this fits very well into their theory. In fact, they
are bound to draw such conclusions, since they have opened
the door to the special character of a prophet by means of
a property which is contrary to the ordinary qualities of men.
The degrees of this special character cannot be exhausted by
intellectual comprehension. Why should it be necessary for
one, who believes in any degree of this special character,
to disbelieve an account of it which has been handed down on
the strength of uninterrupted testimony, and which finds its
confirmation in the Sacred Law?

In fine, from the facts:

(a) that only the sperm receives the form of an animal :

(b) that the animal faculties flow on to it from the
angels who are—according to the philosophers—the Princi-
ples of Being ;

(c) that the sperm of man gives birth only to a man, and
the sperm of a horse only to a horse—since the origination of
the latter from a horse is most apt to determine the selection
of the form of a horse, in contradistinction to all other forms,
for the offspring which, therefore, can receive only the form
so determined. For the same reason, barley does not grow
from wheat, nor an apple from the seed of a pear ;

(d) that, further, we see many species of animals which
grow out of dust, and do not reproduce their kind—e.g., the
worms. There are some other species which grow out of
dust, but also reproduce their kind—e.g., the mouse, the
snake, and the scorpion, and

(e) that the growth of such animals out of dust, and
their different capacities to receive forms have for their
causes things which are hidden from us, and which it is im-
possible for human faculties ever to discover. For their

192
Impossibility of a Departure from Natural Course of Events

It is not possible for one person to be in two places at the
same time. For by his being in the house we understand his
not-being in the not-house. Therefore, it is impossible to
suppose his being in not-house together with his being in
house which only means the denial of his being in not-house.
Similarly, by will we understand the seeking after something
which is known Now, if the seeking is supposed, but know-
ledge is not supposed, then there will be no will. For the
supposition will have within itself the negation of what we
understand by will.

Nor is it possible that knowledge should be created
in inorganic Matter. For by inorganic Matter we understand
something which has no cognition. If cognition is created in
it, it will be impossible to call it inorganic Matter in the
sense in which we understand it. If in spite of the new-
created cognition, the stone does not cognise, then it will be
impossible to name as knowledge this new-created thing
which does not enable its subject to have any cognition what-
soever. So this is the reason why the creation of knowledge
in inorganic Matter is impossible.

As regards the transformation of Genera, some of the
Mutakalliman believe that God has power over it. But we
maintain that it is unintelligible for something to become an-
other. For instance, if blackness becomes power, does black-
ness remain, or not? If it disappears, it does not become,
but only passes away, and something else comes into exis-
tence. If it still exists together with power, it has not be-
come, but something else has just been added to it. If
blackness remains, and power is not there, then there is no
becoming at all. The whole thing remains as it was.

When we say that blood becomes sperm, we mean that
one and the same Matter has put off one form to take on
another. So the final outcome is that one form has passed
away, and another has come into existence, while Matter re-
mains unchanged beneath successive forms. Again, when
we say that water becomes air because of heat, we mean that
Matter which had received the form of water has now dis-
carded that form to receive another. So the Matter is common;
it is only its attributes which change. Similarly, therefore,
we may speak of the Rod becoming a serpent, or of dust
becoming an animal. But between the Substance and the
Accident there is no common Matter. Nor is there any

195

Prob. XVIT| Tahafut al-Falasifah

is your definition of the Impossible? If it is the combination
of affirmation and negation in the same thing, then say that
of every two things, This is not That, nor That This, and
that therefore the existence of neither presupposes the exist-
ence of the other. Further, say:

(a) that God has the power to create will without the
knowledge of the object of will; or knowledge without life; or

(b) that He has the power to cause the movement of a
dead man’s hand, causing him to sit up, write out a book, or
pursue some other art while his eyes may be open, and his
vision concentrated on what is before him ; and

(c) that still the man may not be able to ‘see,’ and
may have no life or power—for his systematic actions have
been created by God, by causing his hand to move, and by
directing the movement Himself.

When such a thing is regarded as possible, all distinction
between voluntary and spasmodic movements will disappear.
No controlled action will be an indication of knowledge or
power on the part of the agent. Further, it will be reason-
able to maintain that He has the power to change the
Genera—e.g., substance into accident ; knowledge into power ;
black into white, and sound into smell—just as He has the
power to change inorganic Matter into an animal, or a stone
into gold. And many other absurdities will follow ; in fact,
their number will be unlimited.

The answer:

No one has power over the Impossible. What the Im-
possible means is the affirmation of something together with
its denial ; or the affirmation of the particular together with
the denial of the general ; or the affirmation of two together
with the denial of one, That which does not fall under these
heads is not impossible. And that which is not impossible
is within power.

Thecombination of blackness and whiteness is impossible;
for by the affirmation of the forms of blackness in a subject we
understand the negation of whiteness, and the existence of
blackness. Therefore, if the negation of whiteness is under-
stood by the affirmation of blackness, then the affirmation of

whiteness together with its (understood) negation will be
impossible.

194
PROBLEM XVIII

OF THEIR INABILITY TO GIVE A RATIONAL DEMON-
STRATION OF THEIR THEORY THAT THE HUMAN
SOUL IS A SPIRITUAL SUBSTANCE WHICH EXISTS
IN ITSELF ; IS NOT SPACE-FILLING; IS NOT BODY,
OR IMPRESSED UPON BODY ; AND IS NEITHER CON-
NECTED NOR DISCONNECTED WITH BODY—AS GOD
IS NEITHER INSIDE THE WORLD NOR OUTSIDE IT,
OR AS THE ANGELS ARE

HE consideration of this problem requires the description
of their theory of the animal and human faculties :
The animal faculties are divided by them into two:
motive and perceptive. The perceptive faculties are of two
kinds: external and internal. The external perceptive facul-
ties consist of the five senses. These are impressed upon
bodies. The internal perceptive faculties are three:

(i) The faculty of fantasy, which is located in the fore-
part of the brain, behind the faculty of sight. In this faculty
remain the forms of seen things, when the eyes are closed.
Indeed, the data of all the five senses are impressed upon it.
Hence it is called the sensus communis. But for it, he who
saw white honey, and could not perceive its sweetness until
he tasted of it, would not perceive the sweetness without
tasting it—as he did before—even on seeing it a second
time. But in this faculty there is something which judges
that this white thing is also sweet. It follows that this
‘something’ is a judge working with the combination of two
things—viz., colour and sweetness. For only thus can it
judge of the existence of one from that of another.

(ii) The estimative faculty perceives the meanings,
whereas the preceding one perceives the forms. Form means
something which depends upon Matter—i.e., body—for its
existence. By meaning, on the other hand, is understood
something whose existence does not require body, although
accidentally it may be in body—e.g., hatred or kindliness.
For instance, the goat perceives the colour and shape of a
wolf. These things cannot but be in body, But it also per-
ceives the wolf’s hostility towards it. Or the lamb per-

197

Prob, XVIT Tahafut al-Falasi fa,

common Matter between blackness and power, or between
any other two Genera. Hence the impossibility of transfor-
mation in their case.

_As regards the case in which God causes the hand of
a dead man to move, and places him on the footing of a
living man, so that he may sit up and write, till the move-
ment of his hand results in coherent writing, we must say
that initselfit isnot impossible. For we ascribeall temporal
events to the will of One who acts by choice. But it is to
be rejected insofar as it is subversive of the usual course of
events. Your statement that the possibility of such a
thing will destroy the probative value of the adjustment of
an action as an indication of knowledge on the agent’s part
1s not true. For it is God who is the agent ; He makes the ad-
justment, and performs the action—through the dead man.

___As regards your statement that there remains no dis-

tinction between voluntary and spasmodic movements, we
will say that we know such a thing from ourselves. When
in Our own case, we observe a distinction between the two
States, we designate the cause of distinction as power. And
then we conclude that what actually happens is only one
of the two possible things—i.e., either the state in which
movement is produced by power, or the state in which it is
produced not-by-power. So when we look at someone else,

se€ many coherent movements, we acquire the know-
ledge of his power over the movements. Now, this know-
ledge 15 one of those cognitions which are created by God,
and which depend upon the continuance of the regular
course of events. Knowledge of this kind can only tell us of
the rmistence of one of the two possible things. But, as
shown earlier, it does not prove i ibili 1
other ‏ا‎ Pp the impossibility of the

196
Their Inability to Give a Rational Demonstration

the form of an object of desire or aversion is impressed upon
the faculty of fantasy (which we have mentioned above), the
faculty of appetence impels the active motive faculty to-
wards movement. It has two subdivisions:

(i) Faculty of desire, which rouses to movement that
brings about approximation to things imagined to be neces-
sary or useful in the search for pleasure.

(ii) Faculty of anger, which rouses to movement where-
by it is sought to keep away that which is imagined to be
harmful or deleterious, and thus to overcome it. With the
action of this faculty is completed the coordination of the
faculties which results in the activity called action.

The active motive faculty comes into play in the muscles
and the nerves. Its function is to contract the muscles and
to pull the tendons and ligaments, which are connected with
the limbs, towards the position where this faculty runs its
course; or to relax or expand them so that they tend away
from the position.

These, then, are the faculties of the animal soul, des-
cribed here in a brief and general way.

The Human Rational Soul

It is also called (by them) the Communicative Soul.
For, apparently, being the choicest fruit of Reason, com-
munication by language is the rational activity. Hence the
relation between the two terms.

The rational soul has two faculties: the theoretical, and
the practical. Each one of these twois called Reason, but
this is so because the name is common to them. The prac-
tical faculty is the motive principle of the human body,
urging it towards those human activities which are marked
by coordination, and whose coordination is derived from the
deliberation characteristic of man.

The function of the theoretical faculty, which is also
called Speculation, is to apprehend the realities of the in-
telligibles, which are free froin Matter, Space, and Dimen-
sion—i.e., the universal judgments which are called States
or Aspects by the Muiakallimin, and the Abstract Universals
by the philosophers.

Thus the soul has two faculties, corresponding to. two
different planes. Speculation or the theoretical faculty

199

Prob. XVIII] — Taha fut al-Falasifah

ceives the shape and colour of its mother, then her kindliness
and agreeableness. Therefore, it runs away from the wolf,
but follows its mother. Unlike colour or shape, it is not
necessary for kindliness or enmity to be in bodies, although
accidentally they may be.

Thus the estimative faculty is distinguished from the
preceding one; and it is located in the hindmost ventricle of
the brain.

__, (ili) The third internal perceptive faculty is called sen-
sitive imagination in the case of animals, and cogitation in
the case of man. Its function is to compose sensible forms
with one another, or to superimpose meanings upon forms.
It is in the middle ventricle of the brain, between the facul-
ties of retention and memory. It enables a man to imagine
a flying horse or any other combination which he may never
have observed. This faculty could, as will be seen present-
ly, more properly be connected with the motive faculties,
not the perceptive ones. The knowledge of the location of
these faculties is derived from the Art of Medicine. When
one of the ventricles of the brain is affected, these things—
i.e., perception, etc.,—are also disturbed.

Further, (they assert) the faculty upon which are im- .

pressed the forms of the data of the five senses conserves
those forms—-which (forms) therefore persist after having
been received. When something conserves another, it does
not do so by the faculty by which it receives. For instance,
water receives, but does not conserve. Wax receives by its
moisture; but, unlike water, it conserves—by its dryness.
Therefore, the conserving faculty is not a receiving one. So
it is called ‘retention.’

The meanings impressed upon the estimative faculty are
likewise conserved—by the faculty which is called ‘memory.’

So the internal perceptions, when the faculty of sensi-
tive imagination is included among them, are five, just as
the external are five.

The motive faculties are divided into (a) that which
moves in the sense that it impels towards movement; and
(b) that which moves in the sense that movement is the result
of its direct efficiency.

The motive faculty which moves in the sense that it
impels towards movement is the faculty of appetence. When

198
Their Inability to Give a Rational Demonstration

must also be indivisible. But all bodies are divisible. There-
fore, the substratum of the rational cognitions is not body.
This can be put in accordance with the conditions of the logi-
cal figures. To do that in the aptest way, one might say:

(i) If the substratum of knowledge were a divisible body,
then the knowledge subsisting in it would be divisible.

(ii) But the knowledge subsisting in it is not divisible.

(iil) Therefore, the substratum is not body.
This is a hypothetical syllogism in which the contrary of the
antecedent follows as an indisputable conclusion from the
interpellation of the contrary of the consequent. There can
be no doubt about the validity of the figure of the syllogism,
or about the two premises. For in the first premiss it is
stated that every thing which subsists in a divisible substra-
tum is divisible; and that if the divisibility of the substra-
tum of knowledge is supposed, then the divisibility of know-
ledge will be axiomatic and unquestionable. In the second
premiss it is stated that knowledge which is one and subsists
in man is indivisible. For it is impossible to consider it to
be divisible ad infinitum. If it is considered to be divisible
only to a certain extent, then it will consist of units which
cannot be divided any further,

In short, we know things in such a way that we cannot
suppose the extinction of some of them, while others remain.
For ‘some’ and ‘others’ are inapplicable to them.

Objection from two points :

Firstly, it might be said: How will you disprove one
who says that the substratum of knowledge is an individual
atom which, although filling space, is indivisible? This idea
is found in the theories of the Mutakallimin. This idea having
been adopted, the only difficulty which remains is that it
may be regarded as improbable. That is, it might be said:
How can all the cognitions subsist in the individual atom,
while all other atoms surrounding it are left vacant and un-
occupied? But this assumption of improbability is no good
to the philosophers, for it can be directed against their own
theory. Thus, one might ask, how can the soul be some-
thing one, unspatial, undesignated, neither inside the body
nor outside it, and neither connected nor disconnected with
anything corporeal? However, we do not like to make

201

Prob. 717117[ Tahafut al-Falasif ‏وله‎

corresponds to the plane of the angels, from whom the soul de-
Tives real cognitions. It behoves this faculty perpetually to
be receptive to what comes to it from above. The practical
faculty, on the other hand, brings the soul into relation with
things of a lower order, viz., the body; the governance of
body, and the reform of the moral habits. It is desirable
that this faculty should govern all the bodily faculties ; that
the latter should be ready to learn the manners it has to
teach them ; and that they should be subservient toit. Not
the practical faculty, but the bodily faculties should be the
passive recipients of influences; for otherwise, the physical
qualities would generate in the soul those servile attitudes
called the Vices. Le? the practical faculty be dominant, so
that the soul may thereby acquire attitudes wich are called
Virtues.

_ (This is a brief summary of their detailed account of the
animal and human faculties. Even this much is lengthy
enough, although we have omitted the description of the
Vegetative Faculties, which were not relevant to our purpose.
Nothing of what the philosophers have said here is like those
things which the Sacred Law lays us under an obligation to
disbelieve. For they are observable facts, which—by God’s
will—form part of the regular course of events. However,
we intend to question their claim that by rational arguments
they can know the soul’s being a substance which exists in
itself. Ours is not the attitude of one who would not admit
Goa’s power over such a thing, or would maintain that re-
ligion actually contradicts this view. On the contrary, we
will show in the discussion of Resurrection that religion lends
its support to this view. But we dispute their claim that the
Intellect alone is the guide in this matter, and that therefore
one need not depend on religion in regard to it.

So we demand that they produce their arguments. And

they would assert that they have many :(

(x)
In the first argument, they say:

The rational cognitions subsist in the human soul. These
cognitions are not infinite, and in them there are indivisible
units. It follows that the substratum of these cognitions

200
Their Inability to Give a Rational Demonstration

of Matter. It only perceives the enmity of a particular wolf
which has an objective appearance—viz., the enmity asso-
ciated with his person and figure. But the rational faculty
apprehends realities which are divested of Matter and ob-
jectivity.

we will answer:

Tl e goat perceives the colour and the figure of the wolf,
and then his enmity. Now, if colour is impressed upon the
faculty of sight, and so is figure, and if both are divisible
by the division of the substratum of sight, then what is that
by which the goat perceives enmity? If it is a body, the
perception must be divisible. And I wonder what would be
the content of this divisible perception! Will it be a percep-
tion of a part of enmity? If so, how can enmity have a
part? Or will every part of the perception be the percep-
tion of the whole of enmity? If so, enmity will be known
over and over again—because of the existence of the percep-
tions in each part of the substratum.

This, then, is the doubt which will create difficulties for
them in their argument. They must try to remove it.

Uf it ts 44 :

This means that there is self-contradiction in the in-
telligibles. But the intelligibles are irrefragable. Since it
has not been possible for you to doubt the two premises—
namely, that the ‘one’ knowledge is indivisible; and that
that which is indivisible cannot subsist in a divisible body—
it is not possible for you to doubt the conclusion.

The answer:

Our only purpose in writing this book was to show the
inconsistency and the self-contradiction involved in the phi-
losophers’ theories. And that purpose has been achieved,
inasmuch as we have shown that one of the two things—
viz., either the theory of the rational soul, or the explana-
tion of the estimative faculty—must be abandoned.

Further, we will say, from the contradiction involved
in their thesis, it is clear that the philosophers are unmindful

203

Prob. XVIII] Tahafut al-Falasi fah

much of this point. For the question of the indivisible part
has been discussed at very great length, and the philosophers
have a number of mathematical arguments for it which, if
considered by us, would make the present discussion too

lengthy. One of those ar t b
the philosophies: guments may be related here. Say

If the individual atom is between two other atoms, does
one of its two sides come into contact with the same thing
as the other does, or are the two things different? It is
impossible that the two should be identical ; for then the
two sides of the atom would coincide. For if A touches
B, and B touches C, then A will be in touch with C. If,
on the other hand, things in contact with the two sides of

the atom are different, that only pr iplici

Seinen y proves multiplicity and
Such a difficulty cannot be solved without a lengthy dis-
cussion. However, we are under no obligation to consider it.
Therefore, let us pass on to the next point.

In the second place, we will say:

Your statement that every thing which subsists in bod
must be divisible stands refuted by your own description of

the faculty by which a goat perceives a wolf's enmity. That |

(perception) is something one and indivisible, because enmity
has no parts some of which might be supposed to have been
perceived, while others were not. And, according to you, the
perception does reside in a bodily faculty, inasmuch as the
soul of animals is something impressed upon bodies, and in-
capable of surviving death. And all the philosophers are
agreed on this point. Now, even if it were possible for them
to concoct the supposition of the division of the data of the
five senses: of the sensus communis; and of the retentive
faculty, still it would be impossible for them to suppose the

division of the ‘meanings’ for which it is not a condition to
be in Matter.

Ifitis satd:

The goat does not perceive the absolute enmity divested
202
Their Inability to Give a Rational Demonstration .

Thus, let us ask: Is there a relation between knowledge and
the knower, or not? It is impossible to cut off all the rela-
tion; for in that case, it will not be possible to show why
his being the knower of it is more appropriate than anyone
else’s being the knower of it. But if there is a relation, it
must be one of the following three kinds: (i) Either there
will be a relation with each one of the many parts of the
substratum; or (ii) with some of the parts as distinguished
from others ; or (iii) with none of them.

Now, it will be false to say that there is a relation with
none of the parts; for if there is no relation with the units
there can be none with their aggregate either. The aggre
gate of dissimilar things is still a dissimilar thing.

Again, it will be false to say that there is a relation
with some parts of the substratum. For in that case, the
parts with which knowledge is not related will have nothing
to do with knowledge. Therefore, it will be possible for us
to exclude them from consideration.

Again, it will be false to say that there is relation be-
tween each supposed part of the substratum and the essence
of knowledge. For if there were a relation with the entire
essence of knowledge, then that which is known to any one
part would be, not a part of the object of knowledge, but the
whole object ofknowledgeas such. And then the known thing
would be known over and over again, actually for an infinite
number of times. But if each part were to have a relation
with the essence of knowledge different from that of any other
part, then the essence-of knowledge would be conceptually
divisible. And we have shown that the knowledge of some-
thing one in all respects is not even conceptually divisible.
Finally, if each part of the substratum were to have a
relation with something out of the essence of knowledge
which was different from that with which another part was
related, then the divisibility of knowledge because of this
relation would be all the more evident. And the division is
impossible.

From this it will be seen that the sense data impressed upon
the five senses are nothing but representations of particular
and divisible forms; for perception means the appearance of
the image of the percept in the percipient’s soul. And
each part of the sensible image has a relation with a part of
the bodily organ.

205

ee

Prob. XVIII] Taha fut al-Falasifah

of where in their syllogism confusion lies. Perhaps t
eir | . he

pource of confusion is their assertion that, if impressed upon

ody, knowledge would be impressed, as colour is impressed
pen the coloured object; and that, consequently, like the
vision of colour by the division of the coloured object

nowledge would be divided by the division of the substra-
tum. The unsatisfactory thing here is the word ‘impres-
sion.” Possibly, the relation between knowledge and itssub-
stratum is different from that between colour and the coloured
object. Thatisto say, itis different from that which is said to
becommensurate with the substratum, and impressed upon it
and spread through its extremities, so that the division of
one will divide the other. It is possible for knowledge to be
related to its substratum in a different way. It is possible
that because of that relation the division of the substratum
should not divide knowledge itself. Perhaps, therefore
knowledge is related to its substratum in the same way as
the perception of enmity is related to its physical substratum.
The ways in which attributes are related to their substrata
are not confined to a single pattern. Nor is our knowledge
of their details absolutely reliable. Therefore, judgments
about them, unless based on a perfect knowledge of the de-
tails 0 the relation, will be unreliable judgments.

_ ‘Now, to sum up. There is no denying the fac
things mentioned by the philosophers raise a strong bree
sumption of probability. What is denied here is that

ey can be known by a knowledge which is certain, un-

contested, and indubitable. W a
open to doubt. e have seen how far it is

(2)
In thetr second argument, the philosophers say:

If the knowledge of ‘one’ rational—i.e., divested
Matter—object of knowledge were impressed upon Matter a
the same way as accidents are impressed upon physical
substances, then, as shown above, the division of the physi-
cal substratum would also divide knowledge necessarily.
yu 11 it is not impressed upon, and commensurate with
the substratum, and the word ‘impressed’ is objectionable,
then we can express the same thing in a different way.

204
Their Inability to Give a Rational Demonstration

(3)
In the third argument, the philosophers say:

If knowledge were in a part of the body, then that part,
as distinguished from all other parts of a man’s body, would
be the knower. But man is called a knower; and being a
knower is attributed to him as a whole, not to a particular

e within him.
‏لق مام‎ is silly. For man is also called a seer, a hearer,
and a taster. And these attributes are also predicated of
the animals, But this does not show that sensuous percep-
tion does not reside in the body. Nay, this is a permissible
liberty taken with the words. For instance, it is said: ‘He
is in Baghdad.’ Although the man is actually in only one
part of Baghdad, not the whole of it, still he is related to
the whole.)

(4)
In their fourth argument, they say:

If knowledge were to subsist in a part, say, of the heart
or the brain, then it would be possible for its contrary—1.e.,
ignorance—to exist in another part of the heart or the brain.
And then one might be a knower and an ignorant person at
the same time and in relation to the same thing. Since such
a thing is impossible, it is clear that the substratum of
knowledge is also the substratum of ignorance. It is impos-
sible that two contraries should coexist in this substratum.
If it were divisible, the existence of knowledge in one part
and of ignorance in another would not be impossible. For
two contraries existing in two different places are not mutu-
ally exclusive. For instance, the mottled colouring combines
contrary colours in the same horse, but in different places ;
and blackness and whiteness coexist in the same eye, but
in different parts of it.

Now, this is not necessarily true of the senses ; for sense
perceptions have no contraries. One only does, or does not,

erceive; and between the two states there is the antithesis
of being and non-being. No doubt, we say that one perceives
by one of his parts—e.g., the eye or the ear—and not by, the

207

Prob. XVIII] Taha fut al-Falasif ah
Objection :

Our objection to this argument is the same as to the pre-
ceding one. For the substitution of the word ‘relation’ for
‘impression’ does not remove the doubt about the impression
of the wolf’s enmity upon the goat’s estimative faculty (as
described by them). Obviously, the goat has a perception,
and the perception is related to it, and the relation is deter-
mined in the same way as you have mentioned. For enmity
is not a measurable and quantified thing whose image could
be impressed upon a quantified body, and whose parts would
bear a relation to the parts of that body. The measurable-
ness of wolf’s figure is not enough. For the goat perceives
something else besides the figure, and that ‘something’ is
enmity, or hostility, or unkindliness, And this enmity which
is additional to figure has no quantity or measure. None-
theless, it is perceived by a quantified body. Therefore, in
this way, the present argument is rendered problematical, no
less than the preceding one.

Should one say here:

Why did you not counter these arguments by saying
that knowledge subsists in an indivisible, although space-
filling, substance—viz., the individual atom ?

we would answer:

The theory of the individual atom belongs to Mathe-
matics ; and the explanation of the individual atom requires
a lengthy discourse. Moreover, even that theory does not
remove all the difficulties. For it would follow that power
and will should also be in the individual atom. Man’s action
is inconceivable without power and will. And will is incon-
ceivable without knowledge. The power of writing is in the
hand and the fingers. But the knowledge of it is not in the
hand ; for in case the hand should be cut off, knowledge would
not disappear. Nor is the will in the hand; for one can be
willing to write, even when the hand is paralysed. If in
such a case, one fails to write, the failure is to be attributed
to the absence of power, not to the absence of will.

206
Their Inability to Give a Rational Demonstration

it actually is,

(5)
In their fifth argument, they say:

If the intellect were to perceive the intelligibles by a
bodily organ, it could not know itself. But the consequent
is impossible, since the Intellect does know itself. It follows
that the antecedent must be impossible.

We will say:

Doubtless, the contrary of the antecedent may follow as
the conclusion from the interpellation of the contrary of the
consequent. But this happens only when it is proved that
there is a necessary connection between the consequent and
the antecedent. Now, in your argument, it is not clear
whether the connection between the two is necessary. How
will you prove it?

If it is 544

The argument is as follows: Being in body, sight does
not relate to sight. Vision is not seen; nor can hearing be
heard. And the same holds of all other senses. So if the In-
tellect were to perceive by a bodily organ, it could not per-
ceive itself. But in truth, the Intellect knows itself, as it
knows what is other than itself. Every one of us knows him-
self, as he knows the Other. And we also know that we know
ourselves as well as others.

we will answer:

For two reasons, the point made by you is invalid.
Firstly, in our view, it is possible for sight to relate to
itself, thus becoming the sight of the Other as well as of it-
self—just as the knowledge possessed by any one of us is the
knowledge of the Other as well as of itself. Although such a
thing is contrary to the regular course of events, we admit
the possibility of a departure from that course, 0000
he second reason is even more cogent. We admit this

209

Prob. XVITI} Tahafut al-Falasifah

whole body. And there is no self-contradiction involved in
such a statement. And this statement cannot be superseded
by your statement that being a knower is contrary to being
ignorant, and that the judgment applies to the whole body.
For it is impossible that the judgment should refer to any-
thing other than the substratum of the cause of the judgment.
Therfore, the knower is that substratum wherein knowledge
subsists. If the name is given to the whole of which the
substratum is a part, this will be a metaphorical use. For
instance, one is said to be in Baghdad, whereas he is in only a
part of it. Similarly, one is said to bea seer ; although, evi-
dently, the judgment about seeing does not apply to the hands
or the feet, but refers totheeyes exclusively. Theopposition
between judgments is like the opposition between their causes ;
for judgments exclusively refer to the substrata of the causes.

Nor can this position be invalidated by one’s saying that
the substratum in man which has the capacity to receive
knowledge and ignorance is the same, and that knowledge and
ignorance come to it as contraries. For you have held that
every living body is capable of receiving knowledge and
ignorance. You have not laid down any other condition be-
sides that of life; and to you all the parts of the body are on
par so far as the receiving of knowledge is concerned.

Objection :

This will recoil upon you in the case of desire, appetite,
and will. For these things are possessed by men and animals
alike, and they are impressed upon bodies. _It is impossible
that an animal or man should hate what he loves, thus com-
bining within himself hatred and love for the sdme thing—
in such a way that hatred exists in one substratum, and love
in another. But this does not prove that hatred and love do
not subsist in bodies. The reason why their combination is
impossible is that, although the number of these faculties is
large, and they are distributed among different organs, yet
they are held together by one bond —viz., the soul. This
bond belongs to man and animal alike. So with this bond
holding them together, it is impossible for the diverse facul-
ties to acquire relations which are—with reference to the bond
—mutually exclusive. But this does not prove that the
soul is not impressed upon body ; indeed, in the case of animals,

208
Their Inability to Give a Rational Demonstration

on all hands. Logic tells us (how valid the inference is)
when a universal judgment is based on one or more than one
particular instance. For instance, it is believed that every
animal moves its lower jaw at the time of eating. This in-
ference is made beeause, through the inductive observation
of animals, we have found that all the animals whom we saw
did the same. But this shows our failure to take cognisance
of the crocodile which moves its upper jaw. Now, the philoso-
phers have come across only the five senses through inductive
observation. Having found these senses constituted in a cer-
tain manner, they pass judgment upon all senses. Maybe,
however, the Intellect is a sense bearing the same relation to
all other senses as the crocodile does to all other animals. -
On this view, therefore, the senses will, in spite of their
common corporeality, be divided into those which do, and
those which do not, perceive the substratum. In fact, they are
already divided into those which perceive their object when
it is not in contact with them (e.g., sight), and those which
do not perceive until there is such contact (e.g., taste or
touch). So the description given by the philosophers is not
conducive to certainty, however plausible it may be.

If it ts said:

We rely, not merely on the inductive observation of the
senses, but on a rational argument. Thus, we say, if the
heart or the brain were the soul of man, the perception of the
heart or the brain could never be inaccessible to him. On the
contrary, that knowledge would always be present, because
man is never devoid of self-perception. The essence of none
of us is inaccessible to his essence. On the contrary, we are

etually affirming ourselves by ourselves. But as far as
the heart or the brain is concerned, no one perceives them,
and no one believes in their existence, until he has heard the
story of the heart or the brain, or observed another man
anatomically. So if the Intellect were to subsist in body, it
would be necessary for it either always to perceive the body,
or never to perceive it at all. But neither of the two alter-
natives is true. For sometimes a bodily organ is known;
sometimes, not.

The point may be elucidated as follows: The perception
which subsists in a substratum perceives the substratum

211

Prob. XVIIT] Tahafut al-Falasif ah

impossibility of self-perception in the case of the senses. But
why is it that something which is inapplicable to some of the
senses is considered to be inapplicable to all of them? What
is the difficulty in believing that, in spite of the common cor-
poreality of all the senses, the judgment about the senses
with respect to perception may differ from one case to an-
other? In fact, sight and touch do differ—inasmuch as the
tactual perception is not acquired until there is contact be-
tween the object and the organ of touch (and the same applies
to taste), whereas the case with sight is just the reverse.
The removal of contact is a prerequisite for visual perception,
so much so that if the eyes are closed, the colour of the eye-
lids cannot be seen just because of their contact with the
organ of sight. This difference between sight and touch does
not make the two differ with respect to dependence upon
body. Why, then, is it improbable that that which is called
the Intellect should be one of the bodily senses, differing from
the other senses insofar as it perceives itself?

(6)
In their sixth argument, they say:

If the Intellect were to perceive by a bodily organ as the
sense of sight does, then like any other sense it would be un-
able to perceive the organ. But in fact, it does perceive the
brain, or the heart, or whatever may be called its organ. It
follows that the Intellect has no organ or substratum. For
otherwise, it would not be able to perceive it.

Objection :

Our objection to this argument is the same as that to the
preceding one. It is not improbable that sight should per-
ceive its own substratum although here the question of what
is the usual thing comes up. Again, we might say (as we
did in the preceding argument): Why should it be impossible
for the senses to differ in this respect, even though all are
alike impressed upon bodies? Why do you say that nothing
which exists in body can perceive its physical substratum?
Why do you make a universal judgment based upon a few
particulars? That is a procedure whose invalidity is agreed

210
Their Inability to Give a Rational Demonstration

by the incessant activity of perceiving. For incessant motion
corrupts bodies, and leads to their ex.austion. Similarly,
powerful] things which are perceived through an intense exer-
tion weaken these faculties, and sometimes corrupt them to
such an extent that, having perceived the powerful things
(e.g., a loud noise, in the case of hearing ; or a dazzling light,
in the case of sight), they are unable to perceive lesser and
weaker ones. Therefore, the corrupting effect leaves the ear
or the eye unable to perceive a low voice or minute visible
things. Even so, one who has tasted of very intense sweet-
ness is unable to perceive the sweetness of lesser intensity.

Just the reverse is the case with the rational faculty.
Its continuous apprehension of the intelligibles does not tire
it. The cognition of the more distinct things (viz., things
whose truth is self-evident) gives it greater strength, rather
than weakness, in order to apprehend less distinct things (viz.,
things known by inferential knowledge). If sometimes the
rational faculty appears to be exhausted, this results from
the fact that it had employed the faculty of fantasy, and
received its assistance. It is the physical organ of the faculty
of fantasy which gets weaker, and consequently fantasy does
not serve the Intellect. ١ ١

(This is the same technique as we found in the preceding
argument. Let. us reaffirm that it is not improbable for the
physical senses to differ in respect of these things. Something
proved in the case of some of the senses need not be true of
others. Nay, even for the bodies it is not improbable to
differ—so that some of them are liable to be weakened by
motion of a certain kind ; while others are in a position, not to
be enfeebled, but strengthened by that motion (which anyhow
exercises an influence over them). On this assumption, there
will be a cause producing a new potency in scme of the
bodies, because of which they will not be adversely affected
by motion. And all these assumptions are perfectly possible
inasmuch as it is not necessary to universalise a judgment
which is found applicable to a few things.)

(8)
In their eighth argument, they say:

The faculties which reside in parts of the body get weak-
213

Prob. XVIII] Tahafut al-Falasi fah

because of the relation between the two. And it is inconceiv-
able that perception should bear any other relation to the
substratum than that of subsisting in it. Therefore, it will
always perceive the substratum. If, however, this relation
is not sufficient, it will never perceive the substratum, in-
sofar as it can bear no other relation to the substratum than
that of subsisting in it—just as if it were to know itself, it
would know for ever, not being inattentive at any time.

we will answer:

Man is always conscious of, and inattentive to, himself—
inasmuch as he is conscious of his body, or his physical con-
stitution. No doubt, the name of the heart, or its from,
or its figure is not definite in his consciousness, yet he
affirms himself, gza body—so much so that he affirms him-
self by reference to his clothes or his house. But the Self
mentioned by the philosophers has no such associations as the
house or the clothes (hence the inadequacy of the idea). It
is clear that the fundamental affirmation of body is inse-
parable from self-consciousness. If one is inattentive to its

figure or name, this may be like his inattention to the sub-
stratum of smell (viz., the two protuberances in the forepart
of the brain which resemble the two nipples of the breast).
Everyone knows that he perceives smell by his body; but
everyone does not conjure up the specific character or the

_ shape of the substratum of the perception—even when he is
aware that the substratum is nearer to the head than to the
back, or nearer to the inner part of the nose than to the
inner part of the car. Similar y, man is conscious of himself
and knows that his ego which constitutes him is nearer to his
heart than to his feet. For he can suppose the survival of his
ego, while the feet do not exist. But he cannot suppose the
survival of the ego, while the heart does not exist. Therefore,
it is clear that the philosophers’ statement that sometimes
man is aware, and sometimes unaware, of body is not true.

(7)
In their seventh argument, they say:

Faculties which perceive by bodily organs are exhausted

212
Their Inability to Give a Rational Demonstration:

And how can it be regarded as improbable that the
actions of the soul in two different directions should be mutual-
ly exclusive? For mutual exclusion results from multiplicity
even in one and the same direction. For instance, fear makes a
man forget pain ; desire makes him forget anger ; and inquiry
into one intelligible makes him forget another intelligible.

An indication that disease which befalls body does not
affect the substratum of cognitions is this: when a man re-
covers health, he does not have to learn his cognitions anew.
On the contrary, the entirety of his soul as it had been is
restored tohim. Therefore, all his previous cognitions come
back without being relearnt. .

Our objection ts to be stated as follows:

The increase and decrease of faculties have innumerable
causes. Some of the faculties grow stronger in early life,
others in the middle of it, and yet some others towards the’
end of it. This division takes into account the Intellect as
well. The philosophers can only claim a knowledge of some
of the causes (of the increase and decrease of faculties),
however important they may be. It is not improbable that,
in spite of their similarity in respect of subsistence in body,
sight and smell should differ from each other. This differ-
ence may result in the sense of smell growing stronger after
the age of forty years, whereas the sense of sight might be-
come weaker. In fact, these faculties do differ in the case of
the animals. Some animals have a comparatively strong
sense of smell, others have a strong sense of hearing, and some
others havea powerful sight. Such differences arise from the
different constitutions of the animals. And it is impossible to
give an exhaustive account of the differences of constitutions.
So it is not unreasonable to maintain that the constitution of
sense organs differs among individuals from one state to
another. One of reasons why the weakness of sight precedes
that of the Intellect may be that sight is prior to the Intel-
lect. The activity of seeing starts in the earliest parts of life,
whereas the Intellect ripens at the age of fifteen, or even later
(as we may observe in the case of different men). Similarly,
it is said that the effect of old age on the hair of the head

recedes its effect on the hair of the beard ; for the hair of the
ead is prior. All these facts require careful investigation.

215

Prob. XVIII] Tahafut al-Falasi fah

er when, at about the age of forty, physical growth stops.
From that time onwards, sight or any other physical faculty
is much weaker than it used to be. But in most cases, the
rational faculty grows stronger in that period ; and this rule
is not disproved by the fact that apprehension of the in-
telligibles is not feasible, when disease overtakes the body, or
when senile decay brings about dotage. Once it is recognised
that at least sometimes the rational faculty grows stronger,
while the body is getting weaker, it will be clear that the
former is self-subsisting. And then, even if at some other
time the derangement of the rational faculty is found to
accompany that of the body, it will not follow that the for-
mer depends upon the body. For if (in a hypothetical syllo-
gism) the consequent itself is interpellated, no conclusion
follows. Thus, we can say:

(i) If the rational faculty were to subsist in body, the
weakness of the body would weaken it invariably.

(ii) But the consequent is impossible.

(iii) Therefore, the antecedent is impossible.
If, however, we say that the consequent exists in some cases,
. it doesnot necessarily follow that the antecedent should exist.

The cause of this (independence of the rational faculty) is
that the soul has an action fer se, when it is not distracted
by, or preoccupied with, anything else. In general, it has
two different functions: one in relation to the body (viz., the
direction and the control of it); and the other in relation to
its principles and its essence (viz., the apprehension of the
intelligibles). These two functions are mutually exclusive,
and opposed to each other. So when the soul is preoccupied
with one, it is diverted from the other. It is impossible for
it to combine the two. The diverting influences or the pre-
occupations arising from the body are sensation, imagination,
desires, anger, fear, grief, and pain. When you begin to reflect
over the intelligibles, the effect of all these diverting things
on you will remain in abeyance. Sometimes, mere sensation
hinders the apprehension of the intelligibles, even though
the organ of the Intellect may not have been afflicted, or its

essence disordered. In any case, the cause of the failure to —

apprehend the intelligibles is the soul’s preoccupation with one
function at the expense of the other. For this reason, the
intellectual function is interfered with by pain and sickness
and fear ; for they are all diseases of the brain.

214
Their Inability to Give a Rational Demonstration

the brain are not replaced, then the exceptional character
might belong to the heart as well; for the heart and the
brain are alike physical. And in that case, how will it be
possible for the body as a whole to have been replaced? We
would rather say that even if a man lives for a hundred
years, still parts of the sperm which begot him would remain
within him. They cannot totally disappear. For this man
is what he is by virtue of something which persists within
him. His case is not different from that of a tree or a horse
which remains the same in ths Stage as it was in that. So,
in spite of many a dissolution and replacement, parts of the
sperm do remain.

We can illustrate the point. Pour a pint of water into
a vessel. Pour another, so that the two should mix up. Take
one pint out of the vessel. Pour another into it. Again, take
a pint out of it, and pour another into it. And do the same
thing for a thousand times. Still at the last round we shall
be able to judge that the vessel retains some part of the first
water ; and that no pint is taken out of it, but a part of the
first water exists in it. For the first water existed in the
second round; the third round consisted of parts of the second
round ; the fourth one, of the parts of the third ; and so on to
the last one. And this will be a legitimate inference from
the philosophers’ principles, since they have admitted the
possibility of the infinite division of bodies. So the absorption
of food into the body, on the one hand, and the dissolution of
its parts, on the other, may be compared to the pouring of
water into a vessel and the draining of water out of it.

(10)
In their tenth argument, they say:

The rational faculty apprehends the general rational
universals or the States (as the Mutakallimin call them). It
apprehends the absolute Man ; while a particular human per-
son is perceived by the senses. The absolute Man is not the
particular person whom we can observe. For the observable
person is in a particular place, has a particular colour, a
particular measure, and a particular position; whereas the
absolute Man is divested of all these things. It includes all
that falls under the name ‘man’; even though it had noobserv-

217

Prob. XVIIT} Taha fut al-Falasifah

But if the investigator is not prepared to trace them back to
the regular course of events, it will not be possible for him to
base upon thent a reliable knowledge. For the hypotheses
concerning the causes of the strength and weakness of facul-
ties may beinnumerable. To rely upon only one of them—as
the philosophers have done—is not conducive to certainty.

(9)
In their ninth argument, they say:

How can body with all it accidents constitute man ? The
bodies are constantly subject to dissolution. What they lose
through dissolution ‘is replaced by food. Take for example
a new-born baby. In the years to come, he will fall ill and
become lean. Afterwards, he will recover, and grow fatter
and stronger. And then it will be possible for us to say
that he does not retain any one of those parts which existed
at the time of his birth. Nay, first of all his being consisted
of the parts of sperm. But in an advanced stage of his life,
no part of sperm remains within him. For all those parts
have dissolved; and others have come to replace them.
Therefore, thts body is different from that. And yet we say
that ¢his man is the same as that, and that the congnitions
he had acquired in early childhood remain within him ;al-
though his physical parts may all have been changed and
replaced. It follows that the soul’s existence is independent
of the body, and that the body is an instrument of the soul.

Objection:

This hypothesis breaks down, when in the case of ani-
mals and plants the earlier and later Stages of existence are
compared. Just as a man is said to be the same, so is an
animal or a plant said to be the same as it was in the past.
And this does not prove that the animal or the plant has a
being other than the physical one. Further, the conserva-
tion of imagined forms may be cited in refutation of what has
been said (by the philosophers) on knowledge. For the
imagined forms remain from childhood to advanced age,
even though all the parts of the brain may have been re-
placed. If here the philosophers assert that all the parts of

216
Their Inability to Give a Rational Demonstration

is conformable to the intelligible object and to all other things
like it in the same way. It is in this sense that it is said to
be universal—namely, that there is in the Intellect the form
of the intelligible which has been isolated from its associa-
tions, and which was first perceived by the senses; and that
the relation of this form to all other individuals which belong
to the same genus is one and the same. So if having seen a
man, one sees another man, no new form will come into being
—as it would if he were to see a horse after having seen a man
(whereby two different forms would have come into being).

Such a thing happens even in the case of bare sensations.
When one sees water, a form coines into being in his fantasy.
When, afterwards, he sees blood, another form comes into
being. But if he sees another water, no new form will arise.
On the contrary, the form which has been impressed upon his
fantasy will represent every individual water. Therefore, in
this sense such forms have often been assumed to be universal.
Similarly, when one sees. a hand, there arises in his fantasy
and in the Intellect the form of the position of the parts of the
hand as related to one another—namely, the expansion at the
palm, the division into fingers, the end of the fingers at the
nails, even the size of the hand, and its colour, etc. So when
he sees another hand exactly similar to the first one, no new
form will arise. Rather, the second observation will be in-
capable of giving anything new to the fantasy, just as the
observation of another water in the same vessel and of the
same quantity will not give anything new. But when he sees
another hand which differs from the first one in colour or
measure, then hewill havea new form—viz., that of the differ-
ent colour or measure. But there will be no new form of a
hand ; for the smaller and black hand is as much of a hand
as the larger and white hand. The two differ only in colour
and measure, etc. So that which is common tothe two hands
will not produce a new form ; because that form is identical
with this. Only that in which the second hand differs from
the first one will produce a new form.

This, then, is the meaning of the universal in relation to
the Intellect as well as to the senses. When the Intellect
apprehends the form of body in an animal, it does not acquirea
new form of corporeality from that of the tree—as the fantasy
does not acquire a new form from the preception of two waters
at two different times, or in general no new form is acquired

219

Prob. XVIII] Tahafut al-Falasifah

able colour, or measure, or position, or place. It includes all
that may called ‘man,’ and for which it is possible to come
into existence in the future. Nay, even if man does not exist
at all, the reality of Man —divested of particular qualities—
will subsist in the Intellect. The same applies to all other
particular objects observed by the senses. For the Intellect
abstracts from them their universal reality which is divested
of Matters and Positions. The attributes of this universal
reality may be divided into: (a) those which are essential—
e.g., corporeality in the case of plants and animals, or ani-
mality in the case of man—and (b) those which are acciden-
tal—e.g., whiteness or length in the case of a man or a tree.
We judge the essential or accidental character of these attri-
butes in relation to the genus—i.e., Man or Tree, or any-
thing else we may have apprehended (not in relation to
the particular object which is observed by the senses). This
shows that the universal which is divested of all sensible
associations is an object for the Intellect, wherein it exists.
And this intelligible universal is undesignated, non-local, and
unquantified.

Now, the universal intelligible may derive its non-local
and immaterial character either :

(i) from that which is universalised. But this is im-
possible. For that which is universalised did possess dimen-
sion, position, and quantity.

Or (ii) from that which universalises—viz., the rational
soul. If so, it is necessary that the soul should be non-local,
undesignated, and unquantified. Otherwise, if the soul were
to possess these things, then that which subsists in the soul
would possess them as well.

Objection :

The universal posited by you as subsisting in the Intel-
lect is inadmissible. Only that which subsists in the senses
comes to subsist in the Intellect, The difference, however,
is that in the senses it subsists as an unanalysable whole;
whereas the Intellect can analyse it. When the analysis is
made, then—as far as particularity is concerned—the analysed
thing which is isolated from its associations by the Intellect
is still like that which is not isolated from its associations.
Again, the difference is that that which exists in the Intellect

218
PROBLEM XIX

REFUTATION OF THEIR THESIS THAT, HAVING COME
INTO BEING, THE HUMAN SOULS CANNOT BE
DESTROYED ; AND THAT THEIR EVERLAST-
ING NATURE MAKES IT IMPOSSIBLE FOR
US TO CONCEIVE OF THEIR DES-
TRUCTION

ET us demand their arguments for this thesis. And they
have two arguments:

(1)
In their first argument, they say:

The souls can perish (if they perish at all) because of the
following things :

(i) The death of the body; or

(ii) the occurrence of the contrary of the soul which comes
to replace it ; or

(iii) the power of a powerful agent. |

Now, it is false to say that the soul might perish because
of the death of the body. For the body is not the substratum
of the soul, but only an instrument used by the soul with the
intermediation of the faculties which subsist in the body.
The corruption of the instrument does not necessitate the
corruption of one who uses it—unless the latter were subsist-
ing in, or impressed upon, it, as the animal souls or the bodily
faculties are. Because the soul has two actions: one with
and the other without the help of this instrument, therefore
the action performed with the help of the instrument (namely,
imagination, or sensation, or desire, or anger) will undoubted-
ly undergo corruption or destruction, when the body is corrupt-
ed or destroyed. But the other action of the soul (viz., the
cognition of the intelligibles divested of Matter) is performed
without the help of the body. As far as the soul is cognisant
of the intelligibles, it does not need the body at all. On the
contrary, its preoccupation with the body diverts its atten-
tion from the intelligibles. And since now it is clear that

261

Prob. XVIIT} Tahafut al-Falasifah

from the perception of any two things which are exactly simi-
lar. And this meaning of the universal affords no ground for
the affirmation of a universal which is absolutely non-local.
No doubt, sometimes the judgment of reason does show
the possibility of existence of something which is non-local
and undesignated. For instance, it judges of the existence of
the Creator of the world. But whence comes the idea that
the existence of the Intellect in body is inconceivable? In
the case of the Creator, that which is abstracted from Matter
is the Intelligible-in-Himself which is independent of the In-
tellect and intelligent persons, But in the case of any other

thing which has a basis in Matter, the explanation we have
given shall apply.

220
Their Thesis that Human Souls cannot be Destroyed

tude or quantity is unintelligible. If, however, it is asserted
that no division took place, still it will be an absurd asser-
tion. For, evidently, the soul of Zaid is other than that of
‘Amr. If the two were one, the cognitions of Zaid would be
the cognitions of ‘Amr ; because knowledge is one of the essen-
tial attributes of the soul, and the essential attributes enter
into all the relations of the essence. And if the'souls form a
plurality, what is the cause of plurality? This cause cannot.
be found in Matters, or places, ot times, or attributes; for
there is nothing in all these to necessitate a difference of
quality among the souls. This is not the same case as that
of souls after the death of the body, because in the opinion
of one who believes in the immortality of souls, the departed
souls do differ in quality, insofar as each acquires from its
body a different proclivity. No two souls can have the same
proclivity ; because proclivities result from the moral charac-
ter, and like external physiognomy, the moral character can
never be the same in any two instances. For if the moral
character or the physiognomy of Zaid were the same as that
of ‘Amr, we would confuse one with the other.’’

Since it is proved by this argument : /

that the soul comes into existence when the sperm enters
the womb ;

that because of its physical constitution the sperm is pre-
pared to receive the soul (which will be its director); and
that it does not receive the soul merely because it is just
asoul. For two sperm-drops begetting twins may be with-
in the same womb and at the same time equally prepared
to receive souls. Then two souls emanate—directly or
through intermediaries—from the First Principle to be re-
lated to the embryonic bodies. Thus the soul of this body
cannot be the director of that body, nor the soul of that body
the director of this body. This special relation can arise
only from a special affinity between a particular soul and a
particular body. Forotherwise, the body of one of the twins
would not be more apt than that of the other to receive this
particular soul; because there were two souls which came
into existence simultaneously, and there were two sperm-
drops equally prepared to be directed by souls.

223

Prob. XIX] Tahafut al-Falasifah

the existence of the soul and one of its two functions are in-
dependent of body, it follows that its constitution does not
depend on body.

Again, it is false to say that the soul might perish because
of the occurrence of its contrary. For the substances have no
contraries. The only perishable things in the world are the
accidents and forms which pass in succession over Things.
The form of water perishes because of the occurrence of its
contrary—viz., the form of air. But Matter which is the
substratum of these forms is absolutely imperishable. And
in the case of a substance, which exists in no substratum,
perishing because of the occurrence of a contrary is also in-
conceivable, For that which is not in a substratum has no
contrary, as contraries come to pass in succession over the
same substratum.

Finally, it is false to say that the power of a powerful]
agent might destroy the souls. For non-existence is nothing.
Therefore, it is inconceivable that the power of any agent
should cause it to eventuate.

(This is exactly what they said in the problem of the
evei lasting existence of the world. We have settled this ques-
tion, having dwelt upon it at length.)

Objection to the foregoing may be taken from several points :

In the first place, it is based upon the theory that the death
of the body does not cause the death of the soul, because the
soul does not subsist in body. That theory is based upon
the position taken by the philosophers in the preceding pro-
blem. And that position is unacceptable.

Secondly, although they do not consider the soul as sub-
sisting in body, yet it is evident that there is a connection.be-
tween the soul and body, wherefore a soul does not come into
existence unless a body exists. This view has been adopted by
Ibn Sina and some other thinkers who searched after the
truth through independent inquiry, and who rejected Plato’s
thesis that the soul is eternal and that its relation to body
is accidental. The position taken by these thinkers in their
independent inquiry is as follows:

“Tf the soul was one before the existence of bodies, how
did it get divided? The division of that which has no magni-

222
Their Thesis that Human Souls cannot be Destroyed

-this cannot shake our belief in the fundamental need for the

cause of a definite relation. Nor will it be harmful to our
assertion that the soul does not die because of the death of

the body.

we will answer:

Since the mutual fitness of body and soul is invisible to
us, and because it is this mutual fitness which demands a

_definite relation, it is therefore not improbable that this un-

ascertainable mutual fitness should be of such a kind as to
make the immortality of the soul dependent upon the con-
tinuance of the body, wherefore the corruption of the body
should cause the corruption of the soul. That which is un-
ascertainable affords no ground for the judgment as to
whether it demands a necessary interrelation between the
soul and body, or not. Maybe, the relation between the soul
and body is necessary for the existence of the soul; and the
soul will therefore perish when this relation is severed. It is
therefore clear that no reliance can be placed upon the argu-
ment which has been advanced by the philosophers.

The third objection is that it is not unreasonable to main-
tain that the ‘destruction of the souls may be caused by the
power of God (exalted be He)—as we have conclusively shown
in the problem of the indestructibility of the world.

The fourth objection is that we do not admit that the
three ways of destruction mentioned by you exhaust all the
possibilities. How will you prove that destruction in any
other way besides these three is inconceivable? Since the
division made by you does not revolve between affirmation
and negation, it is possible to add a fourth one to the three

sibilities. Therefore, perhaps destruction will take place
in a fourth or even a fifth way other than the three mentioned
by you. To limit the number to three is not supported by

an argument.
(2)
In their second argument, which ts their mainstay, they say:

The extinction of a substance which does not exist ina
subject is impossible. In other words, the simples are

225

Prob. XIX] Tahafut al-Falasifah

the question arises: What is the cause of the special affinity
between a particular soul and a particular body? If it is a
soul’s being impressed upon body, then the elimination of the
body will eliminate the soul as well. But if there is some other
cause to explain the connection between this particular body
and this particular soul (so that the connection is a condition
for the soul’s coming into existence), then how can it be im-
probable that this very connection should also be a condi-
tion for the soul’s survival? Therefore, when this connection
is severed, the soul will perish. And its existence will not
reappear until God (holy and exalted be His name) causes
such reappearance by way of the reinfusion or resurgence of
life, as religion teaches us in the doctrine of Resurrection.

If tt ts said:

The connection between the soul and the body results
from a natural inclination or instinctive affection created by
God in the soul in favour of this particular body. This affec-
tion draws the soul towards thts, and away from all other
bodies. At no time does it leave the soul; but keeps it im-
prisoned in the particular body, so that no other body can
receive its attention. But this does not make it necessary
for the soul to be corrupted by the corruption of the body
towards whose direction it has an instinctive affection. Nay,
sometimes, this affection remains even after the soul’s de-
parture from the body, if in life the soul’s preocupation with
the body has been strong enough to divert its attention from
the abnegation of desires and from the inquiry into the in-
telligibles. Then this persisting affection causes the soul
pain, because the soul has been deprived of the instrument
whereby the object of its affection could be attained.

As regards the definite relation between, say, the body.

and the soul of Zaid even in the earliest stage of existence,
obviously it has a cause whereby the soul and the body are
suited to each other. So ¢his body becomes fitter than any
other body for his soul because of its exceedingly suitable
character. Hence the definite relationship between the soul
and the body is determined. But it is beyond the power of
man to know the definite character of such instances of
mutual fitness. If, however, we fail to discover the details,

224
Their Thesis that Human Souls cannot be Destroyed

of the potentiality for non-existence before the occurrence of
non-existence). This bearer of potentiality is Matter ; and
that which passes out of it into non-existence 1s Form. di
But the soul is simple. _It is a non-composite Form 01-
vested of Matter. If in it the composition of Form and Matter
is supposed, we shall thereby reintroduce into the discussion
Matter which is the primary Root or Stuff ; for it wi 1 6
necessary for the series thus started to end at such a fun da-
mental principle. Thus we shall arrive at the impossibility
of the extinction of this primary principle, and that is ca 3
the soul—as we have already seen the impossibility of the
extinction of the Matter of bodies. For in either case, Matter
is eternal and everlasting. Forms come into existence in it,
and pass into non-existence out of it. It has the potentia ty
for the occurrence of forms to it, and the potentiality for the
extinction of forms out of it. For it 1s equally receptive to
the two contraries. And from this it is clear that every being
i s a unitary essence is imperishable. 0
‏نط‎ may be set forth in another way. The potentiality
of the existence of a thing is before its existence. Therefore,
it is other than that thing, which (thing) cannot be the poten-
tiality of existence itself. This can be understood in the
light of the fact that one who has a sound vision is said to be
a potential seer. That is, he has the potentiality for vision,
which means that the quality indispensable for the eye in
order to perform sound vision exists. If, however, actual
vision is delayed, the delay is to be ascribed to the failure °
some other condition. So the potentiality, say, for the sig 1
of blackness exists in the eye before the actual sight of black-
ness. When the sight of blackness is actually attained, the
potentiality for the sight of blackness will not coexist with
the actual sight of blackness. For once sight is attained, i
will not be possible to say that it exists actually as well as
entially. ;
por This premiss having been proved, we proceed to say : 11
a simple thing were to perish, the possibility of peris ing
shoyd have been possessed by that thing before actua y
perishing, for that is what potentiality means. And, fur ner,
it must have also possessed the possibility of existence. For
that whose non-existence is possible cannot be necessary.
Therefore, it must be possible of existence , and by the poten-
tiality of existence we ouly mean the possibility of existence.

227

Prob, XTX] Tahafut al-Falastfah

absolutely indestructible.

In this argument, the first thing to be proved is that the
death of the body does not necessitate the extinction of the
soul. The reason for this has been considered above. Next,
it is to be maintained that it is impossible for the soul to
perish because of anything else than the death of the body
either. For when something perishes by any cause whatso-
ever, it follows that it had the potentiality for corruption
before its corruption actually took place. That is, the possi-
bility of extinction precedes actual extinction, just as in case
of a temporal event, the possibility of existence precedes exis-
tence. The possibility of existence is called the potentiality
of existence; and the possibility of extinction is called the
potentiality for corruption. Just as the possibility of exis-
tence is a relative attribute which requires something in
which to exist (so as to be a possibility in relation to it), so
does the possibility of extinction require something in rela-
tion to which it could be a possibility. This is the reason
why it is said that (as shown in the problem of the eternity
of the world) every temporal existence needs a preceding
Matter in which the possibility of the existence of that tem-
poral existent, or its potentiality, should reside. So Matter
in which the potentiality of existence resides is the recipient
of the existence which occurs. And that which receives is
other than that which is received. Therefore, the recipient
and that which is received (and which is other than the re-
cipient) exist together at the time when that which is received
occurs. Similarly, therefore, it is necessary that the recipient
of non-existence should exist at the time when non-existence
occurs—so that something passes out of it into non-existence,
just as something in it had come to exist. Now, that which
passes out of it into non-existence is other than that which
remains. And that which remains is that in which the poten-
tiality for, or the receptivity to, or the possibility of non-
existence resides—just as that which remains at the time of
the occurrence of existence is not that which occurs, but that
in which the potentiality for the reception of the occurrent
resided. From this it follows that anything to which non-
existence occurs is composed, on the one hand, of that which
passes into non-existence; and, on the other hand, of that
which receives non-existence, and which remains at the time
of the occurrence of non-existence (because it was the bearer

226
PROBLEM XX

REFUTATION OF THEIR DENIAL OF
THE RESURRECTION OF BODIES

HEY deny the return of souls to bodies : the existence of a
physical Paradise and Hell : the Har with largeeyes, and
everything which has been promised to man by God.

And they maintain that these things are symbols mentioned
to common men in order to facilitate their understanding of
spiritual reward and punishment which are superior to those
of a physical character. This being opposed to the belief of
all the Muslims, we propose first to explain what the philoso-
phers believe with respect to the things to come ; and then to
state our objections to all those elements which are opposed
to Islam.

They say:

After the death of the body, the soul continues to have
an everlasting existence either in the state of indescribably
great pleasure, or in the state of indescribably great pain.
In some cases, the pain or pleasure will be everlasting ; in
others, it will pass away in the course of time. As regards
its degrees, men have different ranks which are marked by as
great a variety as characterises their mundane ranks. Thus:

(i) the eternal pleasure is for the pure and perfect souls,
(ii) the eternal pain is for the imperfect and impure souls,

and ; ;
(iii) transient pain is for the impure but perfect souls.

And the soul can attain absolute bliss only by means of per-

fection and purity or cleanliness. Perfection is derived from
knowledge, and purity from virtuous action. ;
Knowledge is required because the rational faculty derives
nourishment and pleasure from the cognition of the intelli-
gibles, as the faculty of desire finds pleasure in the satisfaction
of a desire; or the faculty of sight finds pleasure in looking
at beautiful forms, and so on to all other faculties. It is the

229

Prob. XIX] Tahafut al-Falasifah

So the conclusion to be drawn from this will be that there
can be combined within the same thing the potentiality for
its own existence and the actual attainment of its existence,
or that its actual existence can be identical with the poten-
tiality for its existence. But we have shown that the poten-
tiality for sight which resides in the eye is other than actual
seeing. It cannot be identical with actual sight ; for that
means the existence of the same thing actually as well as
potentially — which are mutually exclusive terms. N. ay, when
something is potential, it cannot be actual; and when it is
actual, it cannot be potential. So the affirmation of the
potentiality of the non-existence of a simple thing before
actual non-existence carries within itself the affirmation of the
potentiality for existence as concurrent. with the state of
actual existence. And that is impossible.

[This is exactly the same thing as we have dealt with in
the problems of the eternity and of the everlasting existence
of the world (wherein the hilosophers had recourse to the
assumption of the impossibility of the temporal origin of
Matter and the elements, and the impossibility of their non-
existence), The source of confusion is their stulate that
possibility is an attribute which requires a su ject in which
to exist. We have exposed the specious character of this
assumption ; and we will not repeat our criticism. For the
question remains the same in this problem as it was in those
problems. It makes no difference whether one is speaking of
a material or a spiritual substance.}

228
Their Denial of the Resurrection of the Bodses

of sexual intercourse, we must represent it to the child by
reference to play which is the most pleasant thing toa child,
and to the eunuch by reference to a wholesome meal enjoyed
from an intense appetite. So the child or the eunuch will
realise the fundamental character of the pleasure, although
he will know that the representative symbol itself does not
constitute the pleasure of sexual intercourse, for the symbol (in
the case of the eunuch) is perceived only by the organ of taste.

There are two arguments to prove that intellectual plea-
sures are worthier than physical pleasures :

Firstly, the state of the angels is nobler than that of
beasts and swine. Now, theangels do not experience sensuous
pleasures like those of mating and eating. Their pleasure
consists in the consciousness of the perfection and beauty
which characterise them because of their insight into the
realities of things, and their approximation to the Lord of
the Universe (not in space, but in the order of beings). Since
all beings emanate from God in order and through inter-
mediaries, it is obvious that the intermediaries nearer to Him
should possess a higher rank. ١

_ Secondly, man himself often prefers intellectual pleasures
to sensuous pleasures. For instance, one who seeks victory
over an enemy renounces for its sake the comfort of home
and hearth. Nay, even for the sake of victory in a game of
chess or dice one goes without a meal all the day long. Al-
though such a victory is but a trifle, he would not mind the
pain caused by hunger. Similarly, one whois interested in the
maintenance of his dignity and prestige hesitates to deal with
his mistress in such a way as to be known toothers. At last,
he decides to preserve his dignity, and restrains his passions,
lest the contemptible passions should disgrace him. Obvi-
ously, the preservation of his dignity is more pleasant tohim.
Again, sometimes a brave man sallies forth to face vast hordes
of warriors, because he holds the danger of death in contempt,
being more absorbed in what he imagines to be the pleasure
of posthumous praise and admiration for his intrepidity.

So the intellectual pleasures in the Hereafter will far
superior to the sensuous pleasures of this world. But for
this fact, the Prophet (may God bless him and grant him
peace) would not have reported God to say: ‘I have reserved
for My virtuous worshippers what no eye ever saw, no ear
ever heard, and which never occurred to the heart of man.

231

trem

Prob, XX] Tahafut al-Falasi f ah
body: the physical preoccupations, and the physical senses
which prevent the rational faculty from discovering the in-
telligibles. It would be proper tor an ignorant soul to be
aggrieved, even-in the life of this world, by the loss (on
account of its ignorance) of the pleasures of the soul. But its
preoccupation with the body makes it forgetful of itself, and
diverts its attention from its own grief, as for instance one
stricken with fear is insensitive to pain, or one suffering from
frostbite is insensitive to fire. So if the imperfection of the
ignorant soul remains till the severance of the connection with
the body, the soul will be in the same situation as the man
who suffers from frostbite. When exposed to the fire, the
latter is insensitive to the pain caused by it. But he is
suddenly overwhelmed with the consciousness of extreme
agony, when the effects of frostbite disappear.
ometimes, although a soul does cognise the intelligibles,
yet the pleasure it derives from the cognitions is slight and
falls short of what naturally it ought to have been. This is
again due to physical preoccupations and the soul’s interest
in the objects of carnal desires. And this is like what happens
when a sick man, who has bitterness in his mouth, gets dis-
gusted with wholesome sweetness, and seeks to avoid that
yery food which is really the most adequate cause of pleasure
for him. So he fails to find pleasure in wholesome things be-
cause of the effects of sickness.

Different is the case of the souls perfected by knowledge.
When death puts an end to the physical preoccupations, their
condition is like that of one who has recovered from sickness.
Sickness prevents a man from perceiving pleasure. But when
the accidental affliction is over, the perception of pleasure is
overwhelming. Or the condition of the liberated soul may be
compared to that of a lover. Suppose that the lover is asleep :
or unconscious, or intoxicated, when his mistress comes to
him. At first, he cannot notice the cause ofhis pleasure. But
when he wakes up, he will have an overwhelming conscious-
ness of the pleasures of union (which has been preceded by long
separation). Asa matter of fact, all these pleasures dwindle
into insignificance in comparison with intellectual and spiri-
tual pleasures. But people cannot be enabled to understand
the latter, until they are symbolically represented through
such things as may be observed in this life. For instance, if
we would make a child or a eunuch understand the pleasure

230
Their Denial of the Resurrection of the Bodies

lives, he can hope for the restoration of things like those he
used to have; for the world is always moving on from To-
day to the Morrow. But what will the soul do, when its
hope will be cut off because death deprived it of the body ?
Deliverance from such psychic proclivities is not pos-
sible, unless the soul abstains from carnal desires: turns away
from the world, and betakes itself to the struggle for the
attainment of knowledge and piety. If these conditions are
satisfied, then, while it is yet in the world, its connection
with worldly things will be cut off, whereas tlie connection
with things of the Hereafter will grow stronger. So when
death- comes, the soul will experience the same relief as a
prisoner does when he is set free. And then will it find every-
thing it could have sought. That is its Paradise. ١
But it is not possible for the soul to outgrow or to obli-
terate all the physical qualities ; for the needs of the body
attract it towards them. Nonetheless, it can make its
connection with the body weaker. This is the reason why
God (exalted be He) says: ‘‘Every one of you shall have to
approach it; this is the irrevocable decree of thy Lord.
When its connection with the body has been weakened, the
agony caused by the soul’s separation from the body will
not be very great. On the contrary, the soul will learn to
enjoy those divine things which it will have discovered after
the death of the body. This will shortly obliterate the
effects of its departure from the world and its lingering in-
clination towards worldly things. An analogy of the soul’s
condition is to be found in the case of a man who sets out
from his own country towards another where he might attain
a high position and magnificent authority. Separation from
his family and native land may distress is soul, and he may
feel unhappy. But these effects will wear off, when he gets
accustomed to the pleasure he derives from the elevation
of power and authority. ;
porn ne utter negation of physical qualities not being pos-
sible, religion enjoins upon us the choice of the mean between
all opposite extremes in morals. Tepid water which is
neither hot nor cold is equally free from either of the two
opposite qualities. One should neither hoard wealth nor
squander it away; for the one will engender avarice, while
the other will make him a spendthrift. Similarly, one
should neither shrink back from everything nor meddle with

233

Prob. XX] Tahafut al-Falasifah

And says God (exalted be He) : ‘‘No soul knows what com-
fort of the eye lies concealed in store for them.” This, then,
is the cause of the need for knowledge. And of all cognitions,
the most beneficial are the purely intellectual—viz., the know-
ledge of God: of His attributes: of His angels: of His books,
and of the way in which things derive their being from Him.
As regards other cognitions, only those which are a means to
the purely intellectual cognitions are beneficial by virtue of
this character. Those which arenot even a means to the purely
intellectual cognitions—e.g., Grammar, or Philology, or
Poetry, or other specialised sciences of various kinds—are
only arts and methods like any other art or method.

Next, virtuous conduct and worship are required in
order to purify the soul. During its connection with the
body, the soul is prevented from cognising the realities of
things, not because it is impressed upon body, but because
it is preoccupied with the body, inclining towards carnal
desires, and having affection for the requirements of the
body. This inclination or affection represents a psychic pro-
clivity, which is deepened and strengthened by prolonged
concern with carnal desires and continued interest in the
sensible causes of pleasures. Consequently, even after the
death of the body, it is impossible for the soul to get rid of
this proclivity which is, therefore, an oppressive and dis-
tressing factor for two reasons:

Firstly, because it prevents the soul from attaining its
proper pleasure—viz., the union with the angels and the in-
sight into the beautiful divine things. And the body, with
which before death the soul used to be preoccupied, will
not be there to divert its attention from its grief.

Secondly, because the soul still retains its interest in the
causes of worldly pleasures. But having been deprived of
its instrument—i.e., the body, through which the soul used
to contrive to attain those pleasures—its condition will be
extremely miserable. Suppose that there is a man who loves
his wife : enjoys his property : has affection for his children :
delights in his wealth, and takes pride in his dignity. Now,
suppose that his mistress is killed: he is dismissed from his
position: his children and women are taken prisoner : his
wealth is taken away by his enemies, and his prestige is
utterly fallen. Such a man will undoubtedly have the most
clear and visible cause of grief. Nevertheless, as long as he

232
Their Denial of the Resurrection of the 5

sensible pleasures. Nor do we deny the immortality of the
soul separated from the body. But we know these things on
the authority of religion, as expressed in the doctrine of Re-
surrection. No doubt, the Resurrection will not be compre-
hensible, if the immortality of soul is not taken for granted.
But we take objection, as we did before, to their assertion
that mere reason gives them final knowledge of these things.
Moreover, there are elements in this theory which do come
into conflict with religion. Such are the denial of the revivi-
fication of bodies : the denial of physical pains and pleasures
in hell and paradise, and the denial of the existence of para-
dise and: hell as described in the Qur’an. What is there to
prevent one from assenting to the possibility of the combi-
nation of physical and spiritual pains or pleasures? The
verse : ‘‘No soul knows what lies concealed in store for them”’
only means that no soul knows all those things. Similarly,
from the words: ‘‘I have reserved for My virtuous worship-
pers what no eye ever saw’’ the existence of things of sup-
reme worth can be inferred, but the negation of any other
thing besides them does not necessarily follow. Rather, the
combination of the two will be conducive to greater perfec-
tion. And that which has been promised to us is the most
perfect thing. Hence it follows that the combination of the
two is possible ; and therefore it is necessary to assent to this
possibility in accordance with religion.

If it ts said:

“What we find in the sacred texts is only an allegory pro-
portioned to the limitations of common understanding, just
as the verses and traditions with an anthropomorphic impost
are allegories used to facilitate understanding (since the popu-
lar imagination is too coarse for the Divine, attributes).

The answer:

It is arbitrary to equate the latter instance to the for-
mer. There are two reasons why the two instances should
be kept apart:

Firstly, the words in the verses and traditions which
have an anthropomorphic import bear interpretation on the
same principle as governs conventional metaphors in Arabic.

235

Prob, XX] Tahafut al-Falastfah

everything ; for the former is cowardice, while the latter 1s
rashness. In the first case, he ought to aim at generosity
which is the mean between miserliness and extravagance ,
in the second, at courage which is the mean between cowar-
dice and rashness. And so on to all other moral qualities.
The science of morals is lengthy ; and the Sacred Law fully
takes its details into consideration. Reform of the moral
character is not possible, unless regard is had in conduct for
the Sacred Law. If egotism is the principle of conduct, the
subject will be like one who ‘‘sets up his own desires as his
god.’’ On the contrary, one should be bound by the Sacred
Law, acting or refraining from action at its behest, not by his
ownchoice. Only then will his moral character be reformed.

He who lacks knowledge and virtue is damned. Says
God (exalted be He) : ‘‘He is indeed successful who causeth
it to grow; and he is indeed a failure who stunteth it.
One who combines moral and intellectual greatness 1s the
Devout Sage; and his reward will be absolute bliss. He
who has intellectual, but not moral, greatness is the un-
religious Scholar. Punishment awarded to him will last a long
time: but it will not be perpetual, for after all his soul had
been perfected by knowledge. Although in contrariety to
the substance of his soul, physical accidents had tainted him
with impurity, yet this impurity can be effaced in the course
of time, because in that stage of the soul’s existence, the
accidental causes of impurity will not be renewed. He who
has virtue but no knowledge will yet be saved, and will ex-
perience no pain. But he will not attain perfect bliss.

Moreover (assert the philosophers), as soon as one dies,
Doomsday begins for him. As regards the expressions used
in the Sacred Law, they are intended to serve as an allegory,
for man’s understanding fails to apprehend these spiritual
pleasures and pains. Therefore, these things have been des-
cribed through symbols; but at the same time it has been
pointed out that really spiritual pleasures are far above what
is found in the description.

(This, then, is the philosophers’ theory.)

We shall answer:

Most of these things are not opposed to religion. Wedo
not deny that the pleasures in the Hereafter are superior to

234
Their Denial of the Resurrection of the Bodies ©

perished. Or it may be said that the Matter of the body
would remain as dust, and that resurrection means that this
dust will be collected and composed into the figure of a man,
wherein life will be created for the first time. So this is one
alternative. ; 1

In the second place, it may be said that the soul is an
existent which survives the death of the body, but which will
be returned at the time of resurrection to the original body
when all the parts of that body have been collected. This
is another alternative. ١

In the third place, it may be said that the soul will
return to a body, whether it is composed of the same parts as
the original body had, or of some other parts. Consequently,
the returning one would be that man, insofar as the soul is
that soul. Matter is irrelevant here, because man 1s not man
by virtue of Matter, but by virtue of soul.

Now, all these three alternatives are false.

The first one is evidently false, because when life as well
as the body has disappeared, the recreation of it would be the
production of something similar to, but not identical with,
what had been. But return, as we understand it, implies
the supposition of the continuity of one thing as well as the
emergence of another. For instance, when one is said to re-
sume generosity, the meaning is that the generous person con-
tinues, but that having given up generosity he returns to it.
That is, he returns to something which is generically the
same as what he originally had, but differs from it in number.
Therefore, the return is not to the original thing itself, but
to something like it. Again, when one is said to return to a
city, the meaning is that he continued to exist elsewhere:
that formerly he had been in thecity, and that now he resumes
his being in the city which is similar to his original state. If
there is nothing which continues, andif, onthecontrary, there
are two similar but numerically different things between which
time intervenes, the conditions prerequisite for the application
of the word ‘return’ will not be complete. One might escape
this consequence by saying what the Mu‘tazilah say—namely,
that the non-existent is a positive thing, and that existence is
a state which occurs to the non-existent as an accident : comes
to an end, and returns afterwards. Thus the meaning of the
word ‘return’ will be determined by reference to the conti-
nuity ofanentity. But this amounts to the elimination of the

237

Prob. XX) Taha fut al-Falastfah

But the description of paradise and hell and the details of
these things are so plain that there is no room left for inter-
pretation. What remains is that one might consider such
texts to be fraudulent—i.e., suggesting something untrue
with a view to people’s well-being. But that is beneath the
dignity and the sanctity which characterise prophecy.

Secondly, rational arguments have proved the impossi-
bility of things like space : or dimension : or a physical form:
or an organic hand: or an organic eye, or the capacity for
motion and rest, in the case of God. Hence the need for the
interpretation (of the sacred texts where they occur) by means
of rational arguments. But things of the Hereafter promised
to us are not impossible for the Divine omnipotence. There-
fore, it is necessary to stick to what the text prima facte
means, and not to take it out of the context where it occurs,
and from which it derives its significance.

If it is said:

Rational arguments have actually proved the impossibi-
lity of the resurrection of bodies, even as they have proved
the impossibility of anthropomorphic attributes being possess-
ed by God (exalted be He).

then we will demand that they state what those arguments are.
And they proceed from various points to argue their theory :

(1)
In the first place, they say:

The supposition of the soul’s return to body involves
three alternatives :

In the first place, it may be said (as some of the Muta-
kallimin have held) that man is body, and that life is merely
an accident which depends on body: that the soul which is
supposed to be self-subsisting, and is called the director of the
body, does not exist ; and that death means the discontinuance
of life, or the Creator’s abstaining from creating life. There-
fore, resurrection will mean (a) the restoration by God of the
body which had perished; (b) the recommencement of the exis-
tence of the body ; and (c) the restoration of life which had

236
Their Denial of the Resurrection of the 5

dust, or eaten by worms and birds, and then changes into
blood or vapours, and gets inextricably mixed up with the
air, the vapours, the water of the whole world.

If such a thing is supposed on the strength of the belief
in Divine omnipotence, then it will be inevitable

(i) either that only those parts should be recombined
which were present at the time of death. This would neces-
sarily lead to the resurrection of people whose limbs had been
amputated: or whose ears and nose were cut off, or whose
limbs were defective, in exactly the same form as they had in
theworld. But this is disgusting, particularly with reference
te the people of Paradise, even though they may have been
created defective in the original life. It would be most un-
seemly to cause them to reappear with all the deformities
they had at the time of death. This is, therefore, the diffi-
culty which arises, if the supposition of return is confined to
the recombination of the parts present at the time of death.

(ii) or that all those parts should be recombined which
had ever existed during one’s lifetime. This is impossible
for two reasons :

Firstly, because if a man eats another man (the custom
prevails in some places, and it occurs frequently at the time
of famine), then the resurrection of the two will be very diffi-
cult. For Matter will be the same, because the body of the
eaten person will have been absorbed as food into the body
of the eater. And the restoration of two souls to one body
is not possible.

Secondly, because it will be necessary that the same part
should be resurrected as liver and heart and a hand and a leg
at once. For it has been proved by the art of Medicine that
some organic parts derive nourishment from the residuary
nourishment of others. Thus parts of the heart provide
nourishment for the liver, and so on to all other members.
Soif we suppose some specific parts which had been the Matter
ofall the organs, to which organ will they be returned? Nay,
one need not bring in the hypothesis of a man eating another
in order to establish the impossibility mentioned in the first
objection. If you look at any portion of land, you will come
to know that particles of dust in it have been the bodies of
men. Thus, in course of time, when land is irrigated and
cultivated, dust becomes fruits and vegetables on which
beasts and animals are fed. Then dust becomes flesh. And

239

Prob. XX} Tahafut al-Falasif ah

concept of absolute non-being which is pure negation, by
affirming a permanent entity to which existence may return.
Hence its impossibility.

If one in favour of this alternative

artfully tries to defend it by saying that the dust of the body
is imperishable, and that therefore this dust will be the conti-
nuing entity to which life is restored,

we will reply:

___ This being so, it will be correct to say that dust regains
life, after life had disappeared from it for a while. Now, this
will not be the return of a man, or the reappearance of his
former self. For a man is not what he is by virtue of the
Matter and thedust of which he is composed. All his physical
parts, or at least most of them are replaced by food; and

e is still the same as he was at first by virtue of his spirit or
soul. Soin case life or spirit should perish, the return of that
which has perished will not be intelligible. At the most,
something similar to it can be brought into existence. If God
creates human life in dust which formed the body of a tree,
or a horse, or a plant, this will be the first-creation of a man.
The return of that which does not exist is unintelligible. The
returning entity must be an existent ; it returns to a state it
had before—rather, to a state like the former one. So the
returning entity is dust—returning to the attribute of life.
But man’s body does not make him what heis. For the body
of a horse often becomes man s food, which goes to the mak-
ing of a sperm-drop, which begets another man. But one
cannot say that a horse has become a man; for it is the form
of horse, not the Matter of it, which makes a horse what it is.
And (in the present instance) the form of a horse has perished,
and nothing but the Matter of it remains.

Now, to consider the second alternative—viz., the sup-
position of the continuity of the soul, and its return to the
original body. If such a thing could be conceived, it would be
‘return’ properly so called; it would mean the resumption by
the soul of its function of directing the body, after having
been separated from it by death.

But this is impossible. The body of a man is reduced to

238
Their Denial of the Resurrection of the Bodies

native, and believes that the soul is immortal, and is a self-
subsisting substance? And this does not come into conflict
with religion. On the contrary, the verse: ‘‘Think not of
those who are slain in the way of Allah as dead. Nay,
they are living. With their Lord they have provision,”’
shows that religion is in favour of it. Further evidence can
be found in the words of the Prophet (peace be on him) : ‘‘The
spirits of virtuous men are in the crops of green birds hang-
ing below the Throne.’’ There are other traditions which
speak of the consciousness possessed by spirits of charities and
alms offered in their behalf, of the questions asked by Munkir
and Nakir, and of the punishment in the grave. All these
things point to the immortality of the soul. At the same
time, however, religion teaches us to believe in resurrection
which will be accompanied by the resurgence of life. And
by resurrection is meant the resurrection of bodies. And it
is possible to effect resurrection by restoring the soul to a
body, whether made of the same Matter as the original one
was: or made of the Matter of any other body, or of a Matter
created for the first time, For it is the soul, not the body,
which makes us what we are. All the parts of our body are
continually changing from infancy to old age because of lean-
ness and fatness, and because of the changes caused by food.
And these changes make our constitution differ from one part
of our life to another. Still we continue to be the same as we
ever were. So this is a proper object for Divine omnipotence.
And this will be the return of the soul. Having been depriv-
ed of its instrument (i.e., body), it was prevented from ex-
periencing physical pains and pleasures. Now, that a simi-
lar instrument is given to it again, this is return in the truest
sense of the word.

Their contention that the infinity of the souls and the
finitude of Matters make resurrection impossible is absurd
and groundless, It is based on the eternity of the world, and
the perpetual succession of rotator motion. But one who
does not believe in the eternity of-the world considers the

- number of souls departed from bodies to be finite and com-

mensurable with the number of existing Matters. Even if it
is granted that the number of souls is larger, God has the

wer to create anew any number of Matters. To deny such
power is to deny that He can bring anything into existence.
And that position has been refuted in the problem of the

241

Prob. XX] Tahafut al-Falasifah

when animals are eaten by us, dust finally becomes our body.
So all Matter which can be designated has been the body of
men. It changes: from the dust of dead bodies to plants, from
plants to fiesh, aad from flesh to a living being. The consequ-
ences of this explanation furnish yet another—i.e., a third—
reason for the impossibility of resurrection. Namely, the souls
departed from bodies are infinite in number, whereas the num-
ber of bodies is limited. Therefore, the Matters of men which
are to beused at the time of resurrection will be outnumbered.

Finally, the third alternative—viz., the restoration of
a soul to a body made of any Matter or dust—is impossible
for two reasons :

Firstly, Matters which receive generation and curruption
are restricted to ithe Hollow of the sphere of the Moon. No
addition to them is possible, and they are infinite in number.
On the other hand, the souls departed from bodies are infinite
in number. Therefore, the Matters will be outnumbered by
the souls.

Secondly, dust as long as it remains dust cannot receive
direction from the soul. In order for such reception to take
place, it is necessary that the elements should mix together,
so that the mixtureresemble the composition of sperm. Mere
wood or iron does not receive direction from the soul. Nor
is it possible to cause man to reappear out of wood or iron.
There can be no man until there is an organism composed of
flesh and bones and humours. And whenever the body and
its constitution are prepared for the reception of a soul, they
are entitled to the origination of a soul from the principles
which are the Givers of Souls. Consequently, according to
the hypothesis under consideration, two souls will simulta-
neously come to belong to one body. This is impossible ; and
the refutation of such an hypothesis will also refute Metem-
psychosis. For this hypothesis is exactly the same as that

doctrine, since it is based on the assumption that after its
deliverance from body, the soul will resume the control of a

body which will not be the original one. So the same argu- .

ment is valid against this hypothesis as against the doctrine
of Metempsychosis.

The objection to the foregoing may be stated as follows:

How can you disprove one who chooses the last alter-
240
Their Denial of the Resurrection of the 804165

to elements. The causes which govern iron should first re-
duce it to simple elements. The elements should be recom-
bined and passed through various phases of development so
as to acquire the form of cotton. Cotton should acquire the
form of yarn. Yarn should acquire a definite texture— viz.,
the texture of the particular piece of cloth. It is absurd to
say that iron can become a turban made of cotton, without
gradual passage through these phases.

No doubt, it may occur to man that gradual transfor-
mation through many phases may be brought about in the
minimum of time, the length of which may not be perceived:
by man. Consequently, he will suppose that the whole thing
happened all of a sudden.

This having been understood, if follows that if the resur-
rected man’s body were to be made merely of a stone, or a
ruby, or a pearl, he would not be a man. He cannot con-
ceivably be called a man, unless he has acquired a particular
shape,-resulting from the composition of bones, nerves, flesh,
cartilage, humours, and the simple parts which precede the
compound ones. There can be no body without organic parts :
no composite organic parts without bones and flesh and nerves:
no simple constituents like the bones and flesh and nerves
without the humours; and the four humours cannot exist,
unless their Matters are furnished by food. There can be no
food without animals and plants, which are the sources of
meat and vegetables. There can be no animals and plants,
unless the four elements mix together under certain condi-
tions which are far too many to be analysed by us. It is,
therefore, clear that unless all these things are there, the re-
emergence of a body, to which the soul might return, is not

ssible. And the causes of these things aremany. Let. us
ask: ‘Is it possible that dust should become man, when only
the word ‘Be’ is addressed to it?’’ No, it is necessary that
the causes of its gradual transformation through various
phases should operate. And the causes are: (a) fertilisation
of a womb by a drop which comes out of the marrow of a
man’s body: (b) this drop is assisted by the blood of the
menses and by food for a while: (c) then it grows to be a
lump: (d) then a clot : (e) then an embryo: (f) then an infant :

) then a youth; and (h) then an old man. So it is un-
intelligible that the whole thing should be achieved merely by
uttering the word ‘Be.’ For no words can be addressed to

243

Prob, XX] Tahafut al-Falasifah

origin of the world.

_ As regards the next cause of impossibility - viz., simi-
larity to the doctrine of Metempsychosis—let there be no dis-
pute over words. Whatever religion teaches us we must be-
lieve, even if it is tne doctrine of Metempsychosis. How-

_ever, we reject that doctrine as far as this world is concerned.
. But resurrection we cannot reject, whether it is or is not the
same thing as Metempsychosis.

Your assertion that every constitution which is prepared
for the reception of a soul is entitled to the origination of a
soul from the Principles implies that it is nature, not will,
which explains the origin of a soul. And this has been re-
futed in the problem of the origin of the world. How is it
that you do not find it contradictory to your principles even
to say that the origination of a soul is called forth, and that
(no soul existing there at the time) one is brought into exis-
tence for the first time? It remains for you to say

Why, then, did it not get connected with constitutions
prepared (for the reception of the soul) in the wombs, be-
fore resurrection, even in this world of ours?

The answer will be: Perhaps departed souls require prepara-
tions of a different kind, and the causes of such rrepara.
tions are not complete until the time of resurrection. And
it is not improbable that the preparation required by the
perfect souls which have departed from bodies should be
different from the one required by souls which have come in-
to existence for the first time, and which have not derived
perfection from directing the body for a while. And God
(exalted be He) best knows such requirements : their causes,
and the times of their presence, Since religion introduced
these things, and because these things are possible, it is
necessary for us to assent to them.

~ (2)
In the second place, they say:

It is beyond the power of anyone to transform iron into
a textile fabric, so that it may be used as a turban. Such
a thing would not happen until the parts of iron broke up in-

242
Their Denial of the Resurrection of the Bodtes

attracted, unless there were a thread tied to it to draw it.”
Such a thing is what from his experience he understands
attraction to mean. But when he himself will observe mag
netic attraction, it will fill him with wonder. And then he
will come to know how his own knowledge had failed to en-
compass the mysterious effects of Omnipotence. ١

Similarly, when these atheists, who deny resurrection,
will themselves be resurrected and enabled to see the wonder-
ful things created by God, they will repent themselves of
their disbelief—and repentance will not availthem! It will
be said to them: ‘‘ This is what you used to disbelieve’ —
like one who disbelieves mysterious properties and things.
Suppose that a man is created in such a way that he is gifted
with a mature intellect even at the time of birth. If you
say to him:

This sperm-drop, which is dirty and whose parts are
homogeneous, will develop in the womb into various or-
gans made of flesh and nerves and bones and muscles and
cartilages and fat. Thus it will have eyes which will con-
sist of seven different strata of constitution; and the tongue
and the teeth whose softness and hardness make them so
different from each other, in spite of their contiguity ; and
so on to all other wonders of human nature.

then, having heard of all these things, such a person will
deny them more emphatically than was done by the atheists
who said: ‘‘ Are we going to be brought back to life, when
we are rotten bones ?’’ He who rejects the possibility of re-
surrection does not reflect whence he came to know that the
causes of existence are limited to his own observation. It is
not improbable that the method of the revivification of bodies
should be different from anything ever observed by him.
Some of the traditions say that at the time of resurrection it
will rain, and that the raindrops will be like sperm-drops.
So these drops will mix up with dust to beget human bodies.
It is not improbable that the Divine causes should include
something of this kind which it is not possible for us to dis-
cover, and that such a thing should call forth the resurrec-
tion of bodies and their capacity for the reception of reassem-
bledsouls. Can there be any ground for the rejection of such a
possibility, other than the mere assumption of improbability ?

245

Prob. XX] Tahafut al-Falastfah

dust ; and its becoming a man without passing through these
phases is impossible. And its passing through these phases,
without the operation of certain causes, isimpossible. There-
fore, resurrection is impossible.

Objection :

We agree that gradual transformation through these
phases is necessary, if dust is to become man, just as it is
necessary if iron is to become a turban. For if iron remains
iron, it cannot be a piece of cloth. It must have become
cotton which is spun and woven. But the transition may
possibly take an instant, or any other length of time. It has
not been explained to us whether the resurrection will take
the shortest time possible, or any other length of time. The
collecting of bones: then clothing them with flesh, and caus-
ing the whole thing to grow will take a long time. So this
is not the question at issue. What requires consideration is
whether the progress through these phases can be brought
about by mere power operating without intermediaries, or by
one of the natural causes. Now, to us both are possible, as
we have shown in the first problem of Physics, where we dis-
cussed the nature of the regular course of events, claiming that
things observed to be connected with each other are not neces-
sarily connected, and that a departure from the regular course
of events is possible. So these things may be brought about
by Divine omnipotence, even when their causes do not exist.

Secondly, we might say that although these things de-
pend on a cause, still it is not one of the conditions for them
that the cause should be well known. Nay, the treasure-
house of things to which Divine power extends includes mys-
terious and wonderful things which have not been discover-
ed by man. Their existence can be denied only by such a
person as believes that only those things exist which he has
observed. This is like some people’s rejection of magic,
sorcery, talismanic arts, and the miraculous deeds performed
by prophets or saints. All these things are generally agreed
to be established facts, owing their origin to some mysterious
causes which cannot be discovered by all men. Suppose that
there is a man who has never seen how a lodestone attracts
iron. If he is told of it, he will not believe it. ‘‘For,’’ he
will say, ‘‘ it is inconceivable that a piece of iron should be

244
Their Denial of the Resurrection of the Bodies

(ii) After the creation of the world, which brought about
the existence of the world together with that of God ; and

(iii) The process of resurrection which brings the dura-
tion of possibility to an end.

then this view will exclude all uniformity and system ; for it
makes the Divine modus changeable. But that is impossible.
It may be possible in the case of a will which changes through
a variety of states. But the eternal will has one invariable
course. The Divine action partakes of the nature of the
Divine will, which has a uniform mode of operation, so that it
does not change because of different temporal relations. This
(they further assert) is not incompatible with our affirmation
that God is omnipotent. We do say that He has the power
to effect resurrection, resurgence of life, and all other pos-
sible things—in the sense that if He would, He could do them.
In order for our statement to be true, it is not a condition
that He should be actually doing or willing them. This is
like what we mean when we say: ‘‘Such and such a person
has the power to cut off his own neck, ‘or to burst his own
belly.’’ This statement is true, in the sense that the person
could do so, if he so would. But we know that he neither
wills it, nor does it. And when we say that he neither wills
nor does it, we do not contradict the earlier statement that
he has the power —in the sense that he could do it, if he so
would. As logic explains, the categorical propositions do not
contradict the hypothetical. Our statement: ‘‘ He could do
it, if he would,’’ is a hypothetical affirmative proposition.
And our statement: ‘‘ He never willed, nor did,’’ contains
two categorical negative propositions. The negative cate-
gorical propositions do not contradict the affirmative
hypothetical. oo
So the argument which proves that His will is eternal
and unerring also proves that the course of His action must
be systematic, and that if sometimes it varies, the variation
itself must be systematic and uniform, so as to recur and
return perpetually. For no other basis for this variation is

possible.
The answer :
This is allied to the theory of the eternity of the world —
247

Prob. XX) Tahafut al-Falasif ah

(3)
If tt is said:

The Divine action has one unchangeable and recurrent
pattern. For this reason, He has said: ‘‘ The execution
of Our purpose is but a single act, like the twinkling of an
eye.’’ Further, He says: ‘‘ Thou canst not find any change
in the ways of God.’’ If the causes, which you have imagined
to be possible, existed, then it would be necessary for them
to comme into operation over and over again. This recurrence
would be infinite ; and the existing system of emergence and
development in the universe would also be infinite. Recur-
rence and revolution having been granted, it is not impro-
bable that once in every millennium the pattern of things
should change. But this change itself must be perpetually
along the same lines ; for the ways of God do not change,

And now to pass on to space. The Divine action proceeds
from the Divine will. The Divine will has no specific direc-
tion. If it had a specific direction, its system would change
because of the difference of dimensions. But the will having
no specific direction, whatever proceeds from it governs the
First and the Last in like manner—as we see in all causes
and effects.

So if you admit the possibility of the perpetuity of deve-
lopment and procreation on the basis of what is observed at
present, or admit the possibility of the return of this pattern,
after however Jong a time, according to the law of recurrence
and revolution, then you will have precluded the Judgment,
the Hereafter, and any other thing of the same kind which
follows from the letter of the Sacred Law. For this admis-
sion will imply that this existence of ours has been preceded
by many a resurrection, as it is to return for many a time
afterwards, and this order of precedence and succession will
tend to make the series infinite.

But ifyou say that the Divine modus operandi can change
into something generically different : that the changed modus
will never return ; and that the duration of possibility can
be divided into three periods, namely :

(i) Before the creation of the world, when God was and
the world was not;

246
CONCLUSION
[ SOMEONE SAYS:

Now that you have analysed the theories of the philo-
sophers, will you conclude by saying that one who believes
in them ought to be branded with infidelity and punished with
death ?

we Shall answer:

To brand the philosophers with infidelity is inevitable, so
far as three problems are concerned—namely

(i) the problem of the eternity of the world, where they
maintained that all the substances are eternal.
(ii) their assertion that Divine knowledge does not en-
compass individual objects.
(iii) their denial of the resurrection of bodies.

All these three theories are in violent opposition toIslam. To
believe in them is to accuse the prophets of falsehood, and to
consider their teachings as a hypocritical misrepresentation
designed to appeal to the masses. And this is blatant blas-
phemy to which no Muslim sect would subscribe.

As regards the rest of the problems (e.g., the philosophers’
version of Divine attributes, and their doctrine of Unity, etc.),
the philosophers’ views have close affinity with those of the
Mu'‘tazilah. Indeed, the philosophers’ theory of the necessity
of natural causes is what the Mu‘tazilah have explicitly stated
in the doctrine of Necessary Consequences. And the same
holds of all other views held by the philosophers (in the rest
of the problems). One or another of the Muslim sects has
actually reiterated them. So he who would brand the ‘inno-
vators’ among the Muslims with infidelity can do the same
in the case of the philosophers. And he who hesitates to do
so in the case of the ‘innovators’ may hesitate to do so in the
case of the philosophers, as far as these questions are concerned.
But it is not our purpose to consider whether the Muslim
‘innovators’ are Muslim, or not, Nor do we intend to inquire

249

Prob. XX] Tahafut al-Falasifah

viz., that the Divine will is eternal, and therefore the world
must be eternal. We have refuted that theory, and shown
that reason allows the assumption of three stages—namely,

(i) when God existed and the world did not exist.

(ii) when the world is created : first, to have the order
we observe at present; and, next, to have a new order
which is promised to exist in paradise and hell.

(iii) when everything disappears, and God alone remains.
This assumption is perfectly possible, although religion
indicates that the reward and punishment in paradise and
hell will be everlasting.

This problem, however formulated, is based on two ques-
tions : (a) the origin of the world, and the ibility of the
emanation of the temporal from the Eternal. and (b) depar-
ture from the regular course of events, either through the
creation of effects independent of causes, or through the origi-
nation of causes along lines different from-the regular course
of events. And we have settled both these questions.

248
NOTES

P. 1, . 13-16: To initiate us... by the imagination.

Literal translation: To grant us access, when we have departed from the
House of Delusion, to that happiness and delight : that prosperity and success,
the summit of which towers above the highest ascent(s) of the understanding(s),
and the extremities of which outdistance the range(s) of the darts of the
imagination(s).

11. 38-20: ‘ that which no eye ever... heart of man.”

Apostolic tradition, The tradition, quoted in full in the fhya’ (Cairo,
Ln.t.b.i.,—1357/1938, p. 3012), reads as follows :

من باطنها و باطنها من ظاهرها و فيها من ‎call‏ واللذات والسرورما لاعين رات ولا
عن جابر) -

11١ 33-37 : “ tum men... tocome.”

‎XI, 22 (Sale’s trans.).‏ ; 8ع
‎P. a, 11. 5-8: Ia the second place ... notions.‏

‎Literal translation : And the basis of this disbelief is no other than theoreti-
cal inquiries which result from stumbling over the periphery of doubt where one’s
attention is diverted from the path of rectitude. Also, it results from being
inveigied into trivial notions which are as false as the glitter of mirage.

‎1. 10: People of wilful innovations = £!y® Vly eat ‏.اهل‎

‎P. 3, 1. 5 : sterile genius.

‎Literally : tailless genius.

‎1. 24: two fundamental principles.

‎Literally ; (these) two poles.

‎- P. 4.1. 32: for prolixity is their manner.

‎Reading ‏خطبهم طويل‎ with CE, footnote 4, p. 8 in 2803869.

‎11. 24-25: by saying: ‘* Plato...

‎Aristotle's words are: ‘We had perhaps better consider the universal
good and discuss thoroughly what is meant by it, although such an inquiry is
made an uphill one by the fact that the Forms have been introduced by friends
of our own. Yet it would perhaps be thought to be better, indeed to be our
duty, for the sake of maintaining the truth even to destroy what touches us
closely, especially as we are philosophers or lovers of wisdom ; for, while both are
dear, piety requires us to honour truth above our friends.’ (Section 6, ‏.م‎ 1096 a:
Ethica Nicomachea, tr. by D. W. Ross.)

‎Pp. 6-7, H. 39-40; 1-3: The Sun... prayer. ‏لا تتكسف الشمس لموت‎ (ir) ‏باب‎
‎251

‎Tahafut al-Falasi fah

‎what parts of the ‘innovations’ are sound or unsound. For
that will take us far beyond the scope of this book. And God
(exalted be He) is the Giverof the strength to pursue rectitude.

‎THE Enp

‎250
Notes

P. 1g, 23. 90: most clever.

Ghazalf does not find the argument contemptible, as the Arabic words
‏اخيل‎ or ‏أخيل‎ would suggest. The translation adopted here takes its cue from
the Latin heading : Hoc est potissimam argum. (P. 25 in Byg.)

P. 16, 11. 23-24: when all the conditions . . . are complete.

Lit. trans. : when it is complete with reference to the conditions of its
causality, and with respect to its components and ingredients.

P. 17, 1, 36: morals. .

The word in the text is ‏.عادات‎ In this paragraph, the discussion turns to
psychological, as distinguished from physical, canses and effects.

1. go; p. 18, I. 5, 10, 12, 12,15: inclination. 1

Usually, the word ‏عزم‎ means resolve or determiuation. The choice of
the word ‘inclination’ to translate it is somewhat arbitrary: but that is the

way to express the nnusual sense Ghazali (or the author quoted by him) has
given to the word.

P. 18, 17. 3-4: an inner agitation .. ..an action.

Literally : an agitation inside a man which newly emerges during an
action.

11. 27-28 : the beginning . . . imagined.
Literally : to whose initial phase the Imagination cannot soar.
11. 97-39 : Or, to use... term?

The judgment questioned bere would read: “ The eternal will could not
(have) originate(d) the world.”
P. 1x9, 11. 6-8 : And no one wonld suspect .. . untrue.

Lit. trans,; And there is no doubt concerning the fact that they do not
defy the intellect(s) ont of malice, and iu spite of knowledge to the contrary.

P. 2g, 1. 26: The question...

The comparison of the Divine and the human will does not follow as the
conclusion from the preceding explanation. Hence the translation made here

has got to be somewhat ‘independent,’ so that laa may emerge as the object
ot s-
P. 53, 1. 26 : Principles of Belief.

This is one of the ‘ books’ in the JAy@’. See pp. 95-130, Vol. I of the Ihya’
in yi ‏مصطفى‎ ed. of 1358/1939.
P. 54,1. 35: Abii Hudhayl al-‘Allaf.

The reference embodies a general summary of al-‘Allaf’s well-known
position. .
P. 66, 11. 33-24 : ' does strike,” * does burn,” * does cut.’

Lit. trans. would be : does (i e., performs the action of) striking, etc.
P. So, 11. 31-33: 1 did not ... creation,

Qur’dn : XVIII, 49.

1. 394: Qur’an : XLVIIT, 6.
P. 88, fi 27-28: Think... essence.

حديث ‎gal‏ عباس أن ‎Ligh‏ تفكروا فى الله عز و جل فقال النبى صلى الله عليه وسلم
تفكروا فى خاق الله ولا تتذكروا فى الله ‎SGU‏ ان تقدروا قدره ابو نعيم فالحلية بالمرفوع
253 1

Tahafut al-Falasifah

Apostolic tradition : ‏.م الجامع الصحيح للبخارى‎ 270 in Vol. I of Krehl’s ed.
P. 7, 11. 16-17: When... Him. ١ 1
Apostolic tradition (?).
P. 8, 7. 27-30: 1 will refute .. . ete.
١ it. trans: I will make their position appear to be i . i
Phone through various objections. "Sometimes my objections wait force them into
P. ro, 2. 8-12: In the Art of .,. . Intellects.

Is Ghazal referring to a formal classificati tual
(or authors)? or f 6 cation actually made by an author
orks oe che ter ‘ie word ‘book’ used in the sense of a book in Aristotle’s

1. 18: Jurists.
The word in the text is ‏.إصولرين‎ Shahrastani defines ‏اصول‎ as (a) know-

ledge of the Divine attributes and unity: o
xe Divine : or (b) just k led je
Kalam—as distinguished from ‘ obedience ee 1 a itet rae sabjoct of

4. 26: Demonstration.

le pil wer is Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics. (See Vbg. p. 75.)
P. 11. Sections vii, viii, ix, xi, xiii : the First (Principle). ,

Perhaps the Absolute would be a better translation of ‏.الأول‎ But the
problems enumerated here are largely concerned with the First Principle.
Pp. 11-12. Sections xiv, xviii, xix:

Reading ‏فى ابطال قولهم‎ with ©, H, 0, R, footnote 32, p. 19 ١
F, P, V, 42, p. 19 ‏ذأ‎ in Bouyges.
G, N, 0, 47, P. 20

P. 12, 1. 18: Standard of Knowledge.
Reading ‏معيار العلم‎ with E, ©, L, M, N, O, V, footnote 7, p. 20 in Bygs.
P. 14, Wi. 32-93. T should have . .. problem.

Lit. trans. : p
over this problem. 1 would have had to blacken an enormous number of leaves

Ghazalt’s analysis of the philosophical theories of the world.

The intention expressed in the First Preface (pp. 4-5) does not
have been carried out iu the present instance. (PP. 45) ot seem to

_ Usually, Ghazali’s references to the ‘ancienta’ are uot ver recise :

ioe) may te fee B22 I. 13-14). However, his reference to Plato (L 13 on this
ered to reflect the di i is poi i

In definitely of the opinion thet vergence of views on this point. Aristotle

* Plato alone asserts the creation of time, saying that it had a becoming
with the nniverse, the universe according to him haviug had a becom-
ing. ‘—-Physica, ‏رط 251 .م‎ Il. 13-18.

But the passage Aristotle had in mind (Timaeus, ‘i “(i
the | 38 B) has been ‘interpreted ’ (in
Ghazalf’s sense of the word) by as modern a Platonist as A. E. Taylor (see &
commentary on Timacus, p. 184).

Galen’s book (1. 16 on this page) was, accordin i
: . 0 a gto Ibn al-Nadim, available
in Arabic through Thabit (Ibn Qurrah ?)’s translation. (See al-Fibrist, ‏.م‎ 45.)

P. rg, J. 30: unless there were a change...
Reading ‏من غير تغير 1+( ف القدم‎ with 0, footnote 6
‏من قدرة‎ with M, O, footnote 7

252

} p. 25 in Byg.
Notes

P. ara, 1. 29: ego.

Literally : ‘he-ness.”

P. 217, 11. 20-23: For the first water . . . last one.

Lit. trans,: For the first water existed in the second round, and ‘the
third is next to the second, aud the fourth to the third, and so on to the last one.
P. 231, J. 40: would not have reported...

Reading . .. ‏قال . . . حا كوا عن الله‎ with ©, footnote 4, ‏م‎ 349 in Byg.
P. 232, Ul. 2-2 : “ 210 soul... them.”

Qur'an : XXXII, 17.

P. 233, Ui. 19-20: Every... Lord.”

Qura’n : XIX, 72.

P. 234, il. ro-rz: set up... god.

Qur'an: XXV, 45; XLV, 22.

1٠١ 15-16: “ He... . stunteth it ’’

Qur'an : XCI, 9, to (Pickthall’s trans.).

P, 235, 1. 15:

Qur’an ;: XXXII, 13.

Ue 17-18: Thave ... saw.

‎has been interpreted as an evidence of the‏ و قوله أعددت ‎gold‏ الصالحين
‎fact that Ghazali regards a passage from the Bible (‘But as it is written, cye‏
‎hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the‏
‎things which God hath prepared for them that love him.” I. Corinthians, ii, 9)‏
‎as a Quranic verse. (See D. 8. Macdonald's The Life of al-Ghazahi ... — p. 76—in‏
‎The Journal of the American Oriental Society, Vol. XX, 1899.)‏

‎On p. 1, where the ‘ tradition’ first occurs, it is not clear what in Ghazalt’s
view the source of these words might have been But the context in which it
occurrs on ‏.م‎ 280 definitely shows that it is a Hadith Qudsf—i.e., an apostolic
tradition in which God speaks in the first person (as He does in the Qur'an).
Hence most of the variants given by Boyg (on p. 349: footnote 4) add words
which clarify this position.

‎Iu the present Instance, the quotation is not a full quotation, but an echo
of the quotation on ‏.م‎ 280. So the verse: ‘ No soul...” (XXXII, 17) is not
given in full, and the tradition occurs in an ambiguous form. This shows that
Macdonald's guess is an improbable Possibility . And the Biblical source of the
words is beside the point. For even if Ghazal] confused some extraneous matter
with a Quranic verse, it was a Hadith that he so confused. The Hadith itself
might have been borrowed from the Bible. But, then Ghazall did not approach
the Hadith literature from the same point of view ag in our times Goldziher did,
P. 241, fl. 3-5: Think . . . provision.””

‎Qur’dn ; 111, 163.

‎11. 7-9 : ‘The spirits... Throne.”

‎Tat Apostolic tradition. A slightly different version is to be found in Baidawi’s
afsir :

‏وما روى ابن عباس رضى ‎lace‏ انه قال (ربول ‎(ail‏ عليه الصلاة والسلام ارواح
الشهداء فى اجواف طير خضر ترد اهارالجنة و تاكل من مارها و تاوى الى قناديل معلقة
فى ظل العرش ‏ (انوارالتنزيل الجزء الثانى ‎Core‏ -

‎Hafiiz ‘Iraqi has (in his notes on the traditions about Paradise quoted by
Ghaziali towards the end of Ihya’) brought out the two different versions of this

‎255

‎Tahafut al-Falasif ah

‎ac,‏ باسناد ‎Wiad‏ و ‎hos‏ الاصبهاتى فى الترغيب ‎ely‏ من وجه ‎eval jal‏ منه
‎di pnb! ely) 9‏ فى الاوسط والبيبتئى ق الشعب من حديث إمن عمرو وقال هذا ‎dnl‏
‏فيه نظر قلت فيه الوازع بن نافع متروك (تخريج الحافظ العراق ‏ احياء العثوم - الجزو
الرابع - مطبعة ‎des‏ البابى - ص ‎(1s‏ -

‎P. 99, |. rr: dednitory formula.
Following is the definition of ‏الرسالة الشمسية) القول الشارح‎ y or):
‏.وقد حورت العادة بان يس هوالموصل الى التصور قولا شارحا والموصل الىالتصديق حجة‎
But if the definition of ‘man’ is included (as it is in the text) in the
t ‏قول شار‎ about him, we shell obtain from it something more important than

‎METC 5 gad,
P. 109, 1. 2 : Problem VI.

‎Reading ‏الصغات‎ (gi ‏المسثلة السادسة فى ابطال مذهبهم ف‎ with B, I, footnote
1, p. 163 in Byg.

‎Ghazal] takes up the ' five categories of plurality’ (see ‏,م‎ 108, 1. 30). Thus,
1 and 3 are discussed in this (VI) problem, 2 in IX, 4 a and 5 Vat

‎P. 145, /. 6: Interpeilation.

‎This is Aioys Sprenger’s translation of the word ‏امتثباء‎ in ‏كتاب كشاف‎
O 9:41 cola Wa,ef which contains his translation of ‏الشومسية‎ UL, ‏.الر‎
‎P. 353,11. 14-16: “ nothing... knowledge,”

‎Qur'an : XXXIV, 3.

‎BP. 17a, i. 6-38:

‎This paragraph forms the heading in the Arabic text. The present
arrangement was found preferable for reasons of proportion and balance,

‎1. 6: Preserved Tablet.
Qur’an : LXXXV, az.
1. 29 : ' 36 . . . pen.’
09252 : XCVI, 4.
Pp. 181-183, 11. 42 : 1: the Rod... the Moon.
tivel Miracles performed by the prophets Moses, Jesus and Muhammad respec-
ively,
P, 19%, J. 1: asbestos.
The dictionary equivalent of ‏طلق‎ is ‘ amianthus.,’
P. 201, 11. 2-8 : Therefore, the substratum ... body.
The argument would be coherent if the Arabic sentence read:

‏وكل جسم فينقسم فدل ان ‎Jot) Ug‏ العلوم العقاية) ليس جسما

‎This is the form in which the argument is stated in the following syllogism.
However, the variants given by Byg. (i.e., R, U, V, ¥ in footnote 6 on P. 304)
support the reading (gle, but do not support ‏.ليس جسا‎
BP. 202, 11. 33-12 : 87 ‏ة كاعه‎ . . , with ©

‎Lit. trans. : The meet-er of the meet-er is (itself) a meet-er.

‎234
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Holy Books

- القران الحكم -

tr. into English by (a) George Sale—London, ? (b) M: ini i —
Hyderabad (oe ‏لعلف‎ 8 (>) Marmaduke William Pickthall

‎The Holy Bible—Cambridge U.P., 1903.‏ .2
مسد (التفسي المسءى ‎ptt‏ التنزيل و اسرارالتاويل ‏ تاليف ‎rt‏ ناصرالدين
‎ul‏ سعيد عبدالله ابن عمر بن محمد ‎ASIP‏ البيضاوى - مصر' دارالكتب العربية
‎(irr.  GATI‏ -
‎Apostolic Traditions‏
‎publie par M. Ludolf Krehl—Leyden, 1862.‏
+ سكن المصطنتى صلى الله عليه وسلم لابى عبدالله محمد بن يزيد اين ماجه التزوينى -
مصر ' المطبعة ‎Aj‏ * وجحمروه - :
‎-r‏ صحيح ‎prises‏ - لا بى الحسين مسلم بن الحجاج ين مسام ‎Sil‏ صر
مكتبه محمد على صبيح ' ؟
‎Dictionaries‏

‎1, The Universal Dictionary of the English Language : 11. ©. Wyld, London,
1932.

‏+ القاموس العصرى (الكليزى ‏ عربى' عربى ‏ الكليزى) تاليف الياس انطون الياس
القاهرة * رهوراسهمة-
م المتجد تاليف لويس معاوف - بيروت - رمورء
‎ope‏ الغرائد الدرية -
‎ed. by J.G. Hava S.J.—Beirut, 1951.‏
م القاموس المحيط لمجد الدين محمد بن يعقوب ‎AD‏ و زا بادى .المطبعة
الحسينية المصرية عمجيس هه -

‎257

‎Tahatut al-Falasifak

‎tradition. One has been given here (see note on Il. 18-20 of p. 1). The other one,.

‎related by Abii Hurairah, occurs in Ibn Majah (Sunan, p. 11, p. §89) and Muslim.
In both these sources, the Prophet’s words (reproducing those of God) are supple-
mented by a reference to the Quranic verse; XXXII, 17, Following is Muslim’s
version :

‎Lite‏ سعيد بن عمرو الا شعثى و زهير بن حرب قال زهير حدثنا وقال سعود اخبرنا
سفيان عن ابى الزناد عن الا عرج عن ‎Ul‏ هريرة عن النبى صلى ‎it‏ عليه وسلم قال قال الله
عز و جل اعددت لعبادى الصالحين ما لا عين رات ولا اذن سمعت ولا .عطر على قلب
بشر مصداق ‎WS‏ فى كتابالله فلا تعلم نفس ما ‎aad‏ لهم من قرة اعين جزاء يا كانوا
يعملون ~

‏[صحيح مسام الجزء الثامن كتاب ( رى) الجنة و ‎die‏ تعيمنها و اهلها ص ‎“Lary‏

‎P. 245, 1. rz : This is... distelieve.
Qur'an : LXAXXIII, 17.
ll, 26-27 : “Are we... bones.”
Qur’in ; LXXIX, 11.
P. 246, 3. 4-6 : ‘The execution... eye.”
Qur'an : LIV, 50.
UU. 6-7: “Thou... God.”
Qur'an : XXX, 62 ; RXX, 41 3 XLVIIT, 23.

‎[References to the Qur’dn in these notes use the numbers given in Byg.)

‎256
Bibliography

Streitschvift des Gazali gegen die Batinijja-sokte : von Ignaz Goldziher—
Leiden, 1916.

+- معيارالعلم - مصر (مطبعةكردستان العلمية) ووم ره
‎et‏ ما فى الاحياء منالاخبار لزينالدين العراق - مصر ‎٠‏

(الف) مكعبه و مطبعة مصطنى البابى الحلبى ومور -
(ب) لجنة نشر الثقافة الا سلامية مو -مم -
.م- الماقدذ من الصضلال -

tr. into Eng. “The Faith and Practice of al-Ghasali"’: by W. Montgomery Watt—
London, 1953.

Works of Al-Farabi

‎dot pai gil‏ بن #مد بن طرخان ين أو زلغ الفارابى المتوق وسم/. ىو
]- أحخصاع العلوم ‏ قاهرة امه
+- رسائل ‏ حيدر آباد ‎(oF)‏ وم-مم مره

‎Works of Ibn Sins

‏ابو على الحسين بن عبدالله بن سينا ‎pereetacdoracree‏
‏و- ‎LET‏ الاشارات والتنبيهات -

‎traduction avec introd. et notes par A.-M. Goichon—Paris, 1951.

‎~ ‏الكردى) مصر رمو‎ Gre wl ge ‏(طبع على نفقة‎ ries) | ‏كتاب‎ ey

‎3. Avicenna’s Psychology: (trans. of the VI chapter of the II section in
No. 2): by F. Rahman—Oxford U.P., 1952.

‏م كتاب ‎GAM‏ (اخر كتاب الحيوان من كتاب الشفا من الطبيعات) تهران
(مدرسه دارالنتون) م.م /هممر -

‎oo‏ من كتاب الشفا فى الالهيات ‏ عشر مقالات - تهران (مدرسه دارالفتون)
‎yaaolirer‏ -

‎Works of Ibn Rushd
‏درورو‎ ped door. ‏ابو الوليد محمد بن احمد ين محمد حفيد اين رشد‎
 تناهتلا ‏و- دهافت‎
Texte arabe etabli par Maurice Bouyges—Beyrouth, 1930.

‎259

‎Tahatut al-Falasifah

‎Reference Books

‎1. The Encylopacdia of Islam—Leyden, 1913.
2. Geschichte dey Arabischen Litteratur : C. Brockelma in—Leiden, 1937.

‎. Introduction to the History of Science; George Sarton : published for the
Carnegie Institution of Washington, 1950.

‏م مفتاح كنوز السنة وضعه باللغة الا 25.55 ‎A.J. Wensinck‏ و ‎ala‏ الى اللغة
العربية محمد فواد عبدالباق ‏ مطبعة مصر مم09 -

‏ه كتابالملل والتحل للامام ‎ded‏ بن عبدالكريم الشهرستانى مطبعة الازهر
م96١‏ -

‏د كتاب كشفالفدون عن اسامى الكتب والفنون لمصطنى بن عبدالته الشهير
‎ale‏ خليقه و بكاتب ‎we‏ 5

‎Maarif Matbaasi (Turkey), 1941.
- BIT RA ‏مصر‎ = fot ‏ى- الفورست لابن‎

‎8. A History of Philosophy : by Wilhelm Windelband ; trans. into Eng. by
James H. Tufts—New York & London, 901

‎0. Le Lexiqus de la langue philosophique d’Ibn Sina (Avicenne) : par Amelie-
Marie Goichon—Paris, 1938.

‎10. Vocabslaires compares d' Aristote et d’Ib Sina : par A.-M. Goichon—Paris,
1939.

‏14 كتاب ‎GUT‏ اصطلاحات الفنون للشيخ.محمد على التهانوى

‎Dictionary of the technical terms used in the sciences of the Mussalmans,
containing The Logic of the Arabians, in the original Arabic, with an English trans-
lation by A. Sprenger—Calcutta, 1854.

‎Works of Al-Ghazali
‏بن محمد الغزالى الطوسى الشاقعى .٠م-هة. ه'مة., بدررره‎ dost ‏ابو حامد‎
: ‏تهافت الفلاسفة‎ -,

‎(a) Texte arabe accompagne d’un sommaire latin et d’index : par Maurice
Bouyges S J.—Beyrouth, 1927.

‏(ب) صححه ‎Gle y‏ عليه وقدم له ‎Chale‏ ديا القاهرة .يمور -
+ مقاصد الغلاسفة ‏
‎(See Brockelmann : Supplementband I, p. 755.)‏
و5 الاقتصاد 5 الاعتقاد ‏ القاهرة ‎“ivr.‏
‎-r‏ فيصل التفرقة ‏ القاهرة ‎deg‏ = 1
هم الستظهرى او كتاب ‎Las‏ ¢ الباطئيية و فضائل المستظهرية -
258
INDEX

Baghdad, 207, 208
Being, 51, 52, 69, 75, 77. 5
——, and existence, 78
—, differentia of, 78
‏,سد‎ eternal, 143
——, kinds of, 151
‏,سس‎ movement of, 163, 164
—, nature of, 136
— , Necessary, 96, 97, 105, 106, 509,
130, 111, 128, 129, 130, 132, 133, 136,
140, 162
——, necessity of, 78, 96
‏,د‎ prime, 142
——, pure, 132
—, uncaused, 82
‏,سس‎ universal, 83, 151
Bliss, absolute, 234
Body, 202. 203
‏,سس‎ and soul, 137
‏رس‎ as the First Cause, 138, 139
‏,حسم‎ aa instrament of soul, 221
Botany, 180
—, as the servant of the soul, 184
‏,سب‎ changes in, 216
‏,ب‎ composed of form and matter,
74, 136
——, infinite, 172
—-, infinite division of, 217
——, lowest form of Roots, 75
‏رس‎ possible, 141

6

Categories, to

Cause, 88, 92
——, and effect, 2
—-, as agent, 65, 66, 80, 133
—, condition of, 68, ©

261

A

Abraham, 188, 190
Absolute Man, 217
Abstract Universal, 199
Accident, 33, 47, $5, 61, 62, 75, 100,
112, 113, 132, 141, 192, 222
‏د‎ inseparable, 113, 125, 126, 132
Action, and agent, 72
——, different kinds of, 64, 5
—~—, true significance of, 68, 72
——-, and natural, 169
—, volitional, nature of, 27, 67,
146, 15%
Actuality, 161, 169
Agent Intellect, 58
Alchemy, 181
Allaf, Abi Hudhayl, 54
Angels, 168, 186, 231
——, as giver of Forms, 187
——, as secondary principles of exis-
tence, 130
—, as superior to men, 108
——, nature of, 108
—-—, favourite, 168
Annihilation, 58
Apogee, 28, 33
Aristotle, 2 ١
——, as First Teacher, 4
‏سس‎ criticism by, of Plato, 4
—~-,defective translation of
works of, 4, 5
‏,سب‎ on soul, 22, 94
Arithmetic, 9, 12
Ash’‘ariyya, 59
Astrology, 181, 185
Atheism, 141
Atbeist, 63
Aton, indivisibie, 201, 202, 206
Attributes, cause of plurality, roo

Tahafut al-Falasi Sak
> ‏ما بعد الطبيعة‎ ple OLS ‏م‎

Texto arabe con traduction de C.Q. Rodriguez—Madrid, 1919.
- 1402 ‏(دكن)‎ SUT ‏رسائل ابن رشد - حيدر‎ op

ed. by Maurice Bouyges—Beyrouth, 1932.

- ‏فصل المقال‎
(See Brockelmann : Supp. 1 pp. 834-36.)
Works of Aristotle
(Tr. into English under the editorship of W, D. Ross~Oxford U.P. 1950)

i Cetaphy sica—tr. W. D. Ross,
» Categorias 6 Interpretations—tr. E. M, i
3. Analytica Priora—troA J. ‏ا‎ 84. Baghill
4 ‏اذ يم‎ R. 2. Mure 1
. a 2 histicis Elenchi. . ‏.فق .لال‎ Pi ‏8م‎ 1
6. Physica—tr, RP. Hardie & RK Gaye” Pickard mbridge.
7 De Gorlo— tre J. L. Stocks
. encratione et Corruptions—tr. H, 13 i
9. Meteorologica—tr. E. 7 Websters H. Joachim
10. De Mundo—tr, E. S. Forster,
11. De Anima—tr. J. A. Smith.
12. De Spivitu—tr. J.F. Dobson.
13. Problemata—tr. E, S. Forster.
14. Ethica Nicomachea—tr. W. D. Ross.

The Dialogues of Plato

(Tr. into English by 8. Jowett—Oxford U.P., Impression of 1931)

1, Phasdrus, Vol. I

2. Phaedo. Vol. II
3. Republic, Vol. Hf
4 Timaeus, VoL IV

(4 Commentary om Plato’s Timaeus : by A. E. Taylor—Oxford U.P., 1928)

260
Index

God, as living, 143, 151
——,as Necessary Being, 102, 107
——,as necessary cause of the world,
64
——,as Omnipotent, 45, 60, 104, 105,
189, 191, 193, 224
——, as One, 96 ff.
——-, as Perfect, 107
‏,سك‎ as prior to the world, 35
——,as Pure Good, 108
——,as Simple Being, 132 i.
—,as substance, §, 10%, 102
——, ag the First Principle, 94, 1
——,as uncaused Cause, 89
——, as undefinable, 125
——,as willer, 143
‏سسب‎ as will-less, 63, 104
——, attributes of, as cause of plural-
ity, 109
——, attributes of, as eternal, 143
——, attributes of, as negative, 102
——, attributes of, explained, 102 ff.
—--,attributes of, identical with
Essence, 105, 106, 108, 112, 9
——, beyond the grasp of intellect, 80
——, in relation to different emanations,
80
‏دا‎ knowledge of, 105, 115, 116 ff., 143,
155, 156, 158, 160
‏ندا‎ knowledge of, about particulars,
153 ff., 159
——, knowledge of others of, 150
‏سب‎ knowledge of, the principle of His
action, 104
——, knows only universals, 115, 118,
122, 153 ff.
—-—, priority of, as essential and causal,
35
——-, religious attitude towards, 121
‏رس‎ self-knowledge of, 150, 9
——, self-knowledge of, cause of e¢ma-
nations, 104
Good, 106, 171
‏,سسسب‎ system of, 192
Grammar, 232
Gravitation, 64

263

Faculties, cause of weakness and
strength of, 212, 213, 216
Faith, conflict of, with knowledge, 3
Fantasy, 219
Farabi, on soul, 94
—~, translator and commentator of
Aristole, 15
Figure (of syllogism), 201
Figh, 77
First Principle, 84, 99, 100, 101,106, 107,
108, 113 114, 179, 222
‏,سد‎ as Creator, 89, 90
——, as God, 109, 136, 139,
161, 169
——, Heaven as, go
Form, 33, 47, 55, 60, 61, 74 75, 82, 100,
140, 141, 197, 222, 227
——, of colour, 186, 187
‏سس‎ of colouredness, 51
‏سس‎ of coloured objects, 161
‏سمه‎ of Particulars, 182
-—., of stars, 86
‏مس‎ of the earth, 105
——, of the Heavens, 105
‏,سس‎ of the four elements, 93
——, of the Intelligible, 62, 219

G

Galen, 13, 50, $5, 56

Genera, 51, 115, 120, 143, 159, 194, 195,
196

Genus, 125, 127

Generosity, 106

Geometry, 9, 12

God, as Agent, 67,, 103, 5

~-—, a3 attributeless, 63, 109 ff.

-———,as direct agent of temporary
events, 186

——-, as cause of existence, 102

——, as Cause of causes, 44

‎as eternal will, 16‏ سسب

‎—~—~, as Infinite Power, 23

‎——,as Intelligence, 102, 108, 3

‎as Intelligible, 301, 103, 108‏ ب

‎——, a3 knower, 143, 153 ff.

‎Taha fut al-Falasif ah

‎Earth, roundness of, 6, 9, 39
Effect, 72, 82
‏سب‎ as the principle of other effects,
84
——-, effectless, 74, gt
——, first, 130, 138, 139, 147
——., plurality in, 85
——, Second, 86
Elements, four, 140, 180
Emanation(s), 73, 75, 76, 80, 103, 104,
105, 146
‏رس‎ criticism of the theory
of, 80
——, self-knowledge of God,
cause of, 4
Essence, Divine, 43, 58, 105, 112, 114,
115, 116, 7
—-~, as above quantitative
determination, 43, 58
Estimative faculty, 197
Eternal, relation of, to temporal], 31
Eternal will, as intention, 18, 19
——, nature of, 26
Eternity of the world, 14 ff.
Evil, 106, 108
Existence, as good, 106
‏رس‎ in relation to quiddity, 126,
132, 133, 134
——, necessary, 132
——, Recessity of, 96, 97, 100,
101, 127, 130
——, possibility of, 78, 80
Existent, discreet individual, 22
‏رست‎ intelligible, 58
Extension, infinite, 38
١ ——~,in space and time, 38,
39

‎F

‎Faculty, anima] and human, 197
‏,سب‎ of angels, 199
——, of appentance, 198, 199
‏,سب‎ of desire, 73, 165, 199
—, of fantasy , 197, 199, 3
-——-, of memory, 172, 198

‎Cause, Efficient, 111, 112, 113, 129, 132,
137, 142
———, First, 85, 125, 138
‏سب‎ , infinite series of, possible, 93
——, receptive, 111, 112
‏,سد‎ uncaused, 74, 91

‎Casual relation, not a necessary one,
181, 185 ff.

‎Casuality, efficient, 75

‎Causation, necessary, 64

‎Celestial motion, rotatory, 33, 74, 140,
141, 155, 161, 163 8.. 168, 173, 176, 7

‎a8 source of temporal‏ سد

‎events, 33

‎——-, nature of, 164
——, purpose of, 168 ff.
‏,ل‎ as volition, 173, 176
Celestial plane, 173
Cherubim, 172
Cognition, 198, 200
Constrained movement, 164, 165
Contingent, 113
Contraries, 62

‎De Coelo, 180

‎Definition, logical, 126

‎De generatione corruptione, 0

‎Devil, 95

‎Differentia, 100, 101, 125, 127

‎Diversion, 199

‎Discreet individual existence, 22

‎Divine Attributes, 110, 111 ff., 152, 249

‎—, as uncaused, 112

‎Divine Essence, 43, 58, 105, 112, 14,
115, 116, 147

‎Divine Knowledge, relation of, and
objects, 179

‎Dream symbols, 175
———, interpretation of, 175, 31
Duality, 110, 124, 130

‎E

‎Earth, asa globe, 39

‎262
Index

N

Natural movement, 164, 165
Nearness to God, nature of, 168 ©.
Necessary, 47, 48, 78, 92, 135, 1
—, Being, 96, 128, 133, 136, 140,
162
——, as uncaused, 79, 102
Necessity, 96,97 ~
Non-Being, 78
Non-existence, 43, 57, 60, 62, 68, 108,
226, 237
Norm (uniformity of Nature), 189,
190

P

Paradise, 1, 229, 232, 235, 239
Particular, 153
——, analysable, 127, 179
‏سس‎ as the data of sense, 51
Pen, 172, 173, 176
Perception, 205 ff.
Perceptive faculty, kinds of, 197
Perigee, 33
Philology, 232
Philosophers, conflict of, with religious
ideas, 5
Physics, 180
Physical science, 180, 244
Physical faculties, 211 ff.
Physiogonomy, 18%
Plane of angels, 200
Plato, 2, 4. 3
—. believed that the world was
created in time, 13
—-, criticism of, by Aristotie, 4
—, on soul, 22, 222
Pleasure, intellectual, 231, 232
Plenum, 38
Plorality, arises out of attributes, 100,
109
—, causes of, 100
—-, five categories of, 108
—, implied in the First Princi-
ple, 82, 83, 85, 86, 87

Magic, 181, 244
Materialists, 44, 89, 140, 17
Materialism, 141
Mathematics, 207
Matter, 74, 75, 82, 100, 144, 155, 196,
197, 199, 202, 220, 222, 227
——, and soul, 50
——, as impediment, 144, 5
‏,سس‎ a8 unoriginated, 47
———, bearer of potentiality, 227
——, inorganic, 195
——, possibility as an attribute of,
47
——, Prime, 74
Motive faculty, 197
Mean, doctrine of, 233, 234
Medicine, 180, 185, 8
Meteorological pheuomena, 180
Metaphysics, relation with Logic, 10
‏سس‎ relation with Mathema-
tics, 9
Middle Term, 182
Metempsychosis, 242
Miracle, 183, 184, 191, 244
—, as proof of prophetic truth, 3,
88, 119
——, possibility of, and nature of
causal relation, 181, 185 ff.
Moon, 76, 154, 169, 180
Moses, 182
Movement, 3
——, kinds of, 164 ff.
‏,سسب‎ voluntary, 194, 196
Muhammad, 1, 156
Multiplicity, doe to several reasons, 73,
74077
Munhir, 241
Mu‘tazilite, 8, 58, 160, 237, 4
——, denial of God’s attributes,
109
~~ —, differences of, with Ghazal,
8
Mutakallimtn, 58, 60, 195, 199, 201, 217,
236

265

Tahafut al-Falasi fah

Intelligence, 151
Intelligence, fourfold aspect of, 82,
&
——. Pure or First, 73, 75, 76,
80, 82, 83, 88, 144, 172, 154
——, self-knowledge of, 8a
Intelligible, 148, 183, 190. 203, 209, 213,
214, 221, 229
Intelugible Existent, 58
—— Reality, 61, 87, 104
intelligible Universais, 149, 218
Intuitive power, 182

J

Jahm, the Mu‘tazilite, 160
Jesus, 36

Jin, 95

Jupiter, 20, 76

Jurist, 152

K

Karramiyya, 8, 58, 160
Kingdom of Heaven, 171
Knowledge, conflict between, and
faith, 3
——, Divine, nature of, 19, 20,
26, 105, 142
——, by primary inten
tion, 116
‏,سس‎ by second inten.
tion, 116, 117, 118, 143, 146
——, identical with Hig
will, 105, 115 ff. 7
‏رس‎ in relation to objects of
knowledge, 49, 79, 115 ff., 154, 157,
158, 159
‏سس‎ kinds of, 105, 122

L

Last Judgment, 246
Life to come, 1, 3
Logic, 211

Lunar eclipse, 6

Hayuli, 60

Heaven(s), 75, 83

Hell, 229, 235

Hereafter, 1, 3, 118, 147, 231, 234, 236,
246

Heresy, attributed to Greek philoso.
phers, 2
——, causes of, I, 2, 3

Hidden things, 176, 178, 181

Hidden world, 190

Historia animalium, 180

Hippocrates, 2

Holy Land, 176

Homogeneous, 4

Horoscope, 193

Hw, 229

Ibn Sina, 49
‏,حسم‎ translator and commentator
of Aristotle, 5
‏,ب‎ on soul, 22, 94
——,on knowledge of the First
Intelligence, 79, 80, 115
‏سس‎ on knowledge of God, 143,
144, 145, 148, 153
——, his theory about knowledge
of God refuted, 148
Imagination, 36, 38, 41, 94, 98, 100, 116,
166, 174, 175, 176, 182
Immortality of soul, 223, 225, 235,
241
Impossibility, 50, 52
Impossible, 47, 48, 193, 194
Impression, 204
Inclination and intention, 17
Infinite regress, 133, 141
Intention, 17
Inspiration, 163, 171
Intermediaries, 73, 85, 87, 147, 151, 154,
162, 186, 231
Intellect, helpless without prophetic
guidance, 81

264
Index

U

Universe, as God’s action, 145, 146
——, God's knowledge of, 146, 147
Universal, 218, 219, 220
——, as mental, 51
——, Being, 83
——, judgment, arr
——, will, 173, 175, 7

و

Vegetative faculty, 200

Vices, 200

Virtues, 200

Void, 38, 46, 180

Volitional action, nature of, 27, 67
——, movoment, 165, 168

Ww

What Galen Believed, 13
Will, Universal, 173, 176, 197
‏ب‎ particular, 176, 177
World, as the action (or Product) of
God, 63, 72, 81
‏رعسم‎ eternity of, 249
———, everlastingness of, 54, 55
‏سس‎ origination of, 46, 152
—— possibility of, 48
——- posteriority of, to God, 35
-—-—, priority of, 31
~~, relation of, to God, 70, 7

Soul, vegetable, 140
Souls, as angels, 172
‏رحد‎ 85 aware of all particulars, 172 ff.
‏رعسم‎ as cause of bidy, 137
‏,سمس‎ as eternal, 34
‏سس‎ as related to human soul, 34
——, contact with, cause of dream
symbols, 175
Space, 38, 39, 43, 155, 180, 199, 236
——, empty, 39, 43
Species, 51, 115, 120, 143, 159
Sphere(s), bodies of, 87
Spherical revolution, 20
Standard of knowledge, the, 10, 145
Stars, good and evil effects of, 86
Substance, 59, 194, 195, 249
Substratum, 75, 112, 113, 204, 205, 222
Syllogism, 122
‏ل‎ hypothetical, 145, 201, 254
‏سمه‎ hypothetical conjunctive, 5

T

Talismanic art, 181, 193, 244
Terrestrial plane, 173
Thing, kinds of, 193
Time, 93, 115, 148, 155, 156, 559, 160, 180
——, and space, 43
‏,سس‎ as created, 23, 36
—~—, before the existence of the
world, 43
——, in relation to God, 37
‏,سس‎ relative, 38
Tradition, in conflict with facts to be
rejected, 7

267

Tahafut al-Falasifah

Resurrection, 200, 224, 235, 242, 244,
245, 7
——, different senses of, 236 ff.
——, of bodies, 229, 236, 241,
243
Revelation, 163
Reward and punishment, 229 ff., 235,
248
Roots, primary, 227
‏,ده‎ self-subsisting, kinds of, 75
Rotatory celestial motion, 33, 74, 140,
141, 155, 161, 163 ff., 168, 173, 176, 7

5

Sacred Law, I, 5, 7, 55, 109, 176, 180,
192, 200, 234, 246
Saturn, 20, 76
Scholastic reasoning, art of, ro
Sensus communes, 197, 202
Simple thing, perishing of, 227
Socrates, 3
Solar eclipse, 6, 153
Soul, after death, 94
‏رسب‎ Aristotle on, 22, 4
‏,ست‎ as cognisant of intelligibles, 227
——. as discreet individual existent, 22
——. as primary principle, 227
——, as simple, 227
—, as source of rotatory motion, 33,
155
——, communicative, 199
-——. director of matter, 51
——. of heaven, 33, 76, 85, 169, 178
——, Faribt on, 94
—s human, 75. 85, 91, 92, 140, 179,
181, 184, 190, 200, 201, 221
——. Ibn Sina on, 22, 40, 94
——, nature of, 22, 50
——, not subsisting in body, 222
‏ست‎ Plato on, 22
‏سسسب‎ related to body, 181, 221, 222,
224, 5 1
‏,دا‎ related to matter, 50
——, unity of, after death, 95
——, unity of, before birth, 222

Plurality, implied in the second effect,
86

Poetry, 232

Pole(s), 84, 139, 166

Possible, 47, 48, 93, 95, 141

Possibility, 55, 77, 78, 81, 82, 85, 86,
119, 142, 226, 8

“~~, a3 ar intelectual fudg-

ment, 49

Potentiality, 161, 169, 226, 227, 228

Preserved Tablet, 172, 174, 175, 176,

182

Practical faculty (of the sori), 183

Principles of Being, 187, 185, 191, 192

Principles of Belief, 53

Prophets, 163, 171, 175, 182, 183, 590
191

~—, 5131 authority of, In matters -

of faith, 88, raz
~——, nature of experience of, 175,
176, 182
Proposition, categorical, 247
Psychology, 197

Q

Quantity, 33, 43, 47, 124, 138, 139
Quiddity, 101, 103, 112, 116, 119, 128,
132, 133, 135
——, in relation to existence, 126,
129, 130, 132, 133, 534, 136

R

Rational faculty, 213, 214, 217, 220,
230
Rational soul, 218
Rational universal, 217, 8
Reason, Limitations of, 88, 118, 121,
1§2, 163, 171
——, practical, 199, 200
‏,سب‎ theoretical, 182, 199, 200
Relation, 157, 159
Religion, not in conflict with positive
science, 6, 7, 180 ff.
Religious attitude towards God, 121

266
