1

The Divine Reality
God, Islam & The Mirage of Atheism
Newly Revised Edition

By Hamza Andreas Tzortzis

2

Sapience Institute Online Edition, October 2020, v.1.1

Copyright © 2016, 2018, 2019, 2020 Hamza Andreas Tzortzis
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any
electronic or mechanical means including photocopying, recording and information
storage and retrieval systems—except in the case of brief quotations embedded in
critical articles or reviews—without the permission in writing from the author.

Lion Rock Publishing
Visit the author’s website at www.hamzatzortzis.com
Book Design: Ramit Kumar

First Edition, Newly Revised Edition 2019, 2020

3

In the name of God, the merciful, the giver of mercy.

All praise and gratitude is due to God, the Lord of everything that
exists. May God’s peace and blessings be upon His final Prophet and
Messenger, Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬.

4

For my family.

Their love, patience, and enduring compassion deserve eternal
gratitude.

5

Preliminary notes
In the Islamic tradition when the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬is mentioned
by name or title the honorific phrase ‘‫ ’ﷺ‬is used. It is a sign of love
and respect. The phrase denotes ‘May God’s peace and blessings be
upon him’. This phrase has been used throughout this book.
The word God has been used throughout this book. However, in
the Islamic tradition the name of God is Allah. Arabic linguists suggest
that the name Allah comes from the word Al-Ilah, which means TheDeity. The name Allah has no plural and is genderless.

6

7

Acknowledgements
Undoubtedly this book would not have been possible without God. I
praise and thank Him. Once you finish reading this book you will
realise that everything depends on God and He alone is worthy of
perfect praise and gratitude.
The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬taught that the person who has not
thanked people has “not thanked God.”1 In this light, there are a
number of people to whom I owe thanks for helping and encouraging
me to write this book.
First among them are my family. I cannot ever forget the love,
patience, support, encouragement and sacrifices of my wife and
children. My neglect and isolation was endured and overlooked by the
people I love. The fact that God gave me such a family is something
that deserves eternal gratitude.
I would like to show my appreciation to my brother Spyros
Tzortzis. He was an early intellectual inspiration in my life. We shared
the same bedroom for over two decades. His ability to think outside of
the box and explore new ideas planted intellectual ‘seeds’ in my mind,
the fruit of which is this book. I would like to thank my sister Haris
Tzortzis. She has always supported me and never defined me by my
faults, always by my strengths. My mother Androula Tzortzis is one of
the most loving people that I know. Her undying love, energy and
support have shaped who I am. My father Petros Tzortzis has always
been my hero. His patience, tolerance, love, humility and wisdom have
inspired me. I can never repay my parents. Anything I say cannot truly
express the gratitude that is due to them. I pray that God guides and
protects my family, and that He grants them long, healthy lives full of
8

joy, love and piety. I pray that He continues to unite us in love.
I want to thank my friend Imran Hussein. Imran reviewed the
book and provided significant input. His contribution to Chapter 3 was
extensive. I am also extremely grateful to my friend Subboor Ahmad,
who provided important contributions and moral support.
I want to express my deepest gratitude to Abu Hurayra. He is one
of the smartest people I have had contact with. Although we have
never met, due to our similar interests we have exchanged ideas. He
reviewed the book at its early stage and his input was beyond
significant. Without his incisive criticism and contribution this book
would not have been possible.
I would like to thank the author and academic Dr. Safaruk
Chowdhury. Our friendship has inspired me to pursue further studies
in Islamic thought and philosophy. His review of the book and
scholarly contribution was extremely helpful.
I would like to thank Asif Uddin, who spent hours researching
various Islamic classical texts. His input and corrections helped shaped
the character of the book.
I am ever grateful to my friend Adnan Rashid. His review of the
book and his contribution to Chapter 14 was extensive.
I would also like to express my gratitude to Dr. Atif Imtiaz and
Sharif Randhawa for their important suggestions and advice.
I would like to thank Umm-Talha bint Abi-Bilal who did a last
minute review of the entire manuscript.
I am grateful to Ghazi Mannai, Fahad Tasleem, Dr. Mohamed
Ghilan, Anthony Green, Salahuddin Patel, Joni Molla, Esa Khan,
Abdullah Mekki, Moseen Khalid, Zeenat Bibi, Abu Zakariya and
Umm Zakariya for their noteworthy support and contributions.
Finally, I would like to thank John Paine for his editorial work and
iERA and Sapience Institute for their support which helped make this
book become a reality.
There are many more people whom I should show my
9

appreciation and gratitude to. However, anyone that has been left out,
know that your reward is with God, and what is from Him cannot be
compared to anything in this world.

10

Contents
Preface: My Journey ..................................................................................... 13
Chapter 1: Atheism – Its Definition, History and Growth ............................ 22
Chapter 2: Life Without God – The Implications of Atheism ........................ 39
Chapter 3: Adversaries of Reason – Why Atheism is Irrational ................... 56
Chapter 4: Self-Evident – Why Atheism Is Unnatural .................................. 81
Chapter 5: A Universe from Nothing? – The Qur’an’s Argument for God .. 96
Chapter 6: The Divine Link – The Argument from Dependency................. 121
Chapter 7: Denying God, Denying You – The Argument from Consciousness
..................................................................................................................... 138
Chapter 8: Divine Precision – The Designed Universe .............................. 169
Chapter 9: Know God, Know Good – God and Objective Morality ........... 193
Chapter 10: Divine Singularity – The Oneness of God .............................. 205
Chapter 11: Is God Merciful? – Islam’s Response to Evil and Suffering ... 216
Chapter 12: Has Science Disproved God? – Deconstructing False Atheist
Assumptions ................................................................................................. 233
Chapter 13: God’s Testimony – The Divine Authorship of the Qur’an ...... 260
Chapter 14: The Prophetic Truth – The Messenger of God ....................... 299
Chapter 15: The Free Slave – Why God is Worthy of Our Worship ........... 332
Chapter 16: Conclusion – Transforming Our Hearts ................................. 357
Afterword: Don’t Hate, Debate – Dialogue with Islam .............................. 360
Notes ............................................................................................................ 364

11

12

Preface: My Journey
What is the point of writing a book about God, Islam and atheism?
Philosophers, thinkers and academics from various religious
backgrounds have already written books on similar topics, so why
reinvent the wheel? To explain this, let me elaborate a little on the
journey that I have taken so far in my life.
I was born in London to Greek parents. Both of them came to the
UK in the seventies for different reasons. My father mainly wanted to
escape life in Athens. My mother did not have much of a choice; she
was a refugee driven out by the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974.
My parents suffered many hardships, but with love, patience and
determination they have become now two of the happiest, most loving,
compassionate and tolerant people I know. I am eternally grateful to
have them in my life.
Despite all their setbacks, what concerned my father the most was
solving his version of what people call an existential crisis. He was in
search of answers to life’s key questions. His journey led him to
acquire an array of books. At home, I had access to a wide range of
literature, from The Power of Positive Thinking to The Science of the
Mind. My father was always immersed in his books and constantly
shared his ideas with us. I am the middle of his three children, and
none of us at the time had mature enough minds to comprehensively
grasp what he was saying.
Being brought up in this background, I picked up my father’s
existential anguish, and I began to ask questions about the basis of my
own existence. I still remember how, at around the age of eleven, I
would go into the bath and sit in the tub for a while, crying. I felt so
lonely. What occurred to me was that I was the only one conscious of

13

my existence (see Chapter 7). Only I knew what it was like to be me,
whether I was alone in the bath or playing with friends in the park.
This created a sense of doubt about the existence of other people’s
conscious lives. Were they really conscious? Did they exist in a real
sense? What were they feeling? What were their conscious
experiences when I was not there to witness them?
Later in life, I learnt that this was a form of solipsism, which is the
view that you can only be certain that your mind exists. Nevertheless,
it was a profoundly lonely experience, which I believe was the
emotional driving force to find answers to very important questions in
my life. This experience instilled within me that the concept of truth is
very important. In my search for truth, I used to engage with my
friends and ask them questions about their beliefs. I was so fortunate to
have connections with people from myriad ethnicities and cultures.
This was one of the blessings of being brought up in the London
borough of Hackney.
I felt that without knowing the truth, life seemed unreal and
illusory. Many psychologists have acknowledged that human beings
want to be right and seek to learn from social norms when they are
unsure about things. From this perspective, the search for truth is very
important as it offers the possibility of shaping who we are or the
person we want to be.
I felt that not searching for the truth was tantamount to lying to
myself, or accepting a lie. Therefore, the search for truth was a means
of trying to be sincere with my own existence, as I would be seeking to
establish the truth of this life and my place within it. For me, holding
on to the sceptical view of the truth, which argues that there is no truth,
was self-defeating. This is because the concept that there is no truth is
actually a claim itself, so how could I claim that scepticism is true but
everything else is not? This is the inconsistency of the sceptical view;
a sceptic would claim the truth of scepticism, but would deny all other
truths. Consequently, no matter what position I held, I still had to
14

accept a truth.
When I first learnt about Islam, two aspects fascinated me. The
first was the certainty that emanated from my Muslim friends. The
second was their social and spiritual practices; both eventually led me
to accept Islam. This is not the space to go into detail about my
conversion. However, there was a point when I became intellectually
convinced in the rational foundations of Islam, yet it still was not
enough for me to embrace the religion. So I started adopting two
practices. First, I started to learn some chapters of the Qur’an in
Arabic, and pray several of the five daily prayers that Muslims carry
out as part of their spiritual practice. When I used to prostrate, which is
a part of the Islamic prayer, I would talk to God, asking for His
guidance. I did this after receiving a spiritual insight of my brother’s
friend, Amir Islahi. He was studying medicine at university, but he
would visit my college campus and give us advice. Since I had Muslim
friends, I would listen to him; echoing the words of the Prophet
Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬, Amir once said that you are closest to God during
prostration, so speak to Him.
I found this profound because the face reflects who we are. Many
times it represents our ego and vanity, yet Muslims humble themselves
and acknowledge that they are nothing compared to God. In that
submission they truly find themselves; servants of the One that created
them. In prostration, the physical station of humility and egolessness,
Muslims speak to God. So I started talking to Him too, and begged for
guidance. Dr. Amir Islahi is now my friend, but I do not think he
knows the impact of those few words he conveyed to me over 15 years
ago.
Second, I began to have more conversations with a school friend
of mine, Moynul Ahmed. He would come to my house and speak to
me about Islam, and I would ask him questions. However, early on in
the process I was intellectually convinced, but my heart was dead.
Nothing I knew about the truth of Islam had been internalised. In this
15

struggle to combine what I knew with what I felt, I met Moynul
outside my house and sat in his car on 4 October 2002. To be honest, I
do not really remember what he told me, but I remember how I felt. He
expressed a profound and poetic description of the certainty of death. I
cannot recall the exact words; to do so would be like catching a black
cat in the dark. However, it hit me hard and somehow opened a door
that seemed to have been locked, allowing my certainty in the truth of
Islam to affect my heart.
Human beings do not enjoy thinking about death. It creates the
realisation within us that all of the attachments we have built in this
world will cease to be. Significantly, it awakens us to the brutal fact
that we will no longer exist on this planet. We have to face the reality
of an inevitable personal apocalypse. There have been many
philosophical theories about death. For example, some thinkers hold
the view that death is like a permanent sleep. Others have explained
that death is to be considered part of life, something which every
person must come to terms with in order to live well; part of what is
involved in accepting our finitude. Some thinkers have claimed that
death is a transition from this life to an afterlife, which includes the
eternal life of bliss via Divine mercy, or pain because of our insistence
on rejecting the mercy and guidance of God.
Whatever our views on death are, we can all agree it is a subject
that we do not think about enough. This may sound morbid, but there
is a profound benefit in reflecting on death—it brings about the
realisation that life is short. Pondering our finite nature helps diminish
our egos and our selfish desires no longer seem that important. Our
ephemeral attachments to the material world are put into perspective
and our lives are questioned—all of which offer great benefit. As the
11th century theologian Al-Ghazali said, “…in the recollection of death
there is reward and merit.” 2 Contemplating death provokes thought
and gives us a window of opportunity to reflect on the nature of our
existence.
16

Reflecting on death, answered questions on how I should view
life. It taught me to measure how much importance I should attach to
material things. In viewing my life through the lens of death, I entered
an emotional and intellectual space where I could assess my situation
on this planet. How did I come to be? What should I be doing here?
Where am I going? Death was the driving force behind these critical
questions, because the moment I recognised that this life is short, that
one day I will breathe my last, it put everything into perspective.
To understand what I went through, I want you to reflect on death;
imagine you are here one minute and the next you are no more. You
have probably experienced loved ones that have passed away; how did
you feel? Did you feel loneliness, emptiness and lack of attachment to
the things you used to take so seriously? Now, if you were to taste
death this instant, as every human being eventually will, what would
that mean to you? What would you do differently with your life if you
were given the chance to go back? What thoughts and ideas would you
take more seriously? What would your outlook be if you could relive
your life having experienced the tragic reality of death?
The sad thing about death is that we cannot go back. This
realisation weighed heavily on my mind. Deeply reflecting on death
led me to the conclusion that life is short, and that I wanted to
transform it for the better without delay. The very next morning I took
a taxi to London Central Mosque and embraced Islam. The date was
October 5, 2002.
My need to know the truth transformed into a desire to tell others
about the truth. In my naivety, I would latch onto anything that I felt
supported Islam and its rational foundations. I would study the works
of various Christian philosophers because nothing of that sort was
accessible to Muslims in the English language—most profound
Islamic intellectual writings are in Arabic. This inevitably made my
learning process hard. Adopting the arguments espoused by Christian
philosophers was not the best way to imbibe Islamic theism. Although
17

the two faiths have a lot in common, there are huge and subtle
differences.
Throughout my years as a Muslim, I have learnt things the hard
way. I have made many mistakes and errors, and much of this book
consists of the lessons that I have learnt. Many of my mistakes are
available for all to see on the Internet. This process of trial and error
has had its benefits as well as its negative consequences. The negatives
are that all of my blunders, slip-ups and oversights are available for all
to see. However, by reading this book, you can learn from my
mistakes and you do not have to learn things the hard way. Trial and
error have refined, developed and strengthened the arguments I have
adopted. This journey has also made me appreciate that tolerance and
compassion are among our highest virtues. These experiences also
challenged my views on my own faith, and helped open the door to
find out that Islam has a compassionate tradition. Through the Prophet
Muhammad’s ‫ ﷺ‬teachings, I understood compassion beautifies
everything.
I have tested my ideas and arguments with some of the brightest
atheist minds in the world. I have debated prominent atheist academics
and thinkers from a wide range of intellectual backgrounds. Some of
my interlocutors have been Professor Simon Blackburn, Dr. Brendan
Larvor, Dr. Stephen Law, Professor Richard Norman, Dr. Nigel
Warburton, Professor Peter Simons, Professor Lawrence Krauss,
Professor Graham Thompson, Dr. Peter Cave and Dan Barker. I have
even had a brief street discussion with Professor Richard Dawkins, but
unfortunately we were interrupted and Dawkins made a quick exit.
The topics we have debated range from “Can we live better lives
without religion?”, “Can consciousness be best explained by God’s
existence?” to “Islam or Atheism: Which Makes More Sense?”3 These
debates have facilitated improvements to my arguments. It has been a
huge blessing, and those who are familiar with my work have seen that
I have evolved from mirroring the arguments of analytical
18

philosophers to developing positions rooted in the Islamic tradition.
This does not mean I have ‘thrown away the baby with the bathwater’.
As you will see in this book, I have kept all the sound, universal and
robust arguments, while giving them an Islamic flavour, as well as
refining them to ensure that they are theologically and rationally
coherent.
Completing my Master’s degree in philosophy at the University of
London has proven to be very beneficial. My ability to critically
challenge and support philosophical views has improved. I am
currently continuing postgraduate studies in this field, and it is my
intention to use what I have learnt to articulate an intelligent and
compassionate case for traditional Islam to a wide range of audiences.
These academic experiences have shaped and influenced the logical
flow and content of the arguments presented in this book. They have
also strengthened my view that Islamic theology, thought and
philosophy—grounded in the Qur’an and the prophetic teachings—are
intuitive, coherent and robust.
No other book available in the English language articulates an
intelligent and nuanced case for Islamic theism, while addressing the
incoherence of atheism. This is not to praise this book; rather, it
highlights the lack of writing on this topic. During the lectures that I
have delivered at university campuses all around the world, I have
interacted with thousands of Muslim and non-Muslim students and
academics. These interactions, in addition to the rise of atheism, have
made it quite clear that people have an intellectual thirst concerning
the Islamic view of God, the role of revelation and the personality of
the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬. This book aims to quench that thirst,
thereby providing an English reader with a coherent set of arguments
for God’s existence, oneness and why He is worthy of our worship,
including a compelling case for the Qur’an and the prophethood of
Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬. It also responds to and addresses a wide range of
academic and popular arguments and objections that favour the denial
19

of the Divine.
This book contains a combination of universal and Islamic
arguments for God’s existence, the Qur’an and the prophethood of
Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬. Many of these arguments have been tried and tested
with academics and thinkers over the years. Each chapter has relevant
Islamic references to show the Islamic basis for each argument, which
ensures that they are not only philosophically sound but Islamically
coherent. Approximately fifty percent of the references in this book
come from the Islamic tradition; this includes references from the
Qur’an, the Prophetic Traditions4 (known as hadith; ahadith, pl) and
the Islamic scholarly tradition. This book does not just focus on
Islamic theism and a response to atheism; it addresses a key argument
for the Divine authorship of the Qur’an and explains how, by looking
at the life experiences, teachings and impact of the Prophet
Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬, we can only conclude that he was the final messenger
of God. Significantly, it elaborates in detail on why God is worthy of
our worship, which is the reason for our existence.
Irrespective of whether you consider yourself a Muslim, atheist or
sceptic, I invite you to read this book with an open heart and mind. I
truly believe that if you respond to this invitation, one of the
conclusions you will reach is that atheism is an intellectual mirage and
that the Islamic conception of God is coherent and true. Once you read
this book you will see that the phrase ‘intellectual mirage’ is an apt
description for atheism. A mirage is an optical illusion that we
experience due to atmospheric conditions. Likewise, the conditions
that facilitate the denial of the Divine are based on false assumptions
about the world, incoherent arguments, pseudointellectual postulations
that veil emotional issues and on occasion, egocentricity. Atheism is
not based on a commitment to reason; in many ways, it is its adversary
(see Chapter 3).

20

21

Chapter 1: Atheism – Its Definition,
History and Growth
The best place to start is with a definition. Atheism linguistically
means ‘not a theist’; in other words, someone who does not believe in
a God or gods. The prefix a means none or not, and theism, coming
from the word theos, denotes a ‘belief in the existence of an
intervening God or gods’. Both come from Greek, but relying on the
literal meaning is not enough to explain the implications of the term.
So what does disbelief in a God or gods imply? Does it indicate that
the one who describes himself as an atheist has positive arguments in
favour of atheism? Does it mean that they are currently not convinced
by any theistic arguments? Or does it mean that they just do not
believe in any gods?
Academics have not reached a consensus on a definition for
atheism, but my concern is not with philosophical hair-splitting. My
focus is a practical one. 5 Let’s address the first question I raised: Does
it indicate that the one who describes himself as an atheist has positive
arguments in favour of atheism? In this sense, an atheist is someone
who makes a knowledge claim—that there is no God. Nevertheless,
such a claim requires justification. The claim is a positive assertion,
and it requires some sort of argument to back it up. Therefore, this
type of atheist must provide evidence for their position.
This leads us to the second question: Does it mean that the atheist
is currently not convinced by any theistic arguments? This seems to be
far removed from atheism and is entering into the realm of
agnosticism. Holding such a position would imply that if a good
argument were offered for God’s existence, they would have to accept
it.
22

Finally, we have the question: Does it mean that the person is
someone who just does not believe in any gods? If an atheist
disbelieves based on mere choice, in the absence of any rational
investigation, then how does that differ from any other belief, whether
it is the belief in fairies or astrology?
From my experience, the question why do you believe in no gods?
is an excellent conversation starter with an atheist (see Chapter 4).
Depending on the response I receive, I clearly know if they are
agnostics, atheists who believe without any positive evidence, or if
they have found an argument against God. If they are agnostics, then
the best strategy is to provide good reasons for why you believe God
exists. If they are sincere, and the argument is valid, then they should
accept the existence of the Divine. If they believe in no gods without
evidence, then what I find useful is to get them to question and think
about their beliefs. I would ask them: What evidence do you have to
reject God’s existence? I would also show them the negative
implications of just believing in something based on mere choice
without any reasoning or intellectual basis. If they claim to have found
evidence against God’s existence, I would ask them for the evidence.
In that case, as a Muslim, it would be my job to show how the
evidence they have provided is false or misunderstood, while at the
same time presenting a case for why God does exist.
So here’s a summary of what it practically means to be an atheist.
Firstly, there is the negative assertion that one is simply a disbeliever
in a God or gods. Secondly, there is the view that the current
arguments for God’s existence are not convincing, which implies
agnosticism. Finally, there is the positive assertion that there are no
gods. Such an assertion requires an argument. From my experience,
regardless of the hair-splitting debates on this issue, many atheists are
atheists simply because they are not convinced by any argument in
favour for the Divine. This means that most atheists are not really
atheists at all, but closet agnostics. So there is hope, and all one has to
23

do is offer a good argument for theism. It is important to note that the
practical definitions I have proposed here are not binary; there are
varying degrees of each type of atheist. Atheists can also be described
as having one or a combination of these definitions.
If only it was that easy. Human beings are not intellectual robots.
An array of emotional, social, spiritual and psychological factors
determines which worldview we adopt. Unravelling the vast number of
variables that lead to certain decisions or beliefs is impossible.
However, from my experience, atheism is not a strict intellectual
decision born out of reason and science. On the contrary, atheism is
deeply rooted in psychology (although I appreciate this applies to
some and not all atheists).
Misotheism: hatred of God
Although not considered a form of atheism, I thought it would be of
great interest to elaborate on another type of rejection of the Divine.
Rather than rejecting God’s existence, this perspective involves a
hatred of God and a wish that He did not exist. Known as misotheism,
coming from the Greek misos, meaning hatred, and theos meaning
God, this religious rebellion has been lurking in the dark. It is time
some light was shed on this denunciation of God, which some might
argue is the psychological basis for certain types of atheism.
Associate Professor Bernard Schweizer has written a book on the
topic; after sifting through a number of literary works of prominent
thinkers and writers, including Algernon Charles Swinburn, Zora
Neale Hurston, Rebecca West, Elie Wiesel, Peter Shaffer and Philip
Pullman, he concludes that they seem to struggle with the idea of a
compassionate and merciful God in a world of evil and suffering. He
indicates that the motivation for their hatred of God is due to being
“generally motivated by admirable humanistic impulses”6. Schweizer
also indicates that the misotheist is emotionally and psychologically
24

troubled. He argues that it is “quite true that the psychologically,
emotionally, and physically wounded are most likely to turn away
from God”7, and that it is “by no means certain that more effective
forms of ministering would help douse the fires of misotheism or
block the path to atheism” 8. Although these thinkers and writers
represent different types of misotheists, they all question God’s role in
human suffering:
“The situation is different for the misotheist. To him, the
incompatibility of widespread evil with the image of a
benevolent God is a real problem, not merely a case of hairsplitting theological arguments. Misotheists are genuine
accusers of God, and they will hold him accountable for
random evil and undeserved suffering. Thus, atheists and
misotheists come to the question of God’s role in human
suffering from opposed directions: the unbeliever would say
that the misotheist makes an invalid claim based on fiction. To
the misotheist himself, precisely because he is a believer, God
is not a scapegoat but an accomplice or an instigator of evil.”9
Schweizer’s study is quite nuanced. He categorises misotheism
into agnostic misotheists, absolute misotheists and political
misotheists. To summarise the professor’s main point, the misotheist is
motivated by a key question: What has humanity done to deserve God
and all the evil and suffering that He allows to occur? From my
experience, I would contend that quite a few atheists are closet
misotheists. One question to ask that usually testifies to this conclusion
is: If God did exist, would you worship Him? (see Chapter 15). The
response from many atheists that I have encountered would be no, and
they frequently cite the amount of ‘unnecessary’ and ‘gratuitous’ evil
and suffering in the world. Although I empathise with their concern
and anguish at the suffering inflicted on fellow sentient beings, atheists
25

and misotheists alike suffer from a veiled type of egocentrism. This
means they make special effort not to see the world from any
perspective other than through their own eyes. However, in doing so,
they commit a type of emotional—or spiritual—fallacy. They
anthropomorphise God and turn Him into a limited man. They assume
that God must see things the way we see things, and therefore He
should stop the evil. If He allows it to continue, He must be questioned
and rejected.
Comparing man with God exposes their inability to understand
things holistically. The misotheist would probably at this point exclaim
that this means man has more compassion than God. This further
highlights their inability to see things from beyond their perspective,
and reveals their failure to fathom that God’s actions and will are in
line with a Divine reason that we cannot access. God is not content
with the occurrence of evil and suffering. God does not stop these
things from happening because He sees something we do not, not
because He is content with evil and suffering to continue. God has the
picture and we merely have a pixel. Understanding this facilitates
spiritual and intellectual tranquillity because the believer understands
that ultimately, all that occurs in the world is in line with a superior
Divine wisdom that is based on superior Divine goodness. Refusing to
accept this is actually where the misotheist falls into the quagmire of
arrogance, egocentrism and ultimately, despair. He has failed the test;
his hatred of God makes him forget who God is and dismiss the fact of
Divine wisdom, mercy and goodness (see Chapter 11).
Atheism and Philosophical Naturalism
Before I discuss the Islamic definition of atheism, this chapter is a
good opportunity to introduce a concept that will be referred to in
many chapters of this book. Like atheism, philosophical naturalism
denies the Divine and the supernatural. Therefore, it is not surprising
that most atheists adopt philosophical naturalism as a worldview.
26

Philosophical naturalism is the view that all phenomena within the
universe can be explained via physical processes. These physical
processes are blind and non-rational. This means that they are not
intentionally directed towards a goal or a destination and they are not
able to create and recognise logical relations between things or ideas.
Philosophical naturalists reject all supernatural claims and some argue
that if there is anything ‘outside’ the universe it does not interfere with
it. Atheists, according to Professor Richard Dawkins, are philosophical
naturalists. As stated by Dawkins, an atheist “believes there is nothing
beyond the natural, physical world”.10 However, some atheist
academics are not naturalists. Although these atheists deny the Divine,
they affirm the existence of non-physical phenomena. For the theist,
this type of atheism is—generally speaking—easier to intellectually
engage with because they do not dismiss non-physical phenomena. In
this respect there is some common ground with theism. It is important
to note that most atheists who assert evidence against God’s
existence—or argue that there is an absence of strong evidence for the
Divine—adopt philosophical naturalism, implicitly or explicitly.
Nevertheless, most of the arguments presented in this book can still be
used toward atheists who do or do not adopt philosophical naturalism.
Islamic definition
The traditional Islamic term for atheism is ilhaad, which literally
means ‘deviation’, best translated as ‘godlessness’. The term ilhaad
comes from the Arabic word lahad, which is used to describe a type of
Islamic grave where a hole is dug and a side pocket is made for the
deceased. In this sense the lahad is a deviation from the main hole that
is dug. Linguistically, this implies that atheism is a deviation of what is
natural and rational. The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬taught that all human
beings are born with an innate nature or primordial state that
essentially acknowledges God and has an affinity to worship the
Divine (see Chapter 4).11 This Prophetic teaching provides a clear
27

basis for the Islamic belief that atheism is unnatural and an aberration
of the human psyche.
According to Islamic theology, God’s names include The-Creator
(Al-Khaaliq), The-Sustainer (Al-Muqeet), and The-Originator (AlMubdi). Atheists reject these names as they deny the idea of a creator
for the universe. The Islamic doctrine of God’s oneness, known as
tawheed, considers denying any of God’s names and attributes as a
form of polytheism (see Chapter 15). Therefore, from the Islamic
point of view, atheists are considered polytheists. It is not surprising to
see that the Qur’an affirms that those who reject a creator “are not
certain”12 and describes those who reject monotheism as “fools”13,
which implies that polytheists and by extension atheists are irrational,
imprudent and unwise. In summary, the Islamic description of atheism
is that it is an unnatural worldview based on uncertainty and
irrationality.
This definition of atheism is not neutral. It positively assumes the
existence of a God or a creator. This is not unusual, as the Qur’an does
not accept atheism to be the default position. The Divine book
constantly refers to natural phenomena. These verses are used as a
premise for the reader or listener to conclude that God is worthy of our
worship because He created the universe with wisdom, purpose,
precision and beauty. These verses also evoke an appreciation of
God’s majesty, power, glory, mercy and love. Although at least two
verses directly address atheism (see Chapter 5), much of the Qur’an
that pertains to the empirical world not only provides a basis for
intellectual arguments, but serves as a powerful sign to conclude that
the universe and everything within it was created with a Divine
wisdom, power and purpose. This in turn should propel one’s mind
and soul to conclude that God is worthy of our worship and love (see
Chapter 15). This Qur’anic strategy is a clear indication that atheism,
and the related question does God exist? is not the starting point;
rather, it is the unnatural position that denies reality (see Chapter 4).
28

A brief history of atheism
In Islamic history
Atheism was not a major social and intellectual threat until the
emergence of the 8th century Dahriyya. These thinkers were
empiricists who believed that all knowledge could only be acquired via
the empirical method. They believed that the cosmos was eternal and
composed of four qualities, which were responsible for everything that
existed. They argued that everything had always existed and did not
require any creator or maker. 14
According to Kitab al-Aghani by Faraj al-Isfahani, Abu Hanifa,
the famous jurist and founder of one of the traditional schools of
thought, debated a Dahri in the 8th century. Abu Hanifa was known to
have intellectually hammered the Dahriyya in public debates (see
Chapter 8). Many of the Islamic scholars responded to the claims of
the Dahriyya, including Al-Ghazali, Ibn al-Jawzi, al-Jaḥiẓ,
Muhammad b. Shabib, Ibn Qutayba, and Abu ‘Isa al-Warraq.15 In AlGhazali’s book, Kimiyaʾ-yi sa‘adat, he describes the Dahriyya as
reductionists who do not have a holistic understanding of the universe
and its purpose. He asserts that they are like ants on a piece of paper
that cannot lift their eyes from the ink or the pen they see before them,
thus failing to see who is writing.16
The Islamic history of atheism clearly shows an environment of
intellectual discussion and debate, which could only have been
facilitated by mutual respect and tolerance. The Qur’an makes it
absolutely clear that having myriad beliefs is part of God’s will, and
that there should never be any form of compulsion but mutual respect
and tolerance:
“And had your Lord willed, those on Earth would have
believed—all of them entirely. Then, would you compel the
29

people in order that they become believers?”17
“There is no compulsion in the religion.”18
The Islamic thinker and scholar, Dr. Jaafar Idris, aptly summarises
Islam’s stance on other beliefs:
“Existing peacefully with non-Islamic beliefs is an essential
Islamic principle that is clearly stated in many Qur’anic verses,
and that has been practiced by Muslims throughout their
history. It is not something that Muslims impose on their
religion or something that they have to resort to because of
exceptional external circumstances. It is a requirement
demanded by the nature of the religion….”19
The intellectual heritage of Islam should provide confidence for
Muslims who are exposed to contemporary challenges that confront
the rational foundations of their religion. Many of the answers to socalled new objections from atheist and secular thought have already
been dealt with by Islam’s classical scholarship. From this perspective,
Muslims are standing on the shoulders of giants. Their only concern
should be accessing that wealth of knowledge and learning how to
contemporise it by using a language that is modern, relevant and
applicable.
In the West
Atheism was not a popular movement in antiquity, and it did not have
a substantial following. According to historians, all we have in this
period are individuals (cases of exception) “who dared to voice [their]
disbelief or bold philosophers who proposed intellectual theories about
coming into existence of the gods without, normally, putting their
30

theories into practice or rejecting religious practice altogether.”20 The
first use of the term atheism can be traced back to the Greek scholar
Sir John Cheke in a translation of Plutarch’s On Superstition. In
France during the 1600s, atheism inspired polemical writings and
socio-political measures against its worldview.21 Atheism was
perceived as a threat even as early as the 1700s in Britain. The
celebrated playwright and essayist Joseph Addison wrote a book titled
The Evidence of the Christian Religion, which had a section against
atheism. In this part of the book, he describes atheists in the following
way:
“There is something so ridiculous and perverse in this kind of
Zealots, that one does not know how to set them out in their
proper colours. They are a sort of gamesters who are eternally
upon the fret, tho’ they play for nothing. They are perpetually
teizing their friends to come over to them, though at the same
time they allow that neither of them shall get anything by the
bargain. In short, the zeal of spreading atheism is, if possible,
more absurd than atheism itself… They are wedded to opinions
full of contradiction and impossibility, and at the same time
look upon the smallest difficulty in an article of faith as a
sufficient reason for rejecting it… I would fain ask one of these
bigoted Infidels, supporting all the great points of Atheism, as
the causal or eternal formation of the world, the mortality of
thinking substance, the mortality of the Soul, the fortuitous
organization of the Body, the motions and gravitations of
matter, with the like particulars, were laid together and formed
into a kind of Creed, according to the opinions of the most
celebrated Atheists; I say, supporting such a Creed as this were
formed, and imposed upon any one people in the world,
whether it would not require an infinitely greater measure of
faith, than any set of articles which they so violently oppose.
31

Let me therefore advise this generation of Wranglers, for their
own and for the public good, to act at least so consistently with
themselves, as not to burn with Zeal for Irreligion, and with
Bigotry for Non-sense.”22
Addison’s words, although colourful, indicate the kind of
passionate and fierce discourse on religion in the 1700s. Although
atheism was not a popular movement in Britain, the seeds of disbelief
had already been planted and some of their fruits were already
growing.
Although Addison’s representation of atheism is a biased social
commentary on the emerging discussions of his time, the 17 th and 18th
centuries were marked by significant intellectual achievements that
paved the way for an academic type of scepticism and a form of nondogmatic atheism. There were many philosophers and thinkers
responsible for this. In 1689, the Polish thinker Kazimierz Lyszczynski
denied the existence of God in his De non existential dei. Lyszczynski
maintained that God is a creation of man and that humans created the
concept of God to oppress others. In 1674, Matthias Knutzen, who had
a large following across Europe, produced writings in support of
atheism. In the 1700s, the likes of David Hume and Voltaire presented
arguments and ideas that would provide the necessary intellectual
seeds for atheism to take root. Voltaire argued for deism; a
philosophical and theological position which asserts that a single
creator exists, but rejects the role of revelation, and the authority of
religious knowledge. David Hume wrote a corpus of material on the
issue of God and religion. He argued that the idea of God was
incomprehensible. He also contended the idea of God’s necessary
existence, and attempted to expose the weakness and limitations of the
argument from design (see Chapter 8). Hume argued that the existence
of evil and suffering in the world proved to be intellectually
challenging. Echoing the ancient philosophers, his argument did not
32

deny God; it did, however, question the degree of evil and our inability
to justify it from a human perspective (see Chapter 11). Hume’s attack
on the religious idea of miracles had significant influence. He
maintained that belief in miracles would only be rational if the
probability of the eyewitnesses to be mistaken is less than the
probability of them occurring. Although this is not an exhaustive
account of the thinkers, writers and philosophers that helped cement
atheism in popular culture and academic discourse, it gives an insight
to the history of rejecting the Divine in the West during that period.
During the 19th century, an important figure in the fight to make
atheism acceptable was Charles Bradlaugh. A member of the British
parliament, he fought a long battle to make atheism acceptable to
society. Although he did not achieve his goals, by the end of the 19 th
century he paved the way for others to continue the battle for
acceptability and respect. 23 Bradlaugh wrote many essays, including
Humanity’s Gain from Unbelief, A Plea for Atheism and Doubts in
Dialogue.24 Bradlaugh, a defender of scepticism and atheism, used his
writings to remove “some of the many prejudices prevalent, not only
against actual holders of Atheistic opinions, but also against those
wrongfully suspected of Atheism”.25 Bradlaugh’s activism was not
solely focused on convincing British society to accept atheism; it was
also dedicated to show that atheism makes humanity happier and
increases the well-being of man. He wrote in his essay, Humanity’s
Gain from Unbelief, “As an unbeliever, I ask leave to plead that
humanity has been a real gainer from scepticism, and that the gradual
and growing rejection of Christianity—like the rejection of the faiths
which preceded it—has in fact added, and will add, to man’s happiness
and well-being.”26
The 1920s saw the emergence of the logical positivists. Inspired
by achievements in science, this radical philosophical movement
maintained that statements can only be meaningful if they can be
verified empirically. They argued that if one utters a statement that
33

refers to something that is beyond the reach of the senses, then it is
nonsense. The logical positivists argued that there is nothing that
transcends the physical world. Statements are either analytical or
synthetic. Analytical statements are statements that are true by
definition. For example, the statement ‘the ball is spherical’ is true
because the term ‘spherical’ is contained in the meaning of the term
‘ball.’ Synthetic statements are statements that are true by experience.
For example, the statement ‘the ball is bouncing’ can be verified by
looking at the ball bouncing. In light of this, the logical positivists
created an empirical measure of meaning. This criterion essentially
argues that for any statement to be meaningful, it must be verified by
physical experience. For this reason, many questions pertaining to
God, metaphysics, morality and history were considered meaningless.
Therefore, atheism was the default position, as God could not be
verified via physical experience.
Post 1960s saw the death of logical positivism. One of the key
reasons for its demise was the fact that it was self-defeating. The
logical positivists’ criterion for meaning was that any statement had to
be verified by physical experience; however, the criterion itself could
not be verified by physical experience. Consequently, the criterion
itself was meaningless.
After the demise of logical positivism, the academic world saw
the intellectual resurrection of theism. Time magazine in 1980
commented on the rise of intellectual theism: “In a quiet revolution in
thought and argument that hardly anybody could have foreseen only
two decades ago, God is making a comeback. Most intriguingly, this is
happening not amongst theologians or ordinary believers, but in the
crisp intellectual circles of academic philosophers, where the
consensus had long banished the Almighty from fruitful discourse.”27
One reason for the intellectual revival of theism was the intriguing
scientific discoveries of the mid-20th century. These include the ‘Big
Bang’, which postulates a cosmic beginning to the universe. This was
34

a departure from conventional thinking that postulated the universe
was static and eternal, needing no creator (see Chapter 5). In the
1970s, cosmologists discovered the intriguing phenomenon of finetuning, which explicitly demonstrated that the universe’s laws and
arrangement seemed designed and fine-tuned so that complex
conscious life, like human beings, could exist (see Chapter 8). Near
the beginning of the 20th century, we had an utterly inadequate
understanding of biology’s nuts and bolts. We thought cells—the
building blocks of organisms—were just homogenous blobs of
protoplasm. In 1953, however, James Watson and Francis Crick
demonstrated the double helix structure of DNA, the informationstorage device of the cell. Following this discovery, the molecular
biological revolution continued, unearthing more and more
fascinating, sophisticated features on a microscopic level. Crick (an
atheist himself) was so impressed with the universality of the genetic
code that he became convinced that this could not have happened by
chance, and argued that some sort of extra-terrestrial intervention was
involved.28 These discoveries and progresses in science, as well as
their philosophical implications, progressively brought theism back
onto the intellectual and academic discussion table. Today, theism is a
perfectly respectable position.
To this date, numerous academic publications have attempted to
answer the God question. This has trickled down to the popular level,
where many books have been written on the topic. Social media has
millions of posts on the issue.
The growth of Atheism
In spite of these factors, atheism is now one of the fastest-growing
social and intellectual movements. The past twenty years have featured
an increase in people who describe themselves as atheists or nonreligious. This movement, also known as new atheism, has begun to
35

articulate a case for atheism and secularism (generally considered the
political manifestation of atheism). Modern atheist writers and
academics, including Richard Dawkins, Sam Harris, Christopher
Hitchens and Dan Dennet, have extensively promoted this movement.
Their books have become bestsellers, and thousands have viewed their
public lectures. However, some would argue that their rhetoric has
been nasty, circular and quite unnuanced.
The late Christopher Hitchens argues “religion poisons
everything”29, Sam Harris asserts “the days of our religious identities
are clearly numbered”30 and Richard Dawkins maintains that God is
“delusion”.31 Notwithstanding these similarities, atheists do not form a
homogenous group. Certain atheist academics actually disagree with
the new atheist discourse. For instance, the philosopher Tim Crane
writes:
“It seems to me that many of the claims made by the new
atheists are simply not true, and that their view of the role of
religion in world affairs is in many ways mistaken… going on
in this way about religion is not a very sensible approach to
tackling the problems of the world… it is surprisingly
difficult… to change people’s beliefs. But if there is one thing
which should be obvious here, it is that the way to do it is
(generally) not to tell them that they are stupid, irrational or
hopelessly ignorant.”32
The prominent atheist philosopher Michael Ruse exclaimed, “I
think Dawkins is ignorant of just about every aspect of philosophy and
theology and it shows.” Ruse does not hold back in assessing the
success of the new atheists’ strategies in addressing intelligent design
and Christianity, describing them as:
“…absolute disasters in the fight against intelligent design—
36

we are losing this battle… what we need is not knee-jerk
atheism but serious grappling with the issues—neither of you
are willing to study Christianity seriously and to engage with
the ideas—it is just plain silly and grotesquely immoral to
claim that Christianity is simply a force for evil, as Richard
claims—more than this, we are in a fight, and we need to make
allies in the fight, not simple alienate everyone of good will.”33
Despite ‘internal’ fighting, the new atheist movement has been
very successful in promoting its ideas and worldview. In England and
Wales, 25.1% of the people describe themselves as having no religion,
with a substantial increase on UK campuses. 34 In Europe, 46% of the
people do not believe in the traditional concept of God, and 20% state
that they do not believe there is a spirit, God or life force.35 Half of
Chinese people consider themselves atheists. 36 Professor of Sociology
Phil Zuckerman argues that atheism in many societies is growing. 37 He
also asserts that atheists come in fourth place after the main world
religions: “…finally, nonbelievers in God as a group come in fourth
place after Christianity (2 Billion), Islam (1.2 Billion), and Hinduism
(900 Million) in terms of global ranking of commonly held belief
systems.”38
The Muslim world is not immune to this growing social
movement. According to Win-Gallup International, 5% of Saudis
consider themselves convinced atheists, and over 19% consider
themselves non-religious.39 The Arab world has seen a rise in atheism
with more books on the topic being translated into the Arabic
language. Muslims in the West are facing similar problems. There is
an increase in apostasies, with apostates declaring themselves as
atheists. This problem manifests itself at different levels of the Muslim
community, but an immense change is occurring on university
campuses. The popularisation of atheist publications and social media,
coupled with aggressive and fervent activism, has created an
37

environment of intellectual challenge and peer pressure. A Muslim on
campus who is not equipped with the adequate spiritual, intellectual
and theological tools to address these challenges can be misguided
onto the irrational path of denying the Divine.
One of the main reasons that I have written this book is to provide
people with these tools to show that Islamic theism is coherent and
true, and atheism is an intellectual mirage.

38

Chapter 2: Life Without God – The
Implications of Atheism
Atheism is not an intellectual position that exists in a bubble. If its
claims are true, then one would have to make some inevitable
existential and logical conclusions that are very bleak. Under atheism,
life is ludicrous. The following discussion may not provide a rational
case for God, nor does it follow that God exists simply because life
without God seems absurd. However, it does provide the fertile ground
in which the rational arguments in this book take root.
As discussed in Chapter 1, most atheists are philosophical
naturalists who hold that there is no supernatural and everything in the
universe can be explained in reference to physical processes. Atheism
combined with philosophical naturalism is a recipe for existential
disaster. The formula is simple: no God, which includes the associated
concepts of Divine accountability, equals no ultimate hope, value and
purpose. It also leads to no eternal and meaningful happiness.40 This
conclusion is not an outdated religious cliché; it is a result of thinking
rationally about the logical and existential implications of atheism.
No ultimate hope
Hope is defined as the feeling or expectation and desire for something
to happen. We all hope for good lives, good health and a good job.
Ultimately, we all hope for an immortal blissful existence. Life is such
an amazing gift that no one really wants his or her conscious existence
to end. Similarly, everyone desires that there will be some form of
ultimate justice where wrongs are made right, and the relevant people
will be held accountable. Significantly, if our lives are miserable, or

39

experience pain and suffering, we hope for some peace, pleasure and
ease. This is a reflection of the human spirit; we hope for light at the
end of the dark tunnel, and if we have tranquillity and joy, we want to
keep it that way.
Since atheism denies the Divine and the supernatural, it also
rejects the concept of an afterlife. Without that, there can be no hope
of pleasure following a life of pain. Therefore, the expectation for
something positive to happen after our lives is lost. Under atheism we
cannot expect any light at the end of the dark tunnel of our existence.
Imagine you were born in the third world and spent your whole life in
starvation and poverty. According to the atheist worldview, you are
merely destined for death. Contrast this with the Islamic perspective:
all instances of suffering that happen in our lives are for some greater
good. Therefore, in the larger scheme of things, no pain or suffering
we undergo is meaningless. God is aware of all our sufferings, and He
will provide recompense (see Chapter 11). According to atheism,
however, our pains are as meaningless as our pleasure. The immense
sacrifices of the virtuous and the distress of the victim are falling
dominoes in an indifferent world. They occur for no greater good and
no higher purpose. There is no ultimate hope of an afterlife or any
form of happiness. Even if we lived a life of pleasure and immense
luxuries, most of us would inevitably be doomed to some form of evil
fate or an incessant desire for more pleasure. The pessimist
philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer aptly described the hopelessness and
ill fate that awaits us:
“We are like lambs in a field, disporting themselves under the
eye of the butcher, who chooses out first one and then another
for his prey. So it is that in our good days we are all
unconscious of the evil fate may have presently in store for
us—sickness, poverty, mutilation, loss of sight or reason… No
little part of the torment of existence lies in this, that Time is
40

continually pressing upon us, never letting us take breath, but
always coming after us, like a taskmaster with a whip. If at any
moment Time stays his hand, it is only when we are delivered
over to the misery of boredom… In fact, the conviction that the
world and man is something that had better not have been, is of
a kind to fill us with indulgence towards one another. Nay,
from this point of view, we might well consider the proper
form of address to be, not Monsieur, Sir, mein Herr, but my
fellow-sufferer, Socî malorum, compagnon de miseres!”41
The Qur’an alludes to this hopelessness. It argues that a believer
cannot despair; there will always be hope, and hope is connected to
God’s mercy, and God’s mercy will manifest itself in this life and the
hereafter: “Certainly no one despairs of God’s Mercy, except the
people who disbelieve.”42
Under atheism, ultimate justice is an unachievable goal—a
mirage in the desert of life. Since there is no afterlife, any expectation
of people being held to account is futile. Consider Nazi Germany in
the 1940s. An innocent Jewish lady who just saw her husband and
children murdered in front of her has no hope for justice when she is
waiting for her turn to be cast into the gas chamber. Although the
Nazis were eventually defeated, this justice occurred after her death.
Under atheism she is now nothing, just another rearrangement of
matter, and you cannot give reprieve to something that is lifeless.
Islam, however, gives everyone hope for pure Divine, ultimate justice.
No one will be treated unfairly and everyone shall be taken to account:
“On that Day, people will come forward in separate groups to
be shown their deeds: whoever has done an atom’s weight of
good will see it, but whoever has done an atom’s weight of evil
will see that.”43

41

“God created the heavens and the Earth for a true purpose: to
reward each soul according to its deeds. They will not be
wronged.”44
Life, from the perspective of philosophical naturalism, is like a
mother giving her child a toy and then taking it back for no reason.
Life, without a doubt, is a wonderful gift. Yet any pleasure, joy and
love we have experienced will be taken away from us and lost forever.
Since the atheist denies the Divine and the hereafter, it means that the
pleasures we have experienced in life will disappear. There is no hope
of a continuation of happiness, pleasure, love and joy. However, under
Islam, these positive experiences are enhanced and continued after our
worldly life:
“They will have therein whatever they desire and We have
more than that for them.”45
“The people who lived a pious life will have a good reward
and more….”46
“Verily, the dwellers of Paradise that Day, will be busy in
joyful things… (It will be said to them): ‘Salamun’ (Peace be
on you), a Word from the Lord, Most Merciful.”47
No ultimate value
What is the difference between a human and a chocolate bunny? This
is a serious question. According to many atheists who adopt a
naturalistic worldview, everything that exists is essentially a
rearrangement of matter, or at least based on blind, non-conscious
physical processes and causes.
If this is true, then does it really matter?
If I were to pick up a hammer and smash a chocolate bunny and
then I did the same to myself, according to naturalism there would be
42

no real difference. The pieces of chocolate and the pieces of my skull
would just be rearrangements of the same stuff: cold, lifeless matter.
The typical response to this argument includes the following
statements: “we have feelings”, “we are alive”, “we feel pain”, “we
have an identity” and “we’re human!” According to naturalism these
responses are still just reduced to rearrangements of matter, or to be
more precise, neuro-chemical happenings in one’s brain. In reality
everything we feel, say or do can be reduced to the basic constituents
of matter, or at least some type of physical process. Therefore, this
sentimentalism is unjustified if one is an atheist, because everything,
including feelings, emotions or even the sense of value, is just based
on matter and cold physical processes and causes.
Returning to our original question: What is the difference between a
human being and a chocolate bunny? The answer, according to the
atheist perspective, is that there is no real difference. Any difference is
just an illusion—there is no ultimate value. If everything is based on
matter and prior physical causes and processes, then nothing has real
value. Unless, of course, one argues that what matters is matter itself.
Even if that were true, how could we appreciate the difference between
one arrangement of matter and another? Could one argue that the more
complex something is, the more value it has? But why would that be of
any value? Remember, according to atheism nothing has been
purposefully designed or created. It is all based on cold, random and
non-conscious physical processes and causes.
The good news is that the atheists who adopt this perspective do
not follow through with the rational implications of their beliefs. If
they did, it would be depressing. The reason that they attribute
ultimate value to our existence is because their innate dispositions,
which have been created by God, have an affinity to recognise God
and the truth of our existence (see Chapter 4).
From an Islamic point of view, God has placed an innate
disposition within us to acknowledge our worth, and to recognise
43

fundamental moral and ethical truths (see Chapter 9). This disposition
is called the fitrah in Islamic thought (see Chapter 4). Our claim of
ultimate value is justified because God created us with a profound
purpose, and preferred us to most of His creation. We have value
because the One who created us has given us value.
“Now, indeed, We have conferred dignity on the children of
Adam… and favoured them far above most of Our creation.”48
“Our Lord! You have not created all this without purpose.”49
Islam values the good and those who accept the truth. It contrasts
those who obey God and thereby do good, and those who are defiantly
disobedient, and thereby do evil: “Then is one who was a believer like
one who was defiantly disobedient? They are not equal.”50
Since naturalism rejects the hereafter and any form of Divine
justice, it rewards the criminal and the peacemaker with the same end:
death. We all meet the same fate. So what ultimate value do the lives
of Hitler or Martin Luther King Jr. really have? If their ends are the
same, then what real value does atheism give us? Not much at all.
However, in Islam, the ultimate end of those who worship God
and are compassionate, honest, just, kind and forgiving is contrasted
with the end of those who persist with their evil. The abode of the
good is eternal bliss and the abode of the evil is Divine alienation. This
alienation is a consequence of consciously denying God’s mercy and
guidance, which inevitably results in spiritual anguish and torment.
Clearly, Islam gives us ultimate value. However, under atheism, value
cannot be rationally justified except as an illusion in our heads.
Despite the force of this argument, some atheists still object. One
of their objections involves the following question: Why does God give
us ultimate value? The answer is simple. God created and transcends
the universe, and He has unlimited knowledge and wisdom. His names
44

include The-Knowing and The-Wise. Therefore, what He values is
universal and objective. Another way of looking at it is by
understanding that God is the maximally perfect Being, which means
He is free from any deficiency and flaw. Therefore, it follows that
what He values will be objective and ultimate, because this objectivity
is a feature of His perfection.
Another objection argues that even if we were to accept that God
gives us ultimate value, it would still be subjective, as it would be
subject to His perspective. This contention is premised on a
misunderstanding of what subjectivity means. It applies to an
individual’s limited mind and/or feelings. However, God’s perspective
is based on unlimited knowledge and wisdom. He knows everything;
we do not. The classical scholar Ibn Kathir states that God has the
totality of wisdom and knowledge; we have its particulars. In other
words: God has the picture, we merely have a pixel.
Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Professor of Islamic studies at George
Washington University, provides an apt summary of the concept of
human rights and dignity—which ultimately refer to value—in the
absence of God:
“Before speaking of human responsibilities or rights, one must
answer the basic religious and philosophical question, ‘What
does it mean to be human?’ In today’s world everyone speaks of
human rights and the sacred character of human life, and many
secularists even claim that they are true champions of human
rights as against those who accept various religious worldviews.
But strangely enough, often those same champions of humanity
believe that human beings are nothing more than evolved apes,
who in turn evolved from lower life forms and ultimately from
various compounds of molecules. If the human being is nothing
but the result of ‘blind forces’ acting upon the original cosmic
soup of molecules, then is not the very statement of the
45

sacredness of human life intellectually meaningless and nothing
but a hollow sentimental expression? Is not human dignity
nothing more than a conveniently contrived notion without basis
in reality? And if we are nothing but highly organized inanimate
particles, what is the basis for claims to ‘human rights’? These
basic questions know no geographic boundaries and are asked
by thinking people everywhere.”51
We have value, but what value does the world have?
If I were to put you in a room with all your favourite games, gadgets,
friends, loved ones, food and drink, but you knew that in five minutes
you, the world and everything in it would be destroyed, what value
would your possessions have? They wouldn’t have any at all.
However, what is five minutes or 657,000 hours (equivalent to 75
years)? It is mere time. Just because we may live for 75 years does not
make a difference. In the atheist worldview it will all be destroyed and
forgotten. This is also true for Islam. Everything will be annihilated.
So in reality the world intrinsically has no value; it is ephemeral,
transient and short-lived. Nonetheless, from an Islamic perspective the
world has value because it is an abode for getting close to God, good
deeds and worship, which lead to eternal paradise. So it is not all doom
and gloom. We are not on a sinking ship. If we do the right thing, we
can gain God’s forgiveness and approval.
“There is terrible punishment in the next life as well as
forgiveness and approval from God; so race for your Lord’s
forgiveness….”52
No ultimate purpose
“I do not know why we are here, but I’m pretty sure that it is
46

not in order to enjoy ourselves.”53
These are the words of influential philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein.
Like many philosophers, he did not have an answer to the question:
What is the purpose of life? But he did indicate that life is not just a
game. Other people, however, have argued that the question is false.
There may be nothing we should be bothered about. We should carry
on living and not worry about why we are here. The Nobel Prize
winner Albert Camus explained this attitude in the following way:
“You will never live if you are looking for the meaning of life”54.
Camus was basically saying that the important thing is to live a life
that works for you, regardless of any truth behind your existence.
In light of these differing views, we must ask: Is it reasonable to
believe we have a purpose? To help answer this question, let us take
the following illustration into consideration:
You are probably reading this book sitting on a chair, and you are
wearing some clothes. So I would like to ask you a question: For what
purpose? Why are you wearing the clothes, and what purpose does the
chair have? The answers to these questions are obvious. The chair’s
purpose is to allow us to sit down by supporting our weight, and our
clothes fulfil the purpose of keeping us warm, hiding our nakedness
and of course making us look aesthetically pleasing. Our clothes and
the chair are lifeless objects with no emotional or mental abilities, and
we attribute purpose to these. Yet some of us do not believe we have a
purpose for our own existence. Naturally, this seems absurd and
counter-intuitive.
Having an ultimate purpose for our lives implies that there is a
reason for our existence—in other words, some kind of intention and
objective. Without an ultimate purpose we have no reason to exist, and
we lack a profound meaning for our lives. This is the perspective of
naturalism. It dictates that we merely spring from prior physical
processes. These are blind, random and non-rational. The logical
47

conclusion of this indifferent view on our existence is that we are
riding on a sinking ship. This metaphorical ship is our universe
because, according to scientists, this universe is heading towards its
inevitable demise and will suffer what they call a ‘heat death’. Human
life will be destroyed prior to this heat death as the Sun will eventually
obliterate the Earth. 55 Therefore, if this ship is going to sink, I ask you,
what is the point of reshuffling the deck chairs or giving a glass of
milk to the old lady? The Qur’an represents humanity’s intuitive
stance on this issue: “Our Lord! You have not created all this without
purpose.”56
Nevertheless, various disputes emerge from this discussion. First,
an atheist can argue that the absence of any reason for our existence
gives us more freedom to create purpose for ourselves. To further
explain, some of the existentialists have argued that our lives are based
on nothing, and from this nothingness we can create a new realm of
possibilities for our lives. This rests on the idea that everything is
intrinsically meaningless, and therefore we have the freedom to create
meaning for ourselves in order to live fulfilling lives. The flaw with
this approach is that we cannot really escape meaning. Denying
purpose for the basis of our existence, while attributing some made-up
purpose to our lives is, by definition, self-delusion. It is no different in
saying, “Let’s pretend to have purpose.” This is no different from
children who pretend to be doctors and nurses, cowboys and Indians,
or mothers and fathers. However, we must all grow up and face the
truth that life is not just a game.
Another disagreement consists of the Darwinian claim that our
purpose is to propagate our DNA; as the famous atheist Richard
Dawkins proposes in his book, The Selfish Gene, our bodies have
developed to do just that. 57 The problem with this view is it relegates
our existence to a random accident via a lengthy biological process.
This renders the human nothing more than a by-product, an incidental
being that emerged via the random collision of particles and the
48

random rearrangement of molecules.
Islam’s view on the purpose of our lives is intuitive and
empowering. It elevates our existence from products of matter and
time to conscious beings who choose to have a relationship with the
One who created us (see Chapter 15). Atheism and naturalism provide
no ultimate purpose for our existence.
No eternal and meaningful happiness
“[A]nd a happy future belongs to those who are mindful of
Him.”58
The pursuit of happiness is an essential part of our human nature. All
of us want to be happy—even when sometimes we cannot pinpoint
exactly what ‘happiness’ is. This is why if you were to ask the average
person why they want to get a good job, they would probably reply,
“To earn enough to live comfortably”. However, if you questioned
them further and asked why they want to live comfortably they would
more than likely say, “Because I want to be happy”. If you then asked
them, “Why do you want to be happy?” They would be stuck for an
answer, because happiness is ultimately an end, not a means. It is the
final destination, not necessarily the journey. We all want to be happy,
and there is no reason why we want to be happy other than happiness
itself. This is why we endlessly seek ways to help us achieve that final
happy state.
The journey that people seek varies from one person to the next.
Some dedicate years to adding qualifications and career credentials to
their names. Others work tirelessly in gyms to achieve a perfect figure.
Those who desire the love of family often end up sacrificing their lives
to the care of their spouse and children, while some party their
weekends away with friends, seeking a release from the relentless
cycle of work. The list is endless. It begs the question: What is true,
49

meaningful happiness?
To help answer this question, imagine the following scenario:
While reading this, you are sedated against your will. Suddenly you
wake up and find yourself on a plane. You’re in first class. The food is
heavenly. The seat is a flatbed, designed for a luxurious, comfortable
experience. The entertainment is limitless. The service is out of this
world. You start to use all of the excellent facilities. Time starts to
pass. Now think for a moment, and ask yourself the question: Would I
be happy?
How could you be? You would need some questions answered
first. Who sedated you? How did you get on the plane? What is the
purpose of the journey? Where are you heading? If these questions
remained unanswered, how could you be happy? Even if you started to
enjoy all of the luxuries at your disposal, you would never achieve
true, meaningful happiness. Would a frothy Belgian chocolate mousse
on your dessert tray be enough to drown out the questions? It would be
a delusion, a temporary, fake type of happiness, only achieved by
deliberately ignoring these critical questions.
Now apply this to your life and ask yourself, am I happy? Our
coming into existence is no different from being sedated and thrown
on a plane. We never chose our birth, our parents or where we come
from. Yet some of us do not ask the questions or search for the
answers that will help us achieve our ultimate goal of happiness.
Where does true, meaningful happiness lie? Inevitably, if we
reflect on the previous example, happiness really lies in answering key
questions about our existence. These include: What is the purpose of
life? Where am I heading after my death? In this light, our happiness
lies in our inwardness, in knowing who we are, and finding the
answers to these critical questions. If we claim to be happy, but have
not asked these questions or found any answers, then our happy state is
not very meaningful. It would be like a drunken person who seems to
be happy when he temporarily forgets life’s worries.
50

Unlike animals, we cannot be content by reacting to our instincts.
Obeying our hormones and mere physical needs will not answer these
questions and bring happiness. To understand why, reflect on another
example: Imagine you were one of 50 human beings locked in a small
room with no exit. There are only 10 loaves of bread, and there is no
more food for another 100 days. What do you all do? If you follow
your animalistic instincts, there will be blood. But if you try to answer
the question, how can we all survive? it is likely that you will, because
you will devise ways to do so.
Extend this example to your life. Your life has many more
variables, which can result in almost an infinite number of outcomes.
Yet some of us just follow our carnal needs. Our jobs may require
Ph.Ds. or other qualifications, and we may wine and dine with our
partners, but all of that is still reduced to the mere instincts of survival
and procreation. Meaningful happiness cannot be achieved unless we
find out who we really are and search for answers to life’s critical
questions.
However, under naturalism these questions do not have any real
answers; this is why naturalism can never lead to a meaningful happy
state. Why are we here? No reason at all. Where are we going?
Nowhere. We will just face death. We all need to answer the
fundamental question of why we are here. In Islam, the answer is
simple yet profound. We are here to worship God (see Chapter 15).
But worship in Islam is quite different from the common
understanding of the word. Worship can be shown in every act that we
do. The way we talk to each other and the small acts of kindness we do
each day. If we focus on pleasing God by our actions, then our actions
become acts of worship.
Worship is not merely limited to directing our acts of worship to
God alone, like the spiritual acts of prayer and fasting. Worshipping
God also means loving, obeying and knowing Him the most.
Worshipping God is the ultimate purpose of our existence; it frees us
51

from the ‘slavery’ to others and society. God, in the Qur’an, presents
us with a powerful example:
“God puts forward this illustration: can a man who has for his
masters several partners at odds with each other be considered
equal to a man devoted wholly to one master? All praise
belongs to God, though most of them do not know.”59
Inevitably, if we do not worship God, we end up worshipping
other ‘gods’. Think about it. Our partners, our bosses, our teachers, our
friends, the societies we live in, and even our own desires ‘enslave’ us
in some way. Take, for example, social norms. Many of us define
beauty based on social pressures. We may have a range of likes and
dislikes, but these are shaped by others. Ask yourself, why are you
wearing these trousers or this skirt? Saying you like it is a shallow
response; the point is, why do you like it? If we keep on probing in this
way, many will end up admitting “because other people think it looks
nice”. Unfortunately, we’ve all been influenced by the endless adverts
and peer pressure that bombard us.
In this respect we have many ‘masters’ and they all want
something from us. They are all ‘at odds with each other’, and we end
up living confused, unfulfilled lives. God, who knows us better than
we know ourselves, who loves us more than our mothers love us, is
telling us that He is our true Master, and only by worshipping Him
alone will we truly free ourselves.
The Muslim writer Yasmin Mogahed explains in her book,
Reclaim Your Heart, that anything other than God is weak and feeble,
and that our freedom lies in worshipping Him:
“Every time you run after, seek, or petition something weak or
feeble… you too become weak or feeble. Even if you do reach
that which you seek, it will never be enough. You will soon
52

need to seek something else. You will never reach true
contentment or satisfaction. That is why we live in a world of
trade-ins and upgrades. Your phone, your car, your computer,
your woman, your man, can always be traded in for a newer,
better model. However, there is a freedom from that slavery.
When the object upon which you place all your weight is
unshaking, unbreakable, and unending, you cannot fall.”60
The next question is: Where are we going? We have a choice: to
embrace God’s eternal, unbounded mercy, or to run away from it.
Accepting His mercy, by responding to His message, and obeying,
worshipping and loving Him will facilitate our eternal happiness in
paradise. Rejecting and running away from God’s mercy necessitates
that we end up in a place devoid of His love, a place of unhappiness—
hell. So, we have a choice. Either we decide to embrace His mercy or
try to escape from it. We have the free will to choose. Even though
God wants good for us, He does not force us to make the right choices.
The choices we make in this life will shape our lives after we die:
“…and when that Day comes, no soul will speak except by His
permission, and some of them will be wretched and some
happy.”61
“There they will stay—a happy home and resting place!”62
Since our ultimate purpose is to worship God, we must establish
our natural balance to find out who we really are. When we worship
God, we free ourselves, and find ourselves. If we do not, we are
forgetting what makes us human (see Chapter 15):
“And be not like those who forgot God, so He made them
forget themselves.”63
53

In summary, atheism cannot provide profound answers for our
existence, and therefore real, meaningful happiness can never be
achieved. If someone argues that they are happy under atheism, I
would argue it is a drunken type of happiness. They only sober up
when they start thinking deeply about their own existence. Even if they
have attempted to find the answers and have settled with not
knowing—or being sceptical about the available responses—they will
still not achieve ultimate happiness. Compare the person who knows
why they exist and where they are going with the one who does not.
Their conditions are not the same, even if they both claim to be happy.
This chapter has clearly shown the logical implications of denying
God. While atheists are emotionally justified in believing their lives
have a sense of ultimate value, hope, happiness and purpose, the point
is clear: intellectually they are groundless. Even Richard Dawkins
appreciates the logical implications of naturalism. He argues that under
naturalism, everything is meaningless and based on pitiless
indifference:
“On the contrary, if the universe were just electrons and selfish
genes, meaningless tragedies like the crashing of this bus are
exactly what we should expect, along with equally meaningless
good fortune. Such a universe would be neither evil nor good
in intention. It would manifest no intentions of any kind. In a
universe of blind physical forces and genetic replication, some
people are going to get hurt, other people are going to get
lucky, and you won’t find any rhyme or reason in it, nor any
justice. The universe we observe has precisely the properties
we should expect if there is, at bottom, no design, no purpose,
no evil and no good, nothing but blind, pitiless indifference.”64
A universe made up of non-rational, blind, cold physical stuff is
54

not concerned with our emotions. Only God can provide the
intellectual justification for the things that define our humanity.

55

Chapter 3: Adversaries of Reason – Why
Atheism is Irrational
Imagine you are a taxi-driver and one day you receive a call to pick up
two passengers from the train-station. You are quite close so you
arrive before the scheduled time. The passengers’ train arrives and
after a few moments they get into your car. You exchange greetings
and then you ask them where they want to go. They request that you
take them to their office, which is about 9 miles away. You start the
car and begin to drive. After some time, you drop them off at their
office.
Now rewind the story. Imagine that just after the passengers get
into your car, you put on a blindfold. In this scenario, would you be
able to drive your passengers to their destination? The answer is
obvious. You could never drive them to their destination because you
are blind; you cannot see because of the blindfold. However, what if
you insisted that you could drive your vehicle with your blindfold on?
Wouldn’t your passengers describe you as irrational, if not insane?
The taxi-driver who can see represents Islamic theism, and the
taxi-driver who has a blindfold on represents atheism.
Introducing the argument
Before I explain why the taxi-drivers in this story are analogies of
atheism and Islamic theism, let me provide you with some essential
background information. Both Muslims and atheists assume that they
have the ability to reason. This means that we are able to form mental
or rational insights. We “see” our way to a conclusion in our minds.
Our minds take premises or statements and “drive” them to a mental
destination; in other words, a logical conclusion. This is a key feature
56

of a rational mind.
So why is atheism like a taxi-driver with a blindfold on? Most
forms of atheism imply philosophical naturalism, which demands that
reason (and everything else) must only be explained via blind, nonrational physical processes. However, just as you cannot drive
passengers to their office with a blindfold on, physical processes that
are blind can never “drive” any premises in our minds to a mental
destination. In other words, they cannot create and recognise the
logical relations between the premises of an argument. Therefore,
atheism is in effect equivalent to rejecting reason itself, because it
invalidates its own assumption. Our ability to reason simply does not
fit within the naturalistic worldview, because rationality cannot come
from blind, non-rational physical processes. To maintain that it can is
the same as believing that something can come from nothing. From
this perspective, atheism is irrational. Atheism invalidates the thing
that it claims to use to deny God: reason.
So why is Islamic theism like a taxi-driver who can see? Our
ability to form mental insights fits within Islamic theism because this
ability makes sense (i.e. is explained adequately), as it was given to us
by the Creator Who is All-Seeing, The-Knowing and The-Wise. A
thing cannot give rise to something if it does not contain it, or if it does
not have the ability (or the potential) to give rise to it. In other words,
rationality can only come from rationality. This is why our ability to
form mental insights can come from the Creator.
The argument in this chapter asserts that our ability to reason is
assumed by both atheists and theists. This assumption, however, fits
nicely within Islamic theism and does not fit or make sense under
atheism. Therefore, it would only be rational to accept Islamic theism
over atheism. This chapter will examine these assertions in detail.
However, before I elaborate, the dialogue below is a summary of
what will be discussed in this chapter:

57

Atheist: “There is no evidence for the existence of God. Belief in God
is irrational.”
Muslim: “That’s an interesting assertion. Before we continue, can I ask
you, do you believe that you have rational faculties? In other
words, do you believe you can reason?”
Atheist: “Obviously. Any rational person would deny God. There’s
simply no evidence.”
Muslim: “Okay, great. So can I ask, how do you explain your rational
faculties under atheism?”
Atheist: “What do you mean?”
Muslim: “Well, do you believe all phenomena can be explained via
physical stuff? And do you believe that there is no supernatural?”
Atheist: “Sure.”
Muslim: “Physical stuff is just blind and non-rational. So how can
rationality come from non-rationality? How can anything arise
from something that does not contain it or have the potential to
give rise to it? How can we form rational insights based on blind
physical processes? In this light, how can you explain your ability
to reason?”
Atheist: “Well, we have a brain that has evolved.”
Muslim: “Okay, and according to atheism an evolved brain is based on
physical stuff too, no?”
Atheist: “Yes, but our brains have evolved to be rational, because the
more you know about the world the more likely you are to
survive.”
Muslim: “That’s not true; holding non-rational beliefs about the world
can lead to survival too.”
58

Atheist: “So what? We both assume reason to be true, so it’s not an
issue.”
Muslim: “Well, for me it isn’t. But under atheism your ability to
reason does not make sense. Atheism has invalidated the very
assumption that it claims to use to deny God. So it is absurd to be
an atheist since atheism nullifies reason itself.”
Atheist: “No, you have to prove God to me first.”
Muslim: “That’s a cop-out, because your use of the word ‘proof’
assumes your ability to reason. However, you are not justified in
making such an assumption because rationality is nullified under
atheism. Rationality cannot come from non-rationality. From this
perspective, atheism is irrational. However, rationality can come
from rationality. This is why Islamic theism explains best why we
can use our reason, as it came from the Creator Who is AllSeeing, The-Knowing and The-Wise.”
What is reason?
In the context of this argument, reason refers to the fact that we have
rational faculties. We can acquire truth, we desire to discover, and we
can infer, induce and deduce. A significant aspect of our rational
faculties is the ability to come to a logically valid conclusion. When
we reason logically, our conclusions will be based on our rational
insight that is occurring in our minds; we see that the conclusion
follows. Technically speaking, the conclusions we make are based on
the logical relations between the premises of a logical argument. We
see that the conclusion follows based on these relations. This “seeing”
cannot be explained physically. Nothing in physical world can explain
why and how these premises are connected to the conclusion. In
summary, when we reason logically we have a mental insight that the
conclusion follows logically; it is logically connected to its previous
59

premises.
Deductive arguments are a good example to explain our rational
insights. Deductive arguments are where the premises guarantee the
truth of the conclusion. A deductive argument is valid if its conclusion
follows necessarily from its premises. It is sound if it is valid and its
premises are true or rationally acceptable.
Consider the following deductive argument:
1. All bachelors are unmarried men.
2. John is a bachelor.
3. Therefore, John is an unmarried man.
We know that (3) necessarily follows from (1) and (2) based on
our insight. Nothing in the physical world can prove why (3) is
connected to the previous premises; in other words, why it logically
follows. The conclusion doesn’t only necessarily follow by virtue of
the meaning of the words in the premises65; it does so due to the
relations occurring between them.66 The connection between the
conclusion and the logical relations between the premises cannot be
observed and explained physically. From this perspective, reason
clearly has a transcendent dimension.
To drive this point home, consider the following deductive
argument:
1. John has observed 5 modifus.
2. The 5 modifus John has observed are yellow.
3. Therefore, some modifus at least must be yellow.
This is a valid argument; the conclusion necessarily follows from
the premises. John has observed 5 yellow modifus, so it necessarily
follows that at least some modifus must be yellow. Given premises (1)
and (2), (3) must follow. However, why do we agree that the
60

conclusion (3) necessarily follows from these premises? Why do we
believe in the logical validity of the conclusion, although we have no
idea what a modifu is? (By the way, I have made the word up). It is
because the logical flow of the argument occurs in our minds
regardless of the meaning of the premises and any personal inferences
we might ever have formed from our own experiences. There is a
connection between the relations of the premises and the conclusion.
We have achieved an insight into conclusion (3) without any external,
material and semantic data. We have achieved an insight into
something that is not based on our experience (we do not know what a
modifu is). In actual fact, if the word “yellow” was replaced with
“zellow” (another made-up word), the conclusion would still
necessarily follow; some modifus (at least 5) must be zellow.
Not only have our minds come to a conclusion that is not based on
any external evidence; our minds have also established relations
between the premises. These relations cannot be explained using
physical or empirical evidence. Our minds have directed and driven
our insight (in other words, established these logical relations) to
conclude that (3) must follow from (1) and (2). Our minds have taken
premises (1) and (2) and driven or directed our insight to conclude (3).
However, being driven or directed to a mental destination or endpoint
is not a characteristic of a physical process. Physical processes are
blind, random and have no intentional force directing them anywhere.
This means that we cannot use physical processes to account for our
ability to achieve an insight into a conclusion.
Reason: an assumption of science
The human mind has a distinctive quality; we can distinguish between
right and wrong, truth and falsehood, beauty and vileness. This clearly
separates us from animals. Our mental abilities have enabled us to
progress and advance. In fact, we must trust our rational faculties
61

before we can even begin to conduct science. One of science’s key
assumptions is that our minds have the ability to reason. Without such
an assumption, we could never use words such as evidence, fact, truth
and proof.
The human practice of science rests on the assumption that we can
reason. This means that the existence of reason cannot be fully
accounted for by any type of scientific explanation. For example, when
a scientist attempts to address a testable hypothesis or an answerable
question, there is an assumption that the results can be rationalised.
Scientists also accept that they have the ability to assess the logical
validity of a scientific explanation. This obviously assumes that the
scientist can use her reason before she performs any science.
This does not mean that science cannot provide any partial
explanation at all for our ability to reason. However, it is unable to
justify reason from a foundational point of view. Attempting to
demonstrate how reason emerged via some physical process does
nothing to explain its transcendent dimension. This includes the ability
to come to a logically valid conclusion that is determined by an insight
in one’s mind. This is why relying solely on a scientific explanation is
inadequate: it fails to account for the fact that we see the conclusion in
our minds. We have the ability to make a logical conclusion based on
the relations between premises. We can also do this without the key
words in the premises being based on anything we can understand or
verify empirically. Science can only deal with what can be observed in
some way; logical relations between premises cannot be observed.
Since science requires reason in order to begin to explain reason, to
argue that it can somehow justify our ability to reason would be
tantamount to arguing in a circle. Science is a useful tool to help us
understand the world, but it has many limitations (see Chapter 12).
At this point one might argue that assumptions do not need to be
explained or accounted for, because some assumptions (or first
principles) are taken to be true without evidence. This is a valid point.
62

However, there is a difference between valid and invalid assumptions.
For an assumption to be valid it must make sense to the sphere of
knowledge, concept or theory that it supports. However, if an
assumption that aims to support a worldview cannot fit within that
worldview, then the assumption cannot be presumed. For example,
science rests on the notion that there is “consistency in the causes that
operate the natural world”67. If scientists were to always conclude that
physical causes are inconsistent, then that assumption would need to
be dismissed or changed. If philosophical naturalism (and even
science) maintains that reason can be explained via random, nonrational physical processes, then how can an atheist—who adopts
naturalism—account for such an assumption when it clearly cannot fit
within the perspective of naturalism? Naturalism actually denies
reason, because rationality cannot come from non-rational physical
processes. Mental insights cannot come from blind physical processes.
Therefore, atheists must change their worldview or dismiss the idea
that we are rational.
Under atheism we cannot justify our rational faculties
Most atheists are philosophical naturalists; naturalism asserts that there
is no supernatural, and that physical processes can explain all
phenomena. According to naturalism, if we probe the most basic levels
of reality, we see that everything is the result of blind, random, nonrational physical processes; subatomic particles, atoms and molecules
are whizzing around without any direction, guidance or intended
outcome. Physical stuff has no purpose; nothing is intentionally
driving these physical processes. If this is the case, though, how can
we claim our minds have the ability to achieve mental insights? How
can we claim the ability to reach a conclusion? A key part of being
able to reason is to have rational insights, to see in one’s mind that
something logically follows from something else based on the logical
relations between premises. This is where naturalism fails, as it asserts
63

that all phenomena are based on random, non-rational physical
processes.
The ability to take premises and “drive” them towards a mental
destination is invalidated if one postulates that the ability comes from
blind, non-rational physical processes. A thing cannot give rise to
something if it does not contain it, or if it does not have the ability (or
the potential) to give rise to it. For example, I cannot give you $500 if
I do not have the money, and I cannot raise the amount if I am jobless
with bad credit (this principle will be used throughout this book).
Likewise, if physical processes do not contain rationality, then how do
they give rise to it? Physical processes by definition do not contain
rationality, and they do not have “insight”. They cannot see the
conclusion that follows from an argument. Physical processes are not
purposefully or intentionally driven or directed. Therefore, to even
suggest that rationality can come from non-rational physical processes,
is exactly the same as believing that something can come from
nothing.
Consider the following example. Similar to the story at the
beginning of this chapter, imagine there are two bus-drivers. The first
has good eyesight and is an experienced driver. The second bus-driver
is blind and inexperienced. The first driver starts his journey and picks
up two people called “Premise 1” and “Premise 2”. Their final
destination is “Conclusion”. He sees the destination on his map and as
the journey is coming to an end he clearly observes the final stop. The
second driver is escorted to his bus at the bus station. Waiting on the
bus are “Premise 1” and “Premise 2”. Their destination is the same as
in the first scenario. The driver manages to start the bus. However, do
you think he will reach the destination? Just like the taxi-driver with
the blindfold, he will never reach the final destination. Physical
processes suffer the same problem. They are blind. They cannot
explain reason because a feature of rationality is the ability to derive
insight or reach a conclusion, and one cannot obtain insight from
64

something that is blind. To assert such a thing is the equivalent of
saying something can arise from nothing.
From this perspective, atheism—because of its naturalistic
perspective—is not only irrational, but an adversary of reason. It
invalidates the thing that is required to make any claim about God:
reason itself. Since rationality cannot come from non-rationality, it
follows that naturalism cannot explain our ability to reason.
Despite this argument, there are a few possible objections. These
will be discussed at the end of this chapter. However, one key
objection argues that computer programmes have the ability to reason
deductively: computer programmes are made up of physical stuff;
therefore, physical processes can explain rationality. This contention
will be addressed in detail at the end of this chapter. However, the
main point is that computer programmes do not have “insights”; in
particular, they do not have meaningful insights. Human rationality
involves the ability to establish meaningful conclusions. The very fact
that we can question the implications or the meaning of a conclusion
(even if we do not know its meaning, as in the case of the modifus
above) indicates that human rationality involves meaningful insights.
Computer programmes do not have these meaningful insights. In
actual fact, a computer system is based on syntactical rules (the
manipulation of symbols), not on semantics (meaning). This will be
explained further later.
Can Darwinian evolution justify our rational faculties?
According to naturalists our minds have evolved to be rational.
Naturalists argue that it was advantageous for our ancestors to have
known the truth about their environments. Having an ability to
distinguish between truth and falsehood was necessary for their
survival. Despite the fact that naturalism invalidates the assumption
that we have the ability to reason, Darwinian evolution seems a
plausible explanation on the surface. However, when we scratch a little
65

deeper we run into a myriad of problems. Even Charles Darwin
himself had his doubts about this matter. He understood that our ability
to acquire truth could not be accounted for if it had only evolved from
lower life-forms. He wrote in a letter in 1881: “But then with me the
horrid doubt always arises whether the convictions of man’s mind,
which has been developed from the mind of the lower animals, are of
any value or at all trustworthy. Would anyone trust in the convictions
of a monkey’s mind, if there are any convictions in such a mind?” 68
Now let’s see whether naturalistic evolution can provide a
lifejacket with which to rescue human rationality. When we use the
term naturalistic evolution, we are referring to the idea that the
evolutionary process is free from Divine intervention; according to this
idea, our minds evolved to be rational because our ability to reason
and attain true beliefs is necessary for survival. There are several
problems with this claim. Firstly, our ability to distinguish between
truth and falsehood is not a requirement for survival. Secondly,
achieving mental insights is also not a requirement for our continual
existence. Evolution is about the ability to survive, not about the
ability to make logically valid conclusions. Finally, our ability and
desire to discover—a necessary feature of a rational mind—is often
detrimental to our survival.
One of the key features of our rational minds is their ability to
attain truth and discard what is false. We also have mental insights,
and the ability to see a conclusion based on previous premises. These
are the very processes we use when we engage in science. Now the
question to ask is: Can naturalistic evolution account for these
abilities? The answer is no. All we need to do in order to disprove this
idea is show that false beliefs can lead to survival. In that case, there
is no need for the evolutionary process to result in rational faculties.
So can false beliefs result in survival? It does not take long to
work out that countless false beliefs do. An individual who believes
that all insects with red markings on their bodies are poisonous will
66

avoid all insects with red markings and survive. However, this belief
is false, as many insects with red on their bodies are harmless, the
common ladybird being the most obvious example. Someone else
might avoid all fungi because he or she believes they are poisonous,
and by doing so survive. However, we know that some fungi, like
button mushrooms, are completely healthy and nutritious to eat.
Professor of Philosophy Anthony O’Hear provides a similar example
to show that evolution can produce false, rather than true beliefs,
thereby showing that non-rational beliefs can lead to survival:
“A bird may avoid caterpillars with certain types of colouring
because they are poisonous; but it will also avoid nonpoisonous caterpillars with similar colours, and may be
credited with a false belief about the poisonousness of the
harmless caterpillar. Of course, the survival chances of the bird
are increased by its avoidance of the caterpillar type which
includes both noxious and harmless caterpillars. Having a false
belief, then, about a particular caterpillar will be a by-product
of a survival-producing disposition. Given that the harmless
caterpillars have evolved through mimicry of the poisonous
ones, we have here an evolutionary explanation of falsehood,
reinforcing the general point that there is no direct way of
moving from evolutionary workings to truth.”69
The fact that false beliefs can lead to survival raises another
difficult question for naturalism: Why should we trust our minds?
Since there is no necessary link between truth and survival—and that
false beliefs can also lead to survival—then how can we trust our
rational faculties if they could have been based on an evolutionary
process driven by false beliefs?
Our desire to discover also poses a problem for evolution. There
is no need for evolution to result in abilities that allow us to understand
67

the laws of physics or engage in mathematics. It just does not make
sense that we should end up with minds that have the ability to
understand the universe. Cockroaches and beetles survive extremely
well, and have done so for millions of years, yet we do not see them
sitting over coffee discussing the existential and logical implications of
atheism (or anything else).
Think about this for a moment: Imagine a rocket containing
500,000 kilogrammes of fuel, about to be blasted into space at 17,500
miles per hour. What drives an astronaut to board this shuttle,
unknowing of whether or not he will return or even reach space? Is
this desire to explore and discover conducive to his survival? What
drives a climber to ascend Mount Everest, enduring cold and harsh
conditions, not knowing if he will reach the summit? Isn’t he designed
to put his survival first? What drives a monk to isolate himself, remain
celibate and devote himself to discovering inner peace? Does not this
go completely against survival and reproduction? Indeed, the desire to
discover is powerful in humans and in many cases overrides our desire
to survive. We see many cases of people cutting themselves off from
the very things that are conducive to their survival, and in doing so
achieve true happiness and peace.
So, how can we explain our desire to discover, resulting in
activities that are detrimental to survival? The answer is we cannot.
These desires do not make sense if one adopts naturalistic evolution.
In conclusion, our higher levels of rationality and desire to learn often
lead us to spend time in ‘superfluous’ activities which do not aid
survival and reproduction, such as art, spirituality, philosophy or
designing novel contraceptive techniques. Natural selection should
have eliminated all of these, because such behaviours have no adaptive
benefits. Because the Darwinian evolutionary mechanism explains
only “survival and reproduction”, it cannot account for our ability to
reason, or for its most conspicuous characteristic: the desire to
discover.
68

It should be clear from these two problems that the Darwinian
theory of evolution, which is geared towards survival, not truth, is an
inadequate explanation of our ability to reason and desire to discover.
Academics have recognised these problems and have made some
startling remarks. Biologist John Gray states:
“If the human mind has evolved in obedience to the
imperatives of survival, what reason is there for thinking that it
can acquire knowledge of reality, when all that is required in
order to reproduce the species is that its errors and illusions are
not fatal? A purely naturalistic philosophy cannot account for
the knowledge that we believe we possess.”70
DNA discoverer Francis Crick said, “Our highly developed
brains, after all, were not evolved under the pressure of discovering
scientific truths, but only to enable us to be clever enough to survive
and leave descendants.”71
Cognitive scientist Steven Pinker wrote, “Our brains were shaped
for fitness, not for truth. Sometimes the truth is adaptive, but
sometimes it is not.”72
Although Sam Harris, outspoken atheist and neuroscientist,
believes that science will eventually give us answers, he admits that
“…our logical, mathematical, and physical intuitions have not been
designed by natural selection to track the Truth.”73
In summary, when atheists claim to have used their rational
faculties to prove that God does not exist, it is a form of intellectual
hypocrisy. To account for the fact that they have a rational mind, they
have to deny atheism or deny reason itself. The intellectual irony is
that their ability to reason is best explained by the existence of God.
A Note on Evolutionary Reliabilism
Many naturalists admit that there is no necessary link between survival
69

and truth. They maintain that it is highly likely that there were
biological conditions and pressures that gave rise to reliable cognitive
faculties that produce true beliefs. These faculties must have been
conducive to biological fitness and were subsequently preferred by
natural selection.
The view that Darwinian evolution can explain our truth-reliable
cognitive faculties is referred to as evolutionary reliabilism. In order
for evolutionary reliabilism to be justified the probability of natural
selection favouring truth-reliable cognitive faculties must be greater
than the probability of favouring unreliable cognitive faculties that
produce false beliefs.
The main premise for this argument is that truth-reliable cognitive
faculties were more fitness enhancing (conducive to our survival and
reproduction) than unreliable cognitive faculties that produced false
beliefs. However, based on our discussion so far, this premise is
undermined. There are additional reasons why this premise is
unwarranted; some of these are discussed below.
Unreliable cognitive faculties that produced false beliefs could
have led to our survival and reproduction. We could have held
cautious belief-forming processes that were false, yet fitness
enhancing. The academic James Sage argues:
“For example, an organism may hide because it believes falsely
that a predator is nearby. Evolutionarily, it pays to have cautious
belief-forming processes that “over detect” dangerous predators,
especially when false beliefs carry little cost.” 74
Truth-reliable cognitive faculties could have not been favoured by
natural selection as they came as a high cost. James Sage maintains
that truth-reliable cognitive faculties “come at a high price” 75. The
biological cost of these faculties involves the following:

70

“(i) the brain requires oxygen, calories, and cooling, (ii)
calculating detailed inferences (even with minimal data) requires
considerable time and concentration, (iii) accessing information
from past experience requires extensive storage capacity and
retrieval pathways, (iv) identifying relevant information requires
multi-level sorting subroutines, (v) ranking desires and goals
requires extensive deliberation and reflection, and (vi) utilizing
“detectors” (and other perceptual inputs) requires precision and
acuity. Each of these factors carries a significant biological
cost.”76
Since truth-reliable cognitive faculties put a strain on key
biological resources that are essential for survival, natural selection
could have favoured fitness enhancing unreliable cognitive faculties
that produced false beliefs which were less taxing.77
Like with many philosophical topics there are arguments for and
against evolutionary reliabilism. For an in-depth discussion on the why
evolutionary reliabilism does not adequately explain our truth-reliable
cognitive faculties, with responses to popular and academic objections,
please read my essay Can evolution adequately explain our truthreliable cognitive faculties? 78
Islamic theism: the best explanation
I could not give you a loaf of bread if I did not have one in the first
place or if I did not have the ability to obtain or make one. This is
based on the following rational principle: A thing cannot give rise to
something else if it does not contain it, or if it does not have the ability
to give rise to it. For instance, non-rational forces cannot give rise to
rationality, as they do not contain it in the first place. Physical
processes are non-rational because they do not have any “insight”.
They cannot see a conclusion following from previous premises. God
makes sense of the fact that we have rational minds, because
71

rationality can come from the Creator Who is All-Seeing, TheKnowing and The-Wise. If in the beginning of the universe there had
been only non-rational, blind, random, physical matter and processes,
then no matter how they were arranged they could not give rise to
rationality. However, if in the beginning there was a creator with the
names and attributes mentioned above, it follows that the universe can
contain conscious beings with the ability to reason. From this
perspective, atheists actually need God to account for their rational
faculties. Therefore, the existence of a Creator Who is All-Seeing,
The-Knowing and The-Wise is the best explanation for a universe with
conscious organisms that have the ability to reason.
Islamic theism provides a beautiful and simple answer to the main
questions raised in this chapter. God created us and gave us rational
minds with a desire to discover, in order to aid us in fulfilling our
purpose. One way God does this is by directing us towards His
creation, wherein lie His signs (i.e. clues, hints, indications). By
pondering and reflecting over these signs, we can appreciate His
majesty and creative power, for which appreciation and
acknowledgement then naturally lead us to worship Him (see Chapter
15).
God via His knowledge, power and will created the universe and
our minds, hence explaining our ability to reason and discover the
interconnecting principles of the cosmos. This brings to mind a
beautiful verse of the Qur’an: God says, “We will show them Our
signs in the horizons and within their own selves until it becomes clear
to them that it is the truth. But is it not sufficient concerning your
Lord that He is over all things a Witness?”79
God continuously encourages us to ponder, to use our minds:
“Then do they not reflect upon the Qur’an, or are there locks
upon [their] hearts?”80
“So will you not reason?”81
72

These verses signify that we have the ability to reason and ponder
on the natural world to attain truth. God also says in the Qur’an:
“Indeed, in the creation of the heavens and the Earth and in the
alternation of the night and the day are signs for the people of
understanding.”82
From this, we can draw a comprehensive conclusion. God gave us
rational minds and the desire to discover, so that we can use our
rational faculties to understand the universe in all its beauty, which in
turn leads us to worship the One Who created it (see Chapter 15). God
placed within us the very tools required for us to engage in disciplines
such as science, yet the irony is that when some of us find this Godgiven gift, they use it to challenge God Himself (see Chapter 12).
There are some key objections to this argument that are addressed
below.
God of the gaps
The “god of the gaps” objection asserts that a gap in scientific
knowledge about a particular phenomenon should not give rise to
belief in God’s existence, or reference to Divine activity, because
science will eventually progress far enough to provide an explanation.
This objection cannot be applied to the argument presented in this
chapter because it does not address a gap within scientific knowledge;
it addresses the foundations of science. The ability to reason is
required before any science can take place. To argue that science will
eventually explain its own assumptions is tantamount to arguing in a
circle. This discussion is beyond the realm of science, as we are
discussing the foundational assumptions of science itself. Hence the
“god of the gaps” objection is in this case misplaced.
This is a presuppositional argument
73

Presuppositionalism is a form of argument that asserts that we cannot
account for reason without the Christian worldview. The assertion
maintains that you cannot use reason if it is unaccounted for. However,
the atheist can—and rightly does—throw the argument back at the
Christian. The atheist can ask why the Christian believes he has
accounted for his ability to reason. If the Christian replies that the
Christian worldview accounts for his ability to reason, then the atheist
is within his right to ask how, and the argument can go around in
circles.
The argument in this chapter is not a presuppositional one. It
accepts the assumption that we have the ability to reason, and it does
not argue that before you use your reason you need to account for your
ability to reason. The argument answers the question: Given that we
accept the fact that we can reason, what worldview best explains our
ability to do so? It argues that the best way to explain our ability to
reason is by God’s existence, and that naturalism—and by extension,
atheism—invalidates the assumption that we have the ability to reason.
Therefore, atheism must be rejected.
Rationality can arise out of complexity
Emergent materialists argue that a system of complex physical
processes, undergoing complex interactions, can give rise to properties
or phenomena that do not exist in the individual components that
comprise the system. The emergent materialist will cite the history of
science: when something was deemed ‘mysterious’, it was later
demystified when the underlying complex processes were understood.
Therefore, the emergent materialist responds to the argument from
reason, by postulating that our ability to reason—more specifically, the
ability to achieve an insight into a conclusion—is based on complex
processes in the brain. Once these processes are understood, our
ability to reason will have been explained.
A common example that emergent materialists cite is water, H 20.
74

Water is made up of hydrogen and oxygen, which are gases, yet when
combined chemically they form the life-sustaining liquid. Water has
properties that hydrogen and oxygen do not. Examples like these
provide the emergent materialist with the confidence to argue that a
property can arise from a system of complex processes, even though it
is not present in the components of that system. Nevertheless, this
example is misplaced because the argument articulated in this chapter
is not a case of a physical thing bringing into existence another
physical thing (like gases hydrogen and oxygen giving rise to water’s
physical properties). On the contrary, what requires explaining is a
nonphysical property (having a mental insight into a conclusion)
arising from physical ones (blind physical processes). If the complex
processes that underpin brain-activity were understood, and all of their
causal interactions were mapped out, how would that explain our
ability to reason? It would still not answer the question: How can we
acquire truth using our ability to form insights with minds allegedly
based on prior blind, random physical processes?
To simply refer to complexity does not explain anything, and it is
tantamount to saying, “it just happens”. It seems to me that emergent
materialism is a weak attempt to fill the gap created by a naturalistic
worldview (Chapter 7 explains how emergent materialism cannot
explain subjective conscious experiences).
Another problem with the H20 example is that rational insights—
based on relations between premises—seem to be very different to
physical processes, in this case neural activity. The H 20 example
assumes that rational insights and physical processes are the same.
Professor Raymond Tallis argues that “both shiny water and H20
molecules need to be revealed as one or the other. They correspond to
two different modes of observation… The two aspects of water are
two appearances, two modes of experiencing it, and this hardly applies
to neural activity as electrochemical activity and as experience.” 83
The wider implication of adopting emergent materialism is that
75

we allow theories that cannot explain the physical relations or
processes of a system. If one argues that complexity can explain new
properties—without explaining how they emerge—then why should
we expect a theory to explain anything? Merely waiting for our
scientific understanding to improve is not an argument. This is
equivalent to explaining to a trainee builder that you can build a house
by having many bricks. This is not true; other things are also required
to build a house, such as cement, a design, bricklayers, plumbers,
electricians, tools, etc. In conclusion, emergent materialism is not a
coherent theory; it is an incoherent attempt to fill the gap left by
naturalism.
Computers are rational; therefore, physical processes can explain
rationality
A common objection to the argument that rationality cannot arise from
physical processes is the alleged ability of computer programmes to
engage in deductive reasoning. A key feature of rationality is that, in a
valid deductive argument, the conclusion necessarily follows. Since
computer programmes are based on physical processes and exhibit a
key feature of rationality, physical processes can account for our
ability to reason, the argument goes. This is another misplaced
contention. As highlighted in this chapter, human reasoning is based
on having mental insights based on the logical relations between
premises. Computer programmes cannot “see” anything. Humans not
only have insights; our insights are also meaningful. We have the
ability to understand and question the meaning of the conclusions we
come to. Computer programmes are not characterised as having
meaningful insights. Computer programmes are based on syntactical
rules (the manipulation of symbols), not semantics (meaning).
To understand the difference between semantics and syntax,
consider the following sentences:

76

•
•
•

I love my family.
αγαπώ την οικογένειά μου.
আমি আিার পমরবারকে ভালবামি.

These three sentences mean the same thing: I love my family. This
refers to semantics, the meaning of the sentences. But the syntax is
different. In other words, the symbols used are unalike. The first
sentence is using English ‘symbols’, the second Greek, and the last
Bangla. From this, the following argument can be developed:
1. Computer programmes are syntactical (based on syntax).
2. Minds have semantics.
3. Syntax by itself is neither sufficient for, nor constitutive for
semantics.
4. Therefore, computer programmes by themselves are not
minds.84
Imagine that an avalanche somehow arranges mountain rocks into
the words I love my family. It would be absurd to say that the
mountain knows what the arrangement of rocks (symbols) means.
This indicates that the mere manipulation of symbols (syntax) does not
give rise to meaning (semantics). 85
Computer programmes are based on the manipulation of symbols,
not meanings. Likewise, I cannot know the meaning of the sentence in
Bangla just by manipulating the letters (symbols). No matter how
many times I manipulate the Bangla letters, I will not be able to
understand the meaning of the words. This is why for semantics, we
need more than the correct syntax. Computer programmes work on
syntax and not on semantics. Computers do not know the meaning of
anything.
Professor John Searle’s Chinese Room thought-experiment is a
powerful way of showing that the mere manipulation of symbols does
77

not lead to an understanding of what they mean:
“Imagine that you are locked in a room, and in this room are
several baskets full of Chinese symbols. Imagine that you (like
me) do not understand a word of Chinese, but that you are
given a rule book in English for manipulating the Chinese
symbols. The rules specify the manipulation of symbols purely
formally, in terms of their syntax, not their semantics. So the
rule might say: ‘Take a squiggle-squiggle out of basket number
one and put it next to a squiggle-squiggle sign from basket
number two.’ Now suppose that some other Chinese symbols
are passed into the room, and that you are given further rules
for passing back Chinese symbols out of the room. Suppose
that unknown to you the symbols passed into the room are
called ‘questions’ by the people outside the room, and the
symbols you pass back out of the room are called ‘answers to
questions.’ Suppose furthermore, that the programmers are so
good at designing the programs and that you are so good at
manipulating the symbols, that very soon your answers are
indistinguishable from those of a native Chinese speaker.
There you are locked in your room shuffling your Chinese
symbols and passing out Chinese symbols in response to
incoming Chinese symbols… Now the point of the story is
simply this: by virtue of implementing a formal computer
program from the point of view of an outside observer, you
behave exactly as if you understood Chinese, but all the same
you do not understand a word of Chinese.”86
In the Chinese Room thought-experiment, the person inside the
room is simulating a computer. Another person manages the symbols
in a way that makes the person inside the room seem to understand
Chinese. However, the person inside the room does not understand the
78

language; they merely imitate that state. Professor Searle concludes:
“Having the symbols by themselves—just having the syntax—
is not sufficient for having the semantics. Merely manipulating
symbols is not enough to guarantee knowledge of what they
mean.”87
The objector might respond to this by arguing that although the
computer programme does not know the meaning, the whole system
does. Professor Searle has called this objection “the systems reply” 88.
However, why is it that the programme does not know the meaning?
The answer is simple: it has no way of assigning meaning to the
symbols. Since a computer programme cannot assign meaning to
symbols, how can a computer system—which relies on the
programme—understand the meaning? You cannot produce
understanding just by having the right programme. Searle presents an
extended version of the Chinese Room thought-experiment to show
that the system, as a whole does not understand the meaning: “Imagine
that I memorize the contents of the baskets and the rule book, and I do
all the calculations in my head. You can even imagine that I work out
in the open. There is nothing in the ‘system’ that is not in me, and
since I don’t understand Chinese, neither does the system.” 89
A simple response to this objection also includes the fact that
computers are not independent systems with the ability to engage in
deductive reasoning. They were designed, developed and made by
human beings that are conscious and rational. Therefore, computers
are just a protraction of our ability to perform rational insights.
William Hasker explains:
“Computers function as they do because they have been
endowed with rational insight. A computer, in other words, is
79

merely an extension of the rationality of its designers and
users; it is no more an independent source of rational insight
than a television set is an independent source of news
entertainment.”90

Atheism does not—and cannot—have a monopoly on reason. It is
a shame that there is a growing perception that atheists are rational,
and that atheism is based on reason. Nothing could be further from the
truth. Blind, random physical processes cannot account for our ability
to reason. This is why atheism invalidates the very thing it claims to
use to reject the Divine. However, according to Islamic theism, we live
in a rational universe created by the All-Seeing, The-Wise and TheKnowing Creator, who gave us the ability to reason. This is coherent
and accounts fully for our rational faculties; nothing else will (indeed,
nothing else can). Maintaining that blind, random physical processes
can make sense of our ability to see, think and learn is irrational.
Those who persist in this thinking are in fact adversaries of reason.
They are no different from a taxi-driver putting on a blindfold and
insisting that he can drive his passengers to their destination.

80

Chapter 4: Self-Evident – Why Atheism
Is Unnatural
Imagine one evening you receive a call from David, one of your old
school friends you used to sit next to during science lessons. You
haven’t spoken to him for years, but you remember the weird
questions he used to ask you. Although you found him pleasant, you
were not a fan of his ideas. Reluctantly you answer the phone. After a
brief exchange of greetings, he invites you to have lunch with him.
You half-heartedly accept his invitation. During lunch he asks, “Can I
tell you something?” You reply positively, and he begins to express to
you something that you haven’t heard before: “You know, the past—
like what you did yesterday, last year, and all the way back to your
birth—didn’t really happen. It’s just an illusion in your head. So, my
question to you is do you believe the past exists?” As a rational person
you do not agree with his assertion and you reply, “What evidence do
you have to prove that the past does not exist?”
Now rewind the conversation, and imagine you spent the whole
meal trying to prove that the past is something that really happened.
Which scenario do you prefer?
The reason you prefer the first scenario is because you—like the
rest of the reasonable people out there—regard the reality of the past
as a self-evident truth. As with all self-evident truths, if someone
challenges them, the burden of proof is on the one who has questioned
them.
Now let’s apply this to a theist-atheist dialogue.
A theist invites his atheist friend for dinner, and during the meal
the atheist asserts, “You know, God does not exist. There’s no
evidence for his existence.” The theist replies with a barrage of
81

different arguments for God’s existence. However, has the theist
adopted the right strategy? Before we present a positive case for God’s
existence, shouldn’t we be probing why questioning God’s existence is
the assumed default question? It shouldn’t be: Does God exist? Rather,
it should be: What reasons do we have to reject His existence? Now,
do not get me wrong. I believe we have many good arguments that
support a belief in God, and these are discussed in this book. The point
I am raising here is that if there are no arguments against God’s
existence, then the rational default position is the belief in the Divine.
Otherwise, it would be tantamount to questioning the reality of the past
without any good reason to do so. From this perspective atheism is
unnatural.
Self-evident truths
We consider many beliefs to be self-evidently true. This means the
belief can be described as natural or true by default. Some of them
include:
•
•
•
•
•
•

The uniformity of nature
The law of causality
The reality of the past
The validity of our reasoning
The existence of other minds
The existence of an external world

When someone questions these truths, we do not blindly accept
their conclusions, and we usually reply, “What evidence do you have
to reject them?”
These truths are self-evident because they are characterised by
being:

82

•

•

•
•

Universal: Not a product of a specific culture, they are
cross-cultural. This doesn’t imply that everyone believes in
the truth, or that there is some kind of consensus. The selfevident truth is not born out of specific social conditions.
Untaught: Not based on information transfer. They are not
acquired via information external to your introspection and
senses. In other words, they are not learnt via acquiring
knowledge.
Natural: Formed due to the natural functioning of the
human psyche.
Intuitive: The simplest and most comprehensive
interpretation of the world.

Let’s apply the above features to the belief that the past is real.
The reality of the past is a self-evident truth because it is
universal, untaught, natural and intuitive. It is a universal truth because
most—if not all—cultures have a belief in the past, from a point of
view that the past was once the present. This clearly shows that the
belief is not a result of specific social circumstances. The belief in the
past is also untaught, because when someone first realises that the past
was an actual state of affairs, it is not based on someone telling them
or any type of learning. No one grows up being told by his or her
parents that the past was real. This belief is acquired via their own
experience. The reality of the past is also natural. People with normal
rational faculties agree that the past consists of things that happened.
Finally, the belief that the past once happened is the simplest and most
comprehensive interpretation of our experiences, and it is based on an
innate understanding of the world. To claim that the past is an illusion
raises more problems than it solves. It doesn’t comprehensively
explain our memories, our experience of temporal depth and recorded
history.
83

God: a self-evident truth
Just like the belief that the past was once the present, the existence of
God is also a self-evident truth. What is meant by ‘God’ in this chapter
is the basic concept of a creator, a nonhuman personal cause or
designer. It does not refer to a particular religious conception of a deity
or God. The following discussion explains why the belief in this basic
idea of God is universal, untaught, natural and intuitive. Please note,
this chapter does not aim to prove God’s existence. Rather, it aims to
highlight that the default position of a belief in a creator or an ultimate
cause is more coherent than the atheist’s position.
Universal
The basic underlying idea of a creator, or a supernatural cause for the
universe, is cross-cultural. It is not contingent on culture, but
transcends it, like the belief in causality and the existence of other
minds. For example, the idea of other people having minds exists in all
cultures, a belief held by most rational people. The existence of God or
a supernatural cause is a universally held belief and not the product of
one specific culture. Different conceptions of God are held in various
cultures, but this does not negate the basic idea of a creator or
nonhuman personal cause.
In spite of the number of atheists in the world, the belief in God is
universal. A universal belief does not mean every single person on the
planet must believe in it. A cross-cultural consensus is enough
evidence to substantiate the claim that people universally believe in
God’s existence, and therefore, it is not due to specific social
conditions. Evidently, there are many more theists than atheists in the
world, and this has been the case from the beginning of recorded
history.
Untaught
84

Self-evident truths do not need to be taught or learnt. For example, for
me to know what spaghetti is, I require information of western cuisine
and Italian culture. I cannot know what spaghetti is merely by
reflecting on it. By contrast, you do not require any information,
whether from culture or education, to know a creator for things exists.
This may be the reason why sociologists and anthropologists argue
that even if atheist children were stranded on a desert island, they
would come to believe that something created the island. 91 Our
understanding of God differs, but the underlying belief in a cause or
creator is based on our own reflections.
Some atheists exclaim, “Believing in God is no different than
believing in the spaghetti monster”. This objection is obviously false.
Self-evident truths do not require external information. The idea that
monsters exist, or even that spaghetti exists, requires information
transfer. No one acquires knowledge of monsters or spaghetti by their
own intuitions or introspection. Therefore, the spaghetti monster is not
a self-evident truth; thus, the comparison with God cannot be made.
Diverting our attention from the context of this chapter, this objection
also fails, as there are many good arguments for God’s existence and
no good arguments for the existence of a spaghetti monster.
Natural
Belief in some type of supernatural designer or cause is based on the
natural functioning of the human psyche. People naturally find the idea
of a painting without a painter or a building without a builder absurd.
This is no different for the entire cosmos. The concept of God’s selfevident existence has been a topic of scholarly discussion in the
Islamic intellectual tradition. The classical scholar Ibn Taymiyya
explained that “affirmation of a Maker is firmly-rooted in the hearts of
all men… it is from the binding necessities of their creation….”92 The
85

12th century scholar Al-Raghib al-Asfahani similarly asserts that
knowledge of God “is firmly-rooted in the soul”. 93 As well as the
Islamic position, a wealth of research in various fields supports the
conclusion that we are meant to see the world as created and designed.
Psychological evidence
The academic Olivera Petrovich conducted research concerning the
origins of natural things, such as plants and animals, and she found
that pre-schoolers were about seven times more likely to say God
created them rather than humans.94 In her popular interviews,
including private correspondence I have had with her, Petrovich
concludes that the belief in a non-anthropomorphic God seems to be
natural, and that atheism is an acquired cognitive position. 95 Petrovich
has published a book called Natural-Theological Understanding from
Childhood to Adulthood that elaborates further on this issue.
Psychologist Paul Bloom argues that recent findings in cognitive
psychology indicate that two key aspects of religious belief—belief in
a designer, and belief in mind-body dualism—are natural to young
children.96 In the article Are Children ‘Intuitive Theists’? Professor
Deborah Kelemen explored research that suggested young children
have a propensity to think about natural objects in terms of purpose
and intention. Although more research is required, and it only
tentatively suggests evidence to support ‘intuitive theism’, Kelemen’s
summary further indicates the conclusions we have been discussing in
this chapter:
“A review of recent cognitive developmental research reveals
that by around 5 years of age, children understand natural
objects as not humanly caused, can reason about non-natural
agents’ mental states, and demonstrate the capacity to view
objects in terms of design. Finally, evidence from 6- to 1086

year-olds suggests that children’s assignments of purpose to
nature relate to their ideas concerning intentional nonhuman
causation. Together, these research findings suggest that
children’s explanatory approach may be accurately described
as intuitive theism.”97
Recent research by Elisa Järnefelt, Caitlin F. Canfield and
Deborah Kelemen, titled The divided mind of a disbeliever: Intuitive
beliefs about nature as purposefully created among different groups of
non-religious adults, concluded that there is a natural propensity to see
nature as designed. 98 This conclusion was grounded in three studies.
Study 1 was based on a sample of 352 North American adults. The
sample included religious and non-religious participants. The
procedure involved a speeded creation task which was “a picturebased procedure devised to measure adults’ automatic and reflective
tendencies to endorse natural phenomena as purposefully made by
some being”99. The participants were randomly assigned either to a
speeded or an unspeeded condition. All of the participants were
presented with 120 pictures on a computer. They were then to judge
whether “any being purposefully made the thing in the picture” and
respond yes or no by pressing the relevant keys on a keyboard. 100
Study 2 was based on 148 North American adults “who were recruited
via the email lists of atheist and other explicitly non-religious
associations and organizations” 101. The same speeded creation task of
Study 1 was given to the participants in Study 2. Study 3 was based on
151 Finnish atheist adults “recruited via the email lists of student
associations and organizations all around Finland”102. This group was
given a similar speeded created task. The results were fascinating. In
their discussion the academics conclude that atheists saw things as
purposefully made:
“Consistent with Study 1 and Study 2, Study 3 revealed that
87

non-religious participants in Nordic Finland, where nonreligiosity is not an issue and where theistic cultural discourse
is not present in the way it is in the United States, default to
viewing both living and non-living natural phenomena as
purposefully made by a non-human being when their
processing is restricted. Interestingly, comparisons across the
different groups of non-religious participants in all three
studies showed that, despite the absence of prominent theistic
cultural discourse, non-religious Finnish participants were
more likely than North American atheists to fail in suppressing
their overall level of creation endorsement. This pattern of
results shows that ambient theistic cultural discourse is
therefore not the only factor that explains people’s tendency to
endorse purposeful creation in nature.”103
The general conclusions of this research include the fact that the
results “lend empirical support to the proposal that religious non-belief
is cognitively effortful”104 and that “the current findings suggest that
there is a deeply rooted natural tendency to view nature as
designed”.105 In other words, non-belief is intellectually exhausting,
and seeing things as designed is part of what makes us human. The
study suggests that theism is innate. However, as with most research,
“many questions remain regarding possible connections between these
early developing design intuitions”.106
Much more research is required in both cognitive and
developmental psychology to form any definitive conclusions.
However, the above studies support the view that the belief in God is
natural.
Some objectors may cite research that suggests that children from
religious backgrounds have difficulty distinguishing between reality
and fantasy at a young age. This research cannot undermine the
aforementioned conclusions, because the studies only focused on
88

religious narratives and not the concept of things requiring a designer
or creator.107 Even so, the fact that religious children may have
difficulty distinguishing between reality and fiction is still
metaphysically neutral, because to suggest that it supports atheism
rather than theism assumes that atheism is true and theism is fiction.
Such research would not invalidate the findings mentioned above. It
must be pointed out that some of the research I have presented above
has cross-cultural implications, which means that regardless of the
participants’ theist and atheist backgrounds, they had a tendency to
have theist-like intuitions.
Another contention includes that since some of the research shows
that atheism is cognitively effortful—which implies that more thought
is required—then it indicates that it is the most rational position. This
objection is based on a false inference. The evidence can also suggest
that atheism requires adopting false assumptions about the physical
world (see Chapter 12); hence it becomes mentally taxing as a result.
I have not included all of the relevant research here. The
discussions can be quite complex and although there are contradictory
studies, they are—in my view—less conclusive. The main objective of
this discussion is to show a growing trend in the research that supports
the view that the belief in God’s existence is natural.
Sociological and anthropological evidence
Professor Justin Barrett’s research in his book, Born believers: the
science of children’s religious belief, looked at the behaviour and
claims of children. He concluded that the children believed in what he
calls “natural religion”. This is the idea that there is a personal Being
that created the entire universe. That Being cannot be human—it must
be divine, supernatural:
“Scientific research on children’s developing minds and
89

supernatural beliefs suggests that children normally and rapidly
acquire minds that facilitate belief in supernatural agents.
Particularly in the first year after birth, children distinguish
between agents and non-agents, understanding agents as able to
move themselves in purposeful ways to pursue goals. They are
keen to find agency around them, even given scant evidence.
Not long after their first birthday, babies appear to understand
that agents, but not natural forces or ordinary objects, can
create order out of disorder… This tendency to see function
and purpose, plus an understanding that purpose and order
come from minded beings, makes children likely to see natural
phenomena as intentionally created. Who is the Creator?
Children know people are not good candidates. It must have
been a god… children are born believers of what I call natural
religion….”108
Intuitive
The existence of a creator is the most intuitive interpretation of the
world. It is the simplest and most comprehensive explanation of the
universe and our existence. It is also easy to understand without
explicit instruction. Human beings have an affinity to attribute causes
to things all the time, and the entire cosmos is one of those things (see
Chapters 5 and 6). Not all intuitions are true, but evidence is required
to make someone depart from their initial intuitions about things. For
example, when someone perceives design and order in the universe,
the intuitive conclusion is that there is a designer (see Chapter 8). To
make that person change their mind, valid evidence is required to
justify the counter-intuitive view.
The belief in a God, creator, designer or supernatural cause is a
self-evident truth. It is universal, untaught, natural and intuitive. In this
light, the right question to ask is not: Does God exist? The right
90

question should be: Why do you reject God’s existence? This way you
will have turned the tables and rightly so; atheism is unnatural. The
onus of proof is on someone who challenges a self-evident truth. When
someone claims that the past is an illusion or that other people do not
have minds, he or she would have to shoulder the burden of proof.
Atheists are no different. They have to justify their rejection of a cause
or creator for the universe.
“Atheism is self-evidently true”
Some atheists argue that atheism is true by default. However, the
rejection of a cause or a creator is not self-evident. Although atheism
is now also a universal position (and may have been since the
beginning of recorded history), it is taught and is counter-intuitive.
People have to learn to reject the concept of a creator or cause for
things. Denying a creator for the universe is not the simplest and most
comprehensive explanation. It may be simple, but it does not provide a
comprehensive explanation. It actually creates far more problems than
it solves. For instance, how could the universe come into existence
from nothing (see Chapter 5)? How could this contingent universe
have no explanation for its existence (see Chapter 6)? The atheist may
respond by saying that there are alternative explanations for the origins
and nature of the universe. This is true. However, these explanations
are not self-evident. They are not the default; they are acquired
positions. As mentioned previously, in order to reject what is
considered self-evident, one must provide evidence. I am not
dismissing alternative explanations for the existence of the cosmos, I
am merely pointing out what is the default position. Since the basic
idea of a creator is true by default, the first question we should ask is:
What evidence do we have to reject the existence of a creator?
The innate disposition: fitrah
God as a self-evident truth relates to the Islamic theological concept
91

concerning the fitrah. The word comes from the Arabic trilateral stem
fa ṭa ra (‫)ف ط ر‬, which relates to words such as fatrun and fatarahu,
meaning a created or made thing. From a lexical point of view, the
fitrah refers to something that has been created within us by God.
Theologically, the fitrah is the natural state or the innate disposition of
the human being that has been created by God with innate knowledge
of Him and with the affinity to worship the Divine. 109 This is based on
the authentic statement of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬which states,
“every child is born in a state of fitrah. Then his parents make him a
Jew, a Christian or a Magian….”110
This Prophetic tradition teaches that every human being has this
innate disposition, but external influences such as parenting and by
extension society—change the human being into someone who adopts
beliefs and practices that are not in line with the innate knowledge of
God. There have been numerous scholarly discussions on the concept
of the fitrah. For example, the 11th century theologian Al-Ghazali
argues that the fitrah is a means that people use to acquire the truth of
God’s existence and that He is entitled to our worship. He also
maintained that knowledge of God is something “every human being
has in the depths of his consciousness”.111 Ibn Taymiyya, the 14th
century scholar, describes the innate disposition as something God
created within His creation that contains ingrained knowledge of God:
“…the existence of a perfect Creator is known from the fitrah, and this
knowledge is ingrained, necessary, and obvious.”112
In spite of the fact that the fitrah is a natural state, it can be
‘veiled’ or ‘spoiled’ by external influences. These influences, as
indicated by the above Prophetic tradition, can include parenting,
society and peer pressure. These influences can cloud the fitrah and
prevent someone from acknowledging the truth. Ibn Taymiyya argues
that when the natural state is clouded with other influences, the person
may require other evidences for God’s existence:

92

“Affirmation of a Creator and His perfection is innate and
necessary with respect to one whose innate disposition remains
intact, even though alongside such an affirmation it has many
other evidences for it as well, and often when the innate
disposition is altered… many people may be in need of such
other evidences.”113
These other evidences can include rational arguments. Ibn
Taymiyya was not a strong advocate of rational arguments for God’s
existence. He maintained that the fitrah was the main way of affirming
the Divine. However, he did not dismiss sound rational proofs for
God’s existence. 114 Nevertheless, these rational arguments must
conform to Islamic theology and not adopt premises (or assumptions)
that contradict it.
From the perspective of Islamic epistemology, it is important to
know that conviction in the existence of God is not solely inferred
from some type of inductive, deductive, philosophical or scientific
evidence. Instead, these evidences awaken and uncloud the fitrah so
the human being can recognise the innate knowledge of God. The truth
of God’s existence and the fact that He is worthy of our worship is
already known by the fitrah. However, the fitrah can be clouded by
socialisation and other external influences. Therefore, the role of
rational arguments is to ‘remind’ us of the truth that we already know.
To illustrate this point, imagine I am cleaning my mother’s loft. As I
move old bags around and throw away unwanted objects, I find my
favourite toy that I used to play with when I was 5 years old. I am
reminded about something that I already have knowledge of. In my
mind I think, “Oh yeah. I remember this toy. It was my favourite.” The
truth of believing in God and the fact that He is worthy of our worship
is no different. Rational arguments serve as spiritual and intellectual
awakenings to realise the knowledge that is contained in our fitrah.
Other ways the fitrah can be unclouded include introspection,
93

spiritual experiences, reflection and pondering. The Qur’an promotes
questioning and thinking deeply about things:
“Thus do We explain in detail the signs for who give
thought.”115
“Indeed in that is a sign for a people who give thought.”116
“Or were they created by nothing? Or were they the creators
[of themselves]? Or did they create the heavens and the Earth?
Rather, they are not certain.”117
Islamic epistemology views rational arguments as means and not
ends. They serve as a way of awakening or unclouding the fitrah. This
is why it is very important to note that guidance only comes from God,
and no amount of rational evidence can convince one’s heart to realise
the truth of Islam. God makes this very clear: “Indeed, you do not
guide whom you like, but God guides whom He wills. And He is most
knowing of the [rightly] guided.”118 Guidance is a spiritual matter that
is based on God’s mercy, knowledge and wisdom. If God wills that
someone is guided through rational arguments, then nothing will stop
that person from accepting the truth. However, if God decides that
someone does not deserve guidance—based on a Divine wisdom—
then regardless of how many cogent arguments that are presented, that
person will never accept the truth.
To conclude, the belief in God’s existence is a self-evident truth.
As with all self-evident truths, when someone challenges them, the
onus of proof is on them. The only way the belief in God can be
undermined is if there is any positive evidence for the non-existence of
the Divine. However, as this book will show, the few arguments that
atheists have against the existence of God are weak and
philosophically shallow (see Chapters 11 and 12). The self-evident
94

truth of God was addressed in the Qur’an over 1,400 years ago:
“Can there be doubt about God, Creator of the heavens and
Earth?”119
To end this chapter, Islamic scholar Wesam Charkawi aptly
explains that God’s existence is in line with our natural disposition:
“Indeed, the first sense in the depth of a person if he
contemplates within himself and in the world around him is the
sense of a higher power that reigns over the world with the
command to dispose over life and death, creation and
annihilation, motion and stillness and all the different types of
meticulous changes that occur in it. Unequivocally, mankind
senses this reality and believes in it deeply, regardless of
whether one is able to produce evidence to verify the truth of
this feeling or is unable. This is a natural instinct or the natural
disposition of mankind, which is indeed a precise and exact
evidence… In addition, we feel in ourselves the presence of
compassion, love, hate, encouragement and dislike, though
what is the proof that it exists, even while it flutters within us?
Is one able to bring forth evidence more than that which he
feels and senses, and yet it is real without doubt? One feels
excitement and senses pain, yet is one unable to establish
evidence to prove it exists with more than what he feels?
Without doubt, this is the natural way [fitrah] or instinct on
which mankind has been created, and these are the deep
feelings that have been embedded within us. They are not
within us for no reason or in vain, rather it is a natural truth that
corresponds to the world.”120

95

Chapter 5: A Universe from Nothing? –
The Qur’an’s Argument for God
Imagine you find yourself sitting in the corner of a room. The door that
you entered through is now completely sealed and there is no way of
entering or exiting. The walls, ceiling and floor are made up of stone.
All you can do is stare into open, empty space, surrounded by cold,
dark and stony walls. Due to immense boredom, you fall asleep. A few
hours pass by; you wake up. As you open your eyes, you are shocked
to see that in the middle of the room is a desk with a computer on top
of it. You approach the desk and notice some words on the computer
screen: This desk and computer came from nothing.
Do you believe what you have read on the screen? Of course you
do not. At first glance you rely on your intuition that it is impossible
for the computer and the desk to have appeared from no prior activity
or cause. Then you start to think about what could possibly have
happened. After some thought you realise a limited number of
reasonable explanations. The first is that they could have come from
no causal conditions or prior activity—in other words, nothing. The
second is that they could have caused or created themselves. The third
is that they could have been created or placed there by some prior
cause. Since your cognitive faculties are normal and in working order,
you conclude that the third explanation is the most rational.
Although this form of reasoning is universal, a more robust
variation of the argument can be found eloquently summarised in the
Qur’an. The argument states that the possible explanations for a finite
entity coming into being could be that it came from nothing, it created
itself, it could have been created by something else created, or it was
created by something uncreated. Before I break down the argument
96

further, it must be noted that the Qur’an often presents rational
intellectual arguments. The Qur’an is a persuasive and powerful text
that seeks to engage its reader. Hence it positively imposes itself on
our minds and hearts, and the way it achieves this is by asking
profound questions and presenting powerful arguments. Associate
Professor of Islamic Studies Rosalind Ward Gwynne comments on this
aspect of the Qur’an: “The very fact that so much of the Qur’an is in
the form of arguments shows to what extent human beings are
perceived as needing reasons for their actions….”121
Gwynne also maintains that this feature of the Qur’an influenced
Islamic scholarship:
“Reasoning and argument are so integral to the content of the
Qur’an and so inseparable from its structure that they in many
ways shaped the very consciousness of Qur’anic scholars.”122
This relationship between reason and revelation was understood
even by early Islamic scholars. They understood that rational thinking
was one of the ways to prove the intellectual foundations of Islam. The
14th century Islamic scholar Ibn Taymiyya writes that early Islamic
scholarship “knew that both revelational and rational proofs were true
and that they entailed one another. Whoever gave rational… proofs the
complete enquiry due them, knew that they agreed with what the
messengers informed them about and that they proved to them the
necessity of believing the messengers in what they informed them
about.”123
The Qur’anic argument
The Qur’an provides a powerful argument for God’s existence: “Or
were they created by nothing? Or were they the creators [of
themselves]? Or did they create the heavens and Earth? Rather, they
are not certain.”124
97

Although this argument refers to the human being, it can also be
applied to anything that began to exist, or anything that emerged. The
Qur’an uses the word khuliqu, which means created, made or
originated.125 So it can refer to anything that came into being.
Now let us break down the argument. The Qur’an mentions four
possibilities to explain how something was created or came into being
or existence:
•
•
•

•

Created by nothing: “or were they created by nothing?”
Self-created: “or were they the creators of themselves?”
Created by something created: “or did they create the
heavens and the Earth?”, which implies a created thing
being ultimately created by something else created.
Created by something uncreated: “Rather, they are not
certain”, implying that the denial of God is baseless, and
therefore the statement implies that there is an uncreated
creator.126

This argument can also be turned into a universal formula that
does not require reference to scripture:
1. The universe is finite.
2. Finite things could have come from nothing, created
themselves, been ultimately created by something created,
or been created by something uncreated.
3. They could not have come from nothing, created
themselves, or have been ultimately created by something
created.
4. Therefore, they were created by something uncreated.
The universe is finite
A range of philosophical arguments shows the finitude of the universe.
98

The most cogent and simplest of these arguments involves
demonstrating that an actual physical infinite cannot exist. The type of
actual infinite that I am addressing here is a differentiated type of
infinite, which is an infinite made up of discrete parts, like physical
things or objects. These physical things can include atoms, quarks,
buses, giraffes and quantum fields. The undifferentiated type of
infinite, however, is an infinite that is not made of discrete parts. This
infinite is coherent and can exist. For instance, the infinity of God is an
undifferentiated infinite, as He is not made up of discrete physical
parts. In Islamic theology, He is uniquely one and transcendent.
The most persuasive and intuitive arguments to substantiate the
impossibility of an actual infinite, come in the form of thought
experiments. Now the concern here is with the impossibility of the
physical infinite being actualised. This is different from mathematical
infinites. Although logically coherent, these exist in the mathematical
realm, which is usually based on axioms and assumptions. Our
concern is whether the infinite can be realised in the real physical
world.
Take the following examples into consideration:
1. Bag of balls: Imagine you had an infinite number of balls in
a bag. If you take two balls away, how many balls do you
have left? Well, mathematically you still have an infinite
number. However, practically, you should have two less
than what is in the bag. What if you added another two
balls instead of removing them? How many balls are there
now? There should be two more than what was in the bag.
You should be able to count how many balls are in the bag,
but you cannot because the infinite is just an idea and does
not exist in the real world. This clearly shows you cannot
have an actualised infinite made up of discrete physical
parts or things. In light of this fact, the famous German
99

mathematician David Hilbert said, “The infinite is nowhere
to be found in reality. It neither exists in nature nor
provides a legitimate basis for rational thought… the role
that remains for the infinite to play is solely that of an
idea.”127
2. Stack of cubes with different sizes: Imagine you had a stack
of cubes. Each cube is numbered. The first cube has a
volume of 10cm3. The next cube on top of that has a
volume of 5cm3 and the next cube is half of the previous
cube. This goes on ad infinitum (again and again in the
same way forever). Now go to the top of the stack and
remove the cube at the top. You cannot. There is no cube to
be found. Why? Because if there was a cube to be found at
the top it would mean that the cubes did not reach infinity.
However, since there is no cube at the top, it also shows—
even though the mathematical infinite exists (with
assumptions and axioms)—that you cannot have an
actualised infinite in the real world. Since there is no end to
the stack, it shows the infinite—that is made up of discrete
physical things (in this case the cubes)—cannot be
physically realised.
Conceptually, the universe is no different to the bag of balls or the
stack of cubes I have explained above. The universe is real. It is made
up of discrete physical things. Since the differentiated infinite cannot
exist in the real world, it follows that the universe cannot be infinite.
This implies that the universe is finite, and since it is finite it must
have had a beginning.
The scientific research that relates to the beginning of the universe
has not been discussed here because the data is currently
underdetermined. Underdetermination is a “thesis explaining that for
any scientifically based theory there will always be at least one rival
100

theory that is also supported by the evidence given…”128 There are
around 17 competing models to explain the cosmological evidence.
Some of these models conclude that the universe is finite and had a
beginning and others argue that the universe is past eternal. The
evidence is not conclusive. The conclusions might change when new
evidence is observed or new models are developed (see Chapter 12).
Now we are in a position to apply the four logical possibilities to
explain the beginning of the universe and discuss each one.
Created from nothing?
Before I address this possibility, I need to define what is meant by
‘nothing’. Nothing is defined as the absence of all things. To illustrate
this better, imagine if everything, all matter, energy and potential, were
to vanish; that state would be described as nothing. This is not to be
confused with the quantum vacuum or field, a concept I will explain
later. Nothing also refers to the absence of any causal condition. A
causal condition is any type of cause that produces an effect. This
cause can be material or non-material.
Asserting that things can come from nothing means that things
can come into being from no potential, no matter or nothing at all. To
assert such a thing defies our intuitions and stands against reason.
So, could the universe have come into existence from nothing?
The obvious answer is no, because from nothing, nothing comes.
Nothingness cannot produce anything. Something cannot arise from no
causal conditions whatsoever. Another way of looking at it is by way
of simple math. What is 0 + 0 + 0? It is not 3, it’s 0.
One of the reasons that this is so intuitive is because it is based on
a rational (or metaphysical) principle: being cannot come from
nonbeing. To assert the opposite is what I would call counter
discourse. Anyone could claim anything. If someone can claim that the
entire universe can come from nothing, then the implications would be
absurd. They could assert that anything could come into being without
101

any causal conditions at all.
For something to arise from nothing it must have at least some
type of potential or causal conditions. Since nothing is the absence of
all things, including any type of causal condition, then something
could not arise from nothing. Maintaining that something can arise
from nothing is logically equivalent to the notion that things can
vanish, decay, annihilate or disappear without any causal conditions
whatsoever.
Individuals who argue that something can come from nothing
must also maintain that something can vanish from no causal
conditions at all. For example, if a building completely vanished, such
individuals should not be surprised by the event, because if things can
come from no causal conditions at all, then it logically implies that
things can vanish by means of no causal conditions as well. However,
to argue that things can just vanish without reference to any causal
condition would be rationally absurd.
A common contention is that the universe could come from
nothing because in the quantum vacuum particles pop into existence.
This argument assumes that the quantum vacuum is nothing. However,
this is not true. The quantum vacuum is something; it is not an absolute
void and it obeys the laws of physics. The quantum vacuum is a state
of fleeting energy. So it is not nothing, it is something physical. 129
Professor Lawrence Krauss’s ‘nothing’
Professor Lawrence Krauss’s book, A Universe from Nothing,
invigorated and popularised the debate on the Leibnizian question:
“Why is there something rather than nothing?”130 In his book, Krauss
argues that it is plausible that the universe arose from ‘nothing’.
Absurd as this may sound, a few presuppositions and clarifications
need to be brought to light to understand the context of his
conclusions.
Krauss’s ‘nothing’ is actually something. In his book, he calls
102

nothing “unstable”131, and elsewhere he affirms that nothing is
something physical, which he calls “empty but pre-existing space”132.
This is an interesting linguistic deviation, as the definition of nothing
in the English language refers to a universal negation, but it seems that
Krauss’s ‘nothing’ is a label for something. Although his research
claims that ‘nothing’ is the absence of time, space and particles, he
misleads the untrained reader and fails to confirm (explicitly) that
there is still some physical stuff. Even if, as Krauss claims, there is no
matter, there must be physical fields. This is because it is impossible to
have a region where there are no fields because gravity cannot be
blocked. In quantum theory, gravity at this level of reality does not
require objects with mass, but does require physical stuff. Therefore,
Krauss’s ‘nothing’ is actually something. Elsewhere in his book, he
writes that everything came into being from quantum fluctuations,
which explains a creation from ‘nothing’, but that implies a preexistent quantum state in order for that to be a possibility. 133
Professor David Albert, the author of Quantum Mechanics and
Experience, wrote a review of Krauss’s book, and similarly concludes:
“But that’s just not right. Relativistic-quantum-field-theoretical
vacuum states — no less than giraffes or refrigerators or solar
systems — are particular arrangements of simple physical
stuff. The true relativistic-quantum-field-theoretical equivalent
to there not being any physical stuff at all isn’t this or that
particular arrangement of the fields —it is just the absence of
the fields! The fact that some arrangements of fields happen to
correspond to the existence of particles and some do not is not
any more mysterious than the fact that some of the possible
arrangements of my fingers happen to correspond to the
existence of a fist and some do not. And the fact that particles
can pop in and out of existence, over time, as those fields
rearrange themselves, is not any more mysterious than the fact
103

that fists can pop in and out of existence, over time, as my
fingers rearrange themselves. And none of these poppings — if
you look at them aright — amount to anything even remotely
in the neighbourhood of a creation from nothing.”134
Philosophical distinctions
Interestingly, Professor Krauss seems to have changed the definition of
nothing in order to answer Leibniz’s perennial question. This makes
the whole discussion problematic as Krauss’s definition blurs wellknown philosophical distinctions. The term ‘nothing’ has always
referred to non-being or the absence of something. 135 Therefore, the
implications of Krauss’s ‘nothing’ is that it could be reasonable for
someone to assert the following:
“I had a wonderful dinner last night, and it was nothing.”
“I met nobody in the hall and they showed me directions to this
room.”
“Nothing is tasty with salt and pepper.”136
These statements are irrational statements and therefore amount to
meaningless propositions, unless of course someone changes the
definition of nothing. It is no wonder that Professor Krauss hints that
his view of nothing does not refer to non-being. He writes: “One thing
is certain, however. The metaphysical ‘rule,’ which is held as ironclad
conviction by those with whom I have debated the issue of creation,
namely that ‘out of nothing, nothing comes,’ has no foundation in
science.”137
This clearly means Krauss has changed the meaning of nothing to
mean something, because science as a method focuses on things in the
104

physical world. Science can only answer in terms of natural
phenomena and natural processes. When we ask questions like: What
is the meaning of life? Does the soul exist? What is nothing? The
general expectation is to have metaphysical answers—and hence,
outside the scope of any scientific explanation (see Chapter 12).
Science cannot address the idea of nothing or non-being, because
science is restricted to problems that observations can solve.
Philosopher of science Elliot Sober verifies this limitation. He writes
in his essay Empiricism that “science is forced to restrict its attention
to problems that observations can solve.” 138 Therefore, Professor
Krauss has changed the meaning of the word “nothing”, in order for
science to solve a problem that it could not originally solve. Perhaps
this outcome should be accepted as a defeat as it is tantamount to
someone not being able to answer a question, and instead of admitting
defeat or referring the question to someone else, resorting to changing
the meaning of the question.
It would have been intellectually more honest to just say that the
concept of nothing is a metaphysical concept, and science only deals
with what can be observed.
Inconclusive research and popularising linguistic gymnastics
Putting all of this aside, Professor Krauss admits that his ‘nothingness’
research is ambiguous and lacks conclusive evidence. He writes, “I
stress the word could here, because we may never have enough
empirical information to resolve this question unambiguously.”139
Elsewhere in his book he admits the inconclusive nature of his
argument: “Because of the observational and related theoretical
difficulties associated with working out the details, I expect we may
never achieve more than plausibility in this regard.”140
In light of this, Professor Krauss should have just said the
universe came from something physical like a vacuum state, rather
105

than redefining the word nothing. But Krauss seems to be adamant in
popularising his linguistic gymnastics. During our debate: Islam or
Atheism: Which Makes More Sense? I referred to his book to explain
that his nothing is something, like some form of quantum haze.
However, he reacted and said that his nothing is “No space, no time,
no laws… there’s no universe, nothing, zero, zip, nada.”141
Krauss seemed to have deliberately omitted an important hidden
premise: there is still some physical stuff in his nothing, something
which he clearly admitted to in a public lecture. He said that
something and nothing are “… physical quantities.”142
In summary, Professor Krauss’s nothing is something. The
universe came from something physical which Krauss calls “nothing”,
and therefore failing to answer Leibniz’s question: Why is there
something rather than nothing? In reality, Krauss only answers the
question: How did something come from something? That is a question
that science can answer, and which does not require linguistic
acrobatics.
God’s existence is not undermined by Krauss’s view on nothing.
All that he has really presented to us is that the universe (time and
space) came from something. Therefore, the universe still requires an
explanation for its existence.
“Causality only makes sense within this universe; therefore, the
universe may have come from nothing.”
Historical and academic discussions on the notion of causality include
David Hume’s objection that causality is a concept derived from our
experiences. If Hume is right about causality, then we are not justified
in postulating that the concept of causality exists or makes sense
outside of our experiences. Since the argument in this chapter refers to
events outside of our experience—how the universe came into
existence—causality cannot be used to explain these events. In other
words, the universe could have come from nothing, because the notion
106

of causality may only make sense within the universe and cannot be
applied to anything outside of it. If we have no experience of the
beginning of the universe or what happened prior to its existence, then
we should simply stay silent on the matter.
This objection falsely assumes that causality is a concept based on
experience. Causality is a priori; knowledge prior to experience. It is a
metaphysical concept, that is required in order for us to understand our
experiences in the first place. We bring it to all our experience, rather
than our experience bringing it to us. It is like wearing yellow-tinted
glasses, everything looks yellow not because of anything out there in
the world, but because of the glasses through which we are looking at
everything. Without causality, we would not be able to have a
meaningful understanding of the world.
Take the following example into consideration; imagine you are
looking at the White House in Washington DC. Your eyes may
wonder to the door, across the pillars, then to the roof and finally over
to the front lawn. You can also reverse the order of your perceptions;
you can first start to look at the lawn, then to the roof, the pillars and
finally the roof. Now contrast this to another experience, you are on
the river Thames in London and you see a boat floating past. You can
only see the front of the boat before you see the back, and you cannot
reverse the order of that experience as the boat floats past. When you
looked at the White House you had a choice to see the door first and
then the pillars and so on. You could also reverse the order of your
perceptions. However, with the boat you had no choice. The front of
the boat was the first to appear, and you could not reorder your
perceptions by trying to see the back before you saw the front. What
dictates the order in which you had these experiences? Why is it that
you know when you can order your perceptions and when you cannot?
The answer is the concept of causality. There are logical causal
connections occurring in your mind while you are perceiving the
White House and the boat.
107

The point to take here is that you would not have been able to
make the distinction that some experiences are ordered by yourself and
others are ordered independently, unless you had the concept of
causality. In absence of causality, our experiences would be very
different from the way that they are. They would be a single sequence
of experiences only: one thing after another. Causality is independent
of experience because we would not be able to experience anything
without it. Therefore, it logically follows that causality exists prior to
our experience of the universe.
If you cannot have something from nothing, then how did God
create from nothing?
This contention is false, as it implies that God is nothing. God is a
unique agent with the potential to create and bring things into
existence through His will and power. Therefore, it is not the case of
something coming from nothing. God’s will and power were the
causal conditions to bring the universe into existence.
Something coming from nothing is impossible, because nothing
implies non-being, no potential and no causal conditions. It is
irrational to assert that something can emerge from an absolute void
without any potential or prior causal activity. God provides that causal
activity via His will and power. Even though the Islamic intellectual
tradition refers to God creating from nothing, this act of creation
means that there was no material stuff. However, it does not assume
that there were no causal conditions or potential.143 God’s will and
power form the causal conditions to bring the universe into existence.
Self-created?
Could the universe have created itself? The term ‘created’ refers to
something that emerged, and therefore it was once not in existence.
Another way of speaking about something being created is that it was
brought into being. All of these words imply something being finite, as
108

all things that were created are finite. Understanding the concept of
creation leads us to conclude that self-creation is a logical and
practical impossibility. This is due to the fact that self-creation implies
that something was in existence and not in existence at the same time,
which is impossible. Something that emerged means that it once was
not in existence; however, to say that it created itself implies that it
was in existence before it existed!
Consider the following question: Was it possible for your mother
to give birth to herself? To claim such a thing would suggest that she
would have to be born before she was born. When something is
created, it means it once did not exist, and therefore had no power to
do anything. So to claim that it created itself is impossible, as it could
not have any power before it was created in order to create itself. This
applies to all finite things, and that includes the universe too. Islamic
scholar Al-Khattabi aptly summarises the fallacy of this argument:
“This is [an] even more fallacious argument, because if something
does not exist, how can it be described as having power, and how
could it create anything? How could it do anything? If these two
arguments are refuted, then it is established that they have a creator, so
let them believe in Him.”144
Andrew Compson, the current chair of the British Humanist
Association, once engaged in a public debate with me at the University
of Birmingham. I presented the Qur’anic argument for God’s
existence. His response to my assertion that self-creation is impossible
was that self-creation can be found in single-celled organisms, also
known in biology as asexual reproduction.
Andrew’s objection is false on a few grounds. Firstly, what he
referred to in single-celled organisms is not self-creation, but rather a
mode of reproduction by which offspring arise from a single organism
and inherit the genetic material of that parent only. Secondly, if we
logically extend his example to the universe, it assumes that the
universe always existed, because for asexual reproduction to occur you
109

need a parent that existed prior to the offspring. Therefore, his
objection actually proves the point I was making; the universe once
never existed, so it could not bring itself into existence.
You may be thinking that this objection is absurd, and it was not
necessary to discuss it. I agree. However, I included this to show how
unreasonable some atheist counter-arguments can be.
Created by something else that was created?
For argument sake, let’s answer “yes” to the following question: Was
the universe created by something else created? Will that satisfy the
questioner? Obviously not. The contentious person will undoubtedly
ask, “Then, what created that thing?” If we were to answer, “Another
created thing”, what do you think he would say? Yes, you guessed
right: “What created that thing?” If this ridiculous dialogue continued
forever, then it would prove one thing: the need for an uncreated
creator.
Why? Because we cannot have the case of a created thing, like the
universe, being created by another created thing in an unlimited series
going back forever (known as an infinite regress of causes). It simply
does not make sense. Consider the following examples:
•

Imagine that a sniper, who has acquired his designated
target, radios through to HQ to get permission to shoot.
HQ, however, tells the sniper to hold on while they seek
permission from someone higher-up. Subsequently, the
person higher-up seeks permission from the guy even
higher up, and so on and so on. If this keeps going on
forever, will the sniper ever get to shoot the target? Of
course not! He will keep on waiting while someone else is
waiting for a person higher up to give the order. There has
to be a place or person from where the command is issued;
a place where there is no one higher. Thus, our example
110

•

illustrates the rational flaw in the idea of an infinite regress
of causes. When we apply this to the universe we have to
posit that it must have had an uncreated creator. The
universe, which is a created thing, could not be created by
another created thing, ad infinitum. If that were the case
this universe would not exist. Since it exists, we can
dismiss the idea of an infinite regress of causes as an
irrational proposition.145
Imagine if a stock trader at the stock exchange was not able
to buy or sell his stocks or bonds before asking permission
from the investor. Once the stock trader asked his investor,
he also had to check with his investor. Imagine if this went
on forever. Would the stock trader ever buy or sell his
stocks or bonds? The answer is no. There must be an
investor who gives the permission without requiring any
permission himself. In similar light, if we apply this to the
universe, we would have to posit a creator for the universe
that is uncreated.

Once the above examples are applied to the universe directly, it
will highlight the absurdity of the idea that the universe ultimately was
created by something created. Consider if this universe, U1, was
created by a prior cause, U2, and U2 was created by another cause,
U3, and this went on forever. We wouldn’t have universe U1 in the
first place. Think about it this way, when does U1 come into being?
Only after U2 has come into being. When does U2 come into being?
Only after U3 has come into being. This same problem will continue
even if we go on forever. If the ability of U1 to come into being was
dependent on a forever chain of created universes, U1 would never
exist.146 As Islamic philosopher and scholar Dr. Jaafar Idris writes:
“There would be no series of actual causes, but only a series of nonexistents… The fact, however, is that there are existents around us;
111

therefore, their ultimate cause must be something other than temporal
causes.”147
Created by something uncreated?
So, what is the alternative? The alternative is a first cause. In other
words, an uncaused cause or an uncreated creator. The 11th century
theologian and philosopher Al-Ghazali summarised the existence of an
uncaused cause or an uncreated creator in the following way: “The
same can be said of the cause of the cause. Now this can either go on
ad infinitum, which is absurd, or it will come to an end.”148
What the above discussion is essentially saying is that something
must have always existed. Now there are two obvious choices: God or
the universe. Since the universe began and is dependent (see Chapter
6), it cannot have always existed. Therefore, something that always
existed must be God. In the appendix to Professor Anthony Flew’s
book There is a God, the philosopher Abraham Varghese explains this
conclusion in a simple yet forceful way. He writes: “Now, clearly,
theists and atheists can agree on one thing: if anything at all exists,
there must be something preceding it that always existed. How did this
eternally existing reality come to be? The answer is that it never came
to be. It always existed. Take your pick: God or universe. Something
always existed.”149
Thus, we can conclude that there exists an uncreated creator for
everything that is created. The power of this argument is captured in
the reaction of the companion of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬Jubayr ibn
Mut’im. When he heard the relevant verses of the Qur’an addressing
this argument he said, “my heart almost began to soar.” 150 The scholar
Al-Khattabi said that the reason Jubayr was so moved by these verses
was because of “the strong evidence contained therein touched his
sensitive nature, and with his intelligence understood it.”151
What has been established so far is that there must be an uncreated
112

creator. This does not imply the traditional concept of God. However,
if we think carefully about the uncreated creator, we can form
conclusions that lead to the traditional understanding of God.
Eternal
Since this creator is uncreated, it means that it was always in existence.
Something that did not begin has always existed, and something that
has always existed is eternal. The Qur’an makes this very clear: “God,
the Eternal Refuge. He neither begets nor is born.”152
Who created God?
A typical response to the eternality of the Divine is the outdated atheist
cliché: Who created God? This childish contention is a gross
misrepresentation and misunderstanding of the argument I have been
elucidating in this chapter. There are two main responses to this
objection.
Firstly, the third possibility that we discussed concerning how the
universe came into being was: Could it be created by something
created? We discussed that this was ultimately not possible because of
the absurdity of the infinite regress of causes. The conclusion was
simple: there must have been an uncreated creator. Being uncreated
means God was not created. I have already presented a few examples
to highlight this fact.
Secondly, once we have concluded that the best explanation for
the emergence of the universe is the concept of God, it would be
illogical to maintain that someone created Him. God created the
universe and is not bound by its laws; He is, by definition, an
uncreated Being, and He never came into existence. Something that
never began cannot be created. Professor John Lennox explains these
points in the following way:
“I can hear an Irish friend saying: ‘Well, it proves one thing- if
113

they had a better argument, they would use it.’ If that is thought
to be a rather strong reaction, just think of the question: Who
made God? The very asking of it shows that the questioner has
created God in mind. It is then scarcely surprising that one calls
one's book The God Delusion. For that is precisely what a
created god is, a delusion, virtually by definition—as
Xenophanes pointed out centuries before Dawkins. A more
informative title might have been: The Created-God Delusion.
The book could then have been reduced to a pamphlet—but
sales might just have suffered… For the God who created and
upholds the universe was not created—He is eternal. He was
not ‘made’ and therefore subject to the laws that science
discovered; it was he who made the universe with its laws.
Indeed, the fact constitutes the fundamental distinction between
God and the universe. The universe came to be, God did
not.”153
Transcendent
This uncreated creator cannot be part of creation. A useful example to
illustrate this is when a carpenter makes a chair. In the process of
designing and creating the chair, he does not become the chair. He is
distinct from the chair. This applies to the uncreated creator as well.
He created the universe and therefore is distinct from what He created.
The theologian and scholar Ibn Taymiyya argued that the term,
“created”, implied that something was distinct from God. 154
If the creator was part of creation, it would make Him contingent
or dependent with limited physical qualities. This, in turn, would mean
that He would require an explanation for His existence, which would
imply He cannot be God (see Chapter 6).
The Qur’an affirms the transcendence of God. It says, “There is
nothing like unto Him.”155

114

Knowing
This uncreated creator must have knowledge because the universe that
He created has established laws. These include the law of gravity, the
weak and strong nuclear force, and the electromagnetic force (see
Chapter 8). These laws imply there is a lawgiver, and a lawgiver
implies knowledge. The Qur’an says, “Indeed God is, of all things,
Knowing.”156
Powerful
This uncreated creator must be powerful because He created the
universe, and the universe has immense energy, both usable and
potential. Take, for instance, the number of atoms in the observable
universe, which is around 1080.157 If you were to take just one of these
atoms and split it, it would release an immense amount of energy—
known as nuclear fission. A created thing with usable and potential
energy could not have acquired that from itself. Ultimately, it came
from the Creator, who in turn must be powerful.
If the creator did not have power, it would mean that He is unable,
incapable and weak. Since the universe was created, it is a simple
proof that He must have ability and power. Now just imagine the
immense power of the Creator by reflecting on the universe and all
that it contains. The Qur’an asserts the power of God:
“God creates what He wills for verily God has power over all
things.”158
The omnipotence paradox
The Islamic position regarding God’s ability is summed up in the
following creedal statement found in The Creed of Imam Al-Tahawi. It
states, “He is Omnipotent. Everything is dependent on Him, and every
affair is effortless for Him.”159
115

However, a common objection to God’s power is the omnipotence
paradox. This concerns the ability of an All-Powerful Being to limit its
power. The question that is raised is: If God is omnipotent, can He
create a stone He cannot move?
To answer this question, the meaning of ‘omnipotence’ needs to
be clarified. What it implies is the ability to realise every possible
affair. Omnipotence also includes the impossibility of failure. The
questioner, however, is saying that since God is All-Powerful, He is
capable of anything, including failure. This is irrational and absurd, as
it is equivalent to saying “an All-Powerful Being cannot be an AllPowerful Being”. Failure to achieve or do something is not a feature of
omnipotence. From this perspective, the ability of God to “create a
stone He cannot move” actually describes an event that is impossible
and meaningless.
The question does not describe a possible affair, just as if we were
to say “a white black crow” or “a circle triangle”. Such statements
describe nothing at all; they have no informative value and are
meaningless. So why should we even answer a question that has no
meaning? To put it bluntly, the question is not even a question.
In his discussion of the Qur’anic verse, “God has power over all
things”,160 classical scholar Al-Qurtubi explains that God’s power
refers to every possible state of affairs: “This [verse] is general… it
means that it is permitted to describe God with the attribute of power.
The community agree that God has the name The-Powerful… God has
power over every possibility whether it is brought into existence or
remains non-existent.”161
To conclude, God can create a stone that is heavier than anything
we can imagine, but He will always be able to move the stone because
failure is not a feature of omnipotence.162
Will
This uncreated creator must have a will for a number of reasons.
116

Firstly, since this creator is eternal and brought into existence a
finite universe, it must have chosen the universe to come into
existence. This creator must have chosen the universe to come into
existence when the universe was non-existent and could have
remained so. Something that has a choice obviously has a will.
Secondly, the universe contains beings that have a conscious will
and volition. Therefore, the one who created the universe with living
beings that have a will must also have a will. One cannot give
something to a thing that one does not have (or give rise to something
that one does not contain). Therefore, the Creator has a will.
Thirdly, there are two types of explanations we can apply to the
creation of the universe. The first is a scientific explanation, and the
second is a personal one. Let me explain this using tea. In order to
make tea, I have to boil some water, place the tea bag in the cup and
allow it to infuse. This process can be explained scientifically. The
water must be 100 degrees Celsius (212 degrees Fahrenheit) before it
reaches boiling point, it has to travel across a semipermeable
membrane (tea bag), and I have to use my glycogen stores to enable
my muscles to contract to move my limbs to ensure all of this takes
place. Obviously, a trained scientist could go into further detail, but I
think you get the point. Conversely, the whole process can also be
explained personally: the tea has been made because I wanted some
tea. Now let’s apply this to the universe. We do not have observations
or empirical evidence on how the Creator created the universe; we can
only rely on a personal explanation, which is that God chose for the
universe to come into existence. Even if we had a scientific
explanation, it would not negate a personal one, as shown in the tea
example.163
The Qur’an affirms the fact that God has a will: “Your Lord
carries out whatever He wills.” 164
Islamic scholar Al-Ghazali presents an eloquent summary of the
implications of God having a will. He asserts that everything that
117

happens is due to God’s will and nothing can escape it:
“We attest that He is the Willer of all things that are, the ruler
of all originated phenomena; there does not come into the
visible or invisible world anything meagre or plenteous, small
or great, good or evil, or any advantage or disadvantage, belief
or unbelief, knowledge or ignorance, success or failure,
increase or decrease, obedience or disobedience, except by His
will. What He wills is, and what He does not, will not; there is
not a glance of the eye, nor a stray thought of the heart that is
not subject to His will. He is the Creator, the Restorer, the Doer
of whatsoever He wills. There is none that rescinds His
command, none that supplements His decrees, none that
dissuades a servant from disobeying Him, except by His help
and mercy, and none has power to obey Him except by His
will.”165
A Note on Causality, Time and The Big Bang
Some objectors argue that causality only makes sense with time. They
maintain that since time began at the Big Bang, we cannot claim
something caused the universe because there was no ‘before’ at the
beginning of the Big Bang. In absence of time, there is “no cause or
effect, because cause comes before effect.”166
There are a few problems with this objection. 167
•

The view that causality can only make sense with time requires
proof. In philosophy there is no consensus on the definition and
nature of causality. There are various approaches that attempt
to define and understand causality and causal relations. One
such approach is simultaneous causality. This is the view “that
causes always occur simultaneously with their immediate
effects.”168 One could argue that the universe and its cause
occurred at the same time. The following thought experiment
118

•

•

explains such causal relation. Imagine an eternal ball on an
eternal pillow. The ball causes the indentation of the pillow,
but the cause (ball) does not come before the effect
(indentation in the pillow); as time is not a factor due to the
eternality of the objects. 169 In the context of this argument, it
could be that the moment God brought the universe into
existence was the moment the universe came into being. This
type of causation is atemporal. This means that the cause (in
this case, God’s will and power) occurred prior causally but not
prior temporally (in time). The cause and affect occurred
simultaneously.
It assumes there is a consensus on the notion of time in science.
There are different notions of time in quantum mechanics and
general relativity. To assume that there is one conception of
time misrepresents the literature. 170
This objection is self-defeating. If causality cannot exist
without time then the Big Bang should be rejected. Given that
at the point of the Big Bang’s singularity there was no time, but
a boundary to time, and the boundary is obviously causally
connected to the rest of the universe, then how can this causal
relation makes sense with no time? If the objectors accept that
the boundary is causally connected to the rest of the universe,
they should also accept the same atemporal causal relation
when God decided to manifest His will and power to create the
universe.171 If they maintain that causality doesn’t make sense
outside of time, they will have to reject the causal relation
between the boundary of the singularity to the rest of the
universe, which is tantamount to rejecting the existence of the
universe. The objector can argue that some physicists maintain
that the universe has no boundary. This however is a
contentious issue with no consensus.172

Given that there isn’t a consensus on the nature of causality and
the concept of time is contested, the objection above is not an
119

undercutting defeater to the argument presented in this chapter.
Although there are other objections to the argument presented in
this chapter, they do not qualify as defeaters. This means that even if
these objections could not be responded to, the argument would still
maintain its rational force. Nevertheless, there are some questions that
challenge this argument, including: If the Creator of the universe is
eternal, why did the universe begin to exist when it did, instead of
existing from eternity? If God is maximally perfect and transcendent,
what caused Him to create at all? Does God require creation in order
to possess attributes of perfection? These questions have been
intelligently addressed in a paper entitled The Kalam Cosmological
Argument and the Problem of Divine Creative Agency and Purpose.173
In this chapter, we have seen that the Qur’an provides an intuitive
and powerful argument for God’s existence. Since the universe is
finite, it had a beginning. If it began, then it can be explained as
coming from nothing, creating itself, being ultimately created by
something created or being created by something uncreated. The
rational answer is that the universe was brought into being by an
uncreated creator who is transcendent, knowing, powerful and has a
will. This creator must also be uniquely one, but that will be discussed
in Chapter 10.
The argument of this chapter relies on the fact that the universe
must be finite. However, the following argument shows that even if
the universe did not have a beginning, it still necessitates God’s
existence.

120

Chapter 6: The Divine Link – The
Argument from Dependency
Imagine you walk out of your house and on your street you find a row
of dominoes that stretch far beyond what your eyes can see. You start
to hear a noise that gets slightly louder as time passes. This noise is
familiar to you, as you used to play with dominoes as a child; it is the
sound of them falling. Eventually, you see this amazing display of
falling dominoes approaching you. You greatly admire how the basic
laws of physics can produce such a remarkable spectacle; however,
you are also saddened because the last domino has now fallen a few
inches away from your feet. Still excited about what has just
happened, you decide to walk down the street to find the first domino,
hoping to meet the person responsible for producing this wonderful
experience.
Keeping the above scenario in mind, I want to ask you a few
questions. As you walk down your street, will you eventually reach
where the chain of dominoes began? Or will you keep on walking
forever? The obvious response is that you will eventually find the first
domino. However, I want you to ask why. The reason you know that
you will find the first domino is because you understand that if the
domino chain went on forever, the last domino that fell by your feet
would never have fallen. An infinite number of dominoes would have
to fall before the last domino could fall. Yet an infinite amount of
falling dominoes would take an infinite amount of time to fall. In other
words, the last domino would never fall. Putting this in simple terms,
you know that in order for the last domino to fall, the domino behind
must fall prior to it, and for that domino to fall, the domino behind it
must fall prior to it. If this went on forever, the last domino would
121

never fall.
Sticking with the analogy, I want to ask you another question.
Let’s say, walking down the street, you finally come across the first
domino which led to the falling of the entire chain. What would your
thoughts be about the first domino? Would you think this domino fell
‘by itself’? In other words, do you think the falling of the first domino
can somehow be explained without referring to anything external to it?
Clearly not; that runs against the grain of our basic intuition about
reality. Nothing really happens on its own. Everything requires an
explanation of some sort. So the first domino’s fall had to have been
triggered by something else—a person, the wind or a thing hitting it,
etc. Whatever this ‘something else’ is, it has to form a part of our
explanation of falling dominoes.
So to sum up our reflections thus far: neither could the chain of
dominoes contain an infinite number of items, nor could the first
domino start falling for no reason whatsoever. 174
This above analogy is a summary of the argument from
dependency. The universe is somewhat like a row of dominoes. The
universe and everything within it is dependent. They cannot depend on
something else, which in turn depends on something else, forever. The
only plausible explanation is that the universe, and everything within
it, has to depend on someone or something whose existence is in some
ways independent from the universe (and anything else for that
matter). Put differently, this thing must not be ‘dependent’ the way the
universe is, because that would just add one more domino to the chain,
which would then require an explanation. Therefore, there must be an
independent and eternal Being that everything depends upon. Simple
as this sounds, in order to understand this argument, I will have to
define what I mean by ‘dependent’.
What does it mean when we say something is dependent?
1. Firstly, it is something that is not necessary. The word
122

‘necessary’ has a specific, technical meaning in philosophy.
Contrary to popular use, it does not indicate something you
need. Rather, when philosophers say something is necessary,
they mean that it was impossible, inconceivable for it to not
have existed.175 I understand why this may be a bit of a
difficult concept to grasp. This is because nothing in our
empirical experience is ever necessary. We can, however, get
an adequate understanding of what ‘being necessary’ means by
thinking about the opposite. A thing or object not being
necessary implies that it does not have to exist. In other words,
if it is conceivable that a thing could have not existed, it is not
necessary. The chair you are presumably sitting on is clearly
not necessary—we can imagine a thousand different scenarios
where it might not have existed. You may not have chosen to
buy it, the manufacturer may not have chosen to make it, or the
dealer may not have chosen to sell it. Clearly, your chair very
easily could not have existed. Now this possibility of ‘nothaving-been-there’ is a key feature of dependent things.
Something that has this feature requires an explanation for its
existence. This is because for something that might not have
existed, you can easily ask: Why does this thing exist? That
perfectly legitimate question calls for an explanation. It cannot
be that the thing exists on its own, because there is nothing
necessary about its existence. To say that the thing somehow
explains itself would be to deny the property of dependence we
just discussed. Thus, the explanation must be something
external to it. An explanation in this context means an external
set of factors that provide a reason for why something exists.
Going back to our chair analogy, the collection of a number of
factors—e.g., the manufacturer making it, the dealer selling it,
and you buying it—form the explanation for the chair’s
existence. Therefore, if something requires an external set of
123

factors, it means that it is dependent on something other than
itself. Consequently, its existence is dependent on something
external. This is a basic, intuitive and rational form of
reasoning. This is because questioning something that exists
that could not have existed, is the mark of a rational mind.
Think about what scientists do. They point to different features
of reality and ask—why is this flower a certain way? Why does
that bacteria cause this disease? Why is the universe expanding
at the rate that it is? What gives these questions legitimacy is
the fact that none of them are necessary; all of them might not
have been the way that they are. To facilitate a greater
understanding of this concept, consider the following example:
Waking up in the morning, you go down the stairs and walk
into the kitchen. You open the fridge and on top of the egg box
you find a pen. You obviously do not close the fridge door and
conclude that the pen’s existence is necessary. You do not
think that the pen in the fridge got there by itself. You question
why the pen is on top of the egg box. The reason you ask this
question is because the pen’s existence on the egg box is not
necessary. It requires an explanation for its existence and for
the way that it is. The explanations can vary, but the fact that
an explanation is needed means that the pen is dependent. The
pen requires an external set of factors to provide a reason for
why it is placed in the fridge, and why it is the way that it is.
For instance: the fact that the pen was made, and your son
bought the pen from a stationary shop, and then put the pen in
the fridge provides the external set of factors responsible for
the pen. The pen is therefore dependent on these external
factors, and these factors explain the pen’s existence.

124

2. Secondly, something is dependent if its components or basic
building blocks could have been arranged in a different
way. This is because there must have been something external
to that thing which determined its specific arrangement.176 Let
me elaborate with an example:
You are driving home and you pass a roundabout. You see a
bunch of flowers arranged in the following three words: ‘I love
you’. You can conclude that there is nothing necessary about
the arrangement of the flowers. They could have been arranged
in another way—for example, the words ‘I adore you’ instead
of ‘I love you’ could have been used. Alternatively, the flowers
could have not been arranged at all—they might have been
randomly scattered. Since the flowers could have been set in a
different way, some force external to them must have
determined their arrangement. In this case, it could have been
the local gardener or the result of a local government project.
This point holds true for pretty much everything you observe.
The components of everything, be it an atom or a laptop or an
organism, are composed in a specific way. Furthermore, each
basic building block does not exist necessarily. The basic
components of something cannot explain themselves and
therefore require an explanation (see the first definition above).
3. Thirdly, a thing is dependent if it relies on something
outside itself for its existence. This is a common sense
understanding of the word. Another way of explaining that
something is dependent is by stating that it is not selfsustaining. An example includes a pet cat. The cat does not
sustain itself; it requires external things to survive. These
include food, water, oxygen and shelter.

125

4. Finally, the defining features of a dependent thing are that
it has limited physical qualities. These can include shape,
size, colour, temperature, charge, mass, etc. Why is this so?
Well, if something has a limited physical feature, that feature
must be limited by something external to itself, such as an
external source or external set of factors. The following
questions highlight this point: Why does it have these limits?
Why is it not twice the size, or a different shape or colour? The
thing did not give itself these limitations. For example, if I
picked up a cupcake with its limited physical qualities of size,
shape, colour and texture, and claimed that it existed
necessarily, you would think I was foolish. You know that its
size, colour and texture have been controlled by an external
source: in this case, the baker. Things with limited physical
qualities did not give rise to them. There must be an
explanation to explain the existence of these limited physical
qualities.
It is reasonable to assert that all things with limited physical
qualities are finite; there must have been something prior that
was responsible for their qualities. This means that all limited
physical objects at one point had a beginning, because it is
inconceivable that limited physical objects are eternal. This is
due to the fact that an external source or set of factors must
have existed prior to any limited physical object and caused its
limitations.
Imagine if I picked up a plant and claimed that it was eternal.
How would you respond? You would laugh at such an
assertion. Even if you didn’t witness the plant’s beginning, you
know it is finite because of its limited physical qualities.
However, even if limited physical objects (including the
126

universe) were eternal, it would not change the fact that they
are dependent and do not exist necessarily. This argument
works regardless of whether or not objects are eternal or have a
beginning.
Applying the above comprehensive definition of what it means to
be dependent leads us to conclude that the universe and everything
within it is dependent. Reflect on anything that comes to mind—a pen,
a tree, the sun, an electron, and even a quantum field. All of these
things are dependent in some way. If this is true, then all that we
perceive—including the universe—can be explained in one of the
following ways:
1. The universe and all that we perceive are eternal, necessary
and independent.
2. The existence of the universe and all that we perceive
depends on something else which is also dependent.
3. The universe and all that we perceive derives its existence
from something else that exists by its own nature and is
accordingly eternal and independent.
I will take each explanation and discuss which one best explains
the dependency of the universe and everything within it.
1. The universe and all that we perceive are eternal, necessary and
independent.
Could the universe and everything that we perceive exist eternally and
depend on themselves? This is not a rational explanation. The universe
and all the things that we perceive do not necessarily exist; they could
have not existed. They also have limited physical qualities. Since they
could not give rise to their own limitations, something external must
127

have imposed these limitations on them. The universe and all the
things we perceive do not explain themselves by virtue of their own
existence, and their components could have been arranged in a
different way. Therefore, they are dependent, and dependent things do
not exist independently.
Even if the universe were eternal, it still stands that there must
have been an external set of factors that gave rise to its limited
physical qualities. In addition, the universe’s components or basic
building blocks could have been arranged in a different way, and the
universe could have not existed. The universe cannot explain itself by
virtue of its own existence. With these considerations, we can safely
reject the view that the eternity of the universe somehow provides an
explanation for its existence (this point is explained further below).
2. The existence of the universe and all we perceive depends on
something else which is also dependent.
The existence of the universe and all that we perceive could not
depend on something else which is also dependent. Since the universe
and all that we perceive do not explain themselves, then postulating
another dependent thing to explain them does not explain anything at
all. This is because the dependent thing that is supposed to explain the
universe and everything that exists, also requires an explanation for its
existence. Therefore, the only way to explain things that are dependent
is by referring to something that is not dependent and therefore
necessary.
Despite this, someone may argue that the existence of all we perceive
depends on something else, which in turn depends on another thing, ad
infinitum. This is false. For instance: Could this universe be explained
by another universe, which in turn is explained by another universe,
with the series of explanations continuing forever? This would not
128

solve the problem of requiring an explanation. Even if there were an
infinite number of universes all dependent on each other, we could still
ask: Why does this infinite chain of universes exist? Whether or not the
universe is eternal, it still requires an explanation for its existence.
Consider the following example. Imagine there are an infinite
number of human beings. Each human being was produced by the
biological activity of their parents, and each of these parents was in
turn produced by the biological activity of their parents, ad infinitum.
It would still be perfectly reasonable to ask: Why are there any human
beings at all? Even if this chain of human beings had no beginning, the
fact remains that this chain requires an explanation. Since each human
being in the chain could have not existed and possesses limited
physical qualities, they are dependent and not necessary. They still
require an explanation. Just saying the chain of human beings is
infinite does nothing to change the need for an explanation.177
This option also assumes that an infinite regress of dependencies
is possible. However, this is inconceivable. To illustrate this point,
imagine the existence of this universe was dependent on another
universe, and the existence of that universe was also dependent on
another universe, and so on. Would this universe ever come to be? The
answer is no, because an infinite number of dependencies would need
to be established before this universe could exist. Remember, an
infinite number of things do not end; therefore, this universe could not
exist if there were an infinite set of dependencies.
3. The universe and all that we perceive derives its existence from
something else that exists by its own nature and is accordingly
eternal and independent.
Since everything we perceive is dependent in some way, then the most
rational explanation is that the existence of everything depends on
something else that is independent, and therefore eternal. It has to be
129

independent because if it were dependent, it would require an
explanation. It also has to be eternal because if it was not eternal—in
other words, finite—it would be dependent as finite things require an
explanation for their existence. Therefore, we can conclude that the
universe, and everything that we perceive, depends upon something
that is eternal and independent. This is best explained by the existence
of God.
The argument from dependency is supported by the Islamic
intellectual tradition. The concept of an independent Being that is
responsible for bringing everything into existence is highlighted in
various places in the Qur’an. For example, God says:
“God is independent of all that exists.” 178
“O mankind! It is you who stand in need of God, whereas He
alone is self-sufficient, the One whom all praise is due.” 179
The classical exegete Ibn Kathir comments on the above verse:
“They need Him in all that they do, but He has no need of them at
all… He is unique in His being free of all needs, and has no partner or
associate.”180
Islam’s intellectual tradition produced the like of Ibn Sina (known
in the West as Avicenna), who articulated a similar argument. He
maintained that God is Waajib al-Wujood, necessarily existent. Ibn
Sina argued that God necessarily exists and He is responsible for the
existence of everything. Everything other than God is dependent,
which Ibn Sina described as Mumkin al-Wujud.181 The argument from
dependency has also been adopted—and adapted—by many other
influential Islamic scholars, some of whom include Al-Razi, AlGhazali and Imam al-Haramayn al-Juwayni.
Al-Ghazali provides a concise summary of this argument:
“There is no denying existence itself. Something must exist and
130

anyone who says nothing exists at all makes a mockery of
sense and necessity. The proposition that there is no denying
being itself, then, is a necessary premise. Now this Being
which has been admitted in principle is either necessary or
contingent… What this means is that a being must be selfsufficient or dependent… From here we argue: If the being the
existence of which is conceded be necessary, then the existence
of a necessary Being is established. If, on the other hand, its
existence is contingent, every contingent being depends on a
necessary Being; for the meaning of its contingency is that its
existence and non-existence are equally possible. Whatever has
such a characteristic cannot have its existence selected for
without a determining or selecting agent. This too is necessary.
So from these necessary premises the existence of a necessary
Being is established.”182
In summary, according to Islamic theology, God is:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Independent
The Being that everything depends on
The One that sustains everything
Everlasting
Self-sufficient
Waajib al-Wujood (necessarily existent)

I will now address some of the key objections against this argument.
The universe exists independently
A typical atheist contention is: If we are saying that God is
independent and necessary, why cannot we say the same thing for the
universe? This is a misplaced contention for the following reasons.
Firstly, there is nothing necessary about the universe; it could have not
131

existed. Secondly, the components of the universe could have been
arranged in a different way. Whether one considers these components
to be quarks or some type of quantum field, it still raises the question:
Why are they arranged the way that they are? Since a different
arrangement of quarks or fields could have existed instead of the
collection that does exist, it follows that the universe is dependent. 183
Everything we perceive within the universe has limited physical
qualities; this includes the galaxies, stars, trees, animals and electrons.
They have a specific shape, size and physical form. As such, these
things that we perceive around us—the things that make up the entire
universe—are finite and dependent.
The universe is just a brute fact
Another contention suggests that we should not ask any questions
about the universe. During his famous radio debate with Father
Copleston, the philosopher Bertrand Russell said, “I should say that
the universe is just there, and that’s all”184. This position is frankly an
intellectual cop-out. Consider the following hovering green ball
analogy:185
Imagine you were walking in your local park and you saw a
hovering green ball in the middle of the children’s playground. How
would you react? Would you walk by and accept it as a necessary part
of the playground? Of course not; you would question why it exists
and how it is the way that it is. Now, extend the ball to the size of a
universe. The question still remains: Why does the ball exist and why
is it the way that it is? Hence, the validity of questioning why the
universe is the way that it is.
Furthermore, this contention is absurd because it undermines
science itself. Within the scientific community is a field of study
dedicated to trying to explain the existence and basic features of the
universe. This field is called cosmology. This is a perfectly legitimate
field of scientific enquiry, and to label the universe as a ‘brute fact’
132

does a disservice to an established scientific practice.
Science will eventually find an answer!
This objection argues that what has been presented in this chapter is a
form of the ‘God of the gaps’ fallacy. It argues that our ignorance of
scientific phenomena should not be taken as proof of God’s existence
or Divine activity, because science will eventually provide an
explanation. This is a misplaced objection because the argument from
dependency does not aim to address a scientific question. Its concern is
with metaphysics; it seeks to understand the nature and implications of
dependent things. This argument can be applied to all scientific
explanations and phenomena. For example, even if we were to theorise
many universes as an explanation for natural phenomena, they would
still be dependent. Why? Because the components of these
explanations could be arranged in a different way and cannot be
explained by virtue of their own existence, or they require something
else outside of themselves to exist and have limited physical qualities.
Therefore, they are dependent, and—as discussed in this chapter—you
cannot explain a dependent thing with another dependent thing. If
members of the scientific community claim to have found something
that is independent and eternal, and in turn explained the existence of
the universe, I would ask for proof. Interestingly, the minute they
provide some empirical proof would be the moment they contradict
themselves, because things that can be sensed have limited physical
qualities, therefore qualifying as dependent.
Science cannot ever discover anything independent and eternal,
not only because it would be empirical, but also because science only
works on observable dependent things. Therefore, it makes no sense to
say that science would discover an unscientific object! Let’s take a
moment and think about what science is. Science, as a discipline, is in
the business of providing answers and explanations (see Chapter 12).
Only dependent things can have explanations. With this in mind, we
133

realise the scope of science is restricted to the realm of dependent
objects. Therefore, science can only provide an answer that would
relate to another dependent object. It cannot address the metaphysical
nature of this argument. As we have explained, you cannot explain a
dependent object with another dependent object, because that
dependent object would also require an explanation (and if you recall,
we have already discussed that there cannot be a thing that depends on
something else to exist, which in turn depends on still another thing,
ad infinitum). Since the explanation is something that is independent
and eternal, science can never enter into the discussion because it has a
limited scope of empirical, dependent things.
You’ve assumed God exists, as He is the only thing that necessarily
exists.
The argument in this chapter has not assumed God. The argument has
not made up the idea of necessity in order to lead to God. Rather, the
dependency of the universe and everything that we perceive has led to
the idea that there must be an eternal, independent being that exists
necessarily. This conclusion makes sense of the Islamic definition of
God. The ideas of necessity and dependency are well known and
discussed in philosophy (the use of the word dependency in this
argument is usually referred to as contingency in philosophy). They
are not made up concepts to try and sneak the God explanation via the
backdoor.
“Doesn’t God require an explanation?”
The argument presented in this chapter has concluded that there must
be an eternal, independent being that exists necessarily. This makes
sense of the Islamic conception of God. A necessary being doesn’t
require an explanation. Technically, such a being doesn’t require an
explanation that refers to something external to it (unlike dependent
things). Rather, a necessary being is explained by virtue of its own
134

existence. In other words, it was impossible for it to have not existed.
Therefore, it doesn’t require an explanation external to itself.
The Fallacy of Composition
The fallacy of composition is a fallacy of reasoning that mistakenly
concludes that the whole must have the same properties as its
individual parts.186 However, making such a claim is not always
fallacious. It could be that some wholes contain the properties that
exist within its individual parts; however it is not always the case. For
example, a wall (the whole) is made of bricks (individual parts).
Bricks are hard, therefore the wall is hard. This is true. Conversely,
take into consideration a Persian rug. The rug (the whole) is made up
of threads (individual parts); it would be false to conclude that since
the individual threads are light the rug is also light.
With respect to the above, the objector may argue that it does not
logically follow the universe is dependent because it is made up of
dependent parts. Nevertheless this is a misplaced objection. From our
experience dependent things always form dependent wholes. For
example, a house is made up of dependent materials and a house is
dependent. It has limited physical qualities, it could have not existed
and its fundamental building blocks could have been arranged in a
different way. Similarly the universe is made up of dependent things
therefore it is dependent. The onus of proof is on the objector to show
that dependent things do not make up dependent wholes.
Before I end this chapter, I advise reading the book Necessary
Existence by Professor Alexander R. Pruss and Professor Joshua L.
Rasmussen.187 The book addresses similar and other academic
objections to this argument. I also recommend reading Mohammed
Hijab’s book Kalam Cosmological Arguments for an in-depth Islamic
perspective.188
135

Ending on a spiritual note
This understanding of God is not just an intellectual exercise; rather, it
should instil a deep sense of yearning and love for God. In this
chapter, we have concluded that God necessarily exists and everything
can only exist because of Him. In this sense, we as human beings are
not only dependent on God in the philosophical sense, but also in the
normal use of the word; we couldn’t be here without Him, and
everything that we have is ultimately due to Him alone.
The following marvellous short story teaches us that, since we are
ultimately dependent on God, and our success in this life and the
hereafter lies with His boundless mercy, we should submit to God and
accomplish His will:
“One day I set out to tend my fields, accompanied by my
little dog, sworn enemy of the monkeys which ravaged the
plantations. It was the season of great heat. My dog and I were
so hot that we could scarcely breathe. I began to think that one
or other of us would soon fall in a faint. Then, thank God, I
saw a Tiayki tree, the branches of which presented a vault of
refreshing greenery. My dog gave little cries of joy and turned
towards this blessed shade.
When he had reached the shade, instead of staying where
he was, he came back to me, his tongue out. Seeing how his
flanks were palpitating, I realised how completely exhausted he
was. I walked towards the shade. My dog was full of joy. Then,
for a moment, I pretended to continue on my way. The poor
beast groaned plaintively, but followed me none the less, his
tail between his legs. He was obviously in despair, but
determined to follow me, whatever might come of it. This
fidelity moved me profoundly. How could one fully appreciate
the readiness of this animal to follow me, even to death,
although he was under no constraint to do so? He is devoted to
136

me, I said to myself, because he regards me as his master and
so risks his life simply to stay beside me. ‘Oh my Lord,’ I
cried, ‘Heal my troubled soul! Make my fidelity like that of
this being whom I call, contemptuously, a dog. Give me, as
You have given to him, the strength to master my life so that I
may accomplish Your will and follow—without asking, Where
am I going?—the path upon which You guide me! I am not the
creator of this dog, yet he follows me in docility, at the cost of
a thousand sufferings. It is You, Lord, who has gifted him with
this virtue. Give, O Lord, to all who ask it of You—as I do—
the virtue of Love and the courage of Charity!’ Then I retraced
my steps and took refuge in the shade. Full of joy, my little
companion lay down facing me so that his eyes were turned to
mine, as though he wished to speak seriously to me.”189

137

Chapter 7: Denying God, Denying You –
The Argument from Consciousness
My father loves going for walks. He ponders the profound questions
that plague the thinking man. On one of these walks, he decided to
visit the famous Speakers Corner in London. It is known for its loud
and heated discussions about man, life and the universe, including
politics and all sorts of conspiracies. It is a place for unfettered free
speech, where anyone and everyone can say almost what they want in
any way they want. The corner usually witnesses theological and
philosophical debates centred on God’s existence. The day my father
visited the corner he was listening to a discussion about whether or not
we have good reasons to believe in the Divine. My father interrupted
the discussion and told them, “If you reject God, you deny yourself.”
When my father told me this story, I didn’t really understand the
implications of what he said. However, fast-forward a few decades, I
would like to expand on his profound wisdom in this chapter.
My father was trying to tell the crowd that since we have an
awareness of who we are (and what we feel), it is a sign that God
exists. In a broad sense, what my father was referring to was
phenomenal consciousness; in simple terms, the fact that we have
inner subjective experiences. Phenomenal consciousness relates to our
ability to have an inner subjective awareness of what it is like to
experience a particular conscious state. For example, when I eat my
favourite chocolate or when I listen to a recitation of the Qur’an, I am
aware of that internal experience, and I can appreciate what it is like to
be in that conscious state. However, no one else can access what it is
like for me to have those subjective experiences. Of course, other
people will have their own perspectives of chocolate and the recitation
138

of the Qur’an, but they will never truly experience or comprehend
what I feel during those experiences.
Even if you were to know everything about my physical brain,
you would not be able to find out what it is like for me to have a
particular experience, whether drinking orange juice, staring at a
beautiful sunset or falling in love. The main reason for this is that
neuroscience is mostly a science of correlations. Neuroscientists
observe brain activity and correlate that activity with what the
participants report they are conscious of. However, these correlations
can never tell us anything about what it is like for participants to be in
a given state of consciousness; it can only tell us when it occurs. You
may argue that a participant may provide neuroscientists with firstperson data by describing his or her subjective experience, thereby
answering the question. Nonetheless, this is not an answer, because
even if someone uses words like ‘cold’, ‘painful’, ‘sweet’, ‘beautiful’
and ‘sad’, they can never tell us what it is like to have those
experiences and feelings. Words are vehicles for meaning and
experience, but we must go beyond words to fully understand the
conscious experience of another. Another elusive aspect of internal
conscious experiences is why subjective experiences arise from nonconscious biological and physical processes. Why does a unique
internal experience arise from non-conscious matter? This is another
important question in the philosophy of the mind and neuroscience.
The issues I have introduced so far form what academics call the
hard problem of consciousness. This has remained unresolved, despite
having sparked many heated debates on the nature of who we are and
our conscious experiences. Research fellow Daniel Bor states the
problem in the following way:
“There are a lot of hard problems in the world, but only one
gets to call itself ‘the hard problem’. That is the problem of
139

consciousness—how 1300 grams or so of nerve cells conjures
up the seamless kaleidoscope of sensations, thoughts,
memories and emotions that occupy every waking moment…
The hard problem remains unresolved.”190
The very fact that we have internal subjective conscious
experiences can only be explained by the existence of an All-Aware
Being. This Being created the physical universe with conscious
creatures, and gave them the ability to be aware of their internal
subjective experiences. Other explanations fail from the onset—for
instance, a cold, materialistic view on the universe offers no hope for a
solution to the problem. Imagine in the beginning of the universe all
you had were simple arrangements of matter, and after a long period of
time, they rearranged themselves into human beings to form
consciousness. This sounds like magic, because matter is cold, blind
and non-conscious, so how can it be responsible for such a
phenomenon? It cannot. For example, I cannot give you £10 if I do not
have it. Likewise, matter cannot give rise to consciousness if it does
not contain it or have the potential to give rise to it. You may argue
that I can earn the money and then give it to someone; likewise, matter
can somehow ‘earn’ consciousness via some complex process. This is
false, because an individual non-conscious process plus another
individual non-complex process still equal two non-conscious
processes. It is like trying to turn a piece of iron into wood: no matter
how you manipulate the iron, it will never turn into wood, even if you
add more iron.
The scope of this chapter is to deconstruct the popular
explanations for the hard problem of consciousness and explain how a
theistic approach, and by extension God’s existence, provides a far
better explanation. I will also bring to light that this is not an issue for
which ‘science will eventually give us the answers’, because even if
we were to know everything about the brain and insist on referring
140

solely to biological, materialist (or even non-theistic philosophical)
explanations, we will still not answer the hard problem of
consciousness.
More about the hard problem
By their own admission, the issue of consciousness has caused many
academics unsolvable problems, especially those who are excessively
dogmatic in their materialistic approach. In his book Consciousness:
Confessions of a Romantic Reductionist, Professor Christof Koch
openly admits:
“How the brain converts bioelectrical activity into subjective
states, how photons reflected off water are magically
transformed into the percept of an iridescent aquamarine
mountain tarn is a puzzle. The nature of the relationship
between the nervous system and consciousness remains elusive
and the subject of heated and interminable debates…
Explaining how a highly organized piece of matter can possess
an interior perspective has daunted the scientific method,
which in so many other areas has proved immensely
fruitful.”191
These unresolved problems do not concern the physical makeup
of the brain and how we can correlate some conscious states with brain
activity. If I am experiencing pain, some sort of activity in my brain
indicates that I am experiencing pain. No one is denying that the
physical brain and consciousness are related, but I must stress here, it
is just a relationship. The brain and consciousness is not the same
thing. Take the following analogy into consideration: the brain is the
car, and consciousness is the driver. The car will not move without the
driver, and the driver will not be able to start the car—or use it
properly—if it is damaged or broken. However, they are both different
141

and independent in some way.
What are the problems that specialists in the field are trying to
address, and why are the brain and consciousness not the same thing?
The answer to these questions lies in what is known as the hard
problem of consciousness. The hard problem of consciousness
concerns the fact that we have internal subjective experiences. In other
words, the problem is that we cannot explain what it is like for a
particular organism to have a subjective conscious experience in terms
of the third-person language of science. Professor David Chalmers,
who popularised the phrase the hard problem of consciousness,
explains:
“The really hard problem of consciousness is the problem of
experience. When we think and perceive, there is a whir of
information processing, but there is also a subjective aspect…
This subjective aspect is experience. When we see, for
example, we experience visual sensations: the felt quality of
redness, the experience of dark and light, the quality of depth
in a physical field. Other experiences go along with perception
in different modalities: the sound of a clarinet, the smell of
mothballs. Then there are bodily sensations from pains to
orgasms; mental images that are conjured up internally; the felt
quality of emotion; and the experience of a stream of conscious
thought. What unites all these states is that there is something it
is like to be in them. All of them are states of experience… If
any problem qualifies as the problem of consciousness, it is
this one. In this central sense of ‘consciousness’, an organism,
and a mental state is conscious if there is something it is like to
be in that state.”192
Professor Torin Alter adds another dimension to the definition of
the hard problem of consciousness, by focusing on the inability to
142

answer why physical brain processes produce conscious experience:
“As I type these words, cognitive systems in my brain engage in
visual and auditory information processing. This processing is
accompanied by states of phenomenal consciousness, such as
the auditory experience of hearing the tap-tap-tap of the
keyboard and the visual experience of seeing the letters appear
on the screen. How does my brain's activity generate those
experiences? Why those and not others? Indeed, why is any
physical event accompanied by conscious experience? The set of
such problems is known as the hard problem of consciousness…
Even after all the associated functions and abilities are
explained, one might reasonably wonder why there is something
it is like to see letters appear on a computer screen.”193
Let me simplify the above definitions with an example. Say you
were to eat a strawberry. Scientists and philosophers would be able to
find correlations in the brain that indicate that you are eating
something, maybe even the fact that you are eating a piece of fruit, and
whether or not you find it tasty or sweet by asking you to describe
your conscious experience. Nevertheless, they could never find out or
examine what it is like for you to eat a strawberry, or what tastiness or
sweetness mean and feel for you, and why you have had that particular
subjective experience of eating a strawberry arising from physical
processes.
It is important to note that the issue at hand is not merely an
epistemic one; it is not due to a lack of understanding neurobiology or
not being able to understand what it is like for someone to have an
inner subjective conscious experience just by observing
neurobiological happenings. Rather, it is an ontological problem; it
concerns the source and nature of phenomenal experience. The nature
of the physical (in this case, neurobiology) and subjective
143

consciousness are completely different. Not being able to find out
what it is like for someone to have a subjective conscious experience,
and not knowing how these experiences arise from physical processes,
raises the following metaphysical questions: What is the nature of
conscious experience? What is the ultimate source of these
experiences?
Addressing the failed approaches
A range of competing approaches attempt to explain the phenomenon
of consciousness and its hard problem. These approaches include
biological, materialist and non-materialist explanations. I will attempt
to discuss why they do not address the hard problem of consciousness,
and why a theistic approach provides the best explanation. In other
words, God’s existence provides a rational basis to answer the
questions philosophers and neuroscientists have been unable to
answer.
Biological approaches
Let us first address why biological explanations have failed. Some of
these attempts include Francis Crick and Christof Koch’s Toward a
Neurobiological Theory of Consciousness, Bernard Baars’s Global
Workplace theory, Gerald Elderman’s and Giulio Tononi’s The
Dynamic Core theory, Rodolfo Llinas’s Thalamocortical Binding
theory, Victor Lamme’s Recurrent Processing theory, Semir Zeki’s
Microconsciousness theory and Antonio Damasio’s The Feeling of
What Happens theory. Although it is not the purpose of this chapter to
discuss the technicalities and shortcomings of these empirical theories
(because they all have philosophical implications and assumptions,
which are addressed below), none of them comprehensively addresses
the hard problem of consciousness. Professor David Chalmers explains
the failure of the biological approaches in addressing the hard problem
of consciousness. In his book The Character of Consciousness, he
144

mentions five perilous strategies that have been adopted 194:
1. The first strategy is to explain something else. Researchers
simply admit the problem of experience is too difficult for
now. Koch openly admits this failed strategy. In a published
interview, he confessed: “Well, let's first forget about the real
difficult aspects, like subjective feelings, because they may not
have a scientific solution. The subjective state of play, of pain,
of pleasure, of seeing blue, of smelling a rose—there seems to
be a huge jump between the materialistic level, of explaining
molecules and neurons, and the subjective level.” 195
2. The second strategy is to deny the hard problem of
consciousness. It is to decide that we are zombies, with only an
illusion of free will. This strategy describes the human reality
as a biological machine with no subjective experience. In other
words, it ignores the problem and redefines what it means to be
human.
3. The third strategy claims that subjective experience is
explained by understanding the physical processes in our brain.
However, this sounds like magic. Conscious experience
somehow emerges without any explanation. The question, how
do these processes give rise to an inner subjective experience?
is never answered. Furthermore, understanding physical
processes tells us nothing about what it is like for a person to
have a particular internal conscious experience.
4. The fourth strategy is to explain the structure of experience.
This strategy tells us nothing of why experience exists in the
first place, and just by explaining the structure of experience, it
provides us with no answers to what it is like for a person to
145

have unique experiences.
5. The fifth strategy is to isolate the substrate (the underlying
basis or layer) of experience. This strategy aims to isolate the
neural basis for experience by understanding certain processes.
However, this strategy does not explain what it is like to have
an internal conscious experience, why it emerges from these
processes and how.
Enter the philosophy of mind
Now we are in a position to address how philosophers of the mind
explain consciousness in a way that attempts to address the hard
problem. An important note to add here is that scientific theories have
implied philosophical assumptions. Therefore, addressing the
philosophical theories will also address the empirical theories.
Professor Antti Revonsuo makes this point clear:
“However, it is useful also for empirical scientists to be aware
of the different philosophical alternatives, because every
empirical theory also necessarily involves some sort of implicit
philosophical commitments… The overall empirical approach
that a scientist takes to consciousness is guided by his prior
philosophical commitments or intuitions about the nature of
science and the nature of consciousness, whether he is aware of
such commitments or not.”196
Professors Ricardo Manzotti and Paolo Moderato also highlight
that the neurosciences are “not metaphysically innocent” 197 and that
“empirical data needs to be interpreted from the perspective of some
premise.”198
None of the various philosophical attempts to explain
consciousness are comprehensive enough to challenge the theistic
146

alternative. These attempts can be broadly categorised as materialist or
physicalist, and non-materialist. Below is a brief account of these
attempts and an explanation of why they have failed.
Materialistic approaches
Echoing other researchers and academics, the terms physicalism and
materialism will be used interchangeably. 199 200 Although they have
separate histories and some conceptual differences 201, these do not pose a
problem to the concepts dealt with in this chapter. The two terms mean
that consciousness can be explained by the physical sciences, but do not
always imply that conscious states must be equated to bits of matter.
Physical facts are not all the facts!
Before I get into all the materialist approaches, I would like to explain
how physicalism and materialism in general are undermined by Frank
Jackson’s powerful Mary argument. Here is a summary of it:
Mary has lived in a black and white room all her life and
acquires information about the world via black and white
computers and televisions. In her room, Mary has access to all
of the scientific objective information about what happens
when humans see physical phenomena. She knows everything
about the science related to perceiving objects with the human
eye. Yet, she is unaware of what it is like to see colours. One
day she is allowed to leave the room. The moment she opens
the door she looks at a red rose, and experiences the colour red
for the first time. She only appreciates the colour red the
moment she sees it. 202 Her knowledge about all the physical
facts concerning visual perception and colours did nothing to
prepare her for the new experience of seeing red. She did not
know what it was like to see a red rose by learning the physical
147

facts, she only knew what that experience was like the moment
it occurred.
Chalmers provides the following premises to show that the Mary
argument renders materialism unable to solve the hard problem of
consciousness:
1. Mary knows all the physical facts.
2. Mary does not know all the facts.
3. The physical facts do not exhaust all the facts.203
Chalmers’s argument here shows that knowledge of the physical
world will not lead to knowledge of subjective conscious reality—for
example, what it is like to see red. This seems to undermine
materialism. Chalmers generalises the argument in the following way:
1. There are truths about consciousness that are not deducible
from physical truths.
2. If there are truths about consciousness that are not
deducible from physical truths, then materialism is false.
3. Materialism is false. 204
Physicalism and materialism do not explain subjective
consciousness because knowledge of the physical brain does not lead
to an understanding of a subjective experience, and why that
experience emerges from brain activity. Materialism is inadequate,
because there are facts about consciousness that cannot be deduced
from physical facts.
The Mary argument has generated interesting objections. One
objection argues that it is not possible to identify what Mary would
know if she acquired all of the physical facts. This objection
misunderstands the Mary argument. It assumes that the Mary argument
148

is focused on what it is like to know all the physical facts. However,
the argument is focused on Mary’s inability to know what it is like to
see red if she never had the experience of seeing red. Therefore, any
objection to the Mary argument must focus on what Mary gains by
seeing red and not what she would know if she had all the physical
facts.
Another objection is the Ability Hypothesis. This hypothesis
asserts that Mary does not gain any new knowledge, but only acquires
new abilities. For example, when someone learns how to ride a bike
they are not learning new things about the bike, they simply acquire
the ability to ride it. This objection is considered inadequate. If Mary
can gain new abilities when she leaves the room, then it is also
possible that she gains new facts that she did not have prior to leaving
the room. When someone learns how to ride a bike, they do not only
acquire the ability to do so, they also gain new facts. For example, if
someone is riding downhill fast, they will eventually learn not to
constantly use the brakes as this will cause the rims to overheat. For a
controlled descent, the brakes must be gently squeezed with around
two second pulses.
Professor Brian Loar’s objection provides a strong challenge to
the Mary argument. Loar argues that Mary does not acquire new
knowledge about red, only a new way of conceptualising what she
already knew about the colour. This strategy declares that there is only
one property that can give rise to distinct concepts of that property.
These concepts are physical-functional concepts and phenomenal
concepts (concepts that refer to subjective experience). So, when Mary
saw red for the first time, she was not experiencing a new property and
learning new facts about it. She was experiencing a different way of
conceptualising what she already knew. Prior to leaving the room, she
recognised the property of red in physical-functional terms. However,
when she left the room, she acquired a new way of recognising the
physical property of red in phenomenal terms. Mary can only acquire
149

phenomenal concepts when she sees red, because these concepts come
about only by seeing the colour red.205 The main problem with Loar’s
strategy is that it is based on the assumption that we can acquire
phenomenal concepts from observing physical properties. However,
this begs the question: How can our brains, while we experience the
conscious state of observing a physical-functional property, acquire a
phenomenal concept? Loar does not provide any adequate answer. The
non-physicalist will then state that the Mary argument holds its ground
because it provides an answer to that fundamental question: we gain
phenomenal concepts because things (including ourselves) contain
physical and phenomenal properties. In summary, to claim that
phenomenal concepts can arise from a physical property is inadequate
to explain the knowledge one gains from experiencing a subjective
conscious experience.206
There are other reasons why Loar’s phenomenal concept strategy
is not decisive. For detailed discussions and responses to Loar’s
account, please refer to Michael Tye’s Consciousness Revisited:
Materialism Without Phenomenal Concepts 207, Erhan Demircioglu’s
Physicalism and Phenomenal Concepts 208, Karol Polcyn’s Brian Loar
on Physicalism and Phenomenal Concepts 209 and David Chalmers’s
essay, Phenomenal Concepts and the Explanatory Gap210. The
academic literature on the Mary argument is also vast, with compelling
arguments supporting and challenging physicalism. This is not the
space to explore the literature on the topic. However, the academic
discussions do not conclusively undermine what has been presented in
this section.
‘Let’s ignore the problem’: Eliminative materialism
Eliminative materialists assume everything can be explained via
physical processes, and do not accept that subjective conscious states
exist. They argue that the brain is made up of neurons undergoing
150

physical and chemical processes; therefore, explaining these complex
processes will somehow explain consciousness.211 Eliminative
materialists assert that the ideas of ‘folk psychology’ we have
developed to describe subjective consciousness (due to the current lack
of solutions provided by the physical sciences) will be made redundant
when neuroscience has “matured” 212. This is when neuroscience will
replace subjective consciousness with “neural activity in specialized
anatomical areas”.213 In summary, science will one day explain what
we call subjective consciousness; therefore, the hard problem will be
solved.
Echoing the eliminative materialist approach, the analytical
philosopher Patricia Churchland asserts that the apparent question of
subjective consciousness will be demystified when we improve our
scientific knowledge. Churchland argues the hard problem of
consciousness should not be distinguished from other problems in
neuroscience. The reason, according to Churchland, is that researchers
have an array of problems that are unaddressed, and to argue that they
will never be solved seems unreasonable. Just because the hard
problem is described as mysterious or a difficult challenge to
physicalism does not mean that it will never have a scientific solution.
Churchland refers to the history of science in support of her
arguments. History shows that science has solved many ‘hard
problems’, indicating that the hard problem of consciousness will also
be solved.214
However, physical and chemical processes tell us nothing about
what it is like for a particular conscious being to have an internal
subjective experience. This implies that, for the eliminative materialist,
inner subjective experiences are just an illusion. In other words,
proponents of this view do not really accept the hard problem of
consciousness, because they claim that matter and physical processes
are all that is required to explain anything. Nevertheless, matter and
physical processes cannot tell us anything about what it is like to have
151

an inner subjective conscious experience. Furthermore, matter cannot
explain the emergence of subjective conscious experience because
matter is cold, blind and non-conscious. Something cannot give rise to
anything unless it contains that thing in the first place or has the ability
to give rise to it. Matter and physical processes are non-conscious and
therefore cannot give rise to subjective conscious experience as they
do not contain it.
Frank Jackson and Philip Pettit maintain that the eliminative
materialist’s claim—that the history of science has shown that a
physicalist language will replace our primitive folk psychology—does
not logically follow. The basis of their argument is that it is
unreasonable to reject the conclusions of a theory due to the potential
discovery of another theory that may have greater explanatory scope
and power. It could be that the claims of the ‘weaker’ theory are still
true despite a scientifically better way of explaining the same
phenomena. Jackson and Pettit use the kinetic theory of gases as an
example. The kinetic theory of gases studies “the microscopic
behavior of molecules and the interactions which lead to macroscopic
relationships”.215 This theory uses statistical analysis to provide
accurate “results for macroscopic manifestations of microscopic
phenomena”. (Ibid) Jackson and Pettit postulate that if a hypothetical
“Super Kinetic” theory provided non-statistical, deterministic
calculations of the “exact position, mass, velocity, and size of every
gas molecule” it would not provide a basis to reject the fact that gases
have temperature and pressure. 216 The reason is that the super kinetic
theory does not contain “information that supports the relevant part of
the old theory.”217 Jackson and Pettit summarise their argument:
“And yet no reductive reductive identifications of temperature and
pressure with fundamental properties of the super kinetic theory
are possible. Temperature, for instance, is not the mass, velocity,
or position of any individual molecule. There will be no
152

isomorphism even by the most relaxed standards between gas
laws framed in terms of temperature, pressure, and volume and
the laws framed in terms of mass, position, and velocity of
molecules of the super kinetic theory. The basic taxonomic
principles of the two theories are very different.” 218
In light of this, eliminative materialism is not an adequate
explanation of the hard problem of consciousness as it ignores what
requires explaining in the first place. The conclusions of eliminative
materialism can be reduced to the following absurdity: we do not have
inner subjectivity. However, our ability to have inner subjective
experiences is a first-person fact; it is ludicrous to deny it.
Eliminative materialism became popular with the philosopher
Daniel Dennet when he published his book, Consciousness Explained.
In this heavily criticised book, he redefined consciousness by ignoring
what requires explaining: our subjective conscious states. According to
Dennet, we have no real personal subjective experiences; we are
simply biological robots. In other words, we are zombies with the
illusion of subjective experience. Criticism of Dennet’s approach, also
known as Multiple Drafts theory, has been summarised by Professor
Antti Revonsuo in his book, Consciousness: The Science of
Subjectivity:
“Dennet’s theory has been heavily criticized because it seems
to redefine ‘consciousness’ in such a way that the term comes
to mean something very different from what we originally set
out to explain. Dennet’s famous 1991 book is titled
‘Consciousness Explained’, but many felt it should have been
called ‘Consciousness Explained Away’. What most people
wanted to find an explanation for is phenomenal
consciousness, qualia and subjectivity, but Dennet dismisses
them as mere illusions.”219
153

‘Subjectivity exists, but it’s just matter’: Reductive materialism
Reductive materialism asserts that there is a knowledge-gap between
physical processes and subjective conscious experiences. However,
they maintain that the gap can be explained within a materialistic
philosophy. Proponents of this view assert that subjective conscious
experience exists, but is not distinct from physical processes. The basis
for their arguments is that there is a link between certain activities in
the brain and certain experiences of consciousness; therefore,
consciousness can be reduced to physical processes.
Reductive materialism, unlike eliminative materialism, accepts
that subjective consciousness exists, but can be reduced to physical
happenings in our brains. In this way, subjective consciousness is
identical with neurochemical activity. 220 Although there is currently no
way of reducing all subjective conscious states to physical phenomena,
reductive materialism is based on the expectation that neuroscience
will follow the other sciences in that old terms, such as ‘heat’, will
have been replaced with ‘the science of mean kinetic energy of
molecules’. Similarly, neuroscience may replace words like ‘love’
with a neurochemical equivalent. In essence, “consciousness is nothing
over and above a complex set of neural activities going on in our
brain”.221
This view is not an adequate explanation for subjective conscious
states, because it is based on the assumption that subjective
experiences are real, but will be explained in the future by
developments in neuroscience. Essentially, reductive materialism
argues that subjective conscious states will be reduced to physical
brain states. This does not solve the hard problem of consciousness. It
is impossible to know what it is like for a particular organism to
experience a subjective state simply by observing a bunch of neurons
firing. Reductive materialism also doesn’t explain the source of
154

conscious experience. Neurobiology and subjective experience are
completely different. Simply explaining that consciousness emerges
from non-conscious physical processes is not adequate. Just like the
eliminative materialists, reductive materialists cannot solve the hard
problem. The inner subjective realities of the human being are once
again being ignored. Professor Revonsuo explains:
“Still, it seems clear that to talk about neural firings, activations
and deactivations in different brain areas or oscillatory
synchrony in neural assemblies is not at all the same thing as
talking about feelings of pain, sensations of colour, passionate
emotions or inner thoughts—and never will be. What is being
left out is, first and foremost, the subjective aspect of the
conscious mental events.”222
The difference between eliminative materialism and reductive
materialism is quite subtle. Eliminative materialism argues that
subjective consciousness is an illusion and does not exist. According
to this approach, the illusion of subjective consciousness is nothing
more than neurons firing. Reductive materialism accepts that
subjective consciousness exists, but maintains that it is nothing more
than physical activity in the brain. Both fail to address the first-person
fact of subjective consciousness.
‘It’s what you do’: Behaviourism
Another approach that shares the conclusions of eliminative
materialism is behaviourism. Behaviourism postulates that
consciousness is defined in behavioural terms. Behaviourists assert
that a person only has a certain conscious state if it can be verified by
that person’s behaviour (for example, Susan is in pain if, after being
struck with something, she cries ‘ouch!’). Behaviourism denies
subjective conscious experience, and defines consciousness as the way
155

we act rather than the way we are. This approach denies the hard
problem of consciousness because it fails to acknowledge that humans
can have mental states without displaying any behaviour. As the
philosopher David Lund argues, we cannot dismiss the fact that we do
experience inner subjective states that are not always revealed via our
behaviours.223
Behaviourism makes a conscious state identical to a physical
state. The problem with this approach is that it ignores the fact that it is
the conscious state that causes the behaviour. For example, it is the
pain that provokes Susan to say ‘ouch!’, so pain and saying ‘ouch!’ are
not identical to each other.
‘Just a bunch of inputs, mental states and outputs’: Functionalism
Functionalists postulate that consciousness is defined as the functions
or roles it plays, emerging from a set of relations within an organism
or system, just like a computer. A function is defined as a relation of
inputs, mental states and outputs. For example, if I see my bus arriving
(input), I experience the mental state of worrying that I may be late
due to the possibility of missing my bus (mental state); I then run
towards the bus stop (output). Functionalists assert that consciousness
is similar to a computer program, which arises from complex patterns
within the brain.224 Functionalism has faced a number of objections. 225
One of these is that functionalism is unable to consider subjective
conscious states because they cannot be understood functionally. 226 It
does not follow that just by knowing all of the inputs, mental states
and outputs we will somehow know what it is like for a particular
organism to experience a mental state. I can understand that when
someone sees a dangerous dog running towards them (input), they will
experience fear (mental state), they will inevitably run for safety
(output). However, by knowing the relations between the input, mental
state and output, I am no closer to understanding what it is like for that
156

person to be in a particular mental state. It also tells me nothing about
how and why mental states arise from the set of relations. Referring
back to the above example, I cannot know what it is like for someone
else to experience the feeling of being threatened by a dangerous
animal. Understanding how mental states relate to inputs and outputs
does not give rise to knowing what it is like to be in that mental state.
Many academics maintain that despite its popularity, functionalism
does not carry much weight as a solution to the hard problem of
consciousness.227
‘It’s in the complexity’: Emergent materialism
This idea is based on the concept of emergence. Emergence occurs
when things become arranged in such a way that they transform into
complex entities and have complicated causal relationships from
which new phenomena appear. 228 There are two types of emergent
materialism: the strong and the weak.
The weak form asserts that we will eventually understand
subjective consciousness once all of the complex physical processes
are understood. The weak form may explain how consciousness
emerges from physical processes, but it does not follow that it will
lead to knowledge of what it is like for a conscious organism to have
an inner subjective experience. Will the mystery of subjective
consciousness disappear once we have understood how it emerges
from all of the complex physical processes? If it does, then it seems to
be denying what requires explaining in the first place. If subjective
consciousness remains, then emergent materialism suffers from the
same problems as reductive materialism; subjective consciousness
may have a physical basis without telling us anything about what it is
like to have these subjective conscious experiences. 229
A variant of weak emergent materialism maintains that we will
never understand all of the physical processes that underpin subjective
157

consciousness. However, theoretically speaking, if we were ever to
have a perfect understanding of how the brain works, we could
understand subjective consciousness. This form of weak emergent
materialism does not explain anything at all. In the context of the
argument presented in this chapter, accepting an explanation that
actually explains the hard problem of consciousness is more rational
than accepting an approach that does not.
The strong form of emergent materialism argues that subjective
consciousness is a natural phenomenon; however, any physicalist
theory that attempts to address its reality is beyond the capacity of the
human intellect. This form of emergence argues that we can get a new
phenomenon X from Y, without knowing how X emerges from Y.
Strong emergent materialism maintains that we can get something new
from the complex physical processes, but the gap in our understanding
of how this new thing emerges will never be closed. This approach
does not explain the hard problem of consciousness, as it admits that it
cannot be explained. In my view this is no different to saying, “It just
happens. It is so complex that no one knows.” Revonsuo argues that
strong emergent materialism will never be able to address subjective
consciousness, and even if we were to be given the correct theory, it
“would equal what hamsters could make of Charles Darwin’s Origins
of Species if a copy was placed in their cage.” 230 Since we are trying to
explain the hard problem of consciousness, dismissing subjective
consciousness as a mystery does nothing to prevent a rational person
from accepting an approach that actually does coherently explain it.
Will science eventually explain subjective consciousness?
As seen from the above materialist approaches, the main argument is
that a scientific explanation will someday close the current gap in our
knowledge. This approach, however, does not provide an adequate
explanation of consciousness, as I believe it is a form of the ‘science of
158

the gaps’ fallacy.
If we examine the scientific method and the philosophy of
science, we will understand that subjective consciousness is beyond
the reach of science. The previous successes of science stemmed from
the fact that they were able to observe new phenomena or provide new
theoretical models that explained existing observable data. The
likeness of a particular conscious organism cannot be understood by
science. Scientists are limited to the observations they have, because
science is “forced to restrict its attention to problems that observations
can solve”.231 Since it is impossible to observe subjective
consciousness (first-person perspective) from the perspective of the
third person, science cannot address subjective consciousness.
As mentioned before, even if we were to know everything about
the brain we would still not be able to address the hard problem of
consciousness. Brain activity only indicates that something is
happening, not what it is like for that something to happen. Even if all
of the neurochemical activity were mapped out in someone’s brain and
correlated with first-person accounts of his or her subjective
experience, science would be unable to determine that particular
person’s experience or why it results from physical processes.
Even if, ten years from now, a new scientific theory or biological
explanation for consciousness is developed, it would still not be able to
determine what it is like for a person to have a subjective experience,
or why that particular subjective experience emerges from physical
processes. Subjective conscious experience is outside of the scope of a
scientific explanation. In light of the above, materialistic attempts to
explain consciousness fail comprehensively. The neurophysiologist
John C. Eccles aptly summarises this failure: “I maintain that the
human mystery is incredibly demeaned by scientific reductionism,
with its claim in promissory materialism….”232
Non-materialistic approaches
159

These approaches admit that there is more to reality than matter. This
is a view that Islam, and theism in general, recognises. We are more
than matter and energy; there is a spiritual component to our existence.
However, several of these strategies aim to explain consciousness
without admitting, or invoking, the existence of God. I will criticise
these and explain how theism provides the most rational way of
explaining consciousness.
‘They’re different, but we do not know how’: Substance Dualism
Substance dualism is the view that there are two different substances:
one is physical and the other is non-physical. These substances are
fundamentally distinct and exist independently of each other. In the
context of our discussion, substance dualism maintains that
consciousness and the brain are different and are not from the same
substance; one is material and the other immaterial, yet they interact
with each other. This account of consciousness is very intuitive,
making sense of our everyday experiences. For instance, we
experience that conscious states can cause physical states, and vice
versa. If I have the subjective conscious experience of sadness, it can
cause the physical state of frowning or crying. On the converse side, if
I bump my head on an object, I will feel the inner subjective
experience of pain.
A key objection to substance dualism is that since conscious states
and the brain are radically different, then knowing how they interact is
impossible. This is known as the interactionist problem; there is—
according to some philosophers—no coherent account of how and why
the material brain and the immaterial consciousness interact. 233
However, this objection is based on the false assumption that if we do
not know how X causes Y, then we are not justified to believe that X
causes Y. There are many cases of causal interactions in which we
know one thing causes another without knowing how.
Although substance dualism is a strong contender to the theistic
160

alternative, if substance dualism is adopted within a non-theistic
paradigm, it does not address some fundamental questions: Where did
the immaterial substance come from? How does it exist in the physical
universe? Moreover, a theistic explanation provides a more coherent
account of how the physical brain and non-physical consciousness
interact. This is why a theistic type of dualism is the most coherent
approach (see God Is the Best Explanation section below).
‘It’s a lucky accident’: Epiphenomenalism
With this theory, conscious states are distinct from physical states, and
physical states cause conscious states, but not the other way around. In
this way, conscious states are causally impotent. Popular rejections of
epiphenomenalism include that, if true, a sensation of pain in my hand
(conscious experience) due to a hot flame plays no causal role in my
hand moving away (physical state). Another example includes that if
you were to have the unfortunate experience of being chased by a
drunkard hell-bent on throwing a broken bottle at you, the sight of the
bottle moving towards you might create the conscious experience of
fear, but the feeling of fear would not cause you to duck and protect
yourself; your defensive move would occur due to some random
accident. This contradicts our basic understanding of the human
reality. We know that we have physical reactions due to subjective
conscious states, and we also experience subjective feelings and
experiences due to physical causes. If epiphenomenalism were true,
human psychology would be in ruin. Just imagine a patient with
depression telling his psychotherapist that his internal feelings of
depression cause his anxiety attacks, only to be told that it has nothing
to do with it.
‘Everything is conscious’: Panpsychism

161

Panpsychism is somewhat similar to property dualism, which asserts
that one substance exists (physical substance), but contains two
properties (physical and non-physical or subjective conscious
properties). Panpsychism asserts that matter contains a form of
subjective consciousness. From this perspective, it argues that
consciousness is an intrinsic property of the universe and it plays a
causal role. Advocates of panpsychism include professors David
Chalmers and Thomas Nagel. Since each component of matter
contains consciousness, the brain’s consciousness is just an
accumulation of these components of consciousness. One form of
panpsychism states that all matter is conscious in the same way
humans are. The other form of panpsychism asserts that consciousness
contained in matter is in a basic state, also known as
protoconsciousness.
There are a number of problems with panpsychism.
•

•

•

Firstly, there is an absence of evidence for the claim that
matter contains subjective consciousness. Protons,
electrons, quarks and atoms do not exhibit any signs of
having subjective consciousness.234
Secondly, this approach fails to provide an adequate
metaphysical or physical explanation of how matter
contains consciousness. Where did the property of
consciousness come from? How does matter contain this
subjective conscious property? The panpsychist’s failure
to answer these questions undermines any metaphysical
and physical explanation.
Thirdly, there are no examples of consciousness existing
outside of the subjective experience of a living entity. For
instance, what does pain mean without a self or an ‘I’?
What does being conscious of a thought mean without
someone who is thinking? These questions strongly
162

•

suggest that consciousness only makes sense with a
unified conscious being experiencing an array of
subjective states.
Finally, how can a unified conscious experience emerge
from many pieces of matter that all contain a form of
consciousness? How do individual pieces of matter that
contain subjective consciousness manage to add up to a
meaningful, unified experience? If our conscious
experiences were just a result of many conscious elements
contained in the physical parts that make up the brain, our
experience would be incoherent, or less unified. Professor
Edward Feser comments on the unified meaning of a
single conscious experience. He explains that our
experiences are not just a summation of many different
conscious elements; our experiences have a unified feel.
He presents his case using the conscious experience of
reading a book:

“The experience has a coherent significance or meaning, and
significance or meaning for a single subject of experience. You
are not only aware of the shape, texture, colors, etc. as separate
elements, but are aware of them as a book; and it is you who
are aware of them, rather than myriad neural events somehow
each being ‘aware’ of one particular aspect of the book.”235
There is a lot of academic discussion around the approaches I
have summarised above. However, the main intention was to briefly
introduce these approaches and bring to light some criticisms which
undermine their ability to explain subjective consciousness as
sufficiently as theism does.
God is the best explanation
163

How do we explain consciousness in light of the failed attempts to
comprehensively explain our subjective personal experiences? A
theistic approach is the most adequate explanation. It is far more
reasonable to postulate that an All-Aware, conscious agent with
volition and purpose is the author of all consciousness. Here are three
main reasons why God is the best explanation:
Firstly, it answers a question that none of the existing views have
answered: Where did consciousness come from? Professor J. P.
Moreland explains how it could not have been via natural physical
processes: “Our knowledge of the natural world would give us positive
reasons for not believing that irreducible consciousness would appear
in it, e.g., the geometrical rearrangement of inert physical entities into
different spatial structures hardly seems sufficient to explain the
appearance of consciousness.”236
If matter and consciousness are distinct, it follows that
consciousness could not have emerged from matter. However, if
matter contains conscious properties, then how did these properties
arise? We need to ask this ontological question because consciousness
is very different from material stuff. In order to explain the fact that
subjective conscious experiences exist, God must have created
consciousness. It is far more coherent to postulate an All-Aware
conscious agent to explain consciousness. From this point of view,
theism offers a far richer explanation. Moreland argues that physicalist
and materialist accounts of consciousness have “…no plausible way to
explain the appearance of irreducible, genuine mental
properties/events in the cosmos… when compared to the rich
explanatory resources for theism….”237
Secondly, theism answers how consciousness could have entered
the physical world. It often surprises people how non-physical entities
like the soul can interact, and in fact control, physical aspects like the
bodies of humans and animals. However, theism explains this very
naturally. God’s comprehensive will and Divine activity ensure a
164

world where the physical and non-physical interact. Charles Taliaferro
explains:
“But in a theistic view of consciousness, there is no parlor trick
or discrete miraculous act of God behind the emergence of
consciousness. Consciousness emerges from the physical
cosmos through an abiding comprehensive will of God that
there be a world of physical and non-physical objects,
properties, and relations. The relation between matter, energy,
consciousness, the laws of space-time, tout court, all stem from
an overwhelming, divine, activity.”238
According to a non-theistic approach to consciousness,
consciousness seems to have miraculously popped into existence
without any adequate physical explanation. However, theism does not
face this problem, as the emergence of consciousness is viewed as part
of reality. Since God is conscious, Ever-Living and All-Aware, it is
plausible that the world He created contains beings with a conscious
awareness of themselves. Taliaferro similarly concludes:
“From the vantage point of a fundamentally materialist
cosmology, the emergence of consciousness seems strange; it
is likened to claiming ‘then a miracle happens.’ But from the
vantage point of theism, the emergence of consciousness may
be seen as something deeply rooted in the very nature of
reality. The creation of animal and human consciousness is not
some isolated miracle, but a reflection of the underlying
structure of reality.”239
Theism explains the interaction between nonphysical mental and
physical brain states. God’s will and power have enabled such
interaction to take place, as this interaction is part and parcel of the
165

reality that God has created. Simply, if, in the beginning of the
cosmos, only matter existed, then consciousness would not. However,
if in the beginning a type of consciousness created the physical world,
then the interaction between nonphysical mental states and physical
brain states makes sense.
Thirdly, theism explains our ability to have subjective conscious
states and the fact that we have an awareness of what it is to be like
ourselves, experiencing tastes, sounds and textures. Since the universe
was created by an Ever-Living, Alive, All-Aware Being, it follows that
we have been given this capacity to be aware of our inner subjective
states:
“God, there is no god except Him, the Ever Living.”240
“And He is the All-subtle, the All-aware.”241
A theistic explanation for the emergence of consciousness has
greater explanatory power than competing explanations. I must stress
here, however, that I am not denying the usefulness of biological
explanations in unearthing neuro-correlations. Neuroscience can be
conducted just as vigorously and fruitfully in a theistic context. What I
am advocating is adding theism as a philosophical basis to fully
explain what non-theistic explanations cannot: the hard problem of
consciousness. In this sense, my approach is a form of dualism, which
can be called theistic-dualism. In theistic-dualism, neuroscience is not
undermined, and all the research projects can continue to provide their
amazing insights and conclusions on the topic. However, theisticdualism is a metaphysical thesis that provides a comprehensive
explanation. Professor Taliaferro advocates a similar position:
“I do not see why the brain sciences cannot continue with its
study of psycho-physical interaction. The failure to identify
166

metaphysically consciousness with brain states does not for a
nanosecond impede the study of correlation. Moreover one
may be a dualist and treat consciousness and brain states, the
person and body, as functional units without supposing that
there is only one kind of thing metaphysically that is in play.
Mind-body (or, as I prefer to call it, integrative) dualism is a
thesis in metaphysics… integrative dualism is not a scientific
hypothesis that competes with any scientific claims.”242
God’s existence is required to explain the existence and
emergence of subjective conscious experience. In addition, the hard
problem of consciousness and the existence of inner subjective
experiences clearly point to an All-Aware Being, that created the
universe and the ability for you and me to have an awareness of our
subjective conscious states.
We are not meant to know much about the soul
Muslim readers will rightly ask if this argument is compatible with
normative Islamic theology. The common objection usually includes
the fact that the Qur’an explicitly states that the rooh (meaning soul,
spirit, consciousness or the thing that animates the body) is the affair
or command of God and humanity has been given very little
knowledge about it. Therefore, we should keep silent on the matter:
“And they ask you, [O Muhammad], about the soul. Say, ‘The
soul is of the affair of my Lord. And you have not been given
of knowledge except a little.’”243
To reconcile this apparent theological conflict, it must be
understood that this verse concerns the essence of consciousness or the
soul, not its existence. The verse affirms that an immaterial substance
animates the body—in other words, a soul or consciousness. This is
167

exactly what the argument in this chapter has presented: that the
existence of consciousness can only be explained by a non-materialist
worldview. The chapter is not discussing anything beyond what is
already implied by Islamic source texts. For instance, the Qur’an
affirms that the rooh is different from our material universe, that it
animates the body, that it is a unified ‘I’, and that it was created by
God. Therefore, nothing here contradicts core orthodox Islamic
principles.
To conclude, I think we must consider the fact that God tells us to
ponder within ourselves, and by doing so we may conclude that if
there is no God, then we could not have any subjective conscious
experience—in other words, by denying God, we deny ourselves!
“Do they not reflect within themselves?”244

168

Chapter 8: Divine Precision – The
Designed Universe
Imagine you woke up one morning and walked to the kitchen to
prepare your breakfast. As you approached the kitchen table, you
found two pieces of toast with your favourite chocolate spread all over
them. However, the spread has been arranged into the words ‘I love
you’. You are surprised, but why? Do you think that the pieces of
bread somehow managed to toast themselves, and the chocolate spread
was able to arrange itself in such a way—all by chance? Or do you
assume that your loved one decided to wake up a little early and
prepare the toast in advance? Every rational human being on this
planet will deny that it happened without any intention or cause; blind
chance does not suffice as an explanation.
The universe is no different. It has an orderly and precise cosmic
architecture that points towards purposeful design. The universe has
the right set of laws to permit the existence of life, and it is ordered in
a particular way to allow humans to flourish. If the laws were different
or the universe did not contain a life-sensitive arrangement of stars,
planets, and other physical things of varying sizes, you would not be
here reading this book. In fact, there would be no human life at all.
Consider another analogy. 245 Imagine you are an astronaut
working for NASA. The year is 2070, and you will be the first human
being to visit an Earth-like planet in another galaxy. Your mission is to
search for life. You finally land, and as you get out of your spaceship,
you see nothing but rocks. However, as you continue your travels you
eventually find something that looks like a huge greenhouse. Inside,
you can see human-like creatures walking around, eating, playing,
working and living normal productive lives. You also notice plants,
169

trees, and other vegetation. As you approach the structure, friendly
ambassadors receive you and invite you in. During your initial meeting
with these friendly ‘aliens’, they tell you that the structure has the right
levels of oxygen. It also has adequate amounts of water and chemical
compounds to facilitate the production of food and life-supporting
vegetation. Amazed by what you hear, you ask them how they
managed to create a fully functioning ecological system that sustains
life. One of the ambassadors responds, “It happened by chance”.
Immediately your mind starts to comprehend the implications of
such a ludicrous statement. The only possible explanation for the
structure is that it was designed by an intelligent being, not some
random physical process.
As these thoughts run through your mind, another ambassador
interrupts and says, “He is only joking.” Everybody laughs.
If a small ecological structure on a rocky planet evokes the
conclusion that it must have been designed, then imagine what we
should conclude about the whole universe. The universe and
everything within it obeys physical laws. If these laws were different
there would be no complex conscious life. The universe contains
billions of stars and galaxies. Among the countless galaxies occur
innumerable planets. One of these planets is our home, Earth. Our
planet contains trillions of conscious creatures. Imagine the conclusion
we must reach if the reason these conscious beings exist is due to a
sensitive arrangement of celestial bodies and physical laws.
The inevitable conclusion is simple, yet profound: this was not a
result of chance.
The Islamic basis
This argument has an Islamic foundation. The Qur’an refers to
celestial objects, the alternation of night and day, vegetation, animals
and other physical phenomena. God created all of these things with a
Divine precision: “The sun and the moon [move] by precise
170

calculation. And the stars and trees prostrate. And the heaven He
raised and imposed the meezaan.”246
The Arabic word meezan has a few meanings. These include
balance and Divine precision. This word indicates that the cosmos was
created with precision, balance and harmony. Many other references in
the Qur’an indicate this cosmic precision, order and harmony in the
universe:
“Indeed, in the creation of the heavens and the Earth and the
alternation of the night and the day are signs for those of
understanding.”247
“And He has subjected for you the night and day and the sun
and moon, and the stars are subjected by His command.
Indeed, in that are signs for a people who reason.”248
Islamic scholarship has referred to the design of the cosmos to
evoke the need for a designer and maker. They have even used it in
public debates. For example, Al-Ghazali writes: “How can even the
lowest mind, if he reflects at all the marvels of this earth and sky, the
brilliant fashioning of plants and animals, remain blind to the fact that
this wonderful world with its settled order must have a maker to
design, determine and direct it?”249
Abu Hanifa, one of the great scholars of Islam, once engaged in a
discussion with an atheist. It was reported that the scholar successfully
used a variant of the argument from design:
“‘Before we enter into a discussion on this question, tell me
what you think of a boat in the Euphrates which goes to shore,
loads itself with food and other things, then returns, anchors
and unloads all by itself without anyone sailing or controlling
it?’
171

They said, ‘That is impossible; it could never happen.’
Thereupon he said to them, ‘If it is impossible with respect to a
ship, how is it possible for this whole world, with all its
vastness, to move by itself?’”250
These Qur’anic verses and Islamic scholarship echo the
discoveries in physics in the past decade, which have shown that the
universe has physical laws that seem to be precisely set for life, and
that the universe has a particular order that facilitates human existence.
This precision has also been referred to as ‘fine-tuning’ by many
physicists, theologians and philosophers.
Fine-tuning
The fine-tuning of the universe consists of various aspects. Firstly, if
the laws of the universe were to not exist, life, especially complex
conscious life, would not be possible. Secondly, the universe displays
a fascinating order; the way celestial and other physical objects have
been arranged facilitates life on Earth. All of the data associated with
these different aspects of fine-tuning provide a strong cumulative case
for the universe being designed to harbour complex, sentient life.
Physical laws
There must have been exactly the right set of laws for life to exist. If
these laws were even slightly changed, the result would be a universe
without complex life:
•

The law of gravity: Gravity is the force of attraction between
two masses. Without gravity, there would be no force to
aggregate things. Therefore, there would be no stars (and no
planets). Without any stars, there would not be any sustainable
172

source of energy to facilitate life. 251 The universe would be a
dark, empty vacuum.
•

The electromagnetic force: This unique force affects
everything within the universe. The electromagnetic force is
responsible for giving things strength, shape and hardness.
Without it, atoms would not exist, because nothing would keep
the electrons in orbit. If there were no atoms, there could not be
any life. The electromagnetic force also causes chemical
bonding by attracting charges. In absence of any chemical
bonding, life could not exist.252

An interesting aspect of the electromagnetic force is that it has
one-force strength, yet it satisfies a range of requirements. In his book,
Infinite Minds: A Philosophical Cosmology, Professor John Leslie
writes:
“Electromagnetism has one-force strength, which enables
multiple key processes to take place: it allows stars to burn
steadily for billions of years; it enables carbon synthesis in
stars; it ensures that leptons do not replace quarks, which
would have made atoms impossible; it is responsible for
protons not decaying too fast or repelling each other too
strongly, which would have made chemistry impossible. How
is it possible for the same one-force strength to satisfy so many
different requirements, when it seems that different strengths
would be required for each of these processes?”253
Maybe a satisfactory answer to Leslie’s question is that this force
is precisely calibrated to satisfy all of these requirements.
•

The strong nuclear force: Since the nucleus is made up of
173

positively charged protons, it should just fly apart, because
charges repel each other. However, the nucleus remains intact
because of the strong nuclear force. If this were changed, “the
universe would most likely consist of a giant black hole.”254
•

The weak nuclear force: The weak nuclear force is stronger
than the force of gravity, but its strength is only effectual at
extremely small distances. It is responsible for fuelling stars
and the formation of elements. It is also responsible for
radioactive decay. The sun would not be able to burn without
this force, as it plays an important role in nuclear fusion. If this
force were slightly stronger or weaker, stars would not form.

In light of the above examples of the fine-tuning of physical laws,
any rational person would ask some serious questions: Where did these
laws of physics come from? Why do we observe these laws rather than
a different set? How do these laws drive non-conscious, non-rational,
blind and random physical processes to facilitate human life? It is a
sign of a rational mind to conclude that a lawmaker, a ‘grand’
mathematician, or cosmic ‘mind’ created these laws to facilitate
conscious life.
Cosmic order
The orderly display we observe in the universe, and its celestial
harmony, has not only evoked awe in the average thinker, but also
mesmerised the greatest minds. Albert Einstein once said:
“I’m not an atheist, and I do not think I can call myself a
pantheist. We are in the position of a little child entering a huge
library filled with books in many languages. The child knows
someone must have written those books. It does not know how.
It does not understand the languages in which they are written.
174

The child dimly suspects a mysterious order in the arrangement
of the books but does not know what it is. That, it seems to me,
is the attitude of even the most intelligent human being toward
God. We see the universe marvellously arranged and obeying
certain laws but only dimly understand these laws. Our limited
minds grasp the mysterious force that moves the
constellations.”255
Even the outspoken atheist Richard Dawkins has commented on
the order in the universe. Although he dismisses the design hypothesis
and provides his own naturalistic explanation, he still highlights what
mesmerised the likes of Einstein:
“But what I see as I write is that I am lucky to be alive and so
are you. We live on a planet that is all but perfect for our kind of
life: not too warm and not too cold, basking in kindly sunshine,
softly watered; a gently spinning, green and gold harvest festival
of a planet… what are the odds that a planet picked at random
would have these complaisant properties?”256
The universe is indeed “marvellously arranged” and it displays
intricate order. If this order were different, it would be highly unlikely
that human life could flourish. Here are some selected examples to
reflect upon:
•

The position of our planet: One of the life-supporting features
of our planet is its distance from the Sun. Earth is located in an
area known as the habitable zone. This zone is defined as the
“region where heating from the central star provides a
planetary surface temperature at which a water ocean neither
freezes over nor exceeds boiling point.” 257 If our planet were
slightly closer to the Sun, it would be too hot to host life. If it
175

were farther away, it would be too cold to facilitate complex
life, such as our own.
•

Jupiter’s gravitational pull: The absence of the gas giant
Jupiter in our solar system would have severe implications for
life. Professor of Geological Sciences Peter Ward maintains,
“Without Jupiter, there is a strong likelihood that animal life
would not exist on Earth today.”258 Jupiter acts as a cosmic
shield; it prevents comets and asteroids from bombarding our
planet because its gravitational pull ‘sucks’ up asteroids.
Without our friendly gas giant, the development of advanced
life might not have been possible.
Rebecca Martin, a NASA Sagan Fellow who studied the
influence of Jupiter, states, “Our study shows that only a tiny
fraction of planetary systems observed to date seem to have
giant planets in the right location to produce an asteroid belt of
the appropriate size, offering the potential for life on a nearby
rocky planet… Our study suggests that our solar system may
be rather special.”259
Without the presence of Jupiter, life on our planet would have
been extremely difficult to sustain, due to the large number of
collisions by asteroids and comets. 260 261

•

Lunar tides: The relatively large size of Earth’s moon is
responsible for tides, due to its gravitational pull. After the
Moon’s formation, it was closer to the Earth than it is now, but
this proximity was short-lived. If the Moon had not receded
(due to angular momentum), there would have been serious
effects on our planet. These include heating the Earth’s surface,
which would have prevented complex life from emerging.
176

Professor Ward explains that a closer Moon would have flexed
the Earth’s crust and produced frictional heating, possibly
melting its surface: “The ocean tides (and land tides) from a
nearby Moon would have been enormous, and the flexing of
the Earth’s crust, along with the frictional heating, may have
actually melted the rocky surface.”262
•

Stabilizing the tilt of the Earth’s spin axis: The Moon has
also been responsible for stabilizing the tilt of the Earth’s axis.
Professor Ward explains that even though “the direction of the
tilt varies over periods of tens of thousands of years as the
planet wobbles, much like precession of a spinning top, the
angle of the tilt relative to the orbit plane remains almost
fixed.”263
This angle has held steady for hundreds of millions of years
due to the gravitational pull of the moon. If the moon were
smaller, or had a different location in relation to the Sun and
Jupiter, it would not provide “long-term stability of the Earth’s
temperature”.264 Therefore, if the Earth did not have a moon,
the climate of our planet would be dynamic, severe and ever
changing. Only small organisms would have emerged, and
complex life would not be possible.

In light of the above, what best explains the laws of physics and
the orderly display of our solar system? There are a few options:
chance, physical necessity, the multiverse or design.
Chance
For this fine-tuning to have arisen by chance indicates that the laws of
physics and the display of our solar system occurred without any
intention or purpose. They were a result of accidental, random and
177

haphazard causes. This is an irrational assertion. Consider this painting
of Bruce Lee265.
If I told you that it was a result
of chance—that some ink fell
on the canvas and produced this
picture—you would dismiss the
idea
immediately.
That’s
because your experiences and
background information tell
you it is impossible. Similarly,
if I argued that the Statue of
Liberty was a result of blind
chance, you would think I was deluded.
The chance hypothesis is not only irrational, it is counterdiscourse. What I mean by this is that if someone were to claim
chance, it would be equivalent to making any type of irrational claim.
For instance, I could tell an atheist that I believe that my mother is not
really the woman who I call my mother, but rather a large pink
elephant that was born on Pluto and flew here on a giant feather. My
atheist friend would call me crazy, but I would reply, “There’s still a
chance.” Adopting the chance hypothesis renders all claims possible,
and the role of reason would be made redundant in our academic and
everyday discussions. I could assert that Islam is true because there is
a chance that it is, and I would be within my epistemic rights to make
such a claim because the minute someone adopts the chance
hypothesis as an argument, it opens the door to anyone claiming
anything they want to claim.
An atheist who accepts the chance hypothesis as a valid
explanation for the fine-tuning of the physical laws must be accused of
intellectual double standards. In their everyday decisions, chance is not
factored in as a reasonable justification for extremely improbable
things. Consider an atheist telling her son not to eat any cookies before
178

he goes to bed, only to find him sleeping on the floor with crumbs all
over his face and the cookie jar open right next to him. What do you
think she will conclude? Do you think the chance hypothesis would
even enter her mind? Of course not. Imagine such reasoning being
applied to our financial transactions, or in courts of law and politics.
Day-to-day life, world affairs and our economy would be chaotic.
Many atheists raise the epistemic bar when it comes to God, yet for
their day-to-day lives use a different standard. Their insistence in
denying the obvious seems to have an emotional cause (or, as some
thinkers argue, a spiritual one). For some atheists, the so-called rational
arguments serve as a veil to hide a greater issue: the arrogance of not
wanting to worship God (see Chapter 15).
But there’s still a chance!
Some atheists still argue that there is still—no matter how
unreasonable—a possibility that cosmic order is not the result of any
intention or purpose. They claim that our life-permitting universe
exists due to a remarkably lucky accident.
To answer this objection, take the likelihood principle into
consideration. A rational mind would agree that whenever a set of data
is unlikely under one hypothesis, then that data counts as evidence in
support of a hypothesis that is more likely. Let me illustrate this
principle with an example. 266 Imagine a paternity test for baby George
had to be done on Paul Y and John X. The mother argues that Paul Y
is most likely to be the biological father. Nevertheless, she is unsure
and wants a paternity test to be performed on them both. John X,
however, believes he is the father and is determined to prove it.
The DNA results report that Paul Y’s DNA matches baby
George’s DNA, and John X’s DNA does not. In light of the evidence,
the mother’s hypothesis is far more likely. John X’s hypothesis is not
supported by the data at all. According to this principle, both DNA
179

results support the mother’s hypothesis. Because for her hypothesis to
be true, John X’s DNA must not match with baby George’s, and Paul
Y’s DNA must provide a match. Therefore, the data supports the
mother’s hypothesis over John X’s.
The data of the fine-tuning of the universe are best explained by
design rather than chance, because fine-tuning supports the fact that
there was some type of intelligent ‘pre-planning’ involved, rather than
an accidental, random and haphazard set of causes. Applying this
principle to the argument I have presented so far, we can see that the
data does not make sense under the chance hypothesis and favours the
design hypothesis.
Physical necessity?
With the concept of physical necessity, the cosmic order has to be the
way that it is. This is false for two main reasons. Firstly, we would
have to believe that a universe that could not permit our existence
would be impossible. This, however, is not the case. Another universe
with a different set of laws could have been created. 267 The physicist
Paul Davies explains that “the physical universe does not have to be
the way it is: it could have been otherwise.”268
Secondly, those who state that the universe had to permit life are
making a claim that has no evidence. Referring back to the toast
analogy, it is like looking at your toast and the chocolate spread and
saying that it had to occur. This is obviously false, because the bread
could have not been toasted and the chocolate spread could have been
replaced with butter.
Multiverse?
Some argue that the fine-tuning can be explained by postulating the
existence of many universes. One of these is our universe. If the
number of universes was a very high number, then the likelihood of
having a universe that permits life would be reasonable. Referring
180

back to our example of the painting, the multiverse essentially
suggests that spilling ink multiple times might result in the image of
Bruce Lee. There are a few variations of the multiverse theory, and
this is not the space to address every one. However, a few fundamental
points can be made to dismiss the multiverse theory in general.
Firstly, the multiverse theory is superfluous. It unnecessarily
multiplies entities beyond necessity. Professor Richard Swinburne
asserts, “It is crazy to postulate a trillion (causally connected)
universes to explain the features of one universe when postulating one
entity (God) will do the job.”269
Secondly, there is no evidence to support the multiverse theory.
Professor Anthony Flew writes, “…the fact that it is logically possible
that there are multiple universes with their own laws of nature does not
show that such universes do exist. There is currently no evidence in
support of a multiverse. It remains a speculative idea.”270
Not only does the multiverse have no evidence, it is unscientific.
Luke A. Barnes, a postdoctoral researcher at the Sydney Institute for
Astronomy, explains that the multiverse theory is beyond the reach of
observation:
“The history of science has repeatedly taught us that
experimental testing is not an optional extra. The hypothesis
that a multiverse actually exists will always be untestable. The
most optimistic scenario is where a physical theory, which has
been well-tested in our universe, predicts a universe-generating
mechanism. Even then, there would still be questions beyond
the reach of observation, such as whether the necessary initial
conditions for the generator hold in the metaspace… Moreover,
the process by which a new universe is spawned almost
certainly cannot be observed.”271
The most popular version of the multiverse, as advocated by many
181

leading cosmologists and theoretical physicists, is the idea that
universes are generated by a physical process or set of laws.
Essentially, they argue that the laws of physics had to exist for the
universe, and all the other universes, to emerge. The problem with this
version of the multiverse theory is that it takes more faith to believe in
some physical process producing universes than God, because we
would have to believe that the physical processes magically
manifested themselves without any explanation. Furthermore, it would
be within our epistemic rights to ask where these physical laws or
processes came from. Significantly, the physical processes themselves
would need to be ‘well designed’ to produce a single universe to
permit our existence. 272 So it seems to me that advocates of this
version of the multiverse are just pushing fine-tuning and order up a
level and not explaining anything at all. Either way, if the multiverse
were true it would not provide a challenge to God’s existence (see
Chapter 6).
It must have been designed!
The physical laws and the remarkable order in the universe cannot be
explained by chance, necessity or the multiverse, and therefore the best
explanation is that it is a result of design. Postulating purposeful ‘preplanning’ and intelligence behind the cosmos is a more coherent and
rational explanation than the alternatives. The simplicity and force of
this argument is evident in the example of someone coming across a
garden with a neatly arranged bed of flowers forming the words ‘I love
you’, and concluding they were designed by a gardener.
However, there are a few objections that need to be addressed. 273
Who designed the designer?
The ‘who designed the designer’ objection can be found in Richard
Dawkins’s book, The God Delusion: “…because the designer
hypothesis immediately raises the larger problem of who designed the
182

designer.”274 This contention claims that if a designer exists, then
surely the designer also requires a designer.
Firstly, a basic principle in the philosophy of science dictates that
when an explanation is understood to be the best possible account for a
particular phenomenon, the explanation itself does not require a further
explanation. The following example illustrates this point:
Imagine 5000 years from now, a group of archaeologists start
digging in London’s Hyde Park and find parts of a car and a bus. They
would be justified in concluding that these finds were not the result of
any biological process, but the products of an unidentified civilization.
However, if some sceptics argued that we cannot make such inferences
because we do not know anything about this civilization, how they
lived and who created them, would the archaeologists’ conclusions be
deemed untrue? Of course not.
Secondly, if we take this contention seriously, it could undermine
the very foundations of science and philosophy themselves. If we
require an explanation for the basic assumptions of science—for
example, that the external world exists—where do you think our level
of scientific progress would be? Additionally, if we were to apply this
type of question to every attempted explanation, we would end up with
an infinite regression of explanations, and an infinite regression of
explanations would defeat the whole purpose of science in the first
place—which is to provide an explanation. 275
The designer must be more complex
Another objection argues that since an explanation must be as simple
as possible—and not create more questions than it answers—
postulating God’s existence to explain the design, fails. God must be
more ‘complex’ than the universe; therefore, maintaining that God
designed the universe just moves the problem up a level.
This objection misrepresents the Islamic conception of God. In
Islamic theology, God is simple and uniquely one. Consider the
183

eloquent summary of God in the Qur’an: “Say, ‘He is God the One,
God the eternal. He begot no one nor was He begotten. No One is
comparable to Him.’”276
Professor Anthony Flew comments on the simplicity of the
concept of God, stating that the idea of God is “an idea so simple that
it is understood by all the adherents of the three great monotheistic
religions”277.
Is God physically complex?
Another problem with this contention is that it assumes God is made of
many physical parts. The reason that this assumption is implied is due
to the fact that entities with complex abilities must also be physically
complex. If God can answer billions of prayers, maintain the vast
universe and know everything that happens within it, then He must
have a complex physical makeup. This, however, is a false
assumption. Complex ability does not imply complex makeup.
Consider a straight razor and an electric shaver as an example. An
electric shaver can shave hair and a straight razor can also shave hair.
They both have the same ability, but the electric shaver is far more
complex than the straight razor. Yet the straight razor can have more
abilities than the physically complex electric shaver. It can cut fruit
and materials, such as cardboard; it can even carve and make holes.
I believe this objection can be easily dismissed by the following
illustration: I know that humans are far more complex than cars.
However, just because a human is more complex than a car does not
mean that a human did not design it. This simple consideration is
enough to take the wind out of the prior false objection.
‘God of the gaps’?
The ‘god of the gaps’ objection is an overused atheist cliché. In popular
atheist discourse it is commonly used as an indiscriminate intellectual
184

weapon. The assumption of this objection is that science will eventually
explain the need for God by providing explanations for the currently
unexplained phenomena. In the context of the design argument, the ‘god
of the gaps’ objection carries little weight. Here are four reasons why:
1. When an atheist puts forward this objection, he or she is
essentially claiming that given the scientific data we have
accumulated thus far, a designer is actually the best
explanation for the universe’s design, but there’s still some
hope that in some unspecified future, scientific progress
will refute the design argument. This is nothing short of
blind faith in science, as it is tantamount to saying,
“Science cannot address this issue, but we have hope.”
2. The atheist’s predicament gets worse once we consider that
a key premise of the ‘god of the gaps’ objection is false. It
holds that science will eventually close the gap in our
knowledge. However, science does not always close the
gaps; it sometimes widens them. A hundred years ago we
believed that cells were just blobs of protoplasm. However,
since the 1950s we have become aware of the vast
information-coding system in all cells. This discovery,
instead of answering our questions, widened the gap in our
understanding of how the first cells emerged.
3. I would like to ask the atheist to consider what questions
science has actually answered. Science has shown
mechanisms within the universe, how everything works and
the physical laws involved. However, science has failed to
provide answers to questions that have deep existential
significance. Science has not explained fine-tuning, the
beginning of the universe (see Chapter 5), the origins of
life, nor the nature and emergence of consciousness (see
Chapter 7). Science does not have a good track record of
185

answering questions that have profound metaphysical
implications (see Chapter 12).
4. The atheist assumes that the God explanation is a scientific
one. Postulating a cosmic designer is a philosophical (or
metaphysical) explanation, which aims to explain the finetuning of the universe.
Notwithstanding, some atheists maintain that the ‘god of the gaps’
objection is an argument from ignorance and not an adherence to the
position that science will one day fill the gap. They maintain that not
knowing how a finely-tuned universe was produced is arguing from
ignorance. They also argue that the design argument assumes the
knowledge gap will remain forever. This formulation of the ‘god of the
gaps’ objection assumes that behind every gap has (or should have) a
naturalistic explanation. The design explanation is a metaphysical
explanation that best explains our current knowledge of the universe’s
finely-tuned features. Further, the design explanation can also be
considered as an inference to the best explanation. Inference to the best
explanation is not an argument from ignorance; it is an indispensable
way of thinking that attempts to coherently explain a set of data and/or
background information. The design conclusion is the inference to the
best explanation given the data we currently have. Instead of
indiscriminately using the ‘god of the gaps’ objection, the atheist
should show why the design explanation is not the best explanation
and provide a better one for everyone to assess.
There is no likelihood!
Some contend that the argument presented in this chapter does not
make sense, because terms like ‘probability’ and ‘likelihood’ cannot
be applied to the fine-tuning and cosmic order in the universe. This
contention holds that mathematical probability cannot be assumed,
because we only have one universe to observe. To have a
186

mathematical probability we need to have a probability distribution. A
mathematical probability is the number of ways an event can occur
divided by the total number of possible outcomes. Since there are no
other universes that we can observe, there are no other possible
outcomes. Therefore, mathematical probability cannot be applied, and
it renders the design hypothesis redundant.
This contention is misplaced. It mistakenly assumes that the
argument refers to a mathematical probability; it does not. The type of
probability that it takes into consideration is epistemic. 278 This type of
probability is not based on any number of possible outcomes; rather, it
addresses the rational acceptability of a particular event considering
the data we have at our disposal. Generally speaking, epistemic
probability involves a hypothesis (H) and evidence (E). The greater the
E for a particular H, the more likely that H is true. A good example is a
crime scene:
Imagine there is a dead man with a knife next to him and blood all
over the floor and on his body. The detective believes that his wife is
guilty of his murder. He discovers the following vital pieces of data:
the wife has no alibi, and he has detected her fingerprints and DNA on
the knife. The detective concludes that it is highly likely that the
deceased’s wife is responsible for his murder. The evidence provides
support for the detective’s hypothesis. This is a clear example of
epistemic probability.
None of the above examples of the fine-tuning of the physical
laws and the cosmic order involve mathematical probability. All that
has been said is that if the laws were different, the existence of a lifepermitting universe would be unlikely, and given our background
knowledge of designed things, the order of the cosmos supports the
fact that this universe is designed for human existence.
Most of the universe is uninhabitable! So where is this so-called
design?
187

This objection posits that if the universe was supposed to be designed
by a cosmic designer, then why does the universe permit life only in an
extremely small section of the universe? This objection is based on a
flawed assumption that the whole universe is supposed to exist for
human habitation. According to Islamic theology, this assumption is
false. The Islamic texts are explicitly clear that the size of our lifepermitting planet is insignificant compared to the rest of the universe.
Why did God design an imperfect universe?
This objection follows from the previous one. The disputants maintain
that if God designed the universe, why would He design one that
exhibits ‘bad design’? In other words, why is the universe designed in
a way that facilitates life only in a very small section?
This objection does not deny the fact that the universe is designed.
However, it addresses the ability of the designer. A key assumption
behind this objection is that if the designer is God, a perfect Being,
then what He creates must exhibit a better design to facilitate human
habitation. This is a false assumption because this is not the purpose of
the entire cosmos. Rather, part of its purpose is to contain human
beings in a small section of the universe. This is the Islamic view of
human habitation. It holds that every corner of the universe is not
supposed to be fit for life, and is not supposed to last forever. (This,
however, does not dismiss the idea that life can exist on other planets.
The point is that life is not meant to exist in every part of the universe.)
From this perspective the design of the universe perfectly fits its
purpose. Therefore, this contention is incorrect.
The Weak Anthropic Principle objection
The weak anthropic principle argues that we should not be surprised
that there is fine-tuning of the physical laws and cosmic order in the
universe, because if the universe was not finely tuned for life, our
existence would not be possible. However, we do exist. Therefore, we
188

should not be surprised that the universe permits our existence. This is
why, according to this objection, the fine-tuning of the universe needs
no explanation.
This contention can be summarised in the following way:
1. If we exist, the universe must have features that would
permit our existence.
2. We exist.
3. Therefore, the universe has features that permit our
existence.
The conclusion is indisputable. However, once again we have a
misplaced contention. The fine-tuning does not assert that we need to
explain the fact that our existence fits with the universe’s features. It
seeks an explanation for the way our existence seems to fit with the
universe’s features. In other words, it seeks an explanation for the
improbability of these features permitting our existence.
The following story clarifies why the anthropic principle objection
is misplaced.279 Imagine one day, while driving home, you
accidentally take a wrong turn and end up in a secluded industrial area.
Your car stops working, so you decide to take a walk to see if you can
find anyone to help you. Suddenly a group of armed people dressed in
nuclear-type suits handcuff you, put a bag over your head and push
you into the back of a car. After a few hours, you are forced out of the
car and walk towards a building. Eventually the armed group take the
bag off your head and place you in a chair. You look around the room,
and all you can see are white walls and bright lights. However, right in
front of you is a huge machine that looks like a giant futuristic
washing machine. Everything turns silent, and you hear a voice
ordering you to climb the stairs and get inside the machine. You are
told you are the first participant to try the newly invented time
machine. You have no choice in the matter. You enter the machine and
189

within minutes you feel lots of heat and hear lots of noise, and your
surroundings become blurry. You lose consciousness. After a while,
you wake up and find yourself in 1625. You are tied up against a tree
and you can see 100 Native Americans, approximately 10 yards away,
pointing their arrows at you. These Native Americans have never
missed when shooting an arrow, and they all have the ability to kill a
fly while riding on a horse, blindfolded. You hear someone count
down from 10, and then someone screams, ‘Fire’. Every single one of
these American Indians is aiming for your heart. However, you open
your eyes and realize every single one of them has missed their
intended target: you. Now, there are two points I want to bring to your
attention. Firstly, you should not be surprised that you are still alive
because they missed; if you were not alive you wouldn’t be able to
know. Secondly, you should be extremely surprised that the reason
you are alive is based on the improbability of them missing. The
anthropic principle argues the first point, while the argument presented
in this chapter makes a case for the second. We should not be surprised
that we are alive in a universe that has features to permit our existence.
However, we should be surprised of the improbability of these features
permitting our existence. Hence, the anthropic principle misses the
point.
You are assuming life is special
An interesting objection to the fine-tuning argument is that it is
‘anthropocentric’. In other words, it assumes that there is something
special about human life that requires fine-tuning. If there was no
sentient life, we could still say that the universe was finely tuned for
stars and planets. If there were no celestial objects, we could say that the
universe was finely tuned for sub-atomic particles. This implies that the
fine-tuning argument can be applied to anything in the universe;
therefore, it is not a good argument at all.
This objection can be responded to in two ways:
190

1. Even if the universe was not fine-tuned for human
existence, the argument could still be made for the
existence of the universe itself. The universe contains
complex celestial objects, along with the intricate chemical
processes that are responsible for—and make up—these
cosmic objects. This complexity requires an explanation. If
such a universe did not exist, and there was just an empty
universe with random particles, there wouldn’t be much for
the universe to fine-tune for. However, there is a complex
cosmic order that the universe seems to be fine-tuned for,
therefore it is deserving of an explanation.
2. Life, especially human life, is extremely complex.
Therefore, it is the mark of a rational mind to search for an
explanation for the existence of such complexity, given the
fact that this complexity is based on the physical laws and
cosmic order being fine-tuned.
Other-forms-of-life objection
Another common objection to the fine-tuning argument is that it is
based on the assumption that the only life that could exist is carbonbased life. If the laws of physics were different, carbon-based life
might have been impossible. However, other non-carbon forms of life
could have existed if the laws of physics were different. Therefore,
intelligent life could exist under a different cosmic order. The finetuning argument, however, is not based on this hypothesis. It is based
on two reasonable assumptions. The first is that conscious intelligent
life requires an energy source, whether that life is carbon-based or not.
For instance, without gravity there would be no stars, and without stars
there would be no energy source for life. The second is that conscious
life requires some form of complexity. For example, if the strong
nuclear force were slightly changed, no atoms would exist apart from
191

hydrogen. It is inconceivable that complex conscious life could be
derived from hydrogen alone. If the physical laws were different, any
form of stable and complex life could not exist. These are rational and
coherent assumptions to make. 280
The fine-tuning or design argument is one of the most intuitive. Its
power and simplicity are difficult to challenge, just as it would be
difficult to prove that your toast toasted itself and managed to spell out
‘I love you’, using your favourite chocolate spread, all by chance. It is
clear that there must have been some purposeful design. However, the
universe is far more complex and displays far more precision than
three words on a piece of toast. It stands to reason that the only
conclusion is that there is a cosmic designer who established order and
precision in the universe to facilitate conscious life.

192

Chapter 9: Know God, Know Good –
God and Objective Morality
Imagine you have come back from a busy day and you switch on the
television. You skim through some of the channels. Shocked by a
headline, you stop at a popular international news channel. Sure
enough, the headline is truly appalling: Man Beheads Five-Year-Old
Boy.
Now let me ask you a question. Was what this man did morally
wrong? You, like the majority of decent human beings, say yes. Now
answer this question: Is it objectively morally wrong? Again, like
most, you say yes.
However, here’s a final question: Why is it objective?
This is where it gets tricky.
Defining ‘objective’
In order to answer this question, the best place to start is with the word
‘objective’. A basic definition of the term refers to considering or
representing facts without being influenced by personal feelings or
opinions. In the case of morals, objective means that morality is not
dependent or based on one’s mind or personal feelings. In this sense, it
is ‘outside’ of one’s personal limited faculties. Mathematical truths
(1+1=2) or scientific truths, like the Earth going around the Sun, are
true regardless of what we feel about them. Therefore, if these morals
are ‘outside’ us, they have to be grounded. In other words, they need a
foundation. If objective morals do not depend on our limited faculties,
then answers to the following questions are required: Where did they
come from? What explains their nature? In order to answer these
questions a rational foundation is required. This will explain their
193

objective nature and provide a rationale of where they came from.
These questions refer to an area in philosophy known as moral
ontology.
Another way of describing objective morality is that it transcends
human subjectivity. For instance, the fact that killing a five-year-old is
morally wrong will always be true, even if the whole world were to
agree that killing a young child is morally right. Not only do we
recognise that some morals are objective, they also provide us with a
sense of moral obligation or duty. In other words, there are some
things that we ought to do and other things that we ought not to do. We
have moral duties and obligations, and these seem to come from
outside the limited self. Professor Ian Markham explains that our
moral language denotes something above and beyond ourselves:
“Embedded in the word ‘ought’ is the sense of a moral fact
transcending our life and world… The underlying character of moral
language implies something universal and external.”281
In the language of philosophy, the notion of objective morality is
the understanding that moral values are mind-independent.
Philosophers who assert that morality is objective are referred to as
moral realists. Those who do not believe in the mind-independent
nature of moral values are referred to as moral anti-realists. When
philosophers discuss morality, they make the distinction between
moral truths (also referred to as moral facts) and moral values. In the
context of moral realism, an example of an objective moral value is
that justice is good and it exists independently of any human being’s
mind or personal feelings. Moral truths are moral statements, and if
considered objective, they are independent from any individual
opinion; they are true irrespective of any consensus. An example of an
objective moral fact is: accepting a false witness in a court of law is
unjust, therefore morally wrong. This moral fact is not contingent on
any individual or collective opinion, mind or personal feelings. This
fact remains true even if there is a consensus asserting the opposite,
194

similar to the scenario in the beginning of this chapter.282
Back to the question
Coming back to the tricky question I raised earlier, let us try to answer
it: Why is it objective? The answer is simple. The morals values and
truths that we consider to be objective are so because God exists. 283
Before I explain this further, I want to ensure that this has nothing to
do with the beliefs that someone has. I am not saying “you cannot be
an atheist and display moral or good behaviour”, or “you have to
believe in God to have moral traits such as defending the innocent or
feeding the poor” or “just by being a believer you will behave well.”
What I am saying is that if God does not exist, then there are no
objective moral values. Sure, we can act as if moral values and truths
are objective, and many atheists throughout history have demonstrated
admirable moral fortitude without believing morality requires a Divine
basis. However, what I’m arguing is that, with God out of the picture,
these moral values are nothing more than social conventions.
Therefore, moral truths such as “murdering innocent people for
entertainment is wrong” and “defending the innocent is good”, for
example, are merely social conventions without God; just like saying it
is wrong to pass wind in public. This conclusion is based on the fact
that God is the only rational foundation for objective morals. No other
concept adequately provides such a foundation.
God provides this foundation because He is external to the
universe and transcends human subjectivity. Professor Ian Markham
similarly explains, “God explains the mysterious ought pressing down
our lives; and God explains the universal nature of the moral claim. As
God is outside the world, God the creator can be both external and
make universal commands.”284
In Islam, God is believed to be a Being of maximal perfection. He
is maximally knowledgeable, powerful and good. Perfect goodness is
God’s essential nature, one of His names is Al-Barr285, which means
195

the source of all goodness. When God makes a moral command, it is a
derivative of His will, and His will does not contradict His nature.
Therefore, what God commands is good because He is good, and He
defines what good is:
“Say, ‘Indeed, God does not order immorality.’”286
Interestingly, some atheists, believing that God cannot exist under
any circumstance, have understood that in absence of the Divine, there
are no objective morals. In Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong, the
influential atheist philosopher J. L. Mackie reflects this position:
“There are no objective values… The claim that values are not
objective… is meant to include not only moral goodness, which might
be most naturally equated with moral value, but also other things that
could be more loosely called moral values or disvalues—rightness and
wrongness, duty, obligation, an action’s being rotten and contemptible,
and so on.”287 Aside from being counter-intuitive, and not representing
a mainstream atheist position, Mackie seems to have understood the
implications of adopting an atheist worldview. If there is no God, there
is no objective good.
Euthyphro’s dilemma
Many atheists respond to the above argument from morality by citing
Plato’s dilemma or Euthyphro’s dilemma. It goes like this: Is
something morally good because God commands it, or does God
command it because it is morally good?
This dilemma poses a problem for theists who believe in an AllPowerful God because it requires them to believe in one of two things:
either morality is defined by God’s commands or morality is external
to His commands. If morality is based on God’s commands, what is
considered good or evil is arbitrary. If this is the case, there is nothing
we as humans should necessarily recognise as objectively evil. This
196

would imply that there is nothing intrinsically wrong with, say, killing
innocent children—just that God puts the ‘evil’ label on it arbitrarily.
The other horn of the dilemma implies that some sort of a moral
standard is completely outside and independent of God’s essence and
nature, and even God is obligated to live by this standard. However,
that would be clearly undesirable for the theist, since it would make
him admit that God is not All-Powerful or independent after all; rather,
He has to rely on a standard external to Himself.
This intuitively sounds like a valid contention. However, a little
reflection exposes it as a false dilemma. The reason is due to a third
possibility: God is good. In his book, The Qur’an and the Secular
Mind, professor of Philosophy Shabbir Akhtar explains:
“There is a third alternative: a morally stable God of the kind
found in scripture, a supreme being who would not arbitrarily
change his mind about the goodness of compassion and the evil
of sexual misconduct. Such a God always commands good
because his character and nature are good.”288
What Professor Akhtar is saying is that there is indeed a moral
standard, but unlike what the second horn of the dilemma suggests, it
is not external to God. Rather, it follows necessarily from God’s
nature. As previously discussed, Muslims, and theists in general,
believe that God is necessarily and perfectly good. As such, His nature
contains within it the perfect, non-arbitrary, moral standard. This
means that an individual’s actions—for example, the killing of
innocents—is not arbitrarily bad, because it follows from an objective,
necessary, moral standard. On the other hand, it does not mean God is
somehow subservient to this standard because it is contained in His
essence. It defines His nature; it is not in any way external to Him.
An atheist’s natural response would be: “You must know what
good is to define God as good, and therefore you haven’t solved the
197

problem”. The simple reply would be that God defines what good is.
He is the only Being worthy of worship, and such a being is the most
perfect and moral Being. The Qur’an affirms these points:
“And your god is one God. There is no deity
[worthy of worship] except Him, the Entirely Merciful, the
Especially Merciful.”289
“He is God, other than whom there is no deity, Knower of the
unseen and the witnessed. He is the Entirely Merciful, the
Especially Merciful. He is God, other than whom there is no
deity, the Sovereign, the Pure, the Perfection, the Bestower of
Faith, the Overseer, the Exalted in Might, the Compeller, the
Superior. Exalted is God above whatever they associate with
Him. He is God, the Creator, the Inventor, the Fashioner; to
Him belong the best names. Whatever is in the heavens and
Earth is exalting Him. And He is the Exalted in Might, the
Wise.”290
In summary, moral values and truths are ultimately derivatives of
God’s will, expressed via His commands, and His commands do not
contradict His nature, which is perfectly good, wise, pure and perfect.
Are there any alternative foundations for objective morals?
Many atheists argue that there are alternative explanations to answer
why some morals are objective. Some of the most popular alternatives
include biology, social pressure, and a non-theistic form of moral
realism.
Biology
Can biology explain our sense of objective morality? The simple
198

answer is no. Charles Darwin provides us with an interesting ‘extreme
example’ of what happens when biology or natural selection forms the
foundation of morality. He argues that if we were the result of a
different set of biological conditions, then what we consider morally
objective could be totally different: “If men were reared under
precisely the same conditions as hive-bees, there can hardly be a doubt
that our un-married females would, like the worker-bees, think it a
sacred duty to kill their brothers, and mothers would strive to kill their
fertile daughters, and no one would think of interfering.”291
In other words, if morals are contingent on biological changes, it
would render morals subject to these changes; therefore, they cannot
be objective. Extending Darwin’s example, if we happened to be
reared under the same conditions as the nurse shark, we would think it
acceptable to rape our partner, as the nurse shark wrestles with its
mate.292 Some respond by asserting that it is specifically natural
selection that forms the basis for our sense of objective morality.
Again, this is false. Conceptually, all that natural selection can do is
give us the ability to formulate moral rules to help us survive and
reproduce. As the moral philosopher Philip Kitcher writes, “All that
natural selection may have done for us is to equip us with the capacity
for various social arrangements and the capacity to formulate ethical
rules.”293
Maintaining that biology provides a basis for morality removes
any meaning we attach to morals. Morals become meaningless, as they
are just a result of non-rational and non-conscious biological changes.
However, the fact that morality comes from Divine commands gives
morals meaning, because being moral would be responding to these
commands. In other words, we have moral duties, and these are owed
to God. You cannot owe anything to a collection of molecules.
Social pressure

199

The second alternative is social pressure or consensus. This, I believe,
is where a lot of atheists and humanists face some difficulty,
philosophically speaking. If social pressure really forms the basis of
objective morals, then the proponents of this assertion face a huge
issue. Firstly, it makes morals relative, as they are subject to inevitable
social changes. Secondly, it leads to moral absurdities. If someone
accepts consensus as a basis for morals, then how can we justify our
moral position towards what the Nazis did in 1940s Germany? How
can we claim that what they did was objectively morally wrong? Well,
we cannot. Even if you claim that some people in Germany fought
against the Nazis, the point is that there was a strong consensus
supporting the evil. There are many other examples in history to
highlight this point.
Moral realism
The final alternative is a non-theistic form of moral realism. Moral
realism, also referred to as moral objectivism, is the view that morals
are objective and they are external and independent of our minds and
emotions. However, the difference between this type of moral realism
and what this chapter has been advocating, is that moral realists do not
assert that they require any foundation. So moral values such as
compassion, justice and tolerance just exist objectively.
There are a few problems with this position. Firstly, what does it
mean to say that justice just exists? Or that objective moral values just
exist? This position is counterintuitive and meaningless. We simply do
not know what ‘justice’ is, existing on its own. Significantly, one has
to understand that if morals are objective (in that they are outside of an
individual’s personal opinion), then they require a rational explanation.
Otherwise, the question How are they objective? is unanswered.
Secondly, morality is not limited to recognizing the objectivity of
compassion or justice. Morality entails a sense of duty or obligation;
200

we are obligated to be compassionate and just. Under moral realism
such obligations are impossible, because recognising that a certain
moral value is objective does nothing to ensure that we are obligated to
implement it. A moral obligation does not follow from just
acknowledging that it is objective. Following through with one’s moral
obligations would make sense if they are owed, or if there is a sense of
duty. Moral realism does not provide any reason why someone must
be obliged to be moral. However, if these moral values are based on
Divine commands, then not only do they make these morals objective,
but they establish the basis for being obligated to be moral—because
we have a duty to obey the commands of God.
In light of the above discussion, it is obvious that objective
morality necessitates God’s existence, as He is external to the universe
and can make the universal moral claim via His commands.
What if they reject objective morality?
As a last resort, some atheists try to avoid intellectual embarrassment
by replying to the above conclusion by denying that morality is
objective. Fair enough. I agree. If someone does not accept the axiom
that morals are objective, then the argument does not work. But that is
a double-edged sword. The minute the atheist denies the objectivity of
any moral claim, he has no right to point the finger at religion, or more
specifically Islam, in any objective way. He cannot even point the
finger at the KKK, ISIS or even the dictatorship of North Korea! The
irony here is that this is exactly what many atheists do. They make
moral judgments that have an objective flavour to them. They should
put a caveat to all of their moral judgments and simply say, “This is
my subjective view.” Doing that renders their moral disagreements or
outrage pointless. However, deep down inside, most sane human
beings do not deny the objectivity of some basic morals, such as
murder, theft and abuse.

201

Misunderstanding the argument
Some atheists, and even some academics, misunderstand the argument
by conflating moral epistemology with moral ontology. The argument I
have presented so far is not concerned with how we get to know what
is good, which refers to moral epistemology—it directs its attention to
where morals come from and their nature, which refers to moral
ontology. God’s commands provide the ontological foundation for
morals values and truths to be objective. How we get to know what
these morals are is a matter of moral epistemology.
The argument presented in this chapter does not concern moral
epistemology. This argument is about moral ontology, which refers to
the foundations and nature of morality. The argument in its simplest
form goes something like this: if something is good, is it objectively
good? If it is objectively good, then it necessitates God’s existence, as
He is the only foundation for objective good. The argument does not
ask how we know when something is good.
Absolute vs. objective
A valid concern that can be raised by the keen and aspiring theologian
is that within Islamic theological discourse (and virtually all of the
justice systems in the world), certain situations exist where killing
(such as defending one’s self and family) becomes morally (and
legally) permissible. Therefore, nothing is objectively evil. This is an
interesting reflection, but it conflates absolute morality with objective
morality; they are very different. Absolute morality entails that a moral
act is good or bad regardless of the given situation. For example,
someone who believes killing is absolutely wrong would believe
killing is wrong even in self-defence. Objective morality, however,
readily acknowledges the context-sensitivity of some moral truths. An
objective moral fact might be killing human beings without
appropriate justification is wrong. The context-sensitive nature of this
moral claim includes an important caveat that the killing must also be
202

unjustified. For instance, killing another human being might be seen as
morally justified, if the person who was killed had been
indiscriminately shooting children at a local school. The argument I
have presented does not involve absolute notions of morality.
A note on ethical relativism
An ethical relativist, who maintains that morality is relative to cultural
norms, would argue that the discussion on absolute and objective
morality proves that morals are not objective, and that they are
relative. Those who maintain that morals are objective would argue
that what people believe or feel or do is irrelevant, and does not take
away from objective moral value (and that is precisely the definition of
objectivity). Ethical relativism is bankrupt from this perspective
because it points to cultural practices to refute what is objectively true.
This is doomed to failure, because the definition of objective morality
states that morals are independent of feelings, beliefs and cultural
practices, so to use them as a means to deny the objectivity of morals
is meaningless.
This chapter has some striking implications for the atheist. If
atheists consider some morals values and truths to be objective, they
must either admit that God exists—as He is the only rational
foundation for the existence of objective morality—or provide a
compelling alternative. If they cannot, they have to ignore their innate
disposition that recognises objective good and evil, and reject the
notion of objective morals altogether. Once they do that, all their
finger-pointing and moral judgements against Islam will be diminished
to the level of personal subjectivity. The argument from the stance of
morality truly makes sense of the Islamic conception of the Divine.
God is perfectly good and wise, and His commands do not contradict
His perfect nature. Therefore, His commands are perfectly good.
Knowing this about God gives us a foundation for objective morals. In
other words, knowing God is knowing good.
203

204

Chapter 10: Divine Singularity – The
Oneness of God
Imagine you are an explorer who took a spaceship to another planet to
visit human-like creatures. Once you land on the planet, you meet your
guide. He tells you that your spaceship landed on Sphinga, the planet’s
borderless country. You are confused and ask your guide if there are
any other countries on the planet. He laughs and replies, “Yes, there
are two.” You retort, “Well, how do you know when you’re in another
country if there is nothing to differentiate them?” Your guide sighs and
says, “Yeah, we have the same problem. There are no borders and the
features of one country are the same as the other.” You finally end the
discussion by saying, “You should have just made them into one
country then, because that is what it looks like to me.”
You both continue your journey to meet a group of officials for
lunch. During the meal, one of the officials praises the kings of the
country. Upon hearing this, you politely ask, “You mean, there is more
than one king?” The official replies, “Yes, we have two kings.” You
seem perplexed and ask how the country can function with two kings.
“How do you have harmony in your laws, and order in your society?”
The official replies, “Well, they always agree. Their wills are one.”
You cannot hold yourself back and you respond, “Well, you do not
really have two kings, then. Because they are acting in accordance
with one will.”
This story contains three of the five arguments I will present for
the fact that there can only be one God. The first part of the story
summarises an argument that I call ‘conceptual differentiation’. It
postulates that in order for multiplicity to exist, there must be some
concepts that differentiate one thing from another. For example, if I
205

said that there are two bananas on the table, you would be able to
verify that statement by observing them. The reason you can see two
bananas is because there are concepts that differentiate them; for
example, their size, shape and location on the table. However, if there
was nothing to differentiate them, you could not distinguish between
them. Similarly, since this book so far has argued that there is a
necessary, uncreated creator who is powerful, knowing, All-Aware
and transcendent, then to claim that there are two would require a
concept that differentiates them. But in order for the Creator to be a
creator, He must have these attributes. So saying there are two without
one being different from another is basically saying that there is only
one creator. If whatever is true of one creator is true of another, then
we have just defined one creator and not two.
The second part of the story summarises both the argument from
exclusion and the argument from definition. The argument from
exclusion maintains that there can only be one Divine will. If there
were two creators and one wanted to create a tree, only three options
would be possible. The first is that they both cancel each other out; this
is not a rational possibility since creation exists, and if they cancelled
each other out, there would be no creation at all. The second is that one
creator overpowers the other by ensuring his tree is created. The third
option is that they both agree to create the same tree in the same way.
The second and third options imply that there is only one will, and one
will in the context of our discussions indicates one creator.
The argument from definition asserts that there cannot be more
than one creator. If there was more than one creator, the cosmos would
not display the harmony that it does. As well as presenting arguments
for a creator, this book warrants the traditional conception of God.
Since the traditional conception refers to God as having an imposing
will that cannot be limited by anything external to Him, then it
logically follows there cannot be two unlimited Divine wills.
This chapter will elaborate on these arguments and present
206

another two to show that this creator must be one:
•
•
•
•
•

The argument from exclusion
Conceptual differentiation
Occam’s razor
The argument from definition
The argument from revelation

Argument from exclusion
This argument maintains that the existence of multiple creators is
impossible because there can only be one will. I have already
discussed that the Creator must have a will (see Chapter 5), so
questioning how many wills can exist leads us nicely to discuss this
argument in detail.
For the sake of argument, let’s say there were two creators.
Creator A wanted to move a rock, and creator B also wanted to move
the same rock. There are three possible scenarios that can arise:
1. One of the creators overpowers the other by moving the
rock in a different direction from the other.
2. They both cancel each other out, and the rock does not
move.
3. They both move the rock in the same direction.
The first scenario implies only one will manifests itself. The
second scenario means that there is no will in action. This is not
possible because there must be a will acted upon, as we have creation
in existence. The third scenario ultimately describes only one will.
Therefore, it is more rational to conclude that there is only one creator
because there is only one will.
If someone argues that you can have more than one entity and still
have one will, I would respond by asking: How do you know there is
207

more than one entity? It sounds like an argument from ignorance,
because there is no evidence whatsoever for such a claim. This leads
us to the next argument.
Conceptual differentiation
For two creators to exist, they must be different in some way. For
example, if you have two trees, they will differ in size, shape, colour
and age. Even if they had identical physical attributes, there would be at
least one thing that allows us to distinguish that they are in fact two
trees. This can include their placement or position. You can also apply
this to twins; we know there are two people because something makes
them different. This could even be the mere fact that they cannot occupy
the same place at the same time.
If there were more than one creator, then there must be something
to differentiate between them. However, if they are the same in every
possible aspect, then how can we say there are two? If something is
identical to another, then what is true of one is also true for the other.
Say we had two things, A and B. If they are the same in every way,
and nothing allows us to differentiate between them, then they are the
same thing. We can turn this into a hypothetical proposition: If
whatever is true of A is true of B, then A is identical to B.
Now let us apply this to the Creator. Imagine that two creators
exist, called creator X and creator Y, and that whatever is true of
creator X is also true of creator Y. For instance, creator X is AllPowerful and All-Wise; so, creator Y is All-Powerful and AllWise. How many creators are there in reality? Only one, due to the
fact that there is nothing to differentiate between them. If someone
were to argue that they are different, then they would not be describing
another creator but something that is created, as it would not have the
same attributes befitting the Creator.
If someone is adamant in claiming that there can be two creators
and they are different from each other, then I simply ask, “How are
208

they different?” If they attempt to answer the question, they enter the
realm of arguing from ignorance, because they will have to make up
evidence to justify their false conclusion.
Occam’s razor
In light of the above, we might find a few irrational and stubborn
people who still posit a plurality of creators or causes. In light of
Occam’s razor, this is not a sound argument. Occam’s razor is a
philosophical principle attributed to the 14th century logician and
Franciscan friar, William of Occam. This principle enjoins: ‘Pluralitas
non est ponenda sine necessitate’; in English: ‘Plurality should not be
posited without necessity.’ In other words, the simplest and most
comprehensive explanation is the best one.
In this case, we have no evidence that the Creator of the universe
is actually a combination of two, three or even one thousand creators,
so the simplest explanation is that the Creator is one. Postulating a
plurality of creators does not add to the comprehensiveness of the
argument either. In other words, to add more creators would not
enhance the argument’s explanatory power or scope. To claim that an
All-Powerful creator created the universe is just as comprehensive as
claiming that two All-Powerful creators created it. One creator is all
that is required, simply because it is All-Powerful. I would argue that
postulating multiple creators actually has reduced explanatory power
and scope; this is because it raises far more problems than it solves.
For example, the following questions expose the irrationality of this
form of polytheism: How do many eternal beings co-exist? What about
the potential of any conflicting wills? How do they interact?
A popular objection to this argument is that if we were to apply
this principle to the pyramids in Egypt, we would absurdly adopt the
view that they were made by one person, because it seems to be the
simplest explanation. This is a misapplication of the principle, because
it ignores the point about comprehensiveness. Taking the view that the
209

pyramids were built by one person is not the simplest and most
comprehensive explanation, as it raises far more questions than it
answers. For instance, how could one man have built the pyramids? It
is far more comprehensive to postulate that it was built by many men.
In light of this, someone can say that the universe is so complex that it
would be absurd to postulate that only one creator created it. This
contention, although valid, is misplaced. A powerful Being creating
the whole universe is a far more coherent and simple explanation than
a plurality of creators, because a plurality of creators raises the
unanswerable questions stated in the previous paragraph. Nevertheless,
the critic may continue to argue that it wasn’t one person that created
the Pyramids, but an All-Powerful creator. The problem with this is
that nothing within the universe is an All-Powerful Being, and since
the Pyramids are buildings, and buildings are built by an efficient
cause (a person or persons that act), then the Pyramids must have been
created by the same type of cause. This leads us back to the original
point, that more than one of these causes was required to build the
Pyramids.
The argument from definition
Reason necessitates that if there were more than one creator, the
universe would be in chaos. There would also not be the level of order
we find in the cosmos. The Qur’an has a similar argument: “Had there
been within the heavens and Earth gods besides God, they both would
have been ruined.”294
The classical commentary known as Tafsir al-Jalalayn states:
“Heaven and the Earth would have lost their normal orderliness since
there would have inevitably been internal discord, as is normal when
there are several rulers: they oppose one another in things and do not
agree with one another.”295
However, one might point out that since more than one person
made your car—one person fitted the wheels, someone else installed
210

the engine and another person installed the computer system—maybe
the universe was created in the same way. This example indicates that
a complex object can be created by more than one creator.
In order to respond to this contention, what has to be understood is
that the most rational explanation for the origins of the universe, as
discussed in the previous chapters, is the concept of God and not just a
‘creator’. There may be an abstract conceptual possibility of multiple
creators, as highlighted by the car example, but there cannot be more
than one God. This is because God, by definition, is the Being that has
an imposing will that cannot be limited by anything external to Him. If
there were two or more Gods, they would have a competition of wills,
which would result in chaos and disorder. The universe we observe is
governed by mathematical laws and order; therefore, it makes sense
that it is the result of one imposing will. Interestingly, the objection
above actually supports Divine oneness. In order for the car to work,
the different people who were responsible for making it had to
conform to the overall ‘will’ of the designer. The design limited the
wills of those responsible for making the car. Since God, by definition,
cannot have His will limited by anything outside of Himself, it follows
that there cannot be more than one Divine will.
However, one may argue that multiple Gods can agree to have the
same will or they can each have their own domain. This would mean
that their wills are limited and passive, which would require that they
are not Gods any more, by definition.
The 12th century Muslim thinker and philosopher Ibn Rushd, also
known as Averroes in the western tradition, summarises this argument:
“The meaning of the… verse is implanted in the instincts [of
man] by nature. It is self-evident that if there are two kings, the
actions of each one being the same as those of the other, it
would not be possible [for them] to manage the same city, for
there cannot result from two agents of the same kind one and
211

the same action. It follows necessarily that if they acted
together, the city would be ruined, unless one of them acted
while the other remained inactive; and this is incompatible with
the attribute of Divinity. When two actions of the same kind
converge on one substratum, that substratum is corrupted
necessarily.”296
The argument from revelation
A simpler way of providing evidence for God’s oneness is to refer to
revelation. This argument postulates that if God has announced
himself to humanity, and this revelation can be proven to be from Him,
then what He says about Himself is true. However, a sceptic may
question some of the assumptions behind this argument. These include
that God has announced Himself to humankind and that the revelation
is in the form of a book.
Let’s first tackle the last assumption. If God has announced
Himself to humankind, there are only two possible ways to find out:
internally and externally. What I mean by ‘internally’ is that you can
find out who God is solely by introspection and internalisation, and
what I mean by ‘externally’ is that you can find out who God is via
communication from outside of yourself; in other words, it is
instantiated in the real world. Finding out about God internally is
implausible for the following reasons:
1. Human beings are different; they have what psychologists call
‘individual differences’. These include DNA, experiences,
social contexts, intellectual and emotional capacities, gender
differences and many more. These differences play a role in
our ability to internalise via introspection or intuition.
Therefore, the results of thinking will differ. If these processes
were solely used to find out about God, inevitably differences
in our conception of Him would arise. This is true from a
212

historical point of view. From the ancient world of 6000 BCE
to the present, there are records of approximately 3,700
different names and concepts for God.
2. Since the method used to conclude that God does exist is a
‘common sense’ method (referred to by philosophers as
‘rational thought’ and by Muslim theologians as ‘innate
thinking’), then trying to find out who God is, rather than just
affirming His existence, would be fallacious. There are limits
to our reasoning. Abstract thinking and reflections on the
physical world can only lead us to the conclusion that a creator
exists, and He is powerful, knowing, etc. To go beyond those
conclusions would be speculative. The Qur’an aptly asks, “Do
you say about God that which you do not know?”297 Trying to
find out who God is via introspection would be like a mouse
trying to conceptualise a galaxy. The human being is not
eternal, unique and powerful. Therefore, the human being
cannot conceptualise who God is. God would have to tell you
via external revelation.
Take the following example into consideration. Your
knowledge that God exists is like the knocking of the door; you
safely assume that something is there, but do you know who it
is? You weren’t expecting anyone, so the only way to find who
is behind the door is if the person tells you. Therefore, you can
conclude that if God has said or announced anything, it must be
external to the human being. Anything else would be mere
speculation.
From an Islamic perspective, this external communication is the
Qur’an (see Chapter 13), as it is the only text to claim to have come
from God that fits the criteria for a Divine text. These criteria include:
213

1. It must be consistent with the rational and intuitive conclusion
of God’s existence. For example, if a book says God is an
elephant with 40 legs, you could safely assume that this book is
not from God, as God must be external to the universe and
independent. An elephant, regardless of form, is a dependent
being. This is because it has limited physical qualities, such as
size, shape and colour. All things with limited physical
qualities are dependent because there are external factors that
gave rise to their limitations. God is not ‘physical’ and is
independent. Therefore, nothing with limited physical qualities
can be God (see Chapter 6).
2. It must be internally and externally consistent. In other words,
if it says on page 20 that God is one and then on page 340 its
says God is three, that would be an internal, irreconcilable
inconsistency. Additionally, if the book says that the universe
is only 6,000 years old, then that would be an external
inconsistency as reality affirms that the universe is older than
that (however, our understanding of reality can change; see
Chapter 12).
3. It must have signposts to the transcendent. The revelation must
contain material that indicates it is from the Divine and that it
cannot be adequately explained naturalistically. In simple
terms, it must have evidence to show that it is from God.
The Qur’an has signposts that indicate it is a Divine text. The
book cannot be explained naturalistically; therefore, supernatural
explanations are the best explanation. Some of these signposts include:
1. The Qur’an’s linguistic and literary inimitability (see
Chapter 13).
214

2. Some of the historical accounts in the Qur’an could not
have been known to man at the time of revelation.
3. Its unique arrangement and structure.298
To conclude, since the only way to know what God has
announced to humankind is via external revelation, and this revelation
can be proven to be the Qur’an—then what it says about God is true.
The Qur’an is explicitly clear concerning His oneness: “And do not
argue with the people of the Scripture except in a way that is best,
except for those who commit injustice among them, and say, ‘We
believe in that which has been revealed to us and revealed to you. And
our God and your God is one; and we are Muslims [in submission] to
Him.’”299
These are some of the arguments that can be used to show that
God is one; however, this topic—once truly understood—will have
some profound effects on the human conscience. If one God has
created us, it follows that we must see everything via His oneness and
not our abstracted perspectives of disunity and division. We are a
human family, and if we see ourselves this way, it can have profound
effects on our society. If we love and believe in God, then we should
show compassion and mercy to what He has created. Just like what the
Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬said:
“Those who are merciful will be shown mercy by the Most
Merciful. Be merciful to those on the Earth and the One in the
heavens will have mercy upon you.”300

215

Chapter 11: Is God Merciful? – Islam’s
Response to Evil and Suffering
When I was a child, my parents would always chide me for trying to
drink my grandfather’s whisky. You can imagine, an active and
inquisitive young child observing his grandfather sip this thick, gold,
smooth liquid. I wanted some! However, every time I attempted to
secretly drink the enticing beverage, I would get into big trouble. I
never understood why, thus negative thoughts about my parents would
race through my mind. Fast-forward many years, I now realise why
they didn’t allow me to drink my grandfather’s whisky; it could have
poisoned me. A 40 percent volume alcoholic drink would not have
been pleasant on my young stomach or liver. However, when I was
younger, I did not have access to the wisdom that formed the basis of
my parents’ decision, yet I thought I was justified in my negativity
towards them.
This sums up the atheist attitude towards God when trying to
understand evil and suffering in the world. The above story is not
intended to belittle the suffering and pain that people experience. As
human beings, we must feel empathy and find ways of alleviating
people’s hardships. However, the example is meant to raise a
conceptual point. Due to a valid and genuine concern for human and
other sentient beings, many atheists argue that the existence of a
powerful and merciful301 God is incompatible with the existence of
evil and suffering in the world. If He is The-Merciful, He should want
the evil and suffering to stop, and if He is All-Powerful, He should be
able to stop it. However, since there is evil and suffering, it means that
either He is not powerful, or He lacks mercy, or both.
The evil and suffering argument has two forms. The logical and
216

the evidential. The logical form attempts to argue that God not existing
is a necessary conclusion. It maintains that it is impossible for evil and
suffering to exist and at the same time God to exist with attributes of
power, knowledge and goodness.302 However, the logical form fails to
show why the conclusion necessarily follows. The logical form below
seems to be missing a premise:303
1. If God exists, then God is all powerful, and all knowing and
allows there to be evil in the world.
2. If God is all good, then he would eliminate evil.
3. If God is all powerful, then he can eliminate evil.
4. If God is all knowing, then he is aware of any evil that exists.
5. Therefore, God does not exist. 304
The missing premise is: “If there is a being that knows about all
evil, wants to eliminate evil, and is able to eliminate evil, then that
being would not allow there to be any evil in the world.”305 This
hidden premise attempts to assert a necessary logical relation between
the previous premises and the conclusion. To dismantle this assertion
all that needs to be done is to provide a possible explanation for the
existence of God and evil. Since there are a range of possible
explanations the logical form’s hidden premise is undermined. 306
The evidential form maintains that given the nature and
abundance of evil, and the apparent unnecessary suffering in the
world, it is highly unlikely that a God with attributes of goodness,
mercy and power exists. This version of the problem of evil and
suffering is intellectually weak because it is based on two major false
assumptions. The first concerns the nature of God. It implies that God
is only The-Merciful and All-Powerful, thereby isolating two attributes
and ignoring others that the Qur’an has revealed about God. Even
though a conception of the evidential form includes God’s knowledge,
it falsely assumes that we will are able comprehend the totality of
217

God’s knowledge. The fact is we have epistemic limitations, we can
never grasp the totality of God’s knowledge. The second assumption is
that God has provided us with no reasons for why He has allowed evil
and suffering to exist.307 This is not true. Islamic revelation provides
us with many reasons for why God has allowed evil and suffering to
exist. Both assumptions will be addressed below.
Is God only The-Merciful and All-Powerful?
According to the Qur’an, God is Al-Qadeer, meaning the AllPowerful, and Ar-Rahmaan, meaning The-Merciful, which also
implies compassion. Islam requires that mankind know and believe in
a God of power, mercy and goodness. However, the atheist grossly
misrepresents the comprehensive Islamic conception of God. God is
not only The-Merciful and All-Powerful; rather, He has many names
and attributes. These are understood holistically via God’s oneness
(see Chapter 15). For instance, one of His names is Al-Hakeem,
meaning The-Wise. Since the very nature of God is wisdom, it follows
that whatever He wills is in line with Divine wisdom. When something
is explained by an underlying wisdom, it implies a reason for its
occurrence. In this light, the atheist reduces God to two attributes and
by doing so builds a straw man, misrepresenting the Islamic
conception of God, thereby engaging in an irrelevant monologue.
The writer Alom Shaha, who wrote The Young Atheist’s
Handbook, responds to the assertion that Divine wisdom is an
explanation for evil and suffering by describing it as an intellectual
cop-out:
“The problem of evil genuinely stumps most ordinary
believers. In my experience, they usually respond with an
answer along the lines of, ‘God moves in mysterious ways.’
Sometimes they’ll say, ‘Suffering is God’s way of testing us,’
to which the obvious response is, ‘Why does he have to test us
218

in such evil ways’ To which the response is, ‘God moves in
mysterious ways.’ You get the idea.”308
Alom, like many other atheists, commits the fallacy of
argumentum ad ignoratium, arguing from ignorance. Just because he
cannot access Divine wisdom does not mean it does not exist. This
reasoning is typical of toddlers. Many children are scolded by their
parents for something they want to do, such as eating too many sweets.
The toddlers usually cry or have a tantrum because they think how bad
mummy and daddy are, but the child does not realise the wisdom
underlying their objection (in this case, too many sweets are bad for
their teeth). Furthermore, this contention misunderstands the definition
and nature of God. Since God is transcendent, knowing and wise, then
it logically follows that limited human beings cannot fully comprehend
the Divine will. To even suggest that we can appreciate the totality of
God’s wisdom would imply that we are like God, which denies the
fact of His transcendence, or suggests that God is limited like a human.
This argument has no traction with any believer, because no Muslim
believes in a created, limited God. It is not an intellectual cop-out to
refer to Divine wisdom, because it is not referring to some mysterious
unknown. Rather, it truly understands the nature of God and makes the
necessary logical conclusions. As I have pointed out before, God has
the picture, and we have just a pixel.
As mentioned in Chapter 1, the problem of the evil and suffering
argument exposes a cognitive bias known as ‘egocentrism’. Such a
person cannot see any perspective on a particular issue apart from their
own. Some atheists suffer from this cognitive bias. They assume that
since they cannot possibly fathom any good reasons to justify the evil
and suffering in the world, everyone else—including God—must also
have the same problem. Thus they deny God, because they assume that
God cannot be justified for permitting the evil and suffering in the
world. If God has no justification, then the mercy and power of God
219

are illusions. Thus, the traditional concept of God is nullified.
However, all atheists have done is superimposed their perspective on
God. This is like arguing that God must think how humans think. This
is impossible because human beings and God cannot be compared, as
God is transcendent and has the totality of wisdom and knowledge.
At this point, the atheist might respond by describing the above as
an intelligent way of evading the problem: If the theist can refer to
God’s wisdom as so great that it cannot be understood, then we can
explain anything ‘mysterious’ in reference to a Divine wisdom. I
somewhat empathise with this reply; however, in the context of the
problem of evil and suffering, it is a false argument. It is the atheist
that refers to God’s attributes to begin with; His power and mercy.
Atheists should refer to God as who He is, not as an agent with only
two attributes. If they were to include other attributes such as wisdom,
their argument would not be valid. If they were to include the attribute
of wisdom, they would have to show how Divine wisdom is
incompatible with a world full of suffering or evil. This would be
impossible to prove, because there are so many examples in our
intellectual and practical lives where we admit our intellectual
inferiority—in other words, there are cases where we submit to a
wisdom we cannot understand. We rationally submit to realities that
we cannot understand on a regular basis. For example, when we visit
the doctor, we assume that the doctor is an authority. We trust the
doctor’s diagnosis on this basis. We even take the medicine the doctor
prescribes without any second thought. This and many other similar
examples clearly show that referring to God’s wisdom is not evading
the problem. Rather, it is accurately presenting who God is and not
making out that God has only two attributes. Since He is The-Wise,
and His names and attributes are maximally perfect, it follows that
there is wisdom behind everything that He does—even if we do not
know or understand that wisdom. Many of us do not understand how
diseases work, but just because we do not understand something does
220

not negate its existence.
The Qur’an uses profound stories and narratives to instil this
understanding. Take, for instance, the story of Moses and a man he
encountered on his travels, known as Khidr. Moses observed him do
things that seemed unjust and evil, but at the end of their journey, the
wisdom that Moses did not have access to was brought to light:
“So the two turned back, retraced their footsteps, and found
one of Our servants— a man to whom We had granted Our
mercy and whom We had given knowledge of Our own. Moses
said to him, ‘May I follow you so that you can teach me some
of the right guidance you have been taught?’ The man said,
‘You will not be able to bear with me patiently. How could you
be patient in matters beyond your knowledge?’ Moses said,
‘God willing, you will find me patient. I will not disobey you
in any way.’ The man said, ‘If you follow me then, do not
query anything I do before I mention it to you myself.’ They
travelled on. Later, when they got into a boat, and the man
made a hole in it, Moses said, ‘How could you make a hole in
it? Do you want to drown its passengers? What a strange thing
to do!’ He replied, ‘Did I not tell you that you would never be
able to bear with me patiently?’ Moses said, ‘Forgive me for
forgetting. Do not make it too hard for me to follow you.’ And
so they travelled on. Then, when they met a young boy and the
man killed him, Moses said, ‘How could you kill an innocent
person? He has not killed anyone! What a terrible thing to do!’
He replied, ‘Did I not tell you that you would never be able to
bear with me patiently?’ Moses said, ‘From now on, if I query
anything you do, banish me from your company— you have
put up with enough from me.’ And so they travelled on. Then,
when they came to a town and asked the inhabitants for food
but were refused hospitality, they saw a wall there that was on
221

the point of falling down and the man repaired it. Moses said,
‘But if you had wished you could have taken payment for
doing that.’ He said, ‘This is where you and I part company. I
will tell you the meaning of the things you could not bear with
patiently: the boat belonged to some needy people who made
their living from the sea and I damaged it because I knew that
coming after them was a king who was seizing every
[serviceable] boat by force. The young boy had parents who
were people of faith, and so, fearing he would trouble them
through wickedness and disbelief, we wished that their Lord
should give them another child—purer and more
compassionate—in his place. 309 The wall belonged to two
young orphans in the town and there was buried treasure
beneath it belonging to them. Their father had been a righteous
man, so your Lord intended them to reach maturity and then
dig up their treasure as a mercy from your Lord. I did not do
[these things] of my own accord: these are the explanations for
those things you could not bear with patience.’”310
In addition to contrasting our limited wisdom with God’s, this
story also provides key lessons and spiritual insights. The first lesson
is that in order to understand God’s will, one has to be humble. Moses
approached Khidr, and knew that he had some Divinely inspired
knowledge that God had not given to Moses. Moses humbly asked to
learn from him, yet Khidr responded by questioning his ability to be
patient; nevertheless, Moses insisted and wanted to learn. (The
spiritual status of Moses is very high according to the Islamic tradition.
He was a prophet and messenger, yet he approached the man with
humility.) The second lesson is that patience is required to emotionally
and psychologically deal with the suffering and evil in the world.
Khidr knew that Moses would not be able to be patient with him, as he
was going to do things that Moses thought were evil. Moses tried to be
222

patient but always questioned the man’s actions and expressed his
anger at the perceived evil. However, at the end of the story, Khidr
explained the Divine wisdom behind his actions after exclaiming that
Moses was not able to be patient. What we learn from this story is that
to be able to deal with evil and suffering in the world, including our
inability to understand it, we must be humble and patient.
Commenting on the above verses, the classical scholar Ibn Kathir
explained that Khidr was the one to whom God had given knowledge
of the reality behind the perceived evil and suffering, and He had not
given it to Moses. With reference to the meaning of the statement,
“You will not be able to bear with me patiently”, Ibn Kathir wrote:
“You will not be able to accompany with me when you see me doing
things that go against your law, because I have knowledge from God
that He has not taught you, and you have knowledge from God that He
has not taught me.”311
In essence, God’s wisdom is unbounded and complete, whereas
we have limited wisdom and knowledge. Another way of putting it is
that God has the totality of wisdom and knowledge; we just have its
particulars. We see things from the perspective of our fragmentary
viewpoint. To fall for the trap of egocentrism is like believing you
know the entire puzzle after seeing only one piece. Hence Ibn Kathir
explains that the verse, “How could you be patient in matters beyond
your knowledge?” means that there is a Divine wisdom that we cannot
access: “For I know that you will denounce me justifiably, but I have
knowledge of God’s wisdom and the hidden interests which I can see
but you cannot.”312
The view that everything that happens is in line with a Divine
wisdom is empowering and positive. This is because God’s wisdom
does not contradict other aspects of His nature, such as His perfection
and goodness. Therefore, evil and suffering are ultimately part of a
Divine purpose. Among many other classical scholars, the 14 th century
scholar Ibn Taymiyya summarises this point well: “God does not create
223

pure evil. Rather, in everything that He creates is a wise purpose by
virtue of what is good. However, there may be some evil in it for some
people, and this is partial, relative evil. As for total evil or absolute evil,
the Lord is exonerated of that.”313
This does not negate the concept of objective moral truths
mentioned in the previous chapter. Even if everything is in line with
ultimate goodness, and evil is ‘partial’, it does not undermine the
concept of objective evil. As discussed, objective evil is not absolute,
but rather it is evil based on a particular context or set of variables. So
something can be objectively evil due to certain variables or context,
and at the same time it can be included within an ultimate Divine
purpose that is good and wise.
This evokes positive psychological responses from believers,
because all the evil and all the suffering that occur are for a Divine
purpose. Ibn Taymiyya summarises this point as well: “If God—
exalted is He—is Creator of everything, He creates good and evil on
account of the wise purpose that He has in that by virtue of which His
action is good and perfect.”314
Henri Laoust, in his Essay sur les doctrines sociales et politiques
de Taki-d-Din Ahmad b. Taimiya, also explains this position: “God is
essentially providence. Evil is without real existence in the world. All
that God has willed can only conform to a sovereign justice and an
infinite goodness, provided, however, that it is envisaged from the
point of view of the totality and not from that of the fragmentary and
imperfect knowledge that His creatures have of reality….”315
Does God give us reasons for why He has allowed evil and
suffering to exist?
A sufficient response to the second assumption is to provide a strong
argument that God has communicated some reasons to us about why
He has allowed evil and suffering in the world. The intellectual
richness of Islamic thought provides us with many reasons.
224

Our purpose is worship
The primary purpose of the human being is not to enjoy a transitory
sense of happiness; rather, it is to achieve a deep internal peace
through knowing and worshipping God (see Chapter 15). This
fulfilment of the Divine purpose will result in everlasting bliss and true
happiness. So, if this is our primary purpose, other aspects of human
experience are secondary. The Qur’an states, “I did not create either
jinn [spirit world] or man except to worship Me.”316
Consider someone who has never experienced any suffering or
pain, but experiences pleasure all the time. This person, by virtue of
his state of ease, has forgotten God and therefore failed to do what he
was created to do. Compare this person with someone whose
experiences of hardship and pain have led him to God, and fulfilled his
purpose in life. From the perspective of the Islamic spiritual tradition,
the one whose suffering has led him to God is better than the one who
has never suffered and whose pleasures have led him away from God.
Life is a test
God also created us for a test, and part of this test is to experience
trials with suffering and evil. Passing the test facilitates our permanent
abode of eternal bliss in paradise. The Qur’an explains that God
created death and life, “so that He may put you to test, to find out
which of you is best in deeds: He is the The-Almighty, TheForgiving.”317
On a basic level, the atheist misunderstands the purpose of our
existence on Earth. The world is supposed to be an arena of trials and
tribulations in order to test our conduct and for us to cultivate virtue.
For example, how can we cultivate patience if we do not experience
things that test our patience? How can we become courageous if there
225

are no dangers to be confronted? How can we be compassionate if no
one is in need of it? Life being a test answers these questions. We need
challenges to ensure our moral and spiritual growth. We are not here to
party; that is the purpose of paradise.
So why is life a test? Since God is perfectly good, He wants every
single one of us to believe and, as a result, experience eternal bliss
with Him in paradise. God makes it clear that He prefers belief for us
all: “And He does not approve for His servants’ disbelief.”318
This clearly shows that God does not want anyone to go to hell.
However, if He were to send everyone to paradise, then a gross
violation of justice would take place; God would be treating Moses
and the Pharaoh and Hitler and Jesus as the same. A mechanism is
needed to ensure that people who enter paradise do so based on merit.
This explains why life is a test. Life is just a mechanism to see who
among us are truly deserving of eternal happiness. As such, life is
filled with obstacles, which act as tests of our conduct.
In this regard, Islam is extremely empowering because it sees
suffering, evil, harm, pain and problems as a test. We can have fun, but
we have been created with a purpose and that purpose is to worship
God. The empowering Islamic view is that tests are seen as sign of
God’s love. The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬said, “When God loves a
servant, He tests him.”319
The reason God tests those whom He loves is because it is an
avenue to achieve the eternal bliss of paradise—and entering paradise
is a result of Divine love and mercy. God points this out clearly in the
Qur’an: “Do you suppose that you will enter the Garden without first
having suffered like those before you? They were afflicted by
misfortune and hardship, and they were so shaken that even [their]
messenger and the believers with him cried, ‘When will God’s help
arrive?’ Truly, God’s help is near.”320
The beauty of the Islamic tradition is that God, who knows us
better than we know ourselves, has already empowered us and tells us
226

that we have what it takes to overcome these trials. “God does not
burden any soul with more than it can bear.”321
However, if we cannot overcome these trials after having tried our
best, God’s mercy and justice will ensure that we are recompensed in
some way, either in this life or the eternal life that awaits us.
Knowing God
Hardship and suffering enables us to realise and know God’s
attributes, such as The-Protector and The-Healer. For example,
without the pain of illness we would not appreciate God’s attributes as
The-Healer, or the one who gives us health. Knowing God in the
Islamic spiritual tradition is a greater good, and worth the experience
of suffering or pain, as it will ensure the fulfilment of our primary
purpose, which ultimately leads to paradise.
Greater good
Suffering and evil allow a greater good, also known as second-order
good. First-order good is physical pleasure and happiness, and firstorder evil is physical pain and sadness. Some examples of secondorder goodness include courage, humility and patience. However, in
order to have a second-order good (like courage) there must be a firstorder evil (like cowardice). According to the Qur’an, elevated good
such as courage and humility do not have the same value as evil: “Say
Prophet, bad cannot be likened to good, though you may be dazzled by
how abundant the bad is. Be mindful of God, people of understanding,
so that you may prosper.”322
Free will
God has given us free will, and free will includes the ability to choose
227

to commit evil acts. This explains personal evil, which is evil or
suffering committed by a human being. One can ask: Why has God
given us free will at all? In order for the tests in life to be meaningful,
there must be free will. An exam is pointless if the student is obligated
or forced to answer correctly on each question. Similarly, in the exam
of life, human beings must be given adequate freedom to do as they
please.
Good and evil lose their meaning if God were to always ensure we
chose good. Take the following example into consideration: someone
points a loaded gun to your head and asks you to give to charity. You
give the money, but does it have any moral value? It does not, for it
only has value if a free agent chooses to do so.
Detachment from the world
According to the Islamic tradition, God has created us so that we may
worship and draw near to Him. A fundamental principle concerning
this is that we must detach ourselves from the ephemeral nature of the
world. Known as dunya, meaning low or lowly, the ephemeral world is
the place of limitations, suffering, loss, desires, ego, excessiveness and
evil. Suffering shows us how truly low the dunya is, thereby
facilitating our detachment from it. Thus, we are able to draw closer to
God.
The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬was reported to have said, “Love of
the dunya is the root of all evil.”323 Therefore, detachment from the
dunya is necessary to reach the ultimate spiritual goal of nearness to
God, and subsequently paradise.
The Qur’an makes it very clear that the dunya is ephemeral and a
deceiving enjoyment: “Know that the life of this dunya is but
amusement and diversion and adornment and boasting to one another
and competition in increase of wealth and children—like the example
of a rain whose [resulting] plant growth pleases the tillers; then it dries
228

and you see it turned yellow; then it becomes [scattered] debris.”324
The concept of the dunya should not be confused with the positive
aspects of creation, known in Arabic as ‘alam and khalq. These
concepts relate to the beauty and wonder of what God has created.
They are intended to encourage people to reflect and understand,
which serve as a means to conclude that there is a Divine power,
mercy and wisdom behind them.
Suffering of innocent people is temporary
Even if there is a lot of greater good to be actualised, one may observe
that some people still suffer without experiencing any relief. This is
why in Islam, God not only provides justifications for evil and
suffering in this world, but also recompenses them. At the end, all
believers who suffered and were innocent will be granted eternal bliss,
and all the suffering they had—even if they suffered all of their lives—
will be forgotten forever. The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬said:
“…the person who had suffered the most affliction in the world
of those destined for Paradise will be brought forth and merely
dipped into Paradise for a moment. Then he will be asked ‘O
son of Adam, have you ever seen suffering? Have you ever
experienced hardship in your life?’ He will reply ‘No my Lord,
by God. I have never undergone suffering. I have never seen
hardship.’”325
Spiritual perspectives
Under atheism, evil has no purpose. It is one of the blind forces in the
world that indiscriminately chooses its prey. Those who are victims of
suffering and evil have no emotional and rational perspectives to help
alleviate their suffering or put their experiences into context. Someone
229

could have suffered all their life and just ended up in the grave. All of
their suffering, sacrifice and pain would have absolutely no meaning
whatsoever. Evil is viewed to occur due to prior physical processes,
and those who experience evil have no recourse. They cannot attribute
any type of will to it, whether human or Divine, because everything is
just reduced to blind, random and non-rational physical occurrences.
Thus, the logical implications of atheism are quite depressing.
The Islamic tradition has a fountain of concepts, principles and
ideas that facilitate the believer’s journey in life. The Prophet
Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬empowered the believers with hope and patience. All of
the suffering that we face is a means of spiritual purification, thereby
facilitating paradise in which we will forget every suffering that we
ever experienced:
“No calamity befalls a Muslim but that God expiates some of
his sins because of it, even though it were the prick he receives
from a thorn.”326
“Amazing is the affair of the believer, verily all of his affair is
good, and this is for no one except the believer. If something of
good/happiness befalls him he is grateful and that is good for
him. If something of harm befalls him he is patient and that is
good for him.”327
Even natural disasters and fatal illnesses are seen through the eyes
of hope, mercy and forgiveness. The Islamic perspective on illness is
that it is a form of purification, which facilitates eternal bliss in
paradise for the sick. The Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬encouraged visiting
the sick: “Feed the hungry, visit the sick, and free the captives.” 328
Those who take care of the sick are rewarded with mercy and
forgiveness, and ultimately paradise. There are many Prophetic
traditions that elaborate on these points. For example, the Prophet
230

Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬said that if a believer dies of the plague or a stomach
illness, they are considered a martyr, and all martyrs 329 go to
paradise.330 There are inspiring traditions of mercy, reward and
blessings for those who visit and care for the sick; the Prophet
Muhammad taht dias ‫ﷺ‬whoever visits a sick person “is plunging into
mercy until he sits down, and when he sits down he is submerged in
it.”331 A moving and powerful narration from the Prophet Muhammad
t ‫ﷺ‬eaches us that those who visit the sick will find God with them:
“Verily, God, the Exalted and Glorious, will say on the Day of
Judgement: ‘O Son of Adam! I fell ill, but you did not visit
Me.’ The human will ask, ‘O my Sustainer! How could I visit
You when You are the Sustainer of the Worlds? And how can
You fall sick?’ He, the Almighty, will say, ‘Did you not know
that such and such a servant of Mine was sick. But you did not
visit him. Did you not know that, had you visited him, you
would have found Me by his side?’”332
Even in the case of natural disasters like tsunamis, the believing
victims would be considered people of paradise because death by
drowning is considered martyrdom in the Islamic tradition. The
Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬said in this regard, “Anyone who drowns is a
martyr.”333 Islamic scholars conclude that if a believer died as a result
of being crushed by a building during an earthquake (some even
extend this to a plane or a car crash), then they are considered people
of paradise. The Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬said that one of the martyrs
includes “the one who died in a collapsed (building)”.334
But God could create a world without suffering
Notwithstanding the discussion so far, a key objection that usually
follows is “but God could create a world without suffering”. This
231

contention is just a repackaging of the original argument; in other
words: Why has God allowed evil and suffering to exist? Therefore,
the same answer applies; Divine wisdom. The one who makes this
objection does so because they cannot understand why there is evil and
suffering in the first place, and they believe that a merciful and
powerful God should prevent every evil and suffering. Nevertheless,
this has already been addressed in this chapter.
The ‘problem’ of evil and suffering is not a problem for the
believer, as evil and suffering are understood as functions of God’s
profound wisdom, perfection and goodness. The spiritual teachings of
Islam create a sense of hope, patience and tranquillity. The logical
implication of atheism is that one is plunged into a hopeless state and
does not have any answers to why evil and suffering exist. This
ignorance is mostly due to an egocentrism that causes atheists to fail in
their ability to see things from another perspective, just as I was when
I thought my parents were malicious when they prevented me from
drinking my grandfather’s whisky.

232

Chapter 12: Has Science Disproved
God? – Deconstructing False Atheist
Assumptions
Imagine you entered an amazing palace. As you walk through the
hallway, you are struck by the size of the building and decide to
explore by opening the nearest door. As you enter the room, you see
hundreds of chairs and tables arranged like a classroom. Suddenly you
lose any motivation to explore the other rooms. You decide to leave
the palace and head off to meet your friend at a local coffee shop. As
you drink coffee with your friend he asks you, “So what did you see in
the palace?” You reply, “Just a room full of tables and chairs arranged
like a classroom”. Your friend then asks, “Why didn’t you see the
other rooms?” You reply by saying, “There’s no point, there was
nothing to see. If this room was full of chairs and tables, then the other
rooms will have nothing in them.”
Is your reply rational? Does it logically follow that just because
there is something in one room, there will be nothing in the other
rooms? Of course it does not. Atheists who claim that science has
disproved God follow a similar logic.
Science focuses its attention on only what observations can solve.
However, God, by definition, is a Being who is outside the physical
universe. Therefore, any direct observation of Him is impossible.
However, an atheist may argue that indirect observation may support
or negate God’s existence. This is not true. Any form of indirect
observation could never negate God’s existence, because it is like
saying an observed phenomenon can negate an unobserved
phenomenon. This follows the same logic as the above example in the

233

palace.
The fact that science does not lead to atheism is attested by the
majority of the philosophers of science. For example, Hugh Gauch
rightly concludes that to “insist that… science supports atheism is to get
high marks for enthusiasm but low marks for logic.”335 Gauch makes
perfect sense because the method of thinking that relies on observation
cannot deny what cannot be observed. What science can do, however, is
stay silent on that matter or provide evidence that philosophers can use
to formulate a philosophical argument that God exists. Notwithstanding,
there are arguments that use scientific evidence that conclude God’s
existence is unlikely. These are known as evidential arguments; they are
philosophical in nature and not scientific conclusions.
Why do some atheists believe science can deny God?
Science has changed the world. From medicine to telecommunications,
science has improved our lives and well-being in ways that no other
field of study has. Science continually improves our lives, and aids our
understanding of the world and the universe. However, science’s
successes have led many atheists to adopt incoherent and false
assumptions. Below is a summary of these assumptions.
•

First, some atheists perceive that science is the only yardstick
for truth and that science has the answers for all of our
questions. This motivates the atheist to conclude that God
doesn’t exist because science can only address what one can
observe. Since God cannot be observed and science is the only
yardstick for truth, then to claim God exists is false. This
assumption also motivates the atheist to believe that God is no
longer required as a reason for things we do not understand.
This is a false assumption because science has many
limitations, and there are many things that it cannot answer. In
addition, there are other sources of knowledge that science
234

cannot justify, yet they are indispensable and fundamental
sources of knowledge. This implies that science is not the only
way to establish truths about the world and reality.
•

The second assumption is that since science is so successful,
scientific conclusions must be true. If scientific conclusions are
true, and science cannot address an unobserved reality like
God, then it follows He does not exist. The logic behind this
assumption is fuzzy and it exposes a common ignorance
concerning the philosophy of science. Simply put, just because
something works does not mean it is true. This is a basic idea
in the philosophy of science. Unfortunately, even some highly
acclaimed atheists take the incoherent view that the successful
practical application of a scientific theory proves it to be true in
an absolute sense. I once met Richard Dawkins at the World
Atheist Convention in 2010, held in Dublin, Ireland. I spoke to
him briefly and asked him why he told one questioner not to
study the philosophy of science and “just do the science”. He
didn’t give me much of a reply. Surveying his public work, it is
now becoming clear that one of his main reasons is that science
“works, b*tches”336. Although intuitive, it is false. It does not
logically follow that a scientific theory or conclusion is true
just because it works.

•

The third assumption is that science leads to certainty. If
science cannot directly prove God’s existence, and it is the
only route to certainty, then we cannot be certain of God’s
existence. This assumption also motivates the atheist to argue
that once something is labelled as a well-confirmed scientific
theory, we must dismiss Divine revelation if it opposes it in
some way. This is not true. When scientists call something a
theory, they are not saying it is absolute and that it will never
235

change. It means it is the best explanation of particular
phenomena, based on our limited observations. However, there
can always be a new observation—or way of seeing things—
that is at odds with previous observations. This is the beauty of
science; it is not set in stone. Therefore, if religious scripture
and science seem to conflict, it is not a huge problem. Why?
Because science can change. All that we can say is our current
understanding of observed phenomena—based on our limited
observations—is at odds with what a particular scripture says,
but it may change. This is a huge difference from using science
as a baseball bat to smash the claims of religious scripture.
Some scientific facts, based on direct observation, are unlikely
to change in science, but most of the arguments that are used to
bash religious discourse are based on more complex scientific
explanations and theories, such as Darwinian evolution. If the
content of a divinely revealed text seems to be at odds with
scientific explanations and theories, you must not reject
revelation to accept the science. In addition, you must not
reject the science to accept the revelation. It is within your
epistemic right to accept both! The correct approach, therefore,
is to accept the science as the best that we have without making
massive epistemic leaps of faith and concluding that it is
absolute; at the same time, you can accept the revealed text
because you have good reasons to do so (see Chapter 13).
•

The final assumption forms the lens by which many atheists
see the world. This lens, as discussed in various chapters of this
book, is naturalism. There are two types of naturalism:
philosophical and methodological. Philosophical naturalism is
the philosophy that all phenomena in the universe can be
explained via physical processes, and that there is no
supernatural. Methodological naturalism is the view that if
236

anything is deemed scientific, it can never refer to God’s
Divine activity or power. The atheist conflates philosophical
naturalism with methodological naturalism. The atheist
inadvertently adopts the non-scientific assumption of
philosophical naturalism to understand scientific conclusions.
The atheist confuses the idea that scientific conclusions, in
order to be scientific, must not refer to God’s creative power or
wisdom (methodological naturalism), with the fact that His
creative power and wisdom do not exist (philosophical
naturalism).
The rest of this chapter will address these assumptions, and the
best way to do that is to go back to basics: understand what science is,
explore its limitations and unravel some of the discussions that exist in
the philosophy of science.
What is science?
The word science comes from the Latin word scientia, meaning
knowledge. Science is the human endeavour to understand how the
physical world works. Mathematician and philosopher of science
Bertrand Russell nicely explains that science is “the attempt to
discover, by means of observation and reasoning based upon it…
particular facts about the world, and the laws connecting facts with one
another.”337
In light of Russell’s definition, let’s further break down the
scientific method.
Science has a particular scope. It focuses on the physical world,
and can only address natural processes and phenomena. From this
perspective, questions such as, what is the soul? What is meaning? are
questions outside the scientific process.
Science aims to explain the physical world. As a collective
institution, it aims to produce accurate explanations of how the natural
237

world works. The way science aims to produce explanations is that it
comes up with testable hypotheses. For a hypothesis to be testable, it
must logically generate specific expectations. Consider the following
hypothesis: “Coffee improves the performance of Olympic wrestlers.”
This hypothesis is testable because it generates the following specific
expectations:
•
•
•

coffee improves performance
coffee impairs performance
there is no change in performance

One of the beautiful aspects of science is that it does not just
examine true hypotheses; rather, it necessitates experimentation and
testing. This is why, ultimately, scientific ideas must not only be
testable; they must actually be tested. A single set of results is not the
preferred option; true science involves that different scientists repeat
the experiment as many times as possible.
There is obviously more to science than what we have discussed
so far, but these observations are sufficient to understand the basic
elements of the scientific method. This leads us to respond to the key
assumptions about science that some atheists use to falsely conclude
that science leads to atheism.
Assumption #1: Science is the only way to establish the truth about
reality, and it can answer all questions.
This assertion, known as scientism, claims that a statement is not true
if it cannot be scientifically proven. In various conversations I have
had with atheists and humanists, I have found that they constantly
presume this assertion. Science is not the only way to acquire truth
about the world. The limitations of the scientific method demonstrate
that science cannot answer all questions. Some of its main limitations
include that it:
238

•
•
•
•
•
•

is limited to observation
is morally neutral
cannot delve into the personal
cannot answer why things happen
cannot address some metaphysical questions
cannot prove necessary truths

However, before we discuss these limitations, it is important to
note that scientism is self-defeating. Scientism claims that a
proposition is not true if it cannot be scientifically proven. Yet the
above statement itself cannot be scientifically proven. It is like saying,
“There are no sentences in the English language longer than three
words”, which is self-defeating because that sentence is longer than
three words.338
Limited to observation
This may sound like an obvious limitation, but it is not entirely
understood. Scientists are always limited to their observations. For
example, if a scientist wants to find out the effect of caffeine on baby
mice, they will be restricted to the number and type of mice they have
and all the variables in place during their experiment. Philosopher of
science Elliot Sober makes this point in his essay, Empiricism: “At any
moment scientists are limited by the observations they have at hand…
the limitation is that science is forced to restrict its attention to
problems that observations can solve.”339
Not only are scientists restricted to observations, but they are also
limited by the fact that a future observation may form new conclusions
that in turn can go against what was previously observed (see the
section below, ‘The Problem of Induction’). Another limitation
involves the fact that what is considered to be non-observable today
239

could be perceived by our senses in the future, either due to improved
technology or persistent investigation. The discovery and use of the
microscope and the electron microscope are good examples of
scientific progress. Therefore, we can never be certain about our
current understanding of the physical world, because it can change
with improved observations.
Morally neutral
Science is morally neutral. Now this does not mean that scientists do
not have morals. What it means is that science cannot provide a
foundation for morality (see Chapter 9). For instance, science cannot
be a basis for the meaningfulness and objectivity of morals, and it
cannot tell us what is right or wrong. This does not mean that it cannot
be part of a multidisciplinary approach that informs some ethical and
moral decisions. However, science on its own fails to provide a basis
for what we consider good or bad.
Science essentially tells us what is and not what ought to be. The
statement, “you cannot get an ought from an is”, has become a
philosophical cliché; however, it has some truth in it. Science can tell us
what happens when a knife penetrates someone’s skin, including all of
the processes involved, but it cannot tell us whether it is immoral. The
blood, pain and physical damage could be due to important life-saving
surgery or the result of a murder. The point is that understanding all the
processes involved in cutting and penetrating the human flesh does not
lead us to a moral decision.
As mentioned in Chapter 9, Charles Darwin considered morals
and science (specifically biology), and came up with an extreme
example of the possible implications of our morality stemming from a
biological process. He suggested that if we were reared under a
different set of biological conditions, then what we would consider
moral could be very different from our current views.340 What Darwin
240

may have been telling us is that if what human beings consider to be
moral was just a result of previous biological conditioning, then
having a different set of conditions would result in different moral
standards. This has immense implications for the foundations and
meaningfulness of morality. Firstly, establishing biology or a set of
physical conditions as a basis for morality renders morals subjective—
because they are (and were) subject to inevitable changes. However,
this contradicts the innate and undeniable fact that some morals are
objective (see Chapter 9). Secondly, if our sense of morality was
based on biological conditions, then what meaning do our morals
have? Since our morals could have been different if we were ‘reared’
differently, then our morals lose their meaning. This is because there is
nothing necessary about our moral outlook, as it is simply a result of
chance and physical processes.
In his book, The Moral Landscape, the outspoken atheist and
neuroscientist Sam Harris has attempted to justify our sense of
objective morality by explaining how science can determine our moral
values. Fellow atheists have commended his efforts, but he has also
faced tremendous criticism from both theists and his comrades in
arms. Harris presents us with his landscape of morality. On the peaks
is moral goodness and in the troughs is moral evil. How does he know
what is good and evil? Well, the peaks represent well-being and the
troughs represent suffering. This may sound like a crude summary of
his discussion, but in fairness it boils down to Harris equating evil with
suffering and goodness with well-being. This is where Harris fails. If it
can be shown that people can increase their own well-being by
harming others, his moral landscape is demolished. Another way to
dismiss Harris’ argument is to show that some things that can promote
our well-being are morally abhorrent. Consider, for instance, incest
with the use of contraception. Both parties have increased well-being
(as they freely decide to act upon their desires), and there is no chance
of harm or suffering—such as conceiving a child with genetic
241

defects—due to the use of contraception. I even raised the issue of
incest to Professor Krauss during our debate, and he wasn’t entirely
sure about his position (he argued that it was not clear to him that it
was wrong and he could not morally condemn it341). Some things that
can promote our well-being are morally abhorrent. Even if you
disagree with this example, there are many other examples to choose
from to make this point.
In his book, Rational Morality, fellow atheist and philosopher of
science Robert Johnson provides a similar criticism to Harris’s
argument. Johnson argues that Harris’s approach lacks justification for
morals being factual and objective:
“Harris still appears to be trapped in the problem of admitting
that he is just assuming that the moral fact relating to
‘wellbeing’ exists. Will we find this moral fact while studying
the ground under rocks? No. Will we be able to imply its
existence when examining the issue like with the laws of
quantum mechanics? No. In fact the only thing backing up our
intuitions that these moral facts simply exist independently is
just that: our intuitions… The problem itself can be explained
fairly simply: just because Harris correctly identifies how
morality is currently defined, it does not mean that morality
should therefore be taken as factual. Indeed, Harris himself
admits there are plenty of things we currently allow for which
are immoral….”342
You cannot test the personal
Science prides itself on testing ideas. Without testing there is no
science. However, at some point testing must give way to trust. For
instance, how do we know what people have intended? How do we
know what a person is feeling? The scientist may argue that they can
242

tell someone is lying by using a lie detector; they may also assert that
an entire array of physiological and behavioural indicators correlates
to certain feelings (this is not true and will be discussed below). They
have a point, but it is not as simple as that. Consider friendships as an
example. Your friend asks you about your day and how you are
feeling, and you respond by saying it has been a great day and that you
are feeling quite happy. Imagine, you meet him the following day and
he asks you the same question, but will only believe you if you hook
yourself up to a lie detector to capture essential physiological data.
Would that harm your friendship? If he continued to make the same
request every time you responded to his question, would the
relationship you have built with him be affected? Of course it would.
The realm of personal friendship is preserved, if we are trustworthy in
our responses and if we trust what people say.
Another example is emotions. How do we know if someone is
feeling depressed? Do we have a depression detector that we could
use? Although physiological data provides some input, a significant
portion of the vital information is in the personal interaction between
the psychiatrist and the patient. This usually takes the form of
questions, answers and even a completed questionnaire. These all
require that we trust some of the patient’s answers. Therefore, it seems
to me that observations alone are not enough for certain domains of
human life, such as friendship and mental health. Science, therefore,
must rely on trusting, rather than depending solely on testing.
As discussed in Chapter 7, science can only deal with third-person
data, whereas personal attributes, such as feelings and experiences, are
first-person data. Frank Jackson’s Mary argument I expounded upon in
Chapter 7, shows that knowing all the physical third-person facts do
not lead to all the facts. In other words, they can tell us nothing about
the personal first-person data. Science cannot tell us anything about
what it is like for an organism to experience an internal subjective
conscious state (see Chapter 7). The only way of getting close to an
243

answer is by trusting someone’s description of their personal
subjective conscious experience (although you will still never be able
to truly know what it is like for them to have that experience; see
Chapter 7). The point is simple: Science cannot test the personal.
Cannot answer ‘why?’
My aunty knocks on your door and presents you with a lovely homebaked chocolate cake. You accept the gift and place the cake on your
kitchen table. Once my aunty has gone, you open the box to have a
slice. Before you indulge, you ask yourself a question: Why has she
baked me this cake? As a scientist you cannot do much apart from
explore the only piece of data you have at hand: the cake. After doing
many tests, you find out that the cake was probably baked at 350
degrees Fahrenheit, and the ingredients included cocoa powder, sugar,
eggs and milk. However, knowing all of this information does not help
you to answer the question. The only way you can find out is if you
ask her.
This example shows us that science can tell us the ‘what’ and the
‘how’, but it fails to give us the ‘why’. What is meant by ‘why’ here is
that there is a purpose behind things. Science can answer why
mountains exist from the point of view that they were formed via
geological processes, but it cannot provide the purpose behind the
formation of the mountains. Many would simply deny the concept of
purpose altogether.
Asking why implies a purpose, and many atheists maintain that
purpose is an illusion, based on outdated religious thinking. This is a
very unhelpful way of looking at our existence in the universe. In such
a world, everything can be explained via physical processes that we
have no control over. We are just one of the dominoes in a falling row
of dominoes. We have to fall, because the domino behind us fell. Not
only is it counterintuitive, but it highlights some striking contradictions
244

in the way we reason in normal day-to-day activities. Imagine, while
reading this book you reach the final chapter and you see the following
sentence: “There is no purpose behind this book”. Would you even
consider taking such a statement seriously?
Cannot answer some metaphysical questions
Science can address some metaphysical questions. However, these are
the questions that can be empirically addressed. For example, science
has been able to address the beginning of the universe via its field
known as cosmology. Nevertheless, some valid questions cannot be
answered scientifically. These include: Why do conclusions in
deductive reasoning necessarily follow from the previous premises? Is
there an afterlife? Do souls exist? What is it like for a conscious
organism to experience a subjective conscious experience? Why is
there something rather than nothing? The reason that science cannot
address these questions is because they refer to things that go beyond
the physical, observable world.
Necessary truths
Scientism cannot prove necessary truths such as mathematics and
logic. As discussed in Chapter 3, the conclusion of a valid deductive
argument necessarily follows from its premises. Consider the
following argument:
1. Conclusions based on limited observations are not absolute.
2. Scientific conclusions are based on limited observations.
3. Therefore, scientific conclusions are not absolute.
The validity of this argument (not to be confused with its
soundness) is not based on empirical evidence. Its validity refers to the
245

logical flow of the argument and has nothing to do with the truth of the
premises. There is a logical connection between the conclusion and the
premises. This connection is not based on anything empirical; it is
happening in one’s mind. Can science justify the logical connection
between the premises and the conclusion? No, it cannot. As discussed
in Chapter 3, there is an insight in our minds that moves us from the
premises to the conclusion. We see something that is not based on
empirical evidence. There seem to be internal logical structures or
aspects of our minds that facilitate this type of reasoning. No form of
observation can justify or prove the logical flow of a deductive
argument.
Mathematical truths such as 3 + 3 = 6 are also necessary truths
and are not purely empirical generalisations.343 For instance, if I were
to ask what is one Fufulah plus one Fufulah, the answer would
obviously be two. Even though you do not know what a Fufulah is,
and you have never sensed one, you know that one of them plus
another one is going to be two.
Other sources of knowledge
Science cannot justify other sources of knowledge, such as testimony.
This is a branch of epistemology “concerned with how we acquire
knowledge and justified belief from the say-so of other people”.344
Therefore, one of the key questions it tries to answer is: How do we
gain “knowledge on the basis of what other people tell us?”345
Professor Benjamin McMyler provides a summary of testimonial
knowledge:
“Here are a few things that I know. I know that the copperhead
is the most common venomous snake in the greater Houston
area. I know that Napoleon lost the Battle of Waterloo. I know
that, as I write, the average price for gasoline in the U.S is
$4.10 per gallon… All of these things I know on the basis of
246

what epistemologists call testimony, on the basis of being told
of them by another person or group of persons.”346
McMyler’s summary seems quite intuitive and highlights why we
claim some knowledge solely based on testimonial transmission. The
world being a sphere is a striking example. The belief that the world is
a sphere is—for most of us—not based on mathematics or science. It is
purely centred on testimony. Your initial reactions may entail the
following statements: “I have seen pictures”, “I have read it in science
books”, “All my teachers told me”, “I can go on the highest mountain
peak and observe the curvature of the Earth”, and so on. However,
upon intellectual scrutiny, all of our answers fall under testimonial
knowledge. Seeing pictures or images is testimonial because you have
to accept the say-so of the authority or person who said it is an image
of the world. Learning this fact from science textbooks is also due to
testimonial transmission, as you have to accept what the authors say as
true. This also applies when referring to your teachers. Attempting to
empirically justify your current conviction by standing on the highest
peak is also based on testimony, as many of us have never done such a
thing. Your assumption that standing on the highest peak will provide
you with evidence for the roundness of the Earth is still based,
ultimately, on the say-so of others. Even if you have done it before, it
does not in any way prove the roundness of the Earth. Standing on a
peak will only indicate that the Earth has some form of curvature—and
not a complete sphere (after all, it can be semi-circular or shaped like a
flower). In summary, for the majority of us, the fact that the world is
round is not based on anything else apart from testimony.
Knowledge is impossible without testimony. Professor of
Epistemology C. A. J. Coady summarises the points made so far, and
lists some of the things that are solely accepted on the basis of
testimonial transmission: “…many of us have never seen a baby born,
nor have most of us examined the circulation of the blood nor the
247

actual geography of the world nor any fair sample of the laws of the
land, nor have we made the observations that lie behind our knowledge
that the lights in the sky are heavenly bodies immensely distant….”347
The significance of testimonial knowledge needs no further
discussion (for a lengthier discussion on testimony please refer to
Chapter 13).
In summary, scientism, which is the view that the scientific
method is the only way to form conclusions about reality, is false.
Scientism is self-defeating; it also cannot account for moral truths,
logical and mathematical truths, and indispensable sources of
knowledge such as testimony. Science is a limited method of study
that cannot answer all the questions.
Assumption #2: It works, therefore it’s true
It does not logically follow that just because something works, it is
true. Despite this, popular ignorance of the philosophy of science has
allowed popularisers such as Richard Dawkins to publicly maintain
that scientific conclusions are true because they work. During a public
lecture, Dawkins was asked about the level of certainty that we can
attribute to science; his answer was—as mentioned previously—crude.
Dawkins was obviously mistaken; it does not follow that just because
something works, it is in fact true. The phlogiston theory is an apt
example to prove this point.
Early chemists postulated a theory that in all combustible objects
was an element called phlogiston. According to this theory, when a
combustible object burned, it would release phlogiston. The more
combustible a material was, the more phlogiston it contained. This
theory was adopted as a fact by the scientific community. The theory
worked so well that in 1772 Dan Rutherford used it to discover
nitrogen, which he called ‘phlogisticated air’ at the time. However,
phlogiston was later found to be a false theory; phlogiston did not
exist. This is one of many examples to show that a theory can work
248

and produce new scientific truths, and yet later be found to be false.
The lesson is obvious: just because something works, does not mean it
is true. Some untrained objectors would argue that the example above
is specific and cannot apply to modern science. They maintain that the
theory of phlogiston was not a complete theory and had assumptions.
However, today’s scientific theories do not suffer from these
problems. This is completely false. Take Darwinian evolution as an
example of a well-established theory. According to mainstream secular
academics, it is based on assumptions, considered relatively
speculative, and there are disputes about its core ideas.348
Scientific U-turns do not care about who is sitting in the passenger
seat. Even things which seemed obvious, undeniable and observable
can be overturned. A relatively recent example of this is the study of
Neanderthal skulls in Europe. Darwinian biologists argued that
Neanderthals must have been the ancestors to our species. In
textbooks, documentaries and museums, this ‘scientific fact’ was
taught; in 1997 biologists announced the Neanderthal simply could not
be our forerunner, based on modern DNA testing.
Every aspect of science, and even the subtheories that make up the
bigger theories in every field, will eventually revise their conclusions.
The history of science has shown us this trend, so to speak of
‘scientific facts’ as immutable is not accurate. It is also impractical.
All scientific theories are ‘work in progress’ and ‘approximate
models’. If someone claims there is such a thing as scientific absolute
truths, then how would he or she explain the fact that ‘quantum
mechanics’ and ‘general relativity’, which are both seen as true by
physicists, contradict each other at a fundamental level? They both
cannot be true in an absolute sense. Knowing this, physicists assume
both to be true working models and use this approach to make further
progress. The idea that well-confirmed scientific theories are final is
therefore misleading, impractical and dangerous for scientific
progress. Historians and philosophers of science have been vocal in
249

their opposition of using such language. Philosophers of science
Gillian Barker and Philip Kitcher drive the point home: “Science is
revisable. Hence, to talk of scientific ‘proof’ is dangerous, because the
term fosters the idea of conclusions that are graven in stone.”349
Assumption #3: Science leads to certainty
Some atheists have a gross misunderstanding of the philosophy of
science. They assume that once science declares something as
scientifically proven, then it is absolutely true and will never change.
This, however, exposes a lack of knowledge of the basic unresolved
issues in science. One of these issues, which is relevant to our
discussion, is induction. Although there are many ways scientists
confirm a theory or form conclusions about the empirical data they
have tested, inductive arguments remain the bedrock of most of them.
Yet inductive arguments can never lead to certainty.
Inductive arguments
Inductive arguments concern our knowledge of the unobserved. They
play a central role in human knowledge, specifically scientific
knowledge. Inductive arguments use instances of what we have
observed to make conclusions for what we have not observed. They
can be applied to include the present and the past. For example:
•

•
•

Past—Premise: The bodybuilders I have spoken to have
increased muscle mass as a result of eating a lot of animal
protein. Conclusion: All bodybuilders in the past increased
muscle mass by eating a lot of animal protein.
Present—Premise: My friend has always experienced
friendly dogs. Conclusion: All dogs are friendly.
Future—Premise: All of the US presidential campaigns
have had a Democrat candidate. Conclusion: The next
250

presidential campaign will have a Democrat candidate.
The above conclusions obviously do not reach the level of true
certainty because they are not deductive arguments. The explanations
below show why the conclusions in the above inductive arguments do
not necessarily follow:
•
•
•

Vegetarian bodybuilders in the past gained muscle mass
from eating only vegetable protein.
It could be the case that some dogs are unfriendly.
In the future, there could be a political paradigm shift in US
politics, the Democrats could dissolve and a new party
could emerge.

The uncertain nature of inductive arguments has caused many
philosophers to question the validity of induction as a means to
knowledge: this is an area of philosophy known as epistemic
justification. This questioning led to what is now known as the
problem of induction. It must be noted that inductive arguments are
not the same as inductive reasoning, as this type of reasoning refers to
the use of the senses and not how conclusions are made. For example,
you observe frogs in your garden, and you mirror what you have
observed by stating that there are frogs in your garden. You do not
make a conclusion for unknown phenomena (in this case all frogs, or
the next frog you have not yet observed).
The problem of induction
The challenge to induction can be traced back to the Greek, sceptical,
philosophical school known as Pyrrhonism. 350 However, it was David
Hume who comprehensively explained the failure of inductive
arguments to provide knowledge of reality. Hume argued that the
nature of our reasoning was based upon cause and effect, and that the
251

foundation of cause and effect was experience. He maintained that
since our understanding of cause and effect was based on experience,
it would not lead to certainty. Hume argued that to use a limited set of
experiences to conclude for an unobserved experience would not give
rise to certainty.351
The previous examples show that inductive arguments make a
conclusion by moving from the particular to the general. In other
words, one moves from a limited set of experiences to conclude for
experiences that have not been experienced. Inductive arguments are
not deductively valid, in that the conclusion does not necessarily
follow from its premises.
Hume does not restrict his argument to the uncertainty of
induction; he claims that they are not justified in any way. Inductive
arguments are based on an assumption that “the future will resemble
the past”,352 which implies that nature is uniform. However, the only
way to justify this assumption would be to use an inductive argument.
Hume argues that this reasoning is circular, because the assumption is
based on the thing that we are seeking to justify. To justify an
inductive argument with this assumption would be tantamount to
justifying induction arguments with inductive arguments. After all, it
could be that nature is not uniform. 353
In summary, Hume’s argument is that we cannot justify inductive
arguments. The assumption that nature is uniform is based on an
inductive argument, and therefore to use this assumption as a means to
validate inductive arguments “is like underwriting your promise to pay
back a loan by promising you will keep your promises”. 354
Inductive arguments as a problem for science
Given that inductive arguments cannot give rise to certainty, it then
becomes a problem for scientific conclusions. Scientists heavily rely
on inductive arguments to form conclusions about the data that they
252

have observed. However, since all observations are limited or based on
a particular set of observed data, then deriving a conclusion based on
limited data will not be certain.
The history of science provides many examples that highlight its
dynamic nature. Prevailing theories in every field of science are very
different from past eras. Samir Okasha, a lecturer of philosophy at the
University of York, argues that if we were to pick any scientific
discipline, we could be “sure that the prevalent theories in that
discipline will be very different from those 50 years ago, and
extremely different from 100 years ago.”355
At the beginning of the 20th century, physics looked neat and tidy
with its Newtonian model of the universe. No one had challenged it for
around 200 years as it was ‘scientifically proven’ to work. However,
quantum mechanics and general relativity shattered the Newtonian
view of the world. Newtonian mechanics assumed time and space to
be fixed entities, but Albert Einstein showed these were relative and
dynamic. Eventually, after a period of upheaval, the ‘Einstein Model’
of the universe replaced the ‘Newtonian Model’. A cursory glance at
the history of science confirms the problem of induction: a new
observation can always contradict previous conclusions.
Science and religious scripture
Since scientific conclusions are inductive in nature, and inductive
arguments do not lead to certainty, it follows that what we call
scientific explanations should not be considered absolute. There are no
Moses tablets in science. There are, however, some things that we
should not be sceptical about, such as: the roundness of the Earth, the
existence of gravity and the elliptical nature of orbits.
Many atheists mock religious scripture for its inability to represent
the facts. There are many online and off-line discussions on science
and religious orthodoxy. Even mainstream television programmes host
253

debates on religious perspectives on the natural world. However, in
light of the discussion above, we have created a false dichotomy of
religion versus science. It is not as simple as accepting one over the
other.
Science is the application of reason to the natural world. It seeks
to understand how the world works. The Qur’an also refers to natural
phenomena, and inevitably there have been direct conflicts with
scientific conclusions. When a conflict arises, there is no reason to
panic or to deny the Qur’anic verse that is not in line with science; nor
can anyone use this situation to claim that the Qur’an is wrong. To do
so, would be to assume that scientific conclusions are true in an
absolute sense and will not change; this is patently false. History has
shown that science revises its conclusions. Believing this does not
make one anti-science. Imagine how much progress we would make if
scientists were not allowed to challenge past conclusions: there would
be none. Science is not a collection of eternal facts and was never
meant to be.
Since there are good arguments to justify the Qur’an’s claim of
being God’s word (see Chapter 13), then if the Qur’an conflicts with
limited human knowledge, it should not create massive confusion.
Remember, God has the picture, we have just a pixel. Until the 1950s,
all physicists, including Einstein, believed that the universe was
eternal; all the data supported this, and this belief conflicted with the
Qur’an. Yet the Qur’an explicitly states that the universe had a
beginning. New observations using powerful advanced telescopes
made physicists drop the ‘steady state’ model (eternal universe) and
replace that with the Big Bang Model (universe with a beginning,
possibly about 13.7 billion years ago). So, science came into line with
the Qur’an. The same thing happened with the Qur’anic view of the
sun. The Qur’an states that the sun has an orbit; astronomers
disagreed, saying it was stationary. This was the most direct
contradiction between observations of scientists and the Qur’an.
254

However, after the discovery of the Hubble telescope, astronomers
revised their conclusions and found the Sun was orbiting around the
centre of the Milky Way galaxy.
Yet this does not mean that the Qur’an is a book of science. It’s a
book of signs. The Qur’an does not give any details concerning natural
phenomena. Most of the things it refers to can be understood and
verified with the naked eye. The main objective of the verses that point
towards the natural world is to expose a metaphysical power and
wisdom. Their role does not include elucidating scientific details.
These can change over time; however, the fact that natural phenomena
have a power and wisdom behind them is a timeless reality. From this
perspective, conflict between the Qur’an and scientific conclusions
will probably continue, as they are two completely different types of
knowledge.
This discussion should not, however, encourage Muslims and
religious people to deny scientific conclusions. To do so would be
absurd. Rather, both well-confirmed scientific theories and the
revelational truths should be accepted, even if they contradict each
other. Scientific conclusions can be accepted practically as working
models that can change and are not absolute, and the revelational
truths can be accepted as part of one’s beliefs. If there is no hope of
reconciling a scientific conclusion and a statement of the Qur’an, then
you do not have to reject revelation and accept the science of the day.
Conversely, the science should not be rejected either. As previously
mentioned, it is within your epistemic right to accept both scientific
and revelational truths.
The balanced and nuanced approach
concerning science and revelation is to accept the science and allow
the evidence to speak for itself. However, this should be in the context
of not making massive epistemic leaps of faith and concluding that the
evidence we have acquired and the conclusions we have made are the
gospel truth. Science can change. In addition, this approach includes
accepting the revelation. In summary, we can accept scientific
255

conclusions practically and as working models, but if anything
contradicts revelation (after attempting to reconcile the two), you do
not have to accept the scientific conclusion into your belief system.
This is why Muslims should not need to deny Darwinian evolution;
they can accept it practically as the current best-working model, but
understand that some aspects of it cannot be reconciled with
orthodoxy. Remember, just because something is the current bestworking model, it is not the absolute truth. It is also important to note
that scientific knowledge and Divine revelation have two different
sources. One is from the human limited mind, the other is from God.
One would have to commit an epistemological disqualification to use
scientific conclusions as a means to dismiss revelation. We have a
pixelated understanding of reality. Our knowledge is finite, God’s
knowledge is not. Therefore, if there happens to be a contradiction
between the two, the above strategy should be adopted.
Islamic inductive arguments?
Critical and learned observers of this discussion will notice that
although this is a mainstream understanding of science (amongst
academics and philosophers), it also brings to light potential criticisms
of Islamic epistemology. They can argue that in the Islamic tradition,
inductive arguments are used to preserve the Qur’an and Prophetic
traditions (known as hadith; ahadith, pl.). Therefore, Muslims cannot
claim certainty in these vital source texts for Islam. This is a misplaced
contention. To explain why, refer back to the earlier distinction
between inductive reasoning and inductive arguments. Inductive
reasoning provides certainty for basic types of knowledge. For
instance, if I observe X in Y, it follows that Y allows X; I observe that
crows fly, so it necessarily follows that some crows fly. As you can
see, this form of induction just ‘mirrors’ the observation. It states the
plain facts without making a conclusion for something that is yet to be
256

observed. This type of induction was used in the preservation of the
Qur’an and the Prophetic traditions. For example, a companion of the
Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬heard the Qur’an, and he simply repeated what
he had heard. He never made a conclusion for a verse that he never
heard. For example, a companion wouldn’t hear “Iyyaka na’abudu wa
iyyaka nasta’een” (it is You we worship and it is You we ask for help)
and then conclude “Qul huwa Allahu ahad” (Say, He is God, the
uniquely One). Hence this objection is false, as it misunderstands the
type of induction involved in the preservation of the Qur’an and the
Prophetic traditions.
Assumption #4: Conflating methodological with philosophical
naturalism
The final assumption behind the assertion that science leads to atheism
refers to philosophical naturalism and methodological naturalism.
Philosophical naturalism is the view that the universe is like a closed
system; there is nothing outside the universe that interferes with it, and
there is no God or anything related to the supernatural. A key aspect of
philosophical naturalism is that all phenomena can be explained via
physical processes. Methodological naturalism maintains that for
anything to be described as scientific, it cannot refer to God’s creative
power or activity.
Atheists who believe that science leads to atheism hold the nonscientific assumption of philosophical naturalism. Philosophical
naturalism forms the ‘lenses’ that are put on one’s eyes to understand
the world. If you wore some yellow tinted glasses, what colour are you
going to see? Yellow. Similarly, if you put on the lenses of
philosophical naturalism, all you will see is a universe without God.
Philosophical naturalism shapes the way one sees the world.
Philosophical naturalism is simply a faith. The atheist Professor
Michael Ruse admits this fact: “If you want a concession, I’ve always
said that naturalism is an act of faith….”356 Why is it a faith? Well,
257

naturalism is incoherent, as it blindly believes that everything can be
explained via physical processes, despite a number of recalcitrant
facts; in other words, facts that resist a theory.357 For example, we both
meet today at a restaurant at six o’clock, and the following day the
police come to my house to arrest me on suspicion of murdering
someone at the same time we were having dinner. The recalcitrant fact
would be that I was with you eating at the time of the murder. My
proven whereabouts resist the police’s suspicions that I committed the
murder. You may be wondering, what are these recalcitrant facts that
render philosophical naturalism as incoherent? Well, many of the
previous chapters are a good starting point. Philosophical naturalism
cannot adequately explain the hard problem of consciousness (see
Chapter 7), the finitude and dependency of the universe (see Chapters
5 and 6), the fine-tuning of the laws and the order in the universe (see
Chapter 8), the existence of objective morals (see Chapter 9) and
much more. In light of this, why would anyone blindly adopt such a
philosophy, which prevents one from allowing reality to speak for
itself? Many atheists have such naturalistic presuppositions. Therefore,
it is not surprising that they dismiss the conclusions of theistic
arguments. Usually they reject good arguments, because they are
blinded with the false assumption that everything has to be explained
by physical processes and that they can never entertain supernatural
explanations.
Methodological naturalism however is not a problem for theism,
especially Islamic theism. Methodological naturalism is not a problem
for Islamic theism because the Islamic tradition accepts that the whole
universe is made up of physical causes and these causes are a
manifestation of the Divine will. Some atheists, however, conflate
methodological naturalism with philosophical naturalism. Just because
scientific conclusions and theories cannot refer to God’s power and
creativity (methodological naturalism), it doesn’t follow that God
doesn’t exist (philosophical naturalism). As evolutionary biologist
258

Scott C. Todd said, “the scientist, as an individual, is free to embrace a
reality that transcends naturalism”358.
So has science disproved God?
In light of the above, the answer is no. Science is a beautiful method of
study that has benefited humanity tremendously. However, its
conclusions are not engraved in stone. As a method, it cannot directly
reject God’s existence, answer all questions, and it is not the only way
to form conclusions about reality. Many of the assumptions that some
atheists hold about science are incoherent and based on a gross
misunderstanding of the philosophy of science.

259

Chapter 13: God’s Testimony – The
Divine Authorship of the Qur’an
Thus far, our concern has been with the evidence for God’s existence
and responses to key arguments against the Divine. Previous chapters
have argued that God is the necessarily existing creator, designer, and
moral lawgiver of the universe. However, that only tells us so much
about the Divine Reality. The next question is: If this Being indeed
created us, then how do we know who He is? Following that line of
thought, we will be looking at the Qur’an as a candidate for Divine
revelation. Although the previous chapters have referenced many
Qur’anic verses, the following chapter will go into detail about the
rational basis for God’s word.
Most of what we know is based on the say-so of others. This holds
true for facts we would never deny. For many of us, these truths
include the existence of Amazonian native tribes, photosynthesis,
ultraviolet radiation and bacteria. Let me elaborate further by using
your mother as an example. How would you prove to me—a perfect
stranger—that your mother did in fact give birth to you? As bizarre as
this question sounds, it will help clarify a very important yet
underrated source of knowledge. You might say “my mother told me
so”, “I have a birth certificate”, “my father told me, he was there”, or
“I have checked my mother’s hospital records”. These responses are
valid; however, they are based on the statements of other people.
Sceptical minds may not be satisfied. You may try to salvage an
empirical basis for your conviction by using the ‘DNA card’ or by
referring to video footage. The conviction that your mother is who she
says she is isn’t based on a DNA home test kit. The reality is that most
of us have not taken a DNA test. It is also not based on video footage,
260

as you still have to rely on the say-so of others to claim that the baby
in the video is actually you. So why are we so sure? This admittedly
quirky example reemphasises an important source of knowledge that
was introduced in Chapter 12: testimony.
Many of our beliefs are based on a form of reasoning which seeks
the best explanation for a collection of data, facts or assertions. Let’s
welcome your mother back briefly, again. She is heavily pregnant with
you inside her womb and the due date was last week. Suddenly, her
waters break and she starts having contractions, so your father and the
relevant medical staff safely assume that she’s started labour. Another
example: some years on, your mother notices an open packet of
biscuits and crumbs around your mouth and on your clothes.
She infers that you opened the packet and helped yourself to some
biscuits. In both examples, the conclusions are not necessarily true or
indisputable, but they are the best explanations considering all of the
facts available. This thinking process is known as inference to the best
explanation.
So why have I introduced the above scenarios? Because using the
concepts and principles from these examples, this chapter will put
forward the case that the Qur’an is an inimitable expression of the
Arabic language, and that God best explains its inimitability. What is
meant by inimitability is that no one has been able to produce or
emulate the Qur’an’s linguistic and literary features. These can
include—but are not limited to—its unique literary form and genre, in
the context of sustained eloquence. Though this assertion seems quite
disconnected to what I have elaborated so far, consider the following
outline:
The Qur’an was revealed in Arabia to the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬
in the 7th century. This period was known as an era of literary and
linguistic perfection. The 7th century Arabs were socialised into being
a people who were the best at expressing themselves in their native
tongue. They would celebrate when a poet rose amongst them, and all
261

they knew was poetry. They would start with poetry and end with
poetry. The cultivation of poetic skills and linguistic mastery was
everything for them. It was their oxygen and life-blood; they could not
live or function without the perfection of their linguistic abilities.
However, when the Qur’an was recited to them they lost their breath;
they were dumbfounded, incapacitated, and stunned by the silence of
their greatest experts. They could not produce anything like the
Qur’anic discourse. It got worse. The Qur’an challenged these
linguists par excellence to imitate its unique literary and linguistic
features, but they failed. Some experts accepted the Qur’an was from
God, but most resorted to boycott, war, murder, torture and a
campaign of misinformation. In fact, throughout the centuries experts
have acquired the tools to challenge the Qur’an, and they too have
testified that the Qur’an is inimitable, and appreciate why the best
linguists have failed.
How can a non-Arab or non-expert of the Arabic language
appreciate the inimitability of the Qur’an? Enter now the role of
testimony. The above assertions are based on an established written
and oral testimonial transmission of knowledge from past and present
scholars of the Arabic language. If this is true, and the people best
placed to challenge the Qur’an failed to imitate the Divine discourse,
then who was the author? This is where testimony stops, and the use of
inference begins. In order to understand the inference to the best
explanation, the possible rationalisations of the Qur’an’s inimitable
nature must be analysed. These include that it was authored by an
Arab, a non-Arab, Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬or God. Considering all of the facts
that will be discussed in this chapter, it is implausible that the Qur’an’s
inimitability can be explained by attributing it to an Arab, a non-Arab
or Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬. For that reason, God is the inference to the best
explanation.
The main assumptions in the above introduction are that testimony
is a valid source of knowledge, and inference is a suitable and rational
262

method of thinking to form conclusions about reality. This chapter will
introduce the epistemology of testimony and elaborate on the rational
use of testimonial transmission. It will highlight the effective use of
inferring to the best explanation, and apply both concepts to the
Qur’an’s inimitability. This chapter will conclude that God is the best
explanation for the fact that no one has been able to imitate the Divine
book. All this will be achieved without the reader requiring any
knowledge or expertise of the Arabic language.
The epistemology of testimony
As briefly discussed in Chapter 12, testimony is an indispensable and
fundamental source of knowledge. There are some very important
questions epistemologists are trying to answer in the field of the
epistemology of testimony. These include: When and how does
testimony yield evidence? Is testimonial knowledge based on other
sources of knowledge? Is testimony fundamental? Although it is not
the scope of this chapter to solve or elaborate on all the issues in this
area of epistemology, it will summarise some of the discussions to
further substantiate the fact that testimony is a valid source of
knowledge.
Is testimony fundamental?
The examples on testimonial transmission in Chapter 12 expose our
epistemic dependence on the say-so of others. This reminds me of a
public discussion I had with outspoken atheist Lawrence Krauss. I
highlighted the fact that observations were not the only source of
knowledge and therefore wanted to expose his empirical
presupposition. I raised the issue of testimony and asked him if he
believed in evolution. He replied that he did, and so I asked him if he
had done all the experiments himself. He replied in the negative. 359
This uncovered a serious issue in his—and by extension, many of
263

our—assumptions about why we believe what we believe. Most of our
beliefs are based on the say-so of others and are not empirical simply
because they are couched in scientific language.
Until relatively recently, testimony was neglected as an area of indepth study. This academic silence came to an end with various studies
and publications, most notably Professor C. A. J. Coady’s Testimony:
A Philosophical Discussion. Coady argues for the validity of
testimony, and attacks David Hume’s reductionist account of
testimonial transmission. The reductionist thesis asserts that testimony
is justified via other sources of knowledge such as perception, memory
and induction. In other words, testimony on its own has no warrant and
must be justified a posteriori; meaning knowledge based on
experience. Coady’s account for testimony is fundamental; he asserts
that testimonial knowledge is justified without appealing to other
sources of knowledge, like observation. This account of testimony is
known as the anti-reductionist thesis. Coady contends the reductionist
thesis by attacking Hume’s approach. Hume is seen as the main
proponent of the reductionist thesis due to his essay, On Miracles,
which is the tenth chapter of his Enquiry Concerning Human
Understanding. Hume’s reductionist approach does not entail denying
testimonial knowledge. He actually highlights its importance: “We
may observe, that there is no species of reasoning more common, more
useful, and even necessary to human life, than that which is derived
from the testimony of men….”360 Hume argues that our trust in
testimony is based on a conformity between testimonial knowledge
and our collective experiences. This is where Coady seeks to dismantle
the basis of Hume’s approach. His criticism is not limited to the
following argument, but elaborating on it here demonstrates the
strength of his overall contentions.
Coady argues that Hume’s appeal to collective observation
exposes a vicious circle. Hume claims that testimony can only be
justified if the knowledge that someone is testifying to, is in agreement
264

with observed facts. However, what Hume implies by observed facts is
not personal observation, but rather collective experience, and Coady
argues that we cannot always rely on personal observed
generalisations. This is where the vicious circle is exposed; we can
only know what others have observed based upon their testimony.
Relying on one’s own direct observations would not suffice, as that
knowledge would be too limited and unqualified to justify anything—
or at least very little. Therefore, the reductionist thesis is flawed. Its
claim that testimony must be justified via other sources of knowledge,
such as observation, actually assumes that which it tries to deny: the
fundamental nature of testimony. The key reason which affirms this
point is that in order to know what our collective observations are, you
must rely on other people’s testimony, as we have not observed them
ourselves.
Relying on experts
The modern scientific progress we all are proud of could never have
happened without trusting an authority’s claim to experimental data.
Take evolution as an example. If Richard Dawkins’s belief in
evolution required that he must perform all of the experiments himself
and personally observe all of the empirical data, he could never be so
bold in claiming its truth. Even if he could repeat some of the
observations and experiments himself, he would still have to rely on
the say-so of other scientists. This area of study is so vast that to verify
everything ourselves would be impossible, and to maintain such a
claim would make scientific progress unattainable.
The previous example raises an important question: What if the
testimonial transmission of knowledge is based on the say-so of an
expert? The fact is that we are not all experts and thus must, at times,
accept the testimony of others. University lecturer in philosophy Dr.
Elizabeth Fricker elaborates:
265

“But that there are some occasions on which it is rational
deferentially to accept another's testimony, and irrational to
refuse to do so, is entailed by her background knowledge of her
own cognitive and physical nature and limitations, together
with her appreciation of how other people are both like and in
other respects unlike herself, hence on some occasions better
epistemically placed regarding some matter than she is herself.
I may rationally regret that I cannot fly, or go for a week
without sleep without any loss of performance, or find out for
myself everything which I would like to know. But given my
cognitive and physical limitations as parametric, there is no
room for rational regret about my extended but canny trust in
the word of others, and enormous epistemic and consequent
other riches to be gained from it.”361
Trust
This is where the concept of trust enters the discussion of testimonial
transmission. To accept the word of others based on their authority on
a particular subject requires us to not only trust them, but to be
trustworthy in our assessments of their trustworthiness.
Discussions about the nature and validity of testimony have
moved on from the reductionist and anti-reductionist paradigms.
Professor of Philosophy Keith Lehrer argues that the justification for
testimony is neither of the two approaches. Lehrer’s argument rests on
trust. He argues that testimony leads to the acquisition of knowledge
under “some circumstances but not all circumstances.”362 He maintains
that testimony is “itself a source of evidence when the informant is
trustworthy in the testimony. The testimony in itself does not
constitute evidence otherwise.” 363 The person who testifies does not
need to be “infallible to be trustworthy”,364 but “the person testifying
to the truth of what she says must be trustworthy in what she accepts
266

and what she conveys.”365 Lehrer admits that trustworthiness is not
sufficient for the conversion of the say-so of others into knowledge, he
asserts that the person’s trustworthiness must be assessed (something
he refers to as “truth-connected”) and that we must be trustworthy and
reliable in our assessment. 366 The assessment of a testimonial
transmission can include background information on a topic, the
testimonies of others on a particular field of knowledge, as well as
personal and collective experiences.
Lehrer claims that in order for us to be trustworthy about the way
we evaluate the trustworthiness of others, we need to refer to previous
experiences in our assessments and whether we were accurate or
mistaken. However, when we learn that the testimony of a person is
not trustworthy, it is usually due to relying on the testimony of others
about that person. 367 This may expose a vicious circle, because to
assess the testimony of others, other testimonies are relied upon.
Lehrer asserts this is more of a “virtuous loop”. 368 How is this the
case? The professor provides two answers:
“First, any complete theory of justification or trustworthiness
will have to explain why we are justified or trustworthy in
accepting the theory itself. So the theory must apply to itself to
explain why we are justified or trustworthy in accepting it.
Secondly, and equally important, our trustworthiness at any
given time must result from what we have accepted in the past,
including what we have accepted from the testimony of others.
The result is that there is a kind of mutual support between the
particular things we have accepted and our general
trustworthiness in what we accept, including, of course, the
particular things we have accepted. It is the mutual support
among the things that we accept that results in the
trustworthiness of what we accept.”369

267

The right of deferral
Lehrer’s discussion on trustworthiness raises the question of how we
can establish trust to rely on the authority of others. Professor
Benjamin McMyler develops an interesting argument that aids in
answering this question. McMyler argues that the epistemological
problem of testimony can be “recast as a problem of explaining the
epistemic right of deferral.”370 McMyler argues that if an audience is
entitled to defer challenges back to the speaker, it provides a new way
in framing the problem of testimony. This requires that both parties
acknowledge a responsibility. The speaker must accept responsibility
for espousing testimonial knowledge, and the audience must accept
that they can defer challenges back to the speaker. 371
Trustworthiness can be built by exercising this right to defer
challenges back to the speaker (or writer). If coherent answers to these
challenges are given, this can potentially increase trust. The following
example explains this point. A professor of linguistics claims that the
Qur’an is inimitable, and elaborates on its eloquence, unique literary
form and genre. The audience takes responsibility and challenges the
professor. The challenge is in the form of questions, including: Can
you give us more examples from the Qur’an? What have other
authorities said about the Qur’an’s genre? How can you explain the
views of academics who disagree with you? Given the historical
background information on the Qur’an, in what way does it support
your assertion? The professor provides coherent answers to the
questions and gradually builds trust.
A note on eyewitness testimony
The discussion so far refers to the testimonial transmission of
knowledge and not the recollection of what was witnessed during an
event or a crime. The existing material concerning eyewitness
268

testimony is vast, and this chapter does not intend to discuss the
conclusions and implications of such studies and research. However,
given that there is an academic concern over eyewitness testimony
with regards to its reliability, it should not be conflated with the
testimonial transmission of knowledge. These are distinct areas.
Eyewitness testimony may suffer due to our imperfect short-term
memories and the psychological influences and constraints on
recalling the sequence of a particular event. The testimony of
knowledge, ideas or concepts does not suffer from such issues,
because the acquisition of knowledge is usually a result of repetition, a
relatively longer duration, internalisation and study.
This point leads to a slight but useful diversion—David Hume’s
treatise on miracles. Hume argued that the only evidence we have for
miracles is eyewitness testimony. He concluded that we should only
believe in miracles if the probability of the eyewitnesses to be
mistaken, is less than the probability for the miracle to occur.372
Notwithstanding the concerns over single eyewitness reports,
eyewitness testimony can be taken seriously in the context of multiple
witnessing (which is related to the concept of tawaatur in Islamic
studies). If there exists a large (or large enough) number of
independent witnesses who transmitted the testimony via varying
chains of transmission, and many of these witnesses never met each
other, then to reject that report would be bordering on the absurd. Even
Hume himself recognized the power of this type of eyewitness report
and maintained that miracles may be possible to prove, if the
testimonial transmission is large enough:
“I beg the limitations here made may be remarked, when I say,
that a miracle can never be proved, so as to be the foundation
of a system of religion. For I own, that otherwise, there may
possibly be miracles, or violations of the usual course of
nature, of such a kind as to admit of proof from human
269

testimony; though, perhaps, it will be impossible to find any
such in all the records of history. Thus, suppose, all authors, in
all languages, agree, that, from the first of January 1600, there
was a total darkness over the whole Earth for eight days:
suppose that the tradition of this extraordinary event is still
strong and lively among the people: that all travellers, who
return from foreign countries, bring us accounts of the same
tradition, without the least variation or contradiction: it is
evident, that our present philosophers, instead of doubting the
fact, ought to receive it as certain….”373
The focus of this chapter is on the testimonial transmission of
knowledge and not events or eyewitness reports—the conceptual
distinctions between the two are obvious. However, it has been
mentioned here to remind the reader of the distinction between the two
types of testimony.
To conclude this section, testimony is a necessary source of
knowledge. Without testimonial transmission, we could not have had
the scientific progress characteristic of our era, many of our
established claims to knowledge would be reduced to a sceptic’s
musings, and we would not be justified in easily dismissing the flatearther’s assertions. For testimony to turn into knowledge, we must be
trustworthy in our assessments of the trustworthiness of others and
take responsibility for deferring challenges back to the one testifying.
We must also ensure that there is some truth connected to their claims,
which can include other testimonies or background information.
Inference to the best explanation
Inference to the best explanation is an invaluable way of thinking. It
involves trying to coherently explain a particular set of data and/or
background knowledge. For example, when we are asked by our
doctor how we are feeling, we present her with the following
270

symptoms: nasal stuffiness, sore or itchy throat, sneezing, hoarseness,
coughing, watery eyes, fever, headache, body aches and fatigue. Based
on this information, the doctor attempts to best explain why we are
unwell. Coupled with her background knowledge accumulated via her
medical education, she concludes that the above symptoms are best
explained by the common cold. Professor of History and Philosophy
Peter Lipton similarly explains the practical and indispensable role of
inference:
“The doctor infers that his patient has measles, since this is the
best explanation of the evidence before him. The astronomer
infers the existence of motion of Neptune, since that is the best
explanation of the observed perturbations of Uranus…
According to the Inference to the Best Explanation, our
inferential practices are governed by explanatory
considerations. Given our data and our background beliefs, we
infer what would, if true, provide the best of the competing
explanations we can generate of those data….”374
As with most things, we can have competing explanations for the
data at our disposal. What filters these explanations is not only their
plausibility, but the availability of other pieces of data that could help
us discriminate between them. Lipton explains: “We begin by
considering plausible candidate explanations, and then try to find data
that discriminate between them… An inference may be defeated when
someone suggests a better alternative explanation, even though the
evidence does not change.”375
The accessibility to additional data is not the only way to assess
which of the competing explanations is the most convincing. The best
explanation is one that is the simplest. Simplicity, however, is just the
beginning, as there must be a careful balance between simplicity and
comprehensiveness. Comprehensiveness entails that an explanation
271

must have explanatory power and scope. The explanation must
account for all of the data, including disparate or unique observations.
Another criterion to assess the comprehensiveness of an
explanation includes explaining data or observations that were
previously unknown, unexpected or inexplicable. An important
principle in assessing the best explanation is that it is most likely to be
true, compared to competing explanations, given our background
knowledge. The academic philosopher at Princeton University Gilbert
H. Harman asserts that when alternative explanations exist, one “must
be able to reject all such alternative hypotheses before one is
warranted in making the inference. Thus one infers, from the premise
that a given hypothesis would provide a ‘better’ explanation for the
evidence than would any other hypothesis, to the conclusion that the
given hypothesis is true.”376
In light of the above, inference to the best explanation is an
indispensable form of reasoning. It can also lead to certainty. If the
data at our disposal is limited and the explanations are finite, then the
best explanation would be, to some extent, certain—as there would not
be a possibility of another better explanation, or a chance of new data
that could change what we consider the best explanation. The Qur’an
coming from the Divine is based on this type of certainty. There are no
other rational explanations for the Qur’an’s authorship, and the data
that the explanations are based on are finite. For example, there will
never be a new letter of the classical Arabic language and a brand new
history of Arabic is untenable.
Formulating an argument
The discussion so far has highlighted the importance of testimony and
inference to the best explanation in arriving at knowledge. However,
merely quoting testimonies will not suffice, because there are
competing expert testimonies about the Qur’an’s inimitability.
Therefore, we will need to present well-established background
272

information to show why the testimonies in support of the Qur’an’s
inimitability should be favoured.
This background information includes the fact that the Qur’an
presents a linguistic and literary challenge, and that the 7th century
Arabs achieved mastery in expressing themselves in the Arabic
language, yet failed to imitate the Qur’an. Once this is established,
adopting the testimony in favour of the inimitability of the Qur’an
would be the rational choice, as it provides the basis to accept them.
The testimonies that disagree with the Qur’an’s uniqueness are
reduced to absurdity, as they deny what has been established (to be
explained later). Once the testimonial transmission is adopted, the
competing explanations for the Qur’an’s inimitability must be assessed
in order to make an inference to the best explanation; the Qur’an was
produced either by an Arab, a non-Arab, Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬or God. A
summary of the argument is as follows:
1. The Qur’an presents a literary and linguistic challenge to
humanity.
2. The 7th century Arabs were best placed to challenge the
Qur’an.
3. The 7th century Arabs failed to do so.
4. Scholars have testified to the Qur’an’s inimitability.
5. Counter-scholarly testimonies are not plausible, as they
have to reject the established background information.
6. Therefore (from 1-5), the Qur’an is inimitable.
7. The possible explanations for the Qur’an’s inimitability are
authorship by an Arab, a non-Arab, Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬or God.
8. It could not have been produced by an Arab, a non-Arab or
Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬.
9. Therefore, the best explanation is that it is from God.
The remaining part of this chapter will elaborate on the premises
273

above.
1. The Qur’an presents a literary and linguistic challenge to
humanity.
“Read in the name of your Lord”.377 These were the first words of the
Qur’an revealed to the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬over 1,400 years ago.
Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬, who was known to have been meditating in a cave
outside Mecca, had received revelation of a book that would have a
tremendous impact on the world we live in today. Not known to have
composed any piece of poetry, Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬had just received the
beginning of a book that would deal with matters of belief, legislation,
rituals, spirituality, and economics in an entirely new genre and
literary form.378
The unique literary and linguistic features of the Qur’an have been
used by Muslims to articulate a number of arguments to substantiate
their belief, that the book is from the Divine. The failure of anyone to
imitate the Qur’an developed into the Muslim theological doctrine of
the Qur’an’s inimitability or al-i’jaaz al-Qur’an. The word i’jaaz is a
verbal noun that means ‘miraculousness’ and comes from the
verb a’jaza, which means ‘to render incapable’ or ‘to make helpless’.
The linguistic meaning of the term brings to light the theological
doctrine that Arab linguists par excellence were rendered incapable of
producing anything like it. Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, prolific 15th century
writer and scholar, summarises this doctrine:
“…when the Prophet brought [the challenge] to them, they
were the most eloquent rhetoricians so he challenged them to
produce the [entire] likes [of the Qur’an] and many years
passed and they were unable to do so as God says, Let them
then produce a recitation similar to it, if indeed they are
truthful. Then, [the Prophet] challenged them to produce 10
274

chapters like it where God says, Say, bring then ten chapters
like it and call upon whomever you can besides God, if you are
truthful. Then, he challenged them to produce a single
[chapter] where God says, Or do they say he [i.e. the Prophet]
has forged it? Say, bring a chapter like it and call upon
whomever you can besides God, if you are truthful… When the
[Arabs] were unable to produce a single chapter like [the
Qur’an] despite there being the most eloquent rhetoricians
amongst them, [the Prophet] openly announced the failure and
inability [to meet the challenge] and declared the inimitability
of the Qur’an. Then God said, Say, if all of humankind and the
jinn gathered together to produce the like of the Qur’an, they
could not produce it—even if they helped one another….”379
According to classical exegesis, the various verses in the Qur’an
that issue a challenge to produce a chapter like it daringly call for the
linguistic experts of any era to imitate the Qur’an’s linguistic and
literary features.380 The tools needed to meet this challenge are the
finite grammatical rules, literary and linguistic devices, and the
twenty-eight letters that comprise the Arabic language; these are
independent and objective measures available to all. The fact that it
has not been matched since it was first revealed, does not surprise
most scholars familiar with the Arabic language and the Qur’an.
2. The 7th century Arabs were best placed to challenge the Qur’an.
The Qur’an posed a challenge to the greatest Arabic linguists, the 7 th
century Arabs. The fact that they reached the peak of eloquence is
affirmed by western and eastern scholarship. The scholar Taqi Usmani
asserts that for the 7th century Arab “eloquence and rhetoric were their
life blood.”381 According to the 9th century biographer of the poets, AlJumahi, “Verse was to the Arabs the register of all they knew, and the
275

utmost compass of their wisdom; with it they began their affairs, and
with it they ended them.”382 The 14th century scholar Ibn Khaldun
highlights the importance of poetry in Arab life: “It should be known
that Arabs thought highly of poetry as a form of speech. Therefore,
they made it the archives of their history, the evidence for what
they considered right and wrong, and the principal basis of reference
for most of their sciences and wisdom.”383
Linguistic ability and expertise was a highly influential feature of
the 7th century Arab’s social environment. The literary critic and
historian Ibn Rasheeq illustrates this: “Whenever a poet emerged in an
Arab tribe, other tribes would come to congratulate, feasts would be
prepared, the women would join together on lutes as they do at
weddings, and old and young men would all rejoice at the good news.
The Arabs used to congratulate each other only on the birth of a child
and when a poet rose among them.”384 The 9th century scholar Ibn
Qutayba defined poetry as the Arabs saw it: “The mine of knowledge
of the Arabs, the book of their wisdom… the truthful witness on the
day of dispute, the final proof at the time of argument.”385
Navid Kermani, a writer and expert in Islamic studies, explains
the extent to which the Arabs had to study to master the Arabic
language, which indicates that the 7th century Arab lived in a world
that revered poetry: “Old Arabic poetry is a highly complex
phenomenon. The vocabulary, grammatical idiosyncrasies and strict
norms were passed down from generation to generation, and only the
most gifted students fully mastered the language. A person had to
study for years, sometimes even decades under a master poet before
laying claim to the title of poet. Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬grew up in a world
which almost religiously revered poetic expression.”386
The 7th century Arab lived in a socio-cultural environment that
had all the right conditions to facilitate the unparalleled expertise in
the use of the Arabic language.

276

3. The 7th century Arabs failed to do so.
Their linguistic abilities notwithstanding, they collectively failed to
produce an Arabic text that matched the Qur’an’s linguistic and
literary features. Linguistics expert Professor Hussein Abdul-Raof
asserts, “The Arabs, at the time, had reached their linguistic peak in
terms of linguistic competence and sciences, rhetoric, oratory, and
poetry. No one, however, has ever been able to provide a single
chapter similar to that of the Qur’an.”387
Professor of Qur’anic Studies Angelika Neuwrith argued that the
Qur’an has never been successfully challenged by anyone, past or
present: “…no one has succeeded, this is right… I really think that the
Qur’an has even brought Western researchers embarrassment, who
weren’t able to clarify how suddenly in an environment where there
were not any appreciable written text, appeared the Qur’an with its
richness of ideas and its magnificent wordings.”388
Labid ibn Rabi’ah, one of the famous poets of the Seven Odes,
embraced Islam due to the inimitability of the Qur’an. Once he
embraced Islam, he stopped composing poetry. People were surprised,
for “he was their most distinguished poet”.389 They asked him why he
stopped composing poetry; he replied, “What! Even after the
revelation of the Qur’an?”390
E. H. Palmer, Professor of Arabic and of the Qur’an, argues that
the assertions made by academics like the one above should not
surprise us. He writes, “That the best of Arab writers has never
succeeded in producing anything equal in merit to the Qur’an itself is
not surprising.”391
Scholar and Professor of Islamic Studies M. A. Draz affirms how
the 7th century experts were absorbed in the discourse that left them
incapacitated: “In the golden age of Arab eloquence, when language
reached the apogee of purity and force, and titles of honour were
bestowed with solemnity on poets and orators in annual festivals, the
277

Qur’anic word swept away all enthusiasm for poetry or prose, and
caused the Seven Golden Poems hung over the doors of the Ka’ba to
be taken down. All ears lent themselves to this marvel of Arabic
expression.”392
The number of testimonial transmissions from the 7th century that
affirm the Arabs’ inability to produce anything like the Qur’an
excludes any doubt in this context. It would be unreasonable to dismiss
the fact that the Arabs were incapacitated. Similar to what was
mentioned in the section on eyewitness testimony, the narratives that
conclude the Arabs’ failure to imitate the Qur’an have reached the
status of tawaatur (mass concurrent reporting). There exist a large
number of experts who have conveyed this knowledge via varying
chains of transmission, and many of them never met each other.
A powerful argument that supports the assertion that the 7 th
century Arabs failed to imitate the Qur’an relates to the socio-political
circumstances of the time. Central to the Qur’anic message was the
condemnation of the immoral, unjust and evil practices of the 7th
century Meccan tribes. These included the objectification of women,
unjust trade, polytheism, slavery, hoarding of wealth, infanticide and
the shunning of orphans. The Meccan leadership was being challenged
by the Qur’anic message, and this had the potential to undermine their
leadership and economic success. In order for Islam to stop spreading,
all that was needed was for the Prophet’s ‫ ﷺ‬adversaries to meet the
linguistic and literary challenge of the Qur’an. However, the fact that
Islam succeeded in its early, fragile days in Mecca testifies to the fact
that its primary audience was not able to meet the Qur’anic challenge.
No movement can succeed if a claim fundamental to its core is
explicitly proven false. The fact that the Meccan leadership had to
resort to extreme campaigns, such as warfare and torture, to attempt to
extinguish Islam demonstrates that the easy method of refuting
Islam—meeting the Qur’anic challenge—failed.

278

4. Scholars have testified to the Qur’an’s inimitability.
Multitudes of scholars from western, eastern, religious and nonreligious backgrounds have testified to the Qur’an’s inimitability.
Below is a non-exhaustive list of the scholarship that forms the
testimony that the Qur’an cannot be emulated:
•

•

•

•

Professor
of Oriental
Studies
Martin
Zammit:
“Notwithstanding the literary excellence of some of the long
pre-Islamic poems… the Qur’an is definitely on a level of
its own as the most eminent written manifestation of the
Arabic language.”393
Scholar Shah Waliyyullah: “Its highest degree of
eloquence, which is beyond the capacity of a human being.
However, since we come after the first Arabs we are unable
to reach its essence. But the measure which we know is that
the employment of lucid words and sweet constructions
gracefully and without affectation that we find in the
Tremendous Qur’an is to be found nowhere else in any of
the poetry of the earlier or later peoples.”394
Orientalist and litterateur A. J. Arberry: “In making the
present attempt to improve on the performance of
predecessors, and to produce something which might be
accepted as echoing however faintly the sublime rhetoric of
the Arabic Koran, I have been at pain to study the intricate
and richly varied rhythms which—apart from the message
itself—constitutes the Koran’s undeniable claim to rank
amongst the greatest literary masterpieces of mankind.”395
Scholar Taqi Usmani: “None of them was able to compose
even a few sentences to match the Qurānic verses. Just think
that they were a people who according to ‘Allāmah Jurjāni,
could never resist ridiculing the idea in their poetry if they
279

•

•

•

•

heard that there was someone at the other end of the globe
who prided himself on his eloquence and rhetorical speech.
It is unthinkable that they could keep quiet even after such
repeated challenges and dare not come forward… They had
left no stone unturned for persecuting the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬. They
tortured him, called him insane, sorcerer, poet and soothsayer, but failed utterly in composing even a few sentences
like the Qurānic verses.”396
Imam Fakhr al-Din: “It is inimitable because of its
eloquence, its unique style, and because it is free of
error.”397
Al-Zamlakani: “Its word structures for instance, are in
perfect harmony with their corresponding scales, and the
meaning of its phraseology is unsurpassed, such that every
linguistic category is unsurpassed in the case of every
single word and phrase.”398
Professor Bruce Lawrence: “As tangible signs, Qur’anic
verses are expressive of an inexhaustible truth, they signify
meaning layered with meaning, light upon light, miracle
after miracle.”399
Professor and Arabist Hamilton Gibb: “Like all Arabs they
were connoisseurs of language and rhetoric. Well, then if
the Koran were his own composition other men could rival
it. Let them produce ten verses like it. If they could not
(and it is obvious that they could not), then let them accept
the Koran as an outstanding evidential miracle.”400

The above confirmations of the inimitability of the Qur’an are a
small sample from the innumerable testimonies available to us.
Other instances of ‘inimitability’: Al-Mutannabi and Shakespeare

280

Abu at-Tayyib Ahmad ibn al-Husayn al-Mutanabbi al-Kindi was
considered an inimitable poetic genius by many Arabs. Some have
argued that although other poets have used the same panegyric genre
and poetic metre as the great poet, they have not been able to match
his level of eloquence and stylistic variance. Therefore, they conclude
that Al-Mutannabi is inimitable because we have the blueprint of his
work and the linguistic tools at our disposal, but cannot emulate
anything like his poetic expression. If this is true, then it undermines
the Qur’an’s inimitability. However, this acclamation of Al-Mutanabbi
is unfounded. There have been imitations of Al-Mutanabbi’s work by
the Jewish poets Moses ibn Ezra and Solomon ibn Gabriol.
Interestingly, the Andalusian poet Ibn Hani’ al-Andalusi was known as
the Al-Mutanabbi of the West. 401
One significant point is that medieval Arabic poetry did not create
new literary genres. This was due to the fact that it depended on
previous poetic work. The academic Denis E. McAuley writes that
medieval poetry largely hinged “more on literary precedent than on
direct experience.”402
In classical Arabic poetry, it was not unusual for a poet to attempt
to match a predecessor’s poem by writing a new one in the same
poetic metre, rhyme and theme. This was considered normal
practice.403 It is not surprising that Professor of Religion Emil
Homerin explored the literary expression of Ibn al-Farid, and
described his work as “very original improvisations on alMutanabbi”.404
To highlight further the fact that Al-Mutanabbi can be emulated,
he disclosed that he borrowed work from another poet, Abu
Nuwas.405 Many medieval Arab literary critics such as Al-Sahib ibn
‘Abbad and Abu Ali Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Hatimi wrote
criticisms of Al-Mutanabbi. Ibn ‘Abbad wrote al-kashf ‘an masawi’
shi’r al-Mutanabbi and Al-Hatimi wrote a biographical account of his
encounter with Al-Mutanabbi in his al-Risala al-Mudiha fi dhikr
281

sariqat Abi al-Tayyib al-Mutanabbi.406 The conclusions of these
literary criticisms imply that although his work is the product of
genius, they can be emulated. Al-Hatimi presents a stronger polemic
against Al-Mutanabbi and argues the case that his poetry does not have
a unique style and contains errors. Professor Seeger A. Bonebakker,
who studied Al-Hatimi’s literary criticism of Al-Mutanabbi, concludes
that his “judgement is often well-founded and one almost ends up
feeling that Mutanabbi was, after all, a mediocre poet who was not
only lacking in originality, but also had insufficient competence in
grammar, lexicography, and rhetoric, and sometimes gave evidence of
incredibly bad taste.”407
Consider the general consensus that Shakespeare is thought to be
unparalleled with regards to the use of the English language. However,
his work is not considered inimitable. His sonnets are written
predominantly in a frequently used meter called the iambic
pentameter, a rhyme scheme in which each sonnet line consists of ten
syllables. The syllables are divided into five pairs called iambs or
iambic feet.408 Since the blueprint of his work is available, it is not
surprising that the English dramatist Christopher Marlowe has a
similar style, and that Shakespeare has been compared to Francis
Beaumont, John Fletcher and other playwrights of his time. 409
Testifying to the Qur’an’s inimitability does not imply accepting its
Divinity
A valid contention concerning academic testimonies of the Qur’an’s
inimitability, is that the scholars who agree that the Qur’an cannot be
imitated have not concluded that it is a divine text. The problem with
this contention is that it conflates testifying to the Qur’an’s inimitability
with inference to the best explanation. The argument I am presenting in
this chapter does not conclude the divinity of the Qur’an from the
statements of scholars. Rather, it articulates that the best explanation to
282

elucidate the inimitability of the Qur’an is that it came from God.
Whether these scholars accept the inference or the divinity of the
Qur’an, is irrelevant. The statements of the scholars are used as
evidence for the Qur’an’s inimitability, not that it is best explained by
God. The argument infers from the text’s inimitability, not from
conclusions the scholars may have drawn from the fact that it cannot be
imitated. It must be pointed out that these scholars may not have been
presented with an argument that presents an inference to the best
explanation, or they may have not reflected on the philosophical
implications of the Qur’an’s inimitability. These academics may even
deny the God explanation because they adopt philosophical naturalism.
The belief in naturalism will deter them from concluding anything about
the supernatural.
Also, many academics, especially living in today’s postmodernist
culture, have a restricted approach to many of the sciences. Therefore,
many of these scholars are interested in the Qur’an not to be convinced
of its divinity or to accept Islam, but to appreciate its literature for the
sake of literary studies. This is a very common trend in modern
academia. So when these scholars probe into the inimitability of the
Qur’an, it is very likely that they are focusing exclusively on its
literary merit, not on its claim to divinity. They want to find out
whether the Qur’an is inimitable or sophisticated, and if so, to what
extent. They are entirely uninterested in the question of what
inimitability implies about its Divine origin.
5. Counter scholarly testimonies are not plausible, as they have to
reject the established background information.
In light of the above, the testimonial transmission concerning the
inimitability of the Qur’an would be the most rational to adopt. This
does not mean there is a complete consensus on the issue, or that all
scholarship asserts that the Qur’an is unchallenged. There are some
283

(albeit in the minority) scholarly opinions that contend against the
Qur’an’s inimitability. If valid testimony does not require unanimity,
why would someone accept one testimonial transmission over another?
The testimony affirming the Qur’an’s inimitability is more
reasonable, because it rests on strong background knowledge. This
knowledge has been discussed in premises 1, 2 and 3. In summary, the
Qur’an presents a literary and linguistic challenge to humanity and the
7th century Arabs, who were best placed to challenge the Qur’an, failed
to meet this challenge.
Adopting the counter testimonies leads to absurdity. This is
because an explanation is required to answer why those who were best
placed to challenge the Qur’an failed to do so. Possible explanations
would include rejecting the validity of this established history, or
claiming a greater understanding and appreciation of classical Arabic
than the 7th century linguist masters. These explanations render the
counter testimonies without a rational basis. Rejecting the established
history would require a remaking of the history of Arabic literature.
Assuming superior linguistic abilities than the 7th century specialists is
debased by the fact that these experts had a relatively homogenous
linguistic environment. These environments are areas where the purity
of the language is maintained, and there is a limited amount of
linguistic borrowing and degeneration. Contemporary Arab linguistic
environments suffer from excessive linguistic borrowing and
degeneration. Therefore, to claim superiority over a people coming
from a culture that had the fertile ground for linguistic perfection, is
untenable.
Despite the weakness of these contentions, when an analysis of
the work of the scholars who testify against the Qur’an’s inimitability
is performed, the results conclude the linguistic meagreness of this
type of scholarship. An example of its inadequacy can be found in the
work of the highly acclaimed German orientalist and scholar Theodor
Nӧldeke. He was an academic critic of the linguistic and literary
284

features of the Qur’an, and therefore rejected the doctrine of the
Qur’an’s inimitability. However, his criticism brings to light the
unsubstantiated nature of such claims. For instance, Nӧldeke remarks,
“The grammatical persons change from time to time in the Qur’an in
an unusual and not beautiful way (nicht schoner Weise).”410
The Qur’anic linguistic feature that Nӧldeke refers to is actually
the effective rhetorical device known as iltifaat or grammatical shifts.
This literary device enhances the text’s literary expression and it is an
accepted, well-researched part of Arabic rhetoric.411 One can find
references to it in the books of Arabic rhetoric by Al-Athir, Suyuti and
Zarkashi.412
These grammatical shifts include: change in person, change in
number, change in addressee, change in tense, change in case marker,
using a noun in place of a pronoun and many other changes. 413 The
main functions of these shifts include the changing of emphasis, to
alert the reader to a particular matter, and to enhance the style of the
text.414 Its effects include creating variation and difference in a text to
generate rhythm and flow, and to maintain the listener’s attention in a
dramatic way.415
The 108th Qur’anic chapter provides a good example of the use of
grammatical shifts:
“Verily, We have granted you The Abundance. Therefore turn
in prayer to your Lord and sacrifice. For he who hates you, he
will be cut off.”416
In this chapter, there is a change from the first-person plural “We”
to the second person “…your Lord”. This change is not an abrupt shift;
it is calculated and highlights the intimate relationship between God
and the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬. The use of “We” is used to emphasize
the Majesty, Power and Ability of God. This choice of personal
pronoun calls attention to the fact that God has the Power and Ability
285

to grant Muhammad ‫…“ ﷺ‬The Abundance”, whereas “your Lord” has
been used to emphasise intimacy, closeness and love; the phrase has a
range of meanings that imply master, provider, and the One that cares.
This is an apt use of language, as the surrounding concepts are about
prayer, sacrifice and worship: “Therefore turn in prayer to your Lord
and sacrifice”. Furthermore, the purpose of this chapter is also to
console Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬, using such intimate language
enhances the psycholinguistic effect.
Theodor Nӧldeke’s criticism of the Qur’an was not only a
personal value judgement, but exposed his crude understanding of
classical Arabic. It also confirmed his inability to reach the level of
expertise that was attained by 7th century Arabs. These grammatical
shifts contribute to the dynamic style of the Qur’an and are obvious
stylistic features and an accepted rhetorical practice. The Qur’an uses
this feature in such a way that conforms to the theme of the text, while
enhancing the impact of the message it conveys. It is not surprising
that in his book, Discovering the Qur’an: A Contemporary Approach
to a Veiled Text, Professor Neal Robinson concludes that the
grammatical shifts used in the Qur’an, “…are a very effective
rhetorical device.”417
To conclude, counter testimonies that argue against the Qur’an’s
inimitability do not hold water, because they create far more problems
than they solve. The scholarship that provides a basis for these
counter-testimonies is meagre and based on a crude understanding of
the Arabic language. Rejecting the inimitability of the Qur’an requires
an answer to the following question: Why did the best-placed Arabs
fail to challenge the Qur’an? The possible answers to this question are
rationally absurd. For these reasons, adopting the counter-testimonies
is flawed.
6. Therefore (from 1-5) the Qur’an is inimitable.

286

It follows from points 1 to 5 that the Qur’an’s inimitability is justified.
7. The possible explanations for the Qur’an’s inimitability are
authorship by an Arab, a non-Arab, Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬or God.
To articulate the Divine origins of the Qur’an without referring to
specifics about the Arabic language, the use of testimony and
inference are required. What has been discussed so far is that there is a
valid testimonial transmission that the Qur’an is inimitable, and that
the possible explanation for its inimitability can be explained by
attributing its authorship to an Arab, a non-Arab, Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬or
God. However, it can be argued that there are other possible
competing explanations, but we do not know what they are. This
assertion commits a type of fallacy that some have called “the fallacy
of the phantom option”. If there are genuine competing explanations,
then they must be presented on the intellectual table for discussion.
Otherwise, this kind of reasoning is no different from claiming that the
leaves do not fall from trees because of gravity, but because of another
explanation that we do not know about.
8. It could not have been produced by an Arab, a non-Arab or
Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬.
To understand who could have possibly produced the Qur’an, the rest
of this chapter will break down the three main theories.
An Arab?
There are a few key reasons why the Qur’an could not have come from
an Arab. Firstly, they achieved unparalleled linguistic and literary
mastery, yet they failed to challenge the Qur’an, and the leading
experts of the time testified to the inimitable features of the Qur’an.
287

One of the best linguists of the time, Walid ibn al-Mughira, exclaimed:
“And what can I say? For I swear by God, there is none
amongst you who knows poetry as well as I do, nor can any
compete with me in composition or rhetoric—not even in the
poetry of jinns! And yet, I swear by God, Muhammad’s speech
[meaning the Qur’an] does not bear any similarity to anything I
know, and I swear by God, the speech that he says is very
sweet, and is adorned with beauty and charm.”418
Secondly, the Arab polytheists in the 7th century initially accused
the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬of being a poet. This was an easier thing to do than
going to war and fighting the Muslims. However, anyone who aspired
to master the Arabic language and Arabic poetry required years of
study under poets. None of them came out to expose Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬as
being one of his students. The very fact that Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬was
successful in his message demonstrates that he succeeded in showing
the poets and linguists of the time, that the Qur’an is indeed a
supernatural genre. If the Qur’an was not inimitable, any poet or
linguist could have produced something better or similar to the
Qur’anic discourse. Expert in Islamic studies Navid Kermani makes
this point clear: “Obviously, the Prophet succeeded in this conflict
with the poets, otherwise Islam would not have spread like
wildfire.”419
An even more fundamental point is that the Qur’an was revealed
throughout the Prophet’s ‫ ﷺ‬life. If an Arab other than the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬
had produced it, he would have had to constantly shadow the Prophet
er tuo weps dna ,tnew eh reverehw ‫ﷺ‬velations whenever the occasion
called for it. Is one seriously to believe such a fraud would go
unexposed for the entire 23-year period of revelation?
What about today’s Arabs? To assert that a contemporary Arabicspeaking person might emulate the Qur’an is unfounded. A few
288

reasons substantiate this point. Firstly, the Arabs in the 7 th century
were better placed to challenge the Qur’an, and since they failed to do
so, it would be unreasonable to assert that a linguistically
impoverished modern Arab might surpass the abilities of their
predecessors. Secondly, modern Arabic has suffered from greater
linguistic borrowing and degeneration than the classical Arabic
tradition. So how can an Arab who is a product of a relatively
linguistically degenerated culture be equal to an Arab who was
immersed in an environment of linguistic purity? Thirdly, even if a
contemporary Arab learns classical Arabic, his linguistic abilities
could not match someone who was immersed in a culture that
mastered the language.
A non-Arab?
The Qur’an could not have come from a non-Arab, as the language in
the Qur’an is Arabic, and the knowledge of the Arabic language is a
prerequisite to successfully challenge the Qur’an. This has been
addressed in the Qur’an itself: “And indeed We know that they
[polytheists and pagans] say: ‘It is only a human being who teaches
him (Muhammad).’ The tongue of the man they refer to is foreign,
while this is a speech Arabeeyun mubeen [clear Arabic].”420
The classical exegete Ibn Kathir explains this verse to mean:
“How could it be that this Qur’an with its eloquent style and perfect
meanings, which is more perfect than any Book revealed to any
previously sent Prophet, might have been learnt from a foreigner who
hardly speaks the language? No one with the slightest amount of
common sense would say such a thing.”421
What if a non-Arab learned the language? This would make that
person an Arabic speaker, and I would refer to the first possible
explanation above. However, there are differences between native and
non-native speakers of languages, as various academic studies in
289

applied linguistics and similar fields have concluded. For instance, in
the English language, there are differences between native and nonnative speakers in reliably discriminating between literal and idiomatic
speech.422 Differences exist between English-speakers with one nonnative parent and those with native parents. The speakers with one
non-native parent exhibit worse linguistic performance on certain tasks
than those with native parents. 423 Even in cases of non-native speakers
having indistinguishable linguistic competence with native speakers,
there are still subtle linguistic differences. Research conducted by
Kenneth Hyltenstam and Niclas Abrahamsson in Who can become
native-like in a second language? All, some, or none? concluded that
competent non-native speakers exhibit features that are imperceptible
except under detailed and systematic linguistic analysis. 424 Therefore,
to conclude that the Qur’an, with its inimitable features and as a
linguistic masterpiece, is a product of a non-Arab, or non-native
speakers, is untenable.
Prophet Muhammad ‫?ﷺ‬
It is pertinent to note that the Arab linguists at the time of revelation
stopped accusing the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬of being the author of the Qur’an after
their initial false assertion that he became a poet. Professor Mohar Ali
writes:
“It must be pointed out that the Qur’an is not considered a book
of poetry by any knowledgeable person. Nor did the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬
ever indulge in versifying. It was indeed an allegation of the
unbelieving Quraysh at the initial stage of their opposition to
the revelation that Muhammad [ noos tub ;teop a denrut dah [‫ﷺ‬
enough they found their allegation beside the mark and
changed their lines of criticism in view of the undeniable fact
of the Prophet’s ‫ ﷺ‬being unlettered and completely
290

unaccustomed to the art of poetry-making, saying that he had
been tutored by others, that he had got the ‘old-worst stories’
written for him by others and read out to him in the morning
and evening.”425
Significantly, the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬did not engage in the craft of poetry
or rhymed prose. Therefore, to claim that he somehow managed to
conjure up a literary and linguistic masterpiece is beyond the pale of
rational thought. Kermani writes, “He had not studied the difficult
craft of poetry, when he started reciting verses publicly… Yet
Muhammad’s recitations differed from poetry and from the rhyming
prose of the soothsayers, the other conventional form of inspired,
metrical speech at the time.”426
Scholar Taqi Usmani similarly argues, “Such a proclamation was
no ordinary thing. It came from a person who had never learned
anything from the renowned poets and scholars of the time, had never
recited even a single piece of poetry in their poetic congregations, and
had never attended the company of soothsayers. And far from
composing any poetry himself, he did not even remember the verses of
other poets.”427
Further, the established Prophetic traditions of the Prophet
Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬are in a distinct style from that of the Qur’an. Dr. Draz
argues the difference between the Qur’anic style and the Prophet’s ‫ﷺ‬:
“When we consider the Qur’ānic style we find it the same
throughout, while the Prophet’s own style is totally different. It
does not run alongside the Qur’ān except like high flying birds
which cannot be reached by man but which may ‘run’
alongside him. When we look at human styles we find them all
of a type that remains on the surface of the Earth. Some of
them crawl while others run fast. But when you compare the
fastest running among them to the Qur’ān you feel that they are
291

no more than moving cars compared to planets speeding
through their orbits.”428
Nonetheless, Dr. Draz’s argument on the differences between
styles may not have much rational force in light of poets and spokenword artists. Poets and spoken-word artists maintain key stylistic
differences between their normal speech and their work over a long
period of time. Thus, to use this as an argument to disprove that the
Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬authored the Qur’an is weak. However, it has
been mentioned here because if the styles were the same or even
similar, then that would rule out any possibility of the Qur’an being
inimitable Divine speech.
The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬experienced many trials and
tribulations during the course of his Prophetic mission. For example,
his children died, his beloved wife Khadija passed away, he was
boycotted, his close companions were tortured and killed, he was
stoned by children, he engaged in military campaigns; throughout all
this, the Qur’an’s literary nature remains that of the Divine voice and
character.429 Nothing in the Qur’an expresses the turmoil and emotions
of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬. It is almost a psychological and
physiological impossibility to go through what the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬went
through, and have none of the resultant emotions manifest themselves
in the literary character of the Qur’an.
From a literary perspective, the Qur’an is known as a work of
unsurpassed excellence. However, its verses were many times revealed
for specific circumstances and events that occurred during the period
of revelation. Each verse was revealed without revision, yet they
collated to create a literary masterpiece. In this light, the explanation
that the Qur’an is a result of the Prophet Muhammad’s ‫ ﷺ‬literary
abilities is obviously unfounded. All literary masterpieces written by
geniuses have undergone revision and deletion to achieve literary
perfection, yet the Qur’an was revealed instantaneously and remained
292

unchanged.430 In the process of making good literature, editing and
amending are absolutely necessary. No one can produce sophisticated
literature ‘on the go’. However, that is exactly what we see in the case
of the Qur’an. Disparate Qur’anic verses were revealed in different
contexts and occasions, and once these verses had been recited by the
Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬to an audience, he could not take them back to improve
their literary quality. This constitutes strong circumstantial evidence
that the Qur’an, given its inimitability, could not have been produced
by the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬. When we consider this and other evidences cited
above, the cumulative impression we get is that it is extremely
unlikely, if not downright impossible, for the Qur’an to have been
produced by the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬.
An example to highlight this point is the work of the highly
acclaimed poet Abu at-Tayyib Ahmad ibn al-Husayn al-Mutanabbi alKindi. Al-Mutanabbi was considered the greatest of all Arab poets and
an unparalleled genius. Therefore, some have concluded that since his
work was unparalleled, and that he was a human being, it follows the
Qur’an was written by a human author too. This reasoning does not
logically follow because Al-Mutannabi would correct his work and
produce various versions until he was satisfied. 431 This was obviously
not the case with Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬, as he did not edit, amend, or change
the Qur’an once it was revealed. This can only mean that the Qur’an is
not the work of a literary genius, who, in general, would need to revise
their work.
To conclude, attributing the authorship of the Qur’an to genius,
specifically Muhammad’s ‫ ﷺ‬genius, is unfounded. Even a literary
genius edits, amends and improves their work. This was not the case
with the Qur’an. All human expressions can be imitated if we have the
blueprint and the tools at our disposal. This has been shown for literary
geniuses such as Shakespeare and Al-Mutanabbi. Therefore, if the
Qur’an had been a result of Muhammad’s ‫ ﷺ‬genius, it should have
been imitated.
293

A central argument that dismisses the assertion that the Qur’an
was a consequence of the Prophet Muhammad’s ‫ ﷺ‬literary abilities
concerns the existence of blueprints for human expressions, and the
tools required to replicate them. All types of human expression—
whether the result of a genius or not—can be imitated if the blueprint
of that expression exists, given that the tools are available for us to
use. This has been shown to be true for various human expressions,
such as art, literature and even complex technology. For example,
artwork can be imitated even though some art is thought to be
extraordinary or amazingly unique. 432 But in the case of the Qur’an,
we have its blueprint (the Qur’an itself) and the tools (the finite words
and grammatical rules of the classical Arabic language) at our
disposal. Yet no one has been able to imitate its eloquence, unique
literary form and genre.
9. Therefore, the best explanation is that the Qur’an is from God.
Since the Qur’an could not have been produced by an Arab, a nonArab or the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬, then it follows that the best
explanation is that it came from God. This provides the best
explanation for the Qur’an’s inimitability because the other
explanations are untenable in light of the available knowledge. A
possible disagreement with this conclusion is that God is assumed to
exist in order for this inference to work; therefore, it begs the question
of the existence of the Divine. Although this argument can work
without any previous conviction in the existence of the Divine, this
argument is best articulated to fellow theists. That is not a real
problem, however, because a sustained case for God’s existence has
been made throughout this book.
Conversely, the point can be made that a previous conviction in
God’s existence is not necessary, and that the inimitability of the
Qur’an is a signpost to the existence of the Divine. If a human being
294

(an Arab, a non-Arab or the Prophet Muhammad ‫ )ﷺ‬could not have
produced the Qur’an—and all possible explanations have been
exhausted—then who else could be the author? It must be something
that has greater linguistic capacity than any known text producer. The
intuitive conclusion is that the concept that describes a being with
greater linguistic capacity than any human is the concept of God. God
is indeed greater. Therefore, the inimitability of the Qur’an provides a
rational basis for God’s existence, or at least a signpost to the
transcendent.
Similar reasoning is adopted by scientists. Take the recent
discovery of the Higgs-Boson. The Higgs-Boson particle is the
building-block of the Higgs field. This field was switched on during
the early universe to give particles mass. Before the discovery of this
particle, it was still accepted as the best explanation for the fact that
during the early universe, particles changed state from having no mass
to having mass (with the exception of photons). So, the Higgs-Boson
particle was the best explanation for the available data even before it
was empirically verified. Applying this reasoning back to the Qur’an,
God is the best explanation for the inimitability of the Qur’an, as He
best explains the information and knowledge available to us. All other
competing explanations fail.
Alternative inferences
Alternative inferences could include the fact that the inimitability of
the Qur’an is best explained by a higher being or that it could have
come from the devil. These alternative inferences are unlikely; hence
they have not been incorporated into the central argument presented in
this chapter. Nevertheless, addressing them here will demonstrate why
they have not been included in the main discussion.
Postulating that the Qur’an comes from a higher being seems to be
a semantic replacement for God. What is meant by “a higher being”?
Is not the best explanation of a higher being God Himself? If “a higher
295

being” implies a greater linguistic power, capacity and ability than a
human, then who can best fit these criteria than God Himself? This
book has articulated independent evidence for God’s existence, and it
is very likely that God would want to communicate with us. This
follows from the fact that not only is God the creator and designer of
the entire cosmos we inhabit, but He has also made it fit for our
existence. In addition, He has created us with souls or consciousness,
and instilled in us a sense of morality. Clearly, God is extremely
invested in our existence and flourishing. As such, it is entirely likely
that He would want to communicate to us in the form of revelation.
So, when we have evidence that the Qur’an—a book that claims to be
from God—has properties that are entirely in line with Divine activity,
it makes perfect sense to attribute its authorship to God. To say that the
Qur’an could have been produced by some unknown “higher beings”
of unknown motives would be tantamount to invoking the existence of
any unknown entity to explain anything.
Theistic responses to this discussion usually entertain the
possibility of the devil being the author of the Qur’an. This
explanation is untenable. The Qur’an could not have come from the
devil, or some type of spirit, because the basis of their existence is the
Qur’an and revelation itself, not empirical evidence. Therefore, if
someone claims that the source of the Qur’an is the devil, they would
have to prove his existence and ultimately have to prove revelation. In
the case of using the Qur’an as the revelation to establish the devil’s
existence, then that would already establish it as a Divine text, because
to believe in the devil’s existence would presuppose the Qur’an to be
Divine, and therefore this contention is self-defeating. If, however, the
revelation that is referred to is the Bible, it must be shown to be a valid
basis to justify the belief in the devil. In light of contemporary studies
into the textual integrity and historicity of the Bible, this is not
feasible.433 Further, a content analysis of the Qur’an would strongly
indicate that the book is not the teachings of the devil, as the Qur’an
296

rebukes him and promotes morals and ethics not in line with an evil
worldview.
Conclusion
This chapter has presented an argument for the Divine nature of the
Qur’anic discourse using testimony and inference to the best
explanation. The crucial and fundamental role of testimony has been
highlighted, and inference to the best explanation has been shown to
be a rational and valid method of thinking to form conclusions about
reality. The Qur’an’s inimitability can be established using testimony.
Arabic linguists and literary experts confirm the inimitability of the
Qur’an, and their testimonial knowledge on the topic is warranted
based on established background knowledge. This knowledge includes
the fact that the Qur’an poses an intellectual linguistic and literary
challenge to the world, that the Arabs in the 7 th century were best
placed to challenge the Qur’an, and the fact that they failed to produce
anything like the Qur’an’s unique content and literary form. Given that
it is reasonable to accept the testimony in favour of the Qur’an’s
inimitability—based on established background information—
inference is then used to best explain the book’s unique linguistic and
literary features. The possible explanations comprise an Arab, a nonArab, Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬and God. Since attributing this unique discourse
to an Arab, a non-Arab or Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬is untenable in light of the
information available to us, the best explanation is that it came from
God.
To reject the conclusions made in this chapter is epistemically
equivalent to rejecting the spherical nature of the Earth and the
conclusions of qualified medical staff. The spherical nature of the
Earth, for most of us, is ultimately based on testimonial transmission,
and the conclusions of trained medical experts are based on inferences
to the best explanation. A retort to this assertion may include the fact
that trust in the spherical nature of the Earth and the medical diagnosis
297

of experts is justified based on other knowledge we have acquired, and
it does not lead to extraordinary claims such as postulating the
supernatural. This contention is common. However, it presupposes a
naturalistic ontology. This means that a hidden assumption behind
such concerns is the rejection of anything supernatural and that all
phenomena can be explained via physical processes. Such a daring and
presumptuous worldview is unjustified and incoherent in light of
modern studies on the philosophy of the mind, the development and
acquisition of language, and objective moral truths and cosmology, as
the preceding chapters in this book demonstrate. Significantly, we are
not postulating the existence of the supernatural here; we have already
established His existence on the basis of evidences in the earlier
chapters. We are merely claiming that the Being whose existence we
have already established serves as the best explanation for certain
facts.
To end, if someone with an open mind and heart—without the
intellectual constraints of non-negotiable assumptions about the
world—has access to the argument presented in this chapter, especially
in light of the stage-setting in the previous ones, they should make the
most rational conclusion that the Qur’an is from the Divine.
Nevertheless, whatever is said or written about the Qur’an will always
fall short in describing and exploring its words and their meanings:
“Say, ‘If the sea were ink for [writing] the words of my Lord, the sea
would be exhausted before the words of my Lord were exhausted,
even if We brought the like of it as a supplement.’”434

298

Chapter 14: The Prophetic Truth – The
Messenger of God
The Qur’an teaches that we must believe in all the prophets and
messengers, and that they were all chosen to help guide humanity to
the ultimate truth of God’s oneness and our servitude to Him. The
Qur’an mentions many of the prophets and messengers whom we have
been accustomed to at school or at home. The Divine book mentions
many of them by name, including Abraham, Moses, Jesus, David,
John, Zacharias, Elias, Jacob and Joseph, may God’s peace be upon
them all. The role of these messengers and prophets is to be a
manifestation of what has been revealed or inspired to them, and to
exemplify God-consciousness, piety and compassion.
The Qur’an mentions the Prophet Muhammad’s ‫ ﷺ‬name five
times,435 and confirms that the book was revealed unto him via the
angel Gabriel. The Qur’an affirms that Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬is God’s final
messenger.436 From this perspective, intellectually affirming this status
of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬is quite simple. Once the Qur’an has
been established as a Divine book, it necessarily follows that whatever
it says will be the truth. Since it mentions Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬as God’s
messenger, and what comes from truth is true, then the fact that
Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬was a recipient of Divine revelation is also true.
Despite this undeniable conclusion, the fact that the Prophet
Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬was the final messenger of God can also be deduced
from his experiences, teachings, character and the impact he had—and
continues to have—on the world.
The Prophet Muhammad’s ‫ ﷺ‬life experiences comprise one of the
strongest arguments in support of his claim—and by extension the
Qur’an’s claim—that he was God’s final messenger. Once an analysis
299

of his life is performed, to conclude that he was lying or deluded
would be tantamount to concluding that no one has ever spoken the
truth. It would be the epistemic equivalent of denying that the person
you call your mother gave birth to you. The teachings of the Prophet
Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬cover a wide range of topics including spirituality,
society, economy and psychology. Studying his statements, and taking
a holistic approach to his teachings, will force any rational mind to
conclude that there was something very unique and special about this
man. Significantly, scrutinising his character in the context of a myriad
of difficult situations and circumstances will facilitate the conclusion
that he had unparalleled levels of tolerance, forbearance and
humility—key signs of a prophetic character. Muhammad’s il ‫ﷺ‬fe and
teachings, however, not only influenced the Arab world, but had a
tremendous impact on the whole of humanity. Simply put, Muhammad
‫ﷺ‬was responsible for unprecedented tolerance, progress and justice.
Denying Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬, denying your mother
As mentioned in Chapter 13, the only real source of knowledge that
we have to confirm that the lady we call our mother gave birth to us, is
testimonial knowledge. Even if we claim to have a birth certificate,
hospital records, or a DNA test certificate, these still are all examples
of testimonial knowledge. You have to believe in the say-so of others.
In this case, the one who filled in the birth certificate, the one
responsible for the hospital records, and the person who completed the
DNA test certificate. Fundamentally, it is just based on a testimonial
transmission; there is not a shred of physical evidence that can
empirically verify the claim that your mother gave birth to you. Even
if you do the DNA test yourself (which is highly unlikely), your
conviction now that she gave birth to you is not based on the fact that
you can potentially acquire the results. The irony is that the only
reason you believe a DNA test can be used to verify that your mother
gave birth to you is based on the testimonial transmission of some
300

authority telling you so, because you haven’t done it yourself yet. So,
from an epistemic perspective, the basis for your belief that your
mother gave birth to you is based on a few instances of testimonial
transmission. Since we have far more authentic testimonial evidence to
conclude that the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬was the final prophet of God,
then to deny Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬would be equivalent to denying your own
mother.
The argument
The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬claimed prophethood over 1,400 years ago
with the following simple, yet profound message: There is none
worthy of worship but God, and the Prophet Muhammad is the final
messenger of God.
The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬became a prophet at the age of 40,
after spending some time meditating and reflecting in a cave outside
Mecca. The dawn of prophethood began with the revelation of the first
verses of the Qur’an. Its message was simple: our ultimate purpose in
life is to worship God. Worship is a comprehensive term in the Islamic
spiritual tradition; it means to know, love, obey, and dedicate all acts
of worship to God alone (see Chapter 15).
To test the truth of his message and claim to prophethood, we
must rationally investigate the historical narratives and testimonies
concerning the life of the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬. Once we do this, we will be in a
position to come to a balanced conclusion in this regard.
The Qur’an provides a rational approach to testing the claim of the
Prophet ‫ﷺ‬. It argues that the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬is not a liar, mad, astray, or
deluded, and denies that he speaks from his own desire. The Qur’an
affirms that he is indeed the messenger of God; therefore, he is
speaking the truth:
“Your companion is not mad.”437

301

“Your companion has not strayed; he is not deluded; he does
not speak from his own desire.”438
“Muhammad is the messenger of God.”439
We can summarise the argument in the following way:
•
•
•

The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬was either a liar, deluded, or
speaking the truth.
The Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬could not have been a liar or deluded.
Therefore, the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬was speaking the truth.

Was he a liar?
Early historical sources on the Prophet Muhammad’s ‫ ﷺ‬life illustrate
the integrity of his character. He was not a liar and to assert as much is
indefensible. The reasons for this abound—for instance, he was known
even by the enemies of his message as the “Trustworthy” 440.
The Prophet Muhammad’s ‫ ﷺ‬message undermined the economic
and power structures of society. Seventh century Meccan society was
based on trade and commerce. The leaders of Meccan society would
attract these traders with the 360 idols they had in the Ka’bah—the
cube-shaped structure built by Abraham as a house of worship. The
Prophet’s ‫ ﷺ‬message was simple, yet it powerfully challenged 7th
century Arabian polytheism. The leaders of that society initially
mocked him, thinking the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬would not have an impact.
However, as his message was gradually taking root with high-profile
conversions, the leadership started to abuse the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬, both
physically and psychologically.
He was persecuted for his beliefs, boycotted and exiled from his
beloved city—Mecca. He was starved of food and stoned by children
to the point where blood drenched his legs. His wife passed away and
his beloved companions were tortured and persecuted.441 Further proof
302

of the Prophet’s ‫ ﷺ‬reliability and credibility is substantiated by the fact
that a liar usually lies for some worldly gain. Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬suffered
tremendously for his message442 and rejected outright the riches and
power he was offered to stop promulgating his message. He was
uncompromising in his call to God’s oneness.
Montgomery Watt, late Emeritus Professor in Arabic and Islamic
Studies, explores this in Muhammad at Mecca and argues that calling
the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬an impostor is irrational: “His readiness to undergo
persecution for his beliefs, the high moral character of the men who
believed in him and looked up to him as a leader, and the greatness of
his ultimate achievement—all argue his fundamental integrity. To
suppose Muhammad an impostor raises more problems than it
solves.”443
Was he deluded?
To claim that the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬was deluded is to argue that
he was misled to believe that he was the messenger of God. If
someone is deluded, they have a strong conviction in a belief despite
any evidence to the contrary. Another way of looking at the issue of
delusion is that when someone is deluded, they speak falsehood whilst
believing it to be true. The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬had many
experiences during his career that, if he were deluded, he would have
used as evidence to support his delusion. One example is the passing
away of his son, Ibrahim. The boy died at an early age and the day he
died there was a solar eclipse. Many Arabs thought that God made the
eclipse happen because His prophet’s son passed away. If the Prophet
na hcus desu evah dluow eh ,deduled erew ‫ﷺ‬opportunity to reinforce
his claim. However, he did not and rejected the people’s assertions.
The Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬replied to them in the following way: “The sun and the
moon do not eclipse because of the death of someone from the people
but they are two signs amongst the signs of God. When you see them,
stand up and pray.”444
303

The Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬foretold many things that would happen to his
community after his death. These events occurred exactly as
Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬stated, and this is not consistent with a deluded
individual. For example:
The Mongol invasion
Six hundred years or so after the death of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬,
the Mongols invaded the Muslim lands and massacred millions of
people. A significant milestone in the invasion was the ransacking of
Baghdad. At that time, it was known as a city of learning and culture.
The Mongols arrived in Baghdad in 1258 and spent a whole week
spilling blood. They were hell-bent on demolishing the city.
Thousands of books were destroyed and up to one million people were
killed. This was a major event in Islamic history.
The Mongols were non-Arabs who had flat noses, small eyes, and
their boots were made of hair; the Mongols had fur covers over their
boots called degtii. This was foretold by the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬
hundreds of years before the Mongol invasion: “The Hour will not be
established till you fight with the Khudh and the Kirman from among
the non-Arabs. They will be of red faces, flat noses and small eyes;
their faces will look like flat shields, and their shoes will be of hair.”445
Competing in constructing tall buildings
“Now, tell me of the Last Hour,” said the man.
The Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬replied, “The one asked knows no more of it
than the one asking.”
“Then tell me about its signs,” said the man.

304

The Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬replied, “That you see barefoot, unclothed,
destitute herders competing in the construction of tall
buildings.”446
Notice the detail in the prophecy: a specific people were
identified; barefoot, unclothed, destitute herders. According to Islamic
scholarship this is an obvious reference to the Bedouin Arabs.447 The
Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬could have easily played it safe by using more general
language such as, “That you see competition in the construction of tall
buildings….” This would have been flexible enough to be applied to
anyone in the world. Today we find in the Arabian Peninsula that the
Arabs who used to be impoverished herders of camels and sheep are
competing in building the tallest tower blocks. Today the Burj Khalifa
in Dubai is the world’s tallest man-made structure at 828 metres. 448 A
short time after it was completed, a rival family in Saudi Arabia
announced that they would build a taller one (1,000 metres), the
Kingdom Tower (also known as Jeddah Tower)—currently estimated
to be completed in 2019. Thus, they are literally competing with each
other over who can build the tallest building. 449
Now, what is remarkable is that until only 50 or 60 years ago, the
people of the region hardly had any houses at all. In fact, most of them
were still Bedouins, living in tents. The discovery of oil in the 20 th
century led to the transformation of the region. If not for oil, chances
are the region would still be the barren desert that it was at the time of
the revelation of the Qur’an. If this were mere guesswork on his part,
the discovery of oil would represent a massive stroke of luck.
Moreover, if Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬were merely guessing, wouldn’t it
have made more sense to relate this prophecy to the superpowers of his
time—Rome and Persia—who (unlike the Arabs) already had a
tendency to construct extravagant buildings and palaces?450
Tunnels in Mecca and tall buildings surpassing its mountains
305

The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬prophesied tunnels in Mecca and that the
buildings of the city would surpass the tops of the mountains: “When
you see tunnels built in Mecca and you see its buildings taller than its
mountains, know that the matter is close at hand.”451
Today in 2018, anyone who visits the city—and you can find
pictures online—can see these buildings that surpass some of the
mountains of Mecca. Here is an example below:

The Arabic word for ‘tunnels’ used in this narration specifically
refers to tunnels that have water passing through them. This can refer
to Mecca’s sewer system that was built hundreds of years after the
death of the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬.
There are many more prophesies that can be found in the authentic
narrations attributed to the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬. A few have been
brought to your attention to raise a conceptual point: the accurate
306

foretelling of the future is evidence to support someone’s truthfulness,
not delusion.
The Prophet Muhammad’s
‫ﷺ‬teachings, character and
unprecedented global impact are also strong evidence to show that he
was not deluded and therefore must have been speaking the truth.
These will be elaborated on later in this chapter.
Was he both lying and deluded?
It is not possible for an individual to be both deluded and a liar. Lying is
done with intent, whereas a delusion is when a person believes in
something that is actually not true. The two are diametrically opposed
phenomena. The assertion that the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬was both
lying and deluded is logically impossible, as the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬could not
have been intentionally untruthful about his claims and at the same time
believe them to be true.
He was speaking the truth
Considering what has been discussed so far, the most reasonable
conclusion is that the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬was speaking the truth.
This conclusion is echoed by the historian Dr. William Draper: “Four
years after the death of Justinian, A.D. 569, was born in Mecca, in
Arabia, the man who, of all men, has exercised the greatest influence
upon the human race… To be the religious head of many empires, to
guide the daily life of one-third of the human race, may perhaps justify
the title of a messenger of God.”452
Objections
Before we discuss the profound teachings, sublime character and the
unprecedented impact of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬, there are some
objections that need to be addressed.
307

Legend
An objection to the argument that has been presented includes that
there can be another option to explain the Prophet Muhammad’s ‫ﷺ‬
claim to prophethood. This additional option is that the Prophet’s ‫ﷺ‬
claim is based on a legend. In other words, it has no basis in
established history. This objection maintains that the narratives and
testimonies that underpin the life of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬cannot
be trusted or independently verified. In essence, the proponent of this
contention does not trust Islamic history.
The ‘legend’ objection is incoherent and exposes a lack of
knowledge concerning how scholars ensured the historical integrity of
the sources of the life of the Prophet .‫ﷺ‬The Islamic approach to
preserving history is based on two main elements: the isnaad, known
as ‘the chain of narration’, and the matn, meaning ‘the text or report’.
There are robust criteria used to establish a sound chain of narration
and a report. This is not the place to go into detail about this Islamic
science (referred to as ‘ilm ul-hadith in the Islamic intellectual
tradition; the knowledge of narrations); however, a brief summary of
what it entails will be enough to demonstrate its robustness.
•

In order for the chain of narration to be authentic, many
rational criteria for each narrator would have to be fulfilled.
Some of these include:
o The name, nickname, title, parentage and occupation of the
narrator should be known.
o The original narrator should have stated that he heard the
narration directly from the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬.
o If a narrator referred his narration to another narrator, the
two should have lived in the same period and have had the
possibility of meeting each other.
308

o At the time of hearing and transmitting the narration, the
narrator should have been physically and mentally capable
of understanding and remembering it.
o The narrator should have been known as a pious and
virtuous person.
o The narrator should not have been accused of having lied,
given false evidence or committed a crime.
o The narrator should not have spoken against other reliable
people.
•

In order for the text of the report to be accepted, a number of
rational criteria must be fulfilled. Some of these include:
o The text should have been stated in plain and simple
language as this was the undisputed manner of speech of
the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬.
o A text which referred to actions that should have been
commonly known and practised by others but were not
known and practised, was rejected.
o A text contrary to the basic teachings of the Qur’an was
rejected.
o A text inconsistent with well-known historical facts was
rejected.453

Unsound logic
Another objection to the argument is that its logical form is unsound.
For example, it could be that the Prophet Muhamad ‫ﷺ‬was not lying
from the perspective of being immoral. Rather, he was falsely
attributing to himself prophethood for a greater good. As a social
reformer, he believed that he had to make such a radical claim to
transform the immoral and decadent society he was living in. This
309

would not make him deluded, as he knew that he was not speaking the
truth, and it would not make him a liar from the perspective of being
immoral. He would be a moral reformer, and like most reformers he
had to choose the lesser of the two evils for a greater good.
This interesting objection is misplaced for a few reasons. Firstly,
it is irrational to assert that a claim to prophethood would be required
to make the necessary moral changes. In actual fact, the Prophet’s ‫ﷺ‬
claim to receiving Divine revelation was the very thing that initially
prevented him from gaining any ground in changing society. He was
mocked, ridiculed and abused. A reformer would not make up such a
claim, especially if that claim created more obstacles to reaching his
objectives. Secondly, the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬went through immense hardship,
yet he did not compromise or sacrifice his message. He was offered
conditional political power, which meant he could change the moral
fabric of society, yet he rejected power because his acceptance would
mean that he would have to abandon his noble call that there is no
deity worthy of worship except God (see Chapter 15). If he had been a
moral reformer he would have amended his strategy. However, he did
not.
The teachings, character and impact of the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬
The teachings of Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬are not those of someone who is
deluded or a liar. Amongst many of his teachings, he taught humanity
about compassion, mercy, humility, peace, love and how to benefit and
serve others. The Prophet’s ‫ﷺ‬character was one of perfection. He
reached the summit of virtues; he was compassionate, humble,
tolerant, just and showed great humanity, forbearance and piety. His
guidance also had an unprecedented impact on the world. The
Prophet’s ‫ﷺ‬profound leadership and sublime teachings of tolerance,
justice, progress, freedom of belief and many other areas of life
strongly indicate that he was not deluded; rather, he was a man of
truth.
310

His teachings and character
The Prophet Muhammad’s ‫ ﷺ‬teachings and character are clear signs
that he was a mercy to mankind and a noble human being given a
Divinely inspired message to take people out of darkness, into the light
of truth. Below are selections of his teachings and examples of his
sublime character. I believe they speak for themselves. The more we
study, reflect and ponder on the Prophetic wisdom, the more we will
fall in love with and appreciate who Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬really was:
His teachings
Mercy and compassion
“The Merciful One shows mercy to those who are themselves merciful
[to others]. So show mercy to whatever is on Earth, then He who is in
heaven will show mercy to you.”454
“God is compassionate and loves compassion.”455
“He is not of us who has no compassion for our young and does
not honour our elderly.”456
“May God have mercy on a man who is kind when he buys, when
he sells, and when he asks for a payment.”457
Contentment and spirituality
“Richness is not having many possessions. Rather, true richness is the
richness of the soul.”458
“Indeed, God does not look towards your bodies nor towards your
appearances. But, He looks towards your hearts and your deeds.”459
“Do not talk too much without remembrance of God. Indeed,
excessive talking without remembrance of God hardens the heart. And
indeed the furthest of people from God are the harsh-hearted.”460
311

“Be mindful of God, you will find Him before you. Get to know
God in prosperity and He will know you in adversity. Know that what
has passed you by was not going to befall you; and that what has
befallen you was not going to pass you by. And know that victory
comes with patience, relief with affliction, and ease with hardship.”461
“Islam has been built on five [pillars]: testifying that there is no
deity worthy of worship except God and that Muhammad is the
Messenger of God, establishing the prayer, paying the obligatory
charity, making the pilgrimage to the House, and fasting in
Ramadan.”462
“God, the Exalted, has said: ‘O son of Adam, I forgive you as
long as you pray to Me and hope for My forgiveness, whatever sins
you have committed. O son of Adam, I do not care if your sins reach
the height of the heaven; then you ask for my forgiveness, I would
forgive you. O son of Adam, if you come to Me with an Earth load of
sins, and meet Me associating nothing with Me, I would match it with
an Earth load of forgiveness.’”463
“God says: ‘I am as My servant thinks I am [or: as he expects Me
to be]. I am with him when he makes mention of Me. If he makes
mention of Me to himself, I make mention of him to Myself. And if he
makes mention of Me in an assembly, I make mention of him in an
assembly better than it. And if he draws near to Me a hand’s span, I
draw near to him an arm’s length. And if he draws near to Me an arm’s
length, I draw near to him a fathom’s length. And if he comes to Me
walking, I go to him at speed.’”464
Love
“By the one who has my soul in His hand, you will not enter the
Garden until you believe, and you will not believe until you love one
another. Shall I point out to you something, which will make you love
one another if you do it? Make the greeting of peace be widespread
312

among you.”465
“The servant of God does not reach the reality of faith until he
loves for the people what he loves for himself of goodness.”466
“Love for the people what you love for yourself and you will be a
believer. Behave well with your neighbours and you will be a
Muslim.”467
“There have come to you the diseases of the nations before you:
envy and hatred, and hatred is the razor. It shaves the religion and it
does not shave hair. By the one in whose hand is the soul of
Muhammad, you will not believe until you love one another. Shall I
tell you something which, if you did it, you would love each other?
Spread peace between yourselves.” 468
“None of you has faith until he loves for the people what he loves
for himself.”469
“When a man loves his brother he should tell him that he loves
him.”470
“Love for humanity what you love for yourself.”471
“The best deed after belief in God is benevolent love towards
people.”472
Community and peace
The Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬was asked: “What sort of deeds or traits of
Islam are good?” The Messenger of God replied: “To feed others, and
to greet those whom you know and those whom you do not know.”473
“He who makes peace between the people by inventing good
information or saying good things is not a liar.”474
“He who does not thank people, does not thank God.”475
“By God, he does not [truly] believe! By God, he does not [truly]
believe! By God, he does not [truly] believe!” Someone asked: “Who,
O Messenger of God?” He said: “He whose neighbour is not safe from
his mischief.”476
313

“All mankind is from Adam and Eve, an Arab has no superiority
over a non-Arab nor a non-Arab has any superiority over an Arab; also
a white has no superiority over a black nor a black has any superiority
over a white, except by piety and good action.”477
“The believer is not he who eats his fill while his neighbour is
hungry.”478
Charity and humanitarianism
“God said: ‘Spend [i.e. on charity], O son of Adam, and I shall spend
on you.’”479
“Charity does not diminish wealth.”480
“Visit the sick, feed the hungry and free the captives.”481
“Make things easy, and do not make them difficult, and give good
tidings and do not make people run away.”482
“Give the labourer his wages before his sweat dries.” 483
“Every act of goodness is charity.”484
Character and manners
“The believers who show the most perfect faith are those who have the
best character, and the best of you are those who are best to their
wives.”485
“[God] has revealed to me that you should adopt humility so that
no one oppresses another.”486
“Neither nurse grudge nor sever [the ties of kinship], nor nurse
enmity, and become as fellow brothers and servants of God.”487
“He who truly believes in God and the last Day should speak good
or keep silent.”488
“The best among you is he who has the best manners.”489
“Beware of suspicion, for suspicion is the worst of false tales.”490
“The strong man is not the one who is strong in wrestling, but the
314

one who controls himself in anger.”491
Environment and animals
“If the Hour [the day of Resurrection] is about to be established and
one of you is holding a palm shoot, let him take advantage of even one
second before the Hour is established to plant it.”492
“If a Muslim plants a tree or sows seeds, and then a bird, or a
person or an animal eats from it, it is regarded as a charitable gift
(sadaqah) for him.”493
“Removing harmful things from the road is an act of charity.”494
The companions asked the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬, “O God’s
Messenger! Is there a reward for us in serving the animals?” He
replied: “There is a reward for serving any living being.”495
“Whoever kills a sparrow or anything bigger than that without a
just cause, God will hold him accountable on the Day of Judgment.”496
“A prostitute saw a dog lolling around a well on a hot day and
hanging his tongue from thirst. She drew some water for it in her shoe,
so God forgave her.”497
Abdullah ibn Amr ibn al-`Aas reported that the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬passed
one day by Sa`d ibn Abi Waqqas while he was performing wudoo’
(ritual ablution). The Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬asked Sa’d, “Why this wastage?” Sa’d
replied “Is there wastage in ritual ablution also?” The Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬said,
“Yes, even if you are at a flowing river.”498
His character
The following testimonies and narrations describe some of the
qualities of the character of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬:
Forbearance, forgiveness and compassion
When the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬had his tooth broken and his face cut during one
of the battles when he was defending the Muslims and non-Muslims
315

under his protection, his companions asked him to curse the
aggressors. However, he replied: “I was not sent to curse, but I was
sent as a summoner and as a mercy. O God, guide my people for they
do not know.”499
Anas ibn Malik said, “I served the Messenger of God ‫ﷺ‬for ten
years and he never said ‘Uff!’ to me. He did not say about anything I
had done, ‘Why did you do it?’ nor about anything I had not done,
‘Why did you not do it?’”500
Anas said, “I was with the Prophet ‫ﷺ‬when he was wearing a thick
cloak. A bedouin pulled him so violently by his cloak that the edge of
the cloak made a mark on the side of his neck. Then he said,
‘Muhammad! Let me load up these two camels of mine with the
property of God you have in your possession! You will not let me load
up from your property or your father’s property.’ The Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬was
silent and then he said, ‘Shall I take retaliation from you, bedouin, for
what you have done to me?’ He replied, ‘No.’ The Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬asked,
‘Why not?’ The bedouin replied, ‘Because you do not repay back a
bad action with a bad action.’ The Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬laughed and ordered that
one camel be loaded up with barley and the other camel with
dates.’”501
Once a man demanding repayment for a debt seized hold of the
Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬and behaved very badly. The Prophet’s ‫ﷺ‬
companion was present and chased him off and spoke harshly to him.
However, the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬said, “He and I needed something else from
you. Command me to repay well and command him to ask for his debt
well.” The Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬repaid the loan and added more to it because his
companion had alarmed him. The man, known as Zayd ibn Sa’na, later
became a Muslim. Zayd explains: “There were only two remaining
signs of Prophethood which I had not yet recognised in Muhammad or
noticed: forbearance overcoming quick-temperedness and extreme
ignorance only increasing him in forbearance. I tested him for these
and I found him as described.”502
316

Anas ibn Malik recalls the compassion of the Prophet Muhammad
‫ ﷺ‬towards children: “I never saw anyone who was more
compassionate towards children than God’s Messenger ‫ﷺ‬.”503
The Prophet’s ‫ ﷺ‬companions were killed and tortured; he himself
was boycotted, starved and abused. There were many injustices and
wrongs committed against the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬and his followers. However,
when he peacefully took Mecca, known as the conquest of Mecca, he
delivered a universal forgiveness and pardon. He described the day as
a day of “piety, faithfulness and loyalty.”504
Appearance and approachability
The Prophet Muhammad’s ‫ ﷺ‬companions narrate about his
appearance:
Abdullah ibn al-Harith said, “I did not see anyone who smiled
more than the Messenger of God.”505
Al-Baraa’ ibn ‘Aazib narrated, “The Messenger of God ‫ ﷺ‬was the
most handsome of all people, and had the best appearance.” 506
Jaabir ibn Samurah narrated, “I saw the Messenger of God ‫ ﷺ‬on a
brightly moonlit night wearing a red garment. Then I started looking at
him and at the moon. And for me, he was more beautiful than the
moon.”507
Ali ibn Abi Talib narrated, “Those who saw him suddenly stood
in awe of him and those who shared his acquaintanceship loved him.
Those who described him said they had never seen anyone like him
before or since.”508
Umm Ma’bad al-Khuza’iyah described to her husband what the
Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬looked like: “He was innocently bright and had broad
countenance. His manners were fine. Neither his belly bulged out nor
was his head deprived of hair. He had black attractive eyes finely
arched by continuous eyebrows. His hair glossy and black, inclined to
curl, he wore long. He was extremely commanding. His head was
317

large, well-formed and set on a slender neck. His expression was
pensive and contemplative, serene and sublime. The stranger was
fascinated from the distance, but no sooner he became intimate with
him than this fascination was changed into attachment and respect. His
expression was very sweet and distinct. His speech was well set and
free from the use of superfluous words, as if it were a rosary of beads.
His stature was neither too high nor too small to look repulsive… He
was always surrounded by his Companions. Whenever he uttered
something, the listeners would hear him with rapt attention and
whenever he issued any command, they vied with each other in
carrying it out. He was a master and commander. His utterances were
marked by truth and sincerity, free from all kinds of falsehoods and
lies.”509
Humility and modesty
The Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬said, “Do not exaggerate in praising me as
the Christians praised the son of Mary, for I am only a servant. So, call
me the servant of God and His Messenger.”510
The Prophet’s ‫ ﷺ‬wife, Aishah (may God be pleased with her) was
asked, “What did God’s messenger do at home?” She said, “He was
like any other human being, cleaning and mending his garment,
milking the goat, mending his shoes, serving himself, and be of service
to his family, till he hears the call to prayer, then he goes out [to pray
in the mosque].”511
The Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬showed humility when he said, “I am but a man
like yourselves. I am prone to forget just as you are.”512
When the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬saw a man trembling with fear when he saw
him, he said to him, “Relax, I am not a king; I am the son of a woman
from Quraysh [an Arab people] who would eat dried/jerked meat.”513
The Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬would invoke his Lord saying, “O God, make me
live humbly and make me die humbly, and gather me among the
318

humble on the day of resurrection.”514
Abu Sa‘eed al-Khudri said, “I saw the messenger of God ‫ﷺ‬
prostrating in mud and water so that I saw the marks of mud on his
forehead.”515
Anas said, “The Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬would be invited to eat barley bread
and rancid fat and he would accept it.” 516
Aisha (may God be pleased with her) said, “At our home [that is,
the home of the Prophet’s household], fire would not be kindled
(sometimes) for a whole month; we subsisted merely on water and
dates.”517
There are many other prophetic teachings and narrations relating to
some of the actions of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬that on the surface
may seem harsh. However, when someone takes the socio-political
context and the existing moral variables into consideration, it will
facilitate the conclusion that he was the most compassionate, ethical
and just human being. For example, the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬was relentless in
battle. One must understand that he was defending the community
(that consisted of Muslims and non-Muslims) and that battle was the
final resort. This allows us to acknowledge and praise his bravery,
valour and courage rather than attribute anything negative to him. This
is not the place to go into detail, however further study and research
will substantiate the above points.
Muhammad’s ‫ ﷺ‬impact on the world
The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬was truly a mercy to mankind. This
assertion is not only justified by his message and his teachings, but it
also includes his unprecedented impact on our world. There are two
key reasons why his teachings on a social level were so
transformative: the justice and compassion of Islam.
Compassion and justice are its central values, expressed through a
sincere belief in the existence and worship of one God. By singling
319

Him out for worship and being conscious of one’s accountability, a
Muslim is encouraged to act compassionately, fairly and justly. The
Qur’an clearly states in this regard:
“O you who believe, be steadfast in your devotion to God and
bear witness impartially: do not let the hatred of others lead
you away from justice, but adhere to justice, for that is closer to
being God-conscious. Be mindful of God: God is well
acquainted with all that you do.”518
“O you who believe, uphold justice and bear witness to God,
even if it is against yourselves, your parents, or your close
relatives. Whether the person is rich or poor, God can best take
care of both. Refrain from following your own desire, so that
you can act justly—if you distort or neglect justice, God is
fully aware of what you do.”519
“What will explain to you what the steep path is? It is to free a
slave, to feed at a time of hunger an orphaned relative or a poor
person in distress, and to be one of those who believe and urge
one another to steadfastness and compassion.”520
Tolerance and coexistence
When these values were practised and internalised, the Muslims
created a society that was unmatched in history. At a time when
Europe was entrenched in sectarian violence, racism, tribalism and
hatred, the teachings of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬were a light for the
world. Consider the treatment of minorities such as the Jews and the
Christians. The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬in the treaty of Medina said: “It
is incumbent on all the Muslims to help and extend sympathetic
treatment to the Jews who have entered into an agreement with us.
Neither an oppression of any type should be perpetrated on them nor
320

their enemy be helped against them.”521
The popular historian Karen Armstrong points out how the values
of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬established an unprecedented
coexistence: “The Muslims had established a system that enabled
Jews, Christians, and Muslims to live in Jerusalem together for the
first time.”522
The Jewish academic historian Amnon Cohen illustrates the
practical application of Islamic values, and how the Jews of Ottoman
Jerusalem were free and contributed to society:
“No one interfered with their internal organisation or their
external cultural and economic activities… The Jews of
Ottoman Jerusalem enjoyed religious and administrative
autonomy within an Islamic state, and as a constructive,
dynamic element of the local economy and society they
could—and actually did—contribute to its functioning.”523
‘Umar ibn al-Khattab, the companion and student of the Prophet
Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬, granted the Christians of Palestine religious freedom,
security and peace. His treaty with the Palestinian Christians stated:
“This is the protection which the servant of God, the Leader of
the faithful, grants to the people of Palestine. Thus, protection
is for their lives, property, church, cross, for the healthy and
sick and for all their co-religionists. In this way their churches
shall not be turned into dwelling houses, nor will they be pulled
down, nor any injury will be done to them or to their
enclosures, nor to their cross, and nor will anything be
deducted from their wealth. No restrictions shall be made
regarding their religious ceremonies.”524
In 869 CE, patriarch Theodosius of Jerusalem confirmed the
Muslims’ adherence to the values of their beloved Prophet ‫ﷺ‬: “The
321

Saracens [i.e. the Muslims] show us great goodwill. They allow us to
build our churches and to observe our own customs without
hindrance.”525
These historical narratives are not historical accidents. They are
grounded in the Prophet’s ‫ ﷺ‬timeless values of tolerance and mercy.
Safety and protection
Europe in the 7th century was in utter darkness when it came to
ensuring the safety and protection of minorities and foreign people
living in or visiting a particular land. However, the Prophet
Muhammad’s ‫ ﷺ‬teachings ensured that minorities were protected and
lived in peace:
“He who harms a person under covenant, or charges him more
than he can pay, I will argue against him on the Day of
Judgement.”526
“He who hurts a non-Muslim under protection hurts me.”527
The 13th century jurist Al-Qarafi explains the above Prophetic
teachings:
“The covenant of protection imposes upon us certain
obligations toward the non-Muslims under Muslim protection.
They are our neighbours, under our shelter and protection upon
the guarantee of God, His Messenger, and the religion of Islam.
Whoever violates these obligations against any one of them by
so much as an abusive word, by slandering his reputation, or by
doing him some injury or assisting in it, has breached the
guarantee of God, His Messenger ‫ﷺ‬, and the religion of
Islam.”528

322

In light of the above, it is no wonder the Qur’an describes the
Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬as “a mercy for the worlds” 529 and that God’s mercy
“encompasses all things”530.
When the Prophet’s ‫ ﷺ‬teachings were realised in history,
minorities were protected, experienced peace and praised the Muslim
authorities. For example, Bernard the Wise, a pilgrim monk, visited
Egypt and Palestine in the reign of Al-Mu’tazz (866-9 CE), and he had
the following to say:
“…the Christians and the Pagans [i.e. Muslims] have this kind
of peace between them there that if I was going on a journey,
and on the way the camel or donkey which bore my poor
luggage were to die, and I was to abandon all my goods
without any guardian, and go to the city for another pack
animal, when I came back I would find all my property
uninjured: such is the peace there.”531
The unprecedented impact and effect of Islamic values made
people prefer the mercy and tolerance of Islam. Reinhart Dozy, an
authority on early Islamic Spain, explains:
“…the unbounded tolerance of the Arabs must also be taken
into account. In religious matters they put pressure on no
man… Christians preferred their rule to that of the Franks.”532
Professor Thomas Arnold, commenting on an Islamic source,
states that Christians were happy and at peace with Islam to the point
where they “called down blessings on the heads of the Muslims.”533
Freedom of belief
During a time when freedom of belief was a relatively alien concept,
the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬created a society that never forced anyone
323

to convert to Islam. Forced conversion is utterly forbidden in Islam.
This is due to the following Qur'anic verse: “There is no compulsion in
religion: true guidance has become distinct from error….”534
Michael Bonner, an authority on the history of early Islam,
explains the historical manifestation of the verse above: “To begin
with, there was no forced conversion, no choice between ‘Islam and
the Sword’. Islamic law, following a clear Qur’anic principle (2:256),
prohibited any such things: dhimmis [non-Muslims under Muslim
protection] must be allowed to practice their religion.”535
Economic liberation
The teachings of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬caused the economic
liberation of people under his leadership. Taxes were low and anyone
who could not afford to pay their taxes would not have to pay
anything.536
It was incumbent on the authorities to ensure that everyone,
including non-Muslim citizens, had enough to feed their families and
maintain a decent standard of living. For example, ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al‘Aziz, one of the Muslim leaders, wrote to his agent in Iraq: “Search
for the people of the covenant in your area who may have grown old,
and are unable to earn, and provide them with regular stipends from
the treasury to take care of their needs.”537
A practical manifestation of the Prophet’s ‫ ﷺ‬teachings can be
found in the following letter written by a rabbi in 1453. He was urging
his co-religionists to travel to Muslim lands after Europe’s persecution
of the Jews, he was telling them that they were economically
emancipated: “Here in the land of the Turks we have nothing to
complain of. We possess great fortunes; much gold and silver are in
our hands. We are not oppressed with heavy taxes and our commerce
is free and unhindered. Rich are the fruits of the Earth. Everything is
cheap and every one of us lives in peace and freedom….”538

324

Interracial co-operation
Far from being a source of racial conflict, the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬offered a
viable model of interracial co-operation. The Qur’an eloquently states:
“People, we created you all from a single man and a single woman,
and made you into races and tribes so that you should recognize one
another. In God’s eyes, the most honoured of you are the ones most
mindful of Him: God is all knowing, all aware.”539
The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬made it clear that racism has no place
in Islam: “All mankind is from Adam and Eve, an Arab has no
superiority over a non-Arab nor a non-Arab has any superiority over
an Arab; also a white has no superiority over a black nor has a black
any superiority over a white, except by piety and good action.”540
As Hamilton A. R. Gibb, a historian on Orientalism, stated:
“But Islam has a still further service to render to the cause of
humanity. It stands after all nearer to the real East than Europe
does, and it possesses a magnificent tradition of interracial
understanding and co-operation. No other society has such a
record of success uniting in an equality of status, of
opportunity, and of endeavour so many and so various races of
mankind… Islam has still the power to reconcile apparently
irreconcilable elements of race and tradition. If ever the
opposition of the great societies of East and West is to be
replaced by co-operation, the mediation of Islam is an
indispensable condition. In its hands lies very largely the
solution of the problem with which Europe is faced in its
relation with East. If they unite, the hope of a peaceful issue is
immeasurably enhanced—but if Europe, by rejecting the cooperation of Islam, throws it into the arms of its rivals, the
issue can only be disastrous for both.”541
The respected historian A. J. Toynbee also confirms: “The
325

extinction of race consciousness as between Muslims is one of the
outstanding achievements of Islam and in the contemporary world
there is, as it happens, a crying need for the propagation of this Islamic
virtue….”542
Scientific progress
The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬was the bearer of the message of the
Qur’an, both in word and deed. His message and teachings created the
much-needed tranquillity, tolerance and peace that facilitated one of
the most successful civilisations in history. While Europe was plunged
in the darkness of ignorance, the Islamic civilisation inspired by the
Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬produced a society that was a beacon of light for the entire
world. Historian of science Victor Robinson succinctly summarises the
contrast between medieval Europe and Islamic Spain:
“Europe was darkened at sunset, Cordova shone with public
lamps; Europe was dirty, Cordova built a thousand baths;
Europe was covered with vermin, Cordova changed its
undergarments daily; Europe lay in mud, Cordova’s streets
were paved; Europe’s palaces had smoke-holes in the ceiling,
Cordova’s arabesques were exquisite; Europe’s nobility could
not sign its name, Cordova’s children went to school; Europe’s
monks could not read the baptismal service, Cordova’s
teachers created a library of Alexandrian dimensions.”543
Islamic civilisation produced advances in mathematics, medicine,
astronomy and chemistry. Consider the mathematician Al-Khwarizmi,
who played a significant role in the development of algebra. He also
developed the idea of algorithms, which has earned him the title of the
grandfather of computer science, because without algorithms there
would be no computers. Abu al-Qasim Al-Zahrawi has been described
as the greatest medieval surgeon because of his inventions in surgical
326

procedures and instruments.
Muslims and Arab scientists who understood and internalised
Islamic values were also pioneers in dealing with mental and
psychological disorders. For example, in the 8th century, the physician
Razi built the first psychiatric ward in Baghdad. The 11th century
physician Ibn Sina (known in the West as Avicenna—the founder of
modern medicine) understood that most mental illness is
physiologically based. 544
Interestingly, Abu Zayd al-Balkhi, a 9th century physician, wrote a
book on what is now known as cognitive behavioural therapy. His
book, Sustenance of the Soul, was probably the first written account to
distinguish between endogenous and reactive depression.545
These pioneers and Muslim intellectuals were directly influenced
by the values of Islam. These include the words of the Prophet
Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬that encourage seeking the cure for illnesses: “There is
no disease that God has sent down except that He also has sent down
its treatment.”546
The Qur’an encourages reading, acquiring knowledge, reflection
and the empirical sciences. It is a book that mentions knowledge over
100 times and makes us reflect upon ourselves, and the world around
us:
“The example of this worldly life is but like rain which We
have sent down from the sky that the plants of the Earth
absorb—those from which men and livestock eat—until, when
the Earth has taken on its adornment and is beautified and its
people suppose that they have capability over it, there comes to
it Our command by night or by day, and We make it as a
harvest, as if it had not flourished yesterday. Thus do We
explain in detail the signs for a people who give thought.”547
“Read! In the name of your Lord who created: He created man
327

from a clinging form. Read! Your Lord is the Most Bountiful
One who taught by [means of] the pen, who taught man what
he did not know.”548
“Say, ‘How can those who know be equal to those who do not
know?’ Only those who have understanding will take heed.”549
“Then do they not look at the camels—how they are created?
And at the sky—how it is raised? And at the mountains—how
they are erected? And at the Earth—how it is spread out?”550
“There truly are signs in the creation of the heavens and Earth,
and in the alternation of night and day, for those with
understanding, who remember God standing, sitting and lying
down, who reflect on the creation of the heavens and
Earth….”551
The teachings of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬not only created an
environment conducive to scientific progress, but also helped shaped
the intellectual growth of a very important man in the history of
science. His name was Ibn al-Haytham, and he is considered one of the
world’s first scientists.552 According to many historians of science,
such as David C. Lindberg, Ibn al-Haytham is considered to be
amongst the first to have formalised the scientific method with
emphasis on systematic experimentation. 553
Ibn al-Haytham wrote The Book of Optics, which had a huge
impact on Europe. Without his formalisation of the scientific method,
it could be argued that we would not be enjoying the scientific
advancements that we enjoy today.
Ibn al-Haytham was also a student of theology and the Qur’an. He
clearly cites the Qur’an as his inspiration to study science and the
natural world: “I decided to discover what it is that brings us closer to
328

God, what pleases Him most, and what makes us submissive to His
ineluctable Will.”554
Many academics recognise Europe’s indebtedness to Islam. 555
Professor George Saliba argues, “There is hardly a book on Islamic
civilization, or on the general history of science, that does not at least
pretend to recognize the importance of the Islamic scientific tradition
and the role this tradition played in the development of human
civilisation in general.”556
Professor Thomas Arnold was of the view that Islamic Spain
facilitated the European Renaissance: “…Muslim Spain had written
one of the brightest pages in the history of Medieval Europe...bringing
into birth a new poetry and a new culture, and it was from her that
Christian scholars received what of Greek philosophy and science they
had to stimulate their mental activity up to the time of the
Renaissance.”557
Perhaps one of the most poignant summaries of the greatness of
the civilisation that the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬created, is in a speech
by the former CEO of Hewlett Packard, Carly Fiorina:
“There was once a civilization that was the greatest in the
world. It was able to create a continental super-state that
stretched from ocean to ocean, and from northern climes to
tropics and deserts. Within its dominion lived hundreds of
millions of people, of different creeds and ethnic origins. One
of its languages became the universal language of much of the
world, the bridge between the peoples of a hundred lands. Its
armies were made up of people of many nationalities, and its
military protection allowed a degree of peace and prosperity
that had never been known.
“And this civilization was driven more than anything, by
invention. Its architects designed buildings that defied gravity.
329

Its mathematicians created the algebra and algorithms that
would enable the building of computers, and the creation of
encryption. Its doctors examined the human body, and found
new cures for disease. Its astronomers looked into the heavens,
named the stars, and paved the way for space travel and
exploration. Its writers created thousands of stories. Stories of
courage, romance and magic.
“When other nations were afraid of ideas, this civilization
thrived on them, and kept them alive. When censors threatened
to wipe out knowledge from past civilizations, this civilization
kept the knowledge alive, and passed it on to others. While
modern Western civilization shares many of these traits, the
civilization I’m talking about was the Islamic world from the
year 800 to 1600, which included the Ottoman Empire and the
courts of Baghdad, Damascus and Cairo, and enlightened rulers
like Suleiman the Magnificent.
“Although we are often unaware of our indebtedness to this
other civilization, its gifts are very much a part of our heritage.
The technology industry would not exist without the
contributions of Arab mathematicians. Leaders like Suleiman
contributed to our notions of tolerance and civic leadership.
And perhaps we can learn a lesson from his example: It was
leadership based on meritocracy, not inheritance. It was
leadership that harnessed the full capabilities of a very diverse
population that included Christianity, Islamic, and Jewish
traditions. This kind of enlightened leadership—leadership that
nurtured culture, sustainability, diversity and courage—led to
800 years of invention and prosperity.”558
The key reason the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬was able to directly
330

influence such tolerant and compassionate societies was because
affirming the Oneness of God, pleasing and worshipping Him, was the
spiritual and moral basis of his life and the lives of those who loved
and followed him. This provided timeless, objective moral grounding
to achieve what the 18th century economist Adam Smith claimed was
the first nation: “…under which the world enjoyed that degree of
tranquillity which the cultivation of the sciences requires….”559
The Prophet Muhammad’s ‫ ﷺ‬trustworthiness, high moral
character and the impact he has had on the world establishes a strong
case to claim that he is the final messenger of God. Studying his life
and understanding his teachings in a holistic and nuanced way will
lead to only one conclusion: he was a mercy to the world, and the one
chosen by God to lead the world into Divine guidance and light.

331

Chapter 15: The Free Slave – Why God
is Worthy of Our Worship
“The one who is imprisoned is the one whose heart is
imprisoned from God and the captive is the one whose desires
have enslaved him.”560
Imagine a friend of yours gave you £100 each day because, without
any fault of your own, you required financial assistance. This kindness
did not last for a few days; it continued for years. The money kept on
appearing in your bank account. However, you started to forget who
the benefactor was, and in this state of immense ingratitude, you then
began to thank the money and not the one who gave it to you. This
describes polytheism and atheism in a nutshell. From a spiritual
perspective, it is the height of ingratitude and irrationality. The
emotionally intelligent and rational person would always thank the one
who gave him something that he did not earn or own. This is a nonnegotiable moral principle.
Why, however, does this describe polytheism and atheism?
There is something in your life that you receive freely, yet you do
not earn it and do not own it. There is no good reason to believe that
you deserve it either. This thing is this moment, and the next moment,
and all of the moments of your existence. You do not earn these
moments, so what can you possibly do to earn another instant in your
life? This is exactly why in popular culture we call it a gift: the gift of
life. That’s why we all consider it to be so precious. You do not own
these moments because you do not have the capacity to bring anything
into existence; you cannot even create a fly. You do not deserve
another moment of your existence because it is not yours; you do not
332

have the ability to produce life, even for a second. In light of these
basic truths, you must always be in a state of gratitude, because you
always receive something that you neither earn, nor own, nor deserve.
Since polytheism and atheism have no one to thank or thank the
wrong being (usually a created dependent and finite entity), it follows
that their worldviews are not only irrational, but the height of
ingratitude. As discussed in Chapter 6, God is independent and
everything depends upon Him. Therefore, everything that we say, do,
use and acquire is fundamentally dependent on God alone. It
inevitably follows—if one is sane and moral—that we must be
thankful to God, and acknowledge that all gratitude belongs to Him
alone. Thankfulness and gratitude are a key aspect of worship.
However, the concept of worship in the Islamic tradition is not
restricted to gratitude, it is quite comprehensive. Worship entails that
we must love, know and obey God, as well as dedicate all acts of
worship to Him alone. Acts of worship in Islam include prayer,
praising God, repentance, supplication, performing good deeds and
purifying our hearts from their spiritual diseases. These aspects of
worship are not only rational; they are also repeatedly mentioned in
the Qur’an.
I started this chapter by discussing gratitude, because gratitude is a
key to worship. If you are not grateful, you completely deny the fact
that you are dependent on God alone, and you deny that He is the One
who provides you with everything, no matter how small. So apart from
being grateful to the One who gives us life, why is God worthy of and
entitled to our worship?
Knowing God
Before I answer this question, it is important to elaborate on what is
meant by knowing God. Knowledge of God is essential to
understanding why God is worthy of our worship, because we cannot
worship something we are ignorant of. This is why, in the Islamic
333

tradition, traversing a path of knowing God is a form of worship:
“So know, that there is no deity except God.”561
To know God means that we affirm that He is the sole creator and
maintainer of everything that exists (known as Oneness of God’s
Lordship). It also entails that we affirm His names and attributes in the
context of recognising that they are unique and that nothing can
compare to God (known as Oneness of God’s Names and Attributes).
Knowledge of God also involves that we must know that He is unique
in His Divinity; He alone is entitled to all acts of worship (known as
Oneness of God’s Divinity). It must be noted that in Islamic theology,
it is critical to affirm that nothing whatsoever shares God’s creative
power and ability, names and attributes and Divinity. All forms of
anthropomorphism are completely rejected. God is transcendent and
maximally perfect. He has no imperfections. The concept of oneness in
the Islamic spiritual tradition is referred to as tawheed, which
linguistically means to affirm oneness or to make something one or
unique.
Oneness of Lordship
The oneness of God’s Lordship is to affirm and recognise that God is
the sole creator, master and owner of everything that exists. God is the
One who sustains, takes care of and nourishes everything. According
to the Islamic doctrine of tawheed, anyone who denies this has
associated partners with God, which is polytheism (known as shirk in
Islamic theology). Anyone who believes that these descriptions of God
can be shared by any created thing has deified that thing. Therefore,
they have associated partners with God.
Oneness of God’s names and attributes
334

The ‘oneness of God’s names and attributes’ means to describe God
only by the names and attributes by which He has described Himself,
which are found in the Qur’an and the Prophetic teachings (some
names such as Al-Khaaliq, The-Creator, and Al-Qadeer, ThePowerful, can be affirmed by a sound rational mind). These names and
attributes, such as The-Loving and The-Subtle, are affirmed, but they
are not comparable to creation. God’s names and attributes are perfect
without any deficiency or flaw. God’s names are described by God
Himself as the most beautiful:
“The most beautiful names belong to God: so call on Him by
them.”562
As has been mentioned throughout this book, God is maximally
perfect. The one who compares these names and attributes to creation
has committed humanisation, and therefore has associated partners
with God. The one who compares any created thing to God has
committed deification, which is also a form of associating partners
with God.
Oneness of God’s Divinity
The oneness of God’s Divinity is that we must affirm that all acts of
worship must be directed to Him alone. Someone who directs acts of
worship to anything other than God, and the one who seeks reward
from anything other than God in any act of worship, has associated
partners with Him.
In certain contexts, some acts of obedience, if directed to other
than God, do not constitute associating partners with Him. For
example, one’s love for God may be deficient and require perfecting.
335

Associating partners with God in the context of love would involve
loving something or someone instead of God or as much as God.
Someone can love their family and it would not constitute associating
partners with God. If they loved their family instead of God, or as
much as God, then that would constitute a form of associating partners
with Him.
The gravest sin
Associating partners with God is the gravest sin. The consequence of
this sin is that the one who dies in such a state and has not repented
dies in a state of disbelief. This will never be forgiven by God. (This
applies to major forms of associating partners with God. There are
lesser forms that do not lead to disbelief, such as giving charity for
other than God, obeying someone instead of God and showing off
one’s good deeds. However, major forms of associating partners with
God such as praying to other than Him and believing other things are
worthy of worship lead to disbelief. This however is a nuanced topic
with many variables to consider. I suggest further study on this topic,
as it is not the objective to go into detail here):
“Indeed, God does not forgive association with Him, but He
forgives what is less than that for whom He wills. And he who
associates others with God has certainly committed a
tremendous sin.”563
However, if one associates partners with God and repents to Him
and returns to the path of oneness, he or she will be forgiven, and their
transgressions will be transformed into good deeds:
“And those who invoke not any other deity along with God…
Except those who repent and believe, and do righteous deeds;
336

for those, God will change their sins into good deeds, and God
is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.”564
The one who has associated partners with God and has never
repented, and dies in that state (and has no excuse), has essentially
oppressed themselves by closing the door to God’s mercy. Their hearts
have ‘eternally’ rejected God’s guidance and mercy; therefore, they
have alienated themselves from the Divine. Those who reject God will
plead to go back to earth to do righteousness, but their hearts have
‘eternally’ rejected:
“[For such is the state of the disbelievers], until, when death
comes to one of them, he says, ‘My Lord, send me back that I
might do righteousness in that which I left behind.’ No! It is
only a word he is saying.”565
This self-imposed spiritual reality is a form of denial. The person
has denied all the just and fair opportunities that God has given them
to embrace His mercy and love:
“God has not wronged them, but they wronged themselves.”566
“This is reward for what your hands have done. And God is
never unjust to His servants.”567
It must be noted that according to Islamic theology, if someone
was not given the right message of Islam, and sought the truth, they
will have an excuse and will be tested on the Day of Judgment. 568 God
is The-Just and no one will be treated unjustly. This is why, when a
non-Muslim has passed away, it is considered un-Islamic to pass
judgment on their final abode (however, some scholars have said this
may not apply to those who never sought the truth or had sufficient
337

knowledge of Islam). No one knows what is in someone else’s heart
and whether someone was given the right message in the right way.
However, from a creedal and societal point of view, non-Muslims who
died will be buried as non-Muslims. This does not mean that this is
their final judgement. In reality, God is maximally and perfectly just
and merciful, so no one will be treated unmercifully and no one will be
treated unjustly.
People who have heard the message of Islam in a sound and
correct way will have to account for their denial. However, whoever
dies without having heard the message of Islam, or heard it in a
distorted form, will be given an opportunity to accept the truth.
Echoing the principles from the various verses of the Qur’an and the
Prophetic traditions, Al-Ghazali summarises this nuanced approach.
He argues that people who never heard the message of Islam will have
an excuse: “In fact, I would say that, God willing, most of the
Byzantine Christians and the Turks of this age will be included in
God’s mercy. I’m referring here to those who live in the farthest
regions of Byzantium and Anatolia who have not come into contact
with the message… They are excused.”569
Al-Ghazali also argues that the people who heard negative things
of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬and his message will also be excused:
“These people knew the name ‘Muhammad’, but nothing of his
character or his qualities. Instead, all they heard since childhood is that
a liar and imposter called ‘Muhammad’ claimed to be a prophet…
This party, in my opinion, is like the first party. For even though
they’ve heard his name, they heard the opposite of what his true
qualities were. And this does not provide enough incentive for them to
investigate [his true status].”570
The true teachings of Islam are a barrier to extremism. In my
view, all forms of extremism are based on an ‘ideological hardness’
that hardens people’s hearts. What I mean by this, is that people adopt
non-negotiable, binary and negative assumptions about the world and
338

other people. This makes one group of people ‘otherize’ another.
Otherization is not simply labelling people as belonging to other
groups. This is natural and part of modern society. Otherization
usually happens when one group describes another group in a negative
way and maintains that each member is the same. This hardens
people’s hearts and prevents them from positively engaging with other
people who seem to be different. Islam does not otherize people. It
does not assert that everyone who is not a Muslim is ultimately
doomed or evil. The Qur’an makes it quite clear that people
constituting other groups “are not all alike”571 and describes some of
them as “upright”572. The Qur’an also applies this concept to believers
too; some are righteous and some are not. Nevertheless, Islam teaches
that every human being must be treated with mercy, compassion and
fairness (see Chapter 14).
The essence of worship
In the Islamic tradition, a key act of worship is supplication (known as
dua in Islamic theology). The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬taught that
supplication is “the essence of worship”573. Supplications are to God
alone, because only He can help us when we ask for help for something
that we need or want. Supplicating to anything other than God is an act
of polytheism, because the person is asking for something from an
entity that does not have the ability to provide or fulfil that request. For
example, if someone were to ask a stone idol to grant them twin girls, it
would be an act of polytheism because they are supplicating to an entity
that has no power to fulfil that request. This does not mean, however,
that asking someone who has the ability to assist you for help is
polytheism. It would only be polytheism if one were to believe that God
was not the ultimate creator of their ability to help you. Supplicating to
God is part of making our worship pure, and the way we supplicate to
Him should be with humility. God says: “Invoke your Lord with
humility”574 and “So call upon Him, [being] sincere to Him in
339

religion.”575.
According to the Islamic spiritual tradition, acts of worship are
accepted if they fulfil two conditions. The first is that the act of
worship should be done purely for the sake of God. The second is
that the action itself is prescribed by the Islamic source texts: the
Qur’an and the Prophetic traditions. So a natural question that
follows from this is: What are these acts of worship? The acts of
worship are many. As previously mentioned, any good action that is
done to please God is an act of worship. However, there are some
basic acts of worship which are essential to Islamic spiritual practice.
These have been summarised by the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬as the
five pillars of Islam. They include: affirming and recognising in
one’s heart that there is no deity worthy of worship except God and
that Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬is God’s final messenger; praying five times a
day; giving the obligatory charity if one can afford to; fasting in
Ramadan (the 9th month of the Islamic calendar) and performing the
pilgrimage if one is able to do so. These acts of worship have
profound meanings and inner dimensions. These are the basic pillars
of Islam. However, in developing one’s spiritual practice one can
engage in a plethora of additional spiritual activities. These include:
reciting the Qur’an; remembrance of God; removing the spiritual
diseases in one’s heart; voluntary charity; conveying the message of
Islam to others; feeding the poor; taking care of animals; studying the
life of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ;ﷺ‬memorising the Qur’an; the night
prayer; reflecting on natural phenomena and much more.
So why do all our acts of worship have to be dedicated to God
alone?
I will elaborate on the following points to answer this question:
•
•

God’s right to worship is a necessary fact of His existence.
God has created and sustains everything.
340

•
•
•
•
•

God provides us with innumerable favours.
If we love ourselves, we must love God.
God is The-Loving, and His love is the purest form of love.
Worship is part of who we are.
Obeying God is part of worshipping Him.

God’s right to worship is a necessary fact of His existence
The best place to start is to understand who God is. God, by definition,
is the One who is entitled to our worship; it is a necessary fact of His
own existence. The Qur’an repeatedly highlights this fact about God,
“Indeed, I am God. There is no deity except Me, so worship
Me and establish prayer for My remembrance.”576
Since God is the only Being whose right is our worship, then all
of our acts of worship should be directed to Him alone.
In the Islamic tradition, God is considered a maximally perfect
Being. He possesses all the perfect names and attributes to the highest
degree possible. For example, in Islamic theology, God is described as
the The-Loving, and this means that His love is the most perfect and
greatest love possible. It is because of these names and attributes that
God must be worshipped. We always praise people for their kindness,
knowledge and wisdom. However, God’s kindness, knowledge and
wisdom are to the highest degree possible with no deficiency or flaw.
Therefore, He is worthy of the most extensive form of praise, and
praising God is a form of worship. God is also the only One entitled to
our supplications and prayers. He knows best what is good for us, and
He wants what is good for us. Such a Being with these attributes must
be prayed to and be asked assistance of. God is worthy of our worship
because there is something about God that makes Him so. He is the
Being with the most perfect names and attributes.
An important point regarding worshipping God is that it is His
341

right, even if we are not recipients of any type of comfort. If we were
to live a life full of suffering, God must still be worshipped.
Worshipping God is not dependent on some kind of reciprocal
relationship; He gives us life, and we worship Him in return. Do not
misunderstand what I am saying here: God showers us with many
blessings (as I will discuss below); however, He is worshipped
because of who He is and not necessarily how He decides—via His
boundless wisdom—to distribute His bounty. We praise people due to
their sporting skill, eloquence, strength or any other attribute. We do
so even though they do not benefit us in any direct way. Similarly,
God deserves extensive praise by virtue of His perfect names and
attributes and not as a result of how He decided to manifest them in
our lives. If we can praise people who have limited and flawed
attributes, what does it mean on how we must praise God whose
names and attributes have no deficiency or flaw?
God has created and sustains everything
God has created everything; He continually sustains the entire cosmos
and provides for us out of His bounty. The Qur’an continually repeats
this concept in various ways, which evokes a sense of gratitude and
awe in the heart of the listener or reader:
“It is He who created for you all of that which is on the
Earth.”577
“Do they indeed ascribe to Him as partners things that can
create nothing but are themselves created?”578
“O mankind, remember the favour of God upon you. Is there
any creator other than God who provides for you from the
heaven and Earth? There is no deity except Him, so how are
you deluded?”579

342

Therefore, everything we use in our daily lives, and all of the
essential things that we require to survive, are due to God. It follows
then that His is all gratitude. Since God created everything that exists,
He is the owner and master of everything, including us. Hence, we
must be in a sense of awe and gratitude to Him. Since God is our
Master, we must be His servants. To deny this is not only rejecting
reality, but it is the height of ingratitude, arrogance and thanklessness,
as discussed earlier in this chapter.
Since God created us, our very existence is solely dependent on
Him. We are not self-sufficient, even if some of us are deluded in
thinking that we are. Whether we live a life of luxury and ease or
poverty and hardship, we are ultimately dependent on God. Nothing in
this universe is possible without Him and whatever happens is due to
His will. Our success in business and the great things that we may
achieve are ultimately because of God. He created the causes in the
universe that we use to achieve success, and if He does not will our
success it will never happen. Understanding our ultimate dependency
on God should evoke an immense sense of gratitude and humility in
our hearts. Humbling ourselves before God and thanking Him is a
form of worship. One of the biggest barriers to Divine guidance and
mercy is the delusion of self-sufficiency, which is ultimately based on
ego and arrogance. The Qur’an makes this point clear:
“But man exceeds all bounds when he thinks he is selfsufficient.”580
“There is the one who is miserly, and is self-satisfied, who
denies goodness—We shall smooth his way towards hardship
and his wealth will not help him as he falls. Our part is to
provide guidance.”581
God provides us with innumerable favours
343

“And if you should [try to] count the favours of God, you could
not enumerate them. Indeed mankind is [generally] most unjust
and ungrateful.”582
We should be eternally grateful to God because we could never
thank Him for His blessings. The heart is an appropriate example to
illustrate this point. The human heart beats around 100,000 times a
day, which is approximately 37,000,000 times a year. If we were to
live up to the age of 75, the number of heartbeats would reach
2,759,400,000. How many of us have even counted that number of
heartbeats? No one ever has. It is actually impossible to count that
many heartbeats. Firstly, for the first few years of your life you cannot
count. Already there are a few years of backlog. Secondly, you cannot
count your heartbeats while you are sleeping. To be able to count a
lifetime’s worth of heartbeats, you would have had to start counting
each heartbeat from the day you were born and while you were asleep.
This would interfere with your ability to live a normal life, as you
would always be counting every time your heart started a new beat. As
a practical matter it is impossible. However, every heartbeat is
precious to us. Anyone of us would sacrifice a mountain of gold to
ensure that our hearts function properly to keep us alive. Yet we forget
and deny the One who created our hearts and enables them to function.
This illustration forces us to conclude that we must be grateful to God,
and gratitude is a form of worship. The above discussion just refers to
heartbeats, so imagine the gratitude we must express for all the other
blessings God has given us. From this perspective, anything other than
a heartbeat is a bonus. God has given us favours we cannot enumerate,
and if we could count them we would have to thank Him for the ability
to do so.
If we love ourselves, we must love God
344

Loving God is a fundamental aspect of worship. There are many types
of love and one of these includes self-love. This occurs due to the
desire to prolong our existence, feel pleasure and avoid pain, as well as
the need to satisfy our human needs and motivations. We all have this
natural love for ourselves because we want to be happy and content.
The psychologist Erich Fromm argued that loving oneself is not a form
of arrogance or egocentricity. Rather, self-love is about caring, taking
responsibility and having respect for ourselves. This type of love is
necessary in order to love others. If we cannot love ourselves, how
then can we love other people? There is nothing closer to us than our
own selves; if we cannot care for and respect ourselves, how then can
we care for and respect others? Loving ourselves is a form of ‘selfempathy’. We connect with our own feelings, thoughts and aspirations.
If we cannot connect with our own selves, how then can we empathise
and connect with others? Erich Fromm echoes this idea by saying that
love “implies that respect for one’s own integrity and uniqueness, love
for an understanding of one’s own self, cannot be separated from
respect and love and understanding for another individual.”583
If a person’s love for himself is necessary, this should lead him to
love the One who made him. Why? Because God created the physical
causes and means for human beings to achieve happiness and pleasure,
and avoid pain. God has freely given us every precious moment of our
existence, yet we do not earn or own these moments. The great
theologian Al-Ghazali aptly explains that if we love ourselves we must
love God:
“Therefore, if man’s love for himself be necessary, then his
love for Him through whom, first his coming-to-be, and
second, his continuance in his essential being with all his
inward and outward traits, his substance and his accidents,
occur must also be necessary. Whoever is so besotted by his
fleshy appetites as to lack this love neglects his Lord and
345

Creator. He possesses no authentic knowledge of Him; his gaze
is limited to his cravings and to things of sense.”584
God is The-Loving, and His love is the purest form of love
God is The-Loving. He has the purest form of love. This should make
anyone want to love Him, and loving Him is a key part of worship.
Imagine if I were to tell you that there was this person who was the
most loving person ever, and that no other love could match his love;
wouldn’t that instil a strong desire to get to know this person and
eventually love him too? God’s love is the purest and most intense
form of love; therefore, any sane person would want to love him too.
Given that the English word for love encompasses a range of
meanings, the best way to elaborate on the Islamic conception of
God’s love is to look into the actual Qur’anic terms used to describe
Divine love: His mercy (rahmah), His special mercy (raheem) and His
special love (muwadda). By understanding these terms and how they
relate to the Divine nature, our hearts will learn to love God.
Mercy
It is said that another word for love is mercy. One of God’s names is
The-Merciful; the Arabic word used is Ar-Rahmaan. This English
translation does not fully represent the depth and intensity that the
meaning of this word carries. The name Ar-Rahmaan has three major
connotations: the first is that God’s mercy is an intense mercy; the
second is that His mercy is an immediate mercy; and the third is a
mercy so powerful that nothing can stop it. God’s mercy encompasses
all things and He prefers guidance for people. In God’s book, the
Qur’an, He says,
“…but My mercy encompasses all things….”585

346

“It is the Lord of Mercy who taught the Qur’an.”586
In the above verse, God says He is The-Merciful, which can be
understood as the “Lord of Mercy”, and that He taught the Qur’an.
This is a linguistic indication to highlight that the Qur’an was revealed
as a manifestation of God’s mercy. In other words, the Qur’an is like
one big love-letter to humanity. As with true love, the one who loves
wants good for the beloved, and warns them of pitfalls and obstacles,
and shows them the way to happiness. The Qur’an is no different: it
calls out to humanity, and it also warns and expresses glad tidings.
Special Mercy
Connected to Ar-Rahmaan is Ar-Raheem. These names share the same
linguistic root which comes from the Arabic word for womb. The
difference in meaning however is significant. Ar-Raheem refers to a
special mercy for those who want to embrace it. Whoever chooses to
accept God’s guidance has essentially accepted His special mercy.
This special mercy is for the believers and it is manifested in paradise;
unending, blissful peace with God.
Special Love
According to the Qur’an, God is The-Loving. The Arabic name is AlWadood. This refers to a special love that is apparent. It comes from
the word wud, which means expressing love through the act of giving:
“And He is The Forgiving, The Loving.”587
God’s love transcends all of the different types of love. His love is
greater than all worldly forms of love. For example, a mother’s love,
although selfless, is based on her internal need to love her child. It
completes her, and through her sacrifices she feels whole and fulfilled.
God is an independent Being who is self-sufficient and perfect; He
347

does not require anything. God’s love is not based on a need or want;
it is therefore the purest form of love, because He gains absolutely
nothing from loving us.
In this light, how can we not love the One who is more loving
than anything we can imagine? The Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬said, “God
is more affectionate to His servants than a mother to her children.”588
If God is the most loving, and His love is greater than the greatest
worldly love we have experienced, this should instil in us a deeper love
for God. Significantly, this should make us want to love Him by being
one of His servants. Al-Ghazali aptly said, “For those endowed with
insight there is in reality no object of love but God, nor does anyone but
He deserve love.”589
From a spiritual perspective, God’s love is the greatest blessing
anyone can ever achieve, as it is a source of internal tranquillity,
serenity, and eternal bliss in the hereafter. Not loving God is not only a
form of ingratitude, but the greatest form of hate. Not loving the One
who is the source of love is a rejection of that which enables love to
occur and fill our hearts.
God does not force His special love on us. Although, by His
mercy, He lovingly gives us every moment of our lives, to fully
embrace God’s love and be recipients of His special love, one must
enter into a relationship with Him. It is as if God’s love is waiting for
us to embrace it. However, we have closed the door and put up the
shutters. We have kept the door shut by denying, ignoring and
rejecting God. If God were to force His special love on us, love would
lose all meaning. We have the choice: to follow the right path and
thereby gain God’s special love, or reject His guidance and face the
spiritual consequences.
The most loving Being wants to love you, but in order for you to
embrace that love, and for it to be meaningful, you have to choose to
love Him and follow the path that leads to His love. This path is the
Prophetic path of the Prophet Muhammad ‫(ﷺ‬see Chapter 14):
348

“Say, [O Muhammad]: ‘If you love God, then follow me, [so]
God will love you and forgive your sins. And God is Forgiving
and Merciful’.”590
Worship is part of who we are
God is worthy of our worship because worship is part of who we are.
Just like our need to eat, drink and breathe, worship is an innate
tendency (see Chapter 4). From this perspective, we are natural-born
worshippers, because that is who we are and it is our Divinely given
purpose. Worshipping God is a logical necessity, just as when we say a
car is red. It is red because we have defined that colour as red; it is red
by definition. Likewise, we are worshippers by definition, because
God defined and made us that way: “I did not create the Jinn [spirit
world], nor mankind, except to worship Me.”591
Even people who do not believe in God, including those who
reject the fact that He is entitled to worship, manifest signs of
adoration, reverence and devotion. If you do not worship God, you’ll
still end up worshipping something. From an Islamic perspective, the
object that you love and revere the most, including whatever you
attribute ultimate power to and believe you are ultimately dependent
on, is essentially your object of worship. For many people, this can
include an ideology, a leader, a family member and even your own
self. In other words, many people idolise these things. Polytheism or
idolatry is not just about praying to or bowing down in front of an
object.
God is rooted in our innermost nature, and when God commands
us to worship Him, it is actually a mercy and act of love. It is as if
every human being has a hole in his or her heart. This hole is not
physical, it is spiritual, and it needs to be filled to achieve spiritual
tranquillity. We attempt to fill this hole with a new job, a holiday, a
new house, a new car, a hobby, travel or taking up a popular self-help
349

course. However, every time we fill our hearts with these things, a new
hole appears. We are never truly satisfied, and after a while we seek
something else to fill the spiritual void. Yet, once we fill our hearts
with the love of God, the hole remains permanently closed. Thus, we
feel at peace and experience a tranquillity that can never be put into
words, and a serenity that is undisturbed by calamity.
Obeying God is part of worshipping Him
“[A]nd obey God and the Prophet592 so that you may be given
mercy.”593
When I travel by plane, I usually hear the pilot announce—via the
inflight audio system—to fasten our seat belts due to oncoming
turbulence. My typical response involves sitting down, fastening my
belt and hoping (and praying) for the best. The reason I obey the
pilot’s command is that I understand he is the authority concerning the
plane, how it works and the effects of turbulence. My obedience is a
result of using my rational faculties. Only an arrogant person would
disobey a valid authority. Would any of us take seriously a seven-yearold telling us that our maths professor does not know how to teach
calculus?
In a similar light, disobeying God is foolish and unfounded.
Obeying God, even if we do not know the full wisdom behind some of
His commands, is the most rational thing to do. God’s commands are
based on His boundless knowledge and wisdom. He is the ultimate
authority. To deny this authority is like a two-year-old child scribbling
on a piece of paper and claiming that he is more eloquent than
Shakespeare. (Actually, it is worse.)
This does not mean that we suspend our minds when obeying
God. We are told by God Himself to use our reason. However, once
we have established what God has said, then that should result in
350

obedience.
Obeying God entails that one should fear Him. A believer should
fear God if he wants to be in a state of servitude and obedience. This
fear, however, is not the type of fear that is associated with being
scared of an enemy or an evil force. God wants good for us. Rather,
this fear is associated with skin-shivering awe, loss, love and
unhappiness. We fear God from the perspective of fearing losing His
love and good pleasure.594 To explain this point, consider the
following illustration:
Imagine you are walking through a mall. You notice a young child
being told off by her mother. The child starts to cry and holds on to her
mother’s leg. The child begs for her mother’s forgiveness and asks for
a hug. The mother smiles and tells her child that she was telling her off
to protect her and ensure she stays safe. The child’s fear is a fear of
losing her mother’s love and pleasure. The child does not want to lose
her mother’s love and make her unhappy. This is the type of fear we
must have for God.
We should want to obey God because we fear the spiritual
consequences of disobedience. These include losing God’s special
love; including breaking the connection we have built with Him
through our acts of worship. Disobedience is our way of running away
from God’s mercy, and an absence of His mercy leads to a terrible
abode of self-inflicted suffering; hell. Al-Ghazali summarises this type
of fear by describing it as a fear of losing something that is loved:
“Whoever loves something must fear to lose it. Hence love cannot be
without fear, for the object of love is something that can be lost.”595
The Qur’an mentions the fear of God, and this fear must be
understood in the way I have just explained above. However, the
Divine book also mentions God-consciousness, known as taqwaa in
Islamic theology. A good translation of the Qur’an would distinguish
the two terms. Their meanings are different and they overlap. While
fear of God entails fearing loss and the spiritual consequences of
351

disobedience, God-consciousness refers to being mindful and aware of
the Divine presence; He knows what we are doing and, as lovers of
God, we should want to seek His good pleasure and love.
Does God need our worship?
This common question arises due to a misunderstanding of God in the
Islamic tradition. The Qur’an and the Prophetic traditions clearly
explain that God is transcendent and free of any need; in other words,
He is absolutely independent (see Chapter 6).
Therefore, God does not need us to worship Him at all. He gains
nothing from our worship, and our lack of it takes nothing away from
God. We worship God because—through God’s wisdom and mercy—
He created us that way. God made worship good and beneficial for us,
from both worldly and spiritual perspectives.
Why did He create us to worship Him?
What follows from this answer is usually the question: Why did God
create us to worship Him? God is a maximally good Being, and
therefore His actions are not only good, they are expressions of His
nature. In addition, God loves good. The fact that God has created
rational creatures who would freely choose to worship Him and do
good—some to the point of becoming exalted in virtue like the
prophets, and then being given eternal life in the presence of God—to
pass an eternity of intimate love and companionship, is the greatest
story ever told. Since God loves all good, it is clear why He would
make this story a reality. In summary, God created us to worship Him
because He wants good for us; in other words, He wants us to go to
paradise. He has made it clear that those who attain paradise have been
created to experience His mercy: 596 “If your Lord had pleased, He
would have made all people a single community, but they continue to
have their differences—except those on whom your Lord has mercy—
for He created them to be this way.” 597
352

God creating us to worship Him was inevitable. His perfect names
and attributes were going to manifest themselves. An artist inevitably
produces art work because he has the attribute of being artistic. By
greater reason, God would inevitably create us to worship Him
because He is the One worthy of worship. This inevitability is not
based on need, but rather a manifestation of God’s names and
attributes.
Another way of answering this question is to understand that our
knowledge is fragmentary and finite, so we will never be able to
fathom the totality of God’s wisdom. As previously mentioned, if we
comprehended all of God’s wisdom, it would mean we would become
Gods or that God would be like us. Both are impossibilities. Hence,
the very fact that there may be no answer to this question indicates the
transcendence of God’s knowledge. In summary, He created us to
worship Him due to His eternal wisdom; we just cannot comprehend
why.
A practical way of looking at this question is explained in the
following illustration. Imagine you were on the edge of a cliff and
someone pushed you into the ocean below. This water is infested with
sharks. However, the one who pushed you gave you a waterproof map
and an oxygen tank to enable you to navigate to a beautiful tropical
island, where you will stay forever in bliss. If you were intelligent, you
would use the map and reach the safety of the island. However, being
stuck on the question, why did you throw me in here? will probably
cause you to be eaten by the sharks. For the Muslim, the Qur’an and
Prophetic traditions are the map and the oxygen tank. They are our
tools to navigate the path of life safely. We have to know, love and
obey God, and dedicate all acts of worship to Him alone.
Fundamentally, we have the choice of harming ourselves by ignoring
this message, or embracing the love and mercy of God by accepting it.
The free slave
353

From an existential perspective, worshipping God is true liberation. If
worship entails loving and obeying God the most, then in reality many
of us also have other gods in our lives. Many of us want to love and
obey our own egos and desires the most. We think we are always right,
we never want to be wrong, and we always want to impose ourselves
on others. From this perspective, we are enslaved to ourselves. The
Qur’an points out such a debased spiritual state and describes the one
who considers his desires, passions and whims as his god, to be worse
than an animal: “Think of the man who has taken his own passion as a
god: are you to be his guardian? Do you think that most of them hear
or understand? They are just like cattle—no, they are further from the
path.”598
From self-worship, sometimes we move to worship various forms
of social pressures, ideas, norms and cultures. They become our point
of reference, we start to love them, want to know more about them,
and are led to ‘obey’ them. Examples abound; take, for instance,
materialism. We have become preoccupied with money and material
belongings. Obviously, to want money and possessions is not
necessarily a bad thing, but we have allowed our pursuit to define who
we are. Our time and efforts are devoted to the accumulation of
wealth, making the false notion of material success the primary focus
in our lives. From this perspective, material things start to control us
and lead us to serve the culture of avid materialism rather than serving
God. I appreciate that this does not apply to everyone, but this form of
excessive materialism is very common.
Research by Jean M. Twenge and Tim Kasser concluded that
materialism amongst youth has increased over generations—this study
was based on data from 1976 to 2007—and it has remained very high.
Social instability such as divorce, unemployment, racism, antisocial
behaviour, decreased life-satisfaction and other social problems have
some association with higher levels of materialism. 599 This is
supported by research conducted by S. J. Opree and others, where they
354

conclude that a high level of materialism during childhood years may
decrease life-satisfaction in adulthood.600 Obviously, research of this
kind is not entirely conclusive, and much more research needs to be
done, but it supports a collective intuition that such priorities are
clearly not right. Our sense of who we are is based on our jobs,
earnings, wealth and possessions. Our identities are slowly becoming
contingent on material factors and not on—what many would
consider—higher values such as our ethics, moral standards,
humanitarianism and connecting with God and other human beings.
Essentially, if we are not worshipping God, we are still
worshipping something else. This can be our own egos and desires, or
ephemeral things like material possessions. In the Islamic tradition,
worshipping God defines who we are, as it is part of our nature. If we
forget God, and start to worship things that are not worthy of worship,
we will slowly forget our own selves: “And be not like those who
forgot God, so He made them forget themselves.”601
Our understanding of who we are is dependent on our relationship
with God, which is shaped by our servitude and worship. In this sense,
when we worship God we are freed from submission to other ‘gods’,
whether ourselves or things that we own or desire.
As previously mentioned, the Qur’an presents us with a profound
analogy: “God puts forward this illustration: can a man who has for his
masters several partners at odds with each other be considered equal to
a man devoted wholly to one master? All praise belongs to God,
though most of them do not know.”602
God is essentially telling us that if we do not worship God, we end
up worshipping something else. These things enslave us and they
become our masters. The Qur’anic analogy is teaching us that without
God, we have many ‘masters’ and they all want something from us.
They are all ‘at odds with each other’, and we end up in a state of
misery, confusion and unhappiness. However, God, who knows
everything, including our own selves, and who has more mercy than
355

anyone else, is telling us that He is our master, and that only by
worshipping Him alone will we truly free ourselves from the shackles
of the things we have taken as replacements for Him.
To conclude this chapter, lovingly worshipping God and
peacefully submitting to Him frees you from the degraded worship of
the ephemeral world and the lustful submission to the carnal and
egotistical realities of the human condition. The following lines of
poetry by the Poet of the East, Muhammad Iqbal, eloquently
summarises this point:
“This one prostration which you deem too exacting liberates
you from a thousand prostrations.”603

356

Chapter 16: Conclusion – Transforming
Our Hearts
My father is a free man. What I mean by freedom is not that he lives in
a country that gives him his liberties and human rights. Rather, he is
emotionally free. When he decides to express himself, he does so
without a care in the world. He expresses himself as if there are no
external hindrances. I remember when I was in secondary school, I
used to play for the school band. Since my father encouraged me to
take up classical guitar lessons, attending the school band was a
natural consequence of my extracurricular activity. During a school
concert, my father would attend and enjoy the amazing talents and
abilities of the students. One performance artist had phenomenal
abilities. While she was on stage, she reached the climactic point of
her performance, emotionally and passionately expressing herself. It
was a breath-taking display of talent. My father stood up and gave her
an ovation. He did this all alone, but he did not care. He remained
standing and continued praising her flair and aptitude.
We have all experienced such a reaction to human ability. When
we see amazing spectacles of skill by one of our sporting heroes, or
when we observe great feats of courage, or when we listen to a
motivational speech—we are compelled to praise what we have
experienced. We stand. We clap. We give an ovation. We are moved,
inspired, encouraged, elated and overwhelmed by what we have
experienced. We never forget these moments in our lives. Just think
and reflect on similar experiences. Sink back into the feelings you had.
Something affected your soul; you had to give due praise.
However, we live in this amazing universe. We hope, love, seek
justice and believe in the ultimate value of human life. We reason,
357

infer, deduce and discover. We live in a vast universe with billions of
stars, galaxies and planets. The universe contains sentient beings that
can have a unique stream of consciousness. We have an immaterial
mind that interacts with the physical world. The universe has laws and
a precise arrangement that, if different, would have prevented the
emergence of conscious life. We feel—deep down inside—the
wrongness of evil, and the rightness of good.
In our universe, there are animals that can withstand their own
body weight many times over and seeds that can germinate from the
heat of fire. We live on a planet with over 6,000 languages and over
eight million species. We live in a universe where the human mind can
discover weapons that can wipe out the Earth and produce ideas that
can prevent those weapons from firing. We live in a universe that, if
one of its innumerable atoms is split, can release an immense amount
of energy. We live on a planet which, if hearts are united, can use that
energy for peace.
Yet some of us are not compelled to give God—who created the
universe and everything within it—a standing ovation; to stand, glorify
and praise Him.604 We are deluded, deceived and forgetful of God, the
one who created us: “O mankind, what has deceived you concerning
your Lord, the Generous?”605
God is truly great.
If we do not feel the urge to praise our creator and connect with
Him, there is something wrong with our hearts. We have a spiritual
disease that requires spiritual medicine. This disease is the ego; the
medicine is Islam.
To take this medicine, and therefore be eligible for Divine mercy
and God’s special love, we have to believe, internalise, understand and
submit to the implications of the following profound statement:
“There is no deity worthy of worship except God (Allah), and
Muhammad is His final servant and messenger.”
358

It is my hope that this book has helped you to start the process of
healing.
May God guide and shower you with His special love.

359

Afterword: Don’t Hate, Debate –
Dialogue with Islam
To use a colloquialism, the Internet is phat. There’s a play on words
here, because according to slang, ‘phat’ means ‘excellent’, and
phonetically it can mean ‘big or large’. They both apply to the Internet.
It can be an excellent source of information, but it can also be too big
to access all the authentic and valid information about a particular
topic. Besides its positive value, it is also a large abyss of lies,
misinformation and misrepresentations. The Internet can also be quite
unforgiving. I personally have experienced the dark side of the Internet
many times. All of my mistakes, misunderstandings and errors are
there for everyone to laugh at, but what makes me content is that it
also provides a source for people to learn. I’m a true believer in
espousing contrasting views, because in this context the truth always
prevails. This book is actually a product of learning from my failures
and errors. Now, does that mean this book is perfect? Obviously not.
However, it does lead me to a very important point. Whatever kind of
reader you describe yourself to be (atheist, sceptic, agnostic, Muslim,
secular, humanist, etc.) you will undoubtedly have more questions or
would like further clarifications. This is why I have developed an
online portal that will continue our conversation further. Any
questions, comments, concerns or constructive feedback you have will
be assessed at www.hamzatzortzis.com/thedivinereality.
This is quite unique for this type of publication because the book
is not meant to be a monologue, but a dialogue. The discussion does
have ethical rules, which include no expletives (unless you’re quoting
someone to make a valid point), personal attacks or degrading speech.
Aside from that, anything goes.
360

No one book covers everything on this topic, and some issues
have been left out, mostly due to scope and priority. However, this
does not mean that the Islamic tradition lacks answers.
I would advise interested parties to keep an open mind and to
sincerely engage in a dialogue. You see, we have two spheres in our
life: one is our drama, and the other is our reality. We think our drama
and reality are the same. This is simply not true. Our drama consists of
our negative past experiences, limited intellects, ideas and
perspectives. Reality is just what is, without any skewed perspective.
However, we always skew reality because we superimpose our drama
on it. This is why we find it hard to connect with other human beings,
and this is precisely why our lives seem to be one giant circle,
repeating the same mistakes in different ways. We all have done this
before. We have had a couple of negative experiences in the past
which destroy our ability to connect deeply with people in the present,
thereby creating a future with the building blocks of the past; it is no
wonder we repeat the same mistakes. We have to realise that the past
does not equal the future. So whatever your experiences with religion,
Islam and arguments for God and revelation, I ask you to not allow
them to cloud your judgement when reflecting on what you have read
in this book.
I would like to end this section by sharing some Qur’anic and
prophetic advice on discussing, debating and dealing with others. God
commands His noble Prophet Moses to speak mildly to Pharaoh while
conveying the message of Islam to him: “And speak to him mildly;
perhaps he might accept admonition.”606
The exegete Al-Qurtubi explains that this verse implies that if
Moses were commanded to speak softly and mildly to Pharaoh, who
was an oppressor, then imagine how we must speak to others: “If
Musa was commanded to speak mildly to Pharaoh then it is even more
appropriate for others to follow this command when speaking to others
and when commanding the good and forbidding the evil.”607
361

God commands the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬to discuss using good
words in the best possible manner: “Invite to the way of your Lord
with wisdom and beautiful preaching, and argue with them in a way
that is better.”608
The grammarian Al-Zamakhshari comments on the above verse
by asserting that this means we must engage with others without any
harshness: “Arguing with them in a way that is better means using the
best method of argumentation which is the method of kindness and
gentleness without gruffness and harshness.”609
Using good words in the context of discussion is one of the
greatest virtues in the Islamic tradition. The Qur’an presents a
beautiful example of comparing a good word with a tree with
perpetual fruit and firm roots:
“Have you not considered how God presents an example,
[making] a good word like a good tree, whose root is firmly
fixed and its branches [high] in the sky? It produces its fruit all
the time, by permission of its Lord. And God presents
examples for the people that perhaps they will be reminded.
And the example of a bad word is like a bad tree, uprooted
from the surface of the Earth, not having any stability. God
keeps firm those who believe, with the firm word, in the
worldly life and in the Hereafter. And God sends astray the
wrongdoers. And God does what He wills.”610
It is my personal wish that by internalising some of these timeless
values and teachings, we can all repel evil with good, and realise there
is no need to hate, thereby facilitating close friendships even if we
disagree.
“And not equal are the good deed and the bad. Repel evil by
that deed which is better; and thereupon the one whom between
362

you and him is enmity will become as though he were a
devoted friend.”611
The beautiful teaching of this verse is that in the original Arabic
the word ‘repel’ is not followed by a direct object. This implies that we
must repel anything by that which is better. The scholars have said that
this means that we must respond to anything by that which is more
virtuous and more beautiful.
Let us become people of virtue and people of beauty.

363

Notes
1

Narrated by Abu Dawud. I have referenced the Prophetic traditions by their
compilers. For example, “Narrated by Bukhari” means that it is in the hadith book
compiled by Bukhari. You can search for the various hadiths using online English
and Arabic databases. Please note translations may vary.
2

Al-Ghazali. (2015). The Remembrance of Death and the Afterlife. 2nd Edition.
Translated with an Introduction and Notes by T. J. Winter. Cambridge: Islamic Texts
Society, p. 8.
3
You can watch some of these debates at www.hamzatzortzis.com [Accessed 3rd
October 2016].
4
Prophetic traditions are authentic and verified words, statements, actions and
consent of the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬.
5
Bullivant, S. (2015). Defining ‘Atheism’. In: The Oxford Handbook of Atheism.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 11-21.
6
Schweizer, B. (2010). Hating God: The Untold Story of Misotheism. New York:
Oxford University Press, p. 28.
7
Ibid, p. 216.
8
Ibid, pp. 217-218.
9

Ibid, pp. 217-218.

10

Dawkins, R. (2006). The God Delusion. London: Bantam Press, p. 14.
Narrated by Muslim.
12
The Qur’an, Chapter 52, Verse 36. Throughout this book I have used various
11

Qur’anic translations. The translations I have used most frequently are the translation
by Professor Abdel Haleem [See Abdel Haleem, M. A. S. (2005 & Reissue Edition,
2008) The Qur’an: A New Translation. New York: Oxford University Press] and the
translation by Sahih International [available at: www.quran.com].
13
“Who but a fool would forsake the religion of Abraham?” The Qur’an, Chapter 2,
Verse 130.

364

14

Crone, P. Atheism (pre-modern). In: Encyclopaedia of Islam, THREE, Edited by:
Kate Fleet, Gudrun Krämer, Denis Matringe, John Nawas, Everett Rowson.
Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/1573-3912_ei3_COM_23358 [Accessed 1st
October 2016].
15
Ibid.
16
Al-Ghazali. (2007). Kimiya-e Saadat: The Alchemy of Happiness. Translated by
Claude Field. Kuala Lumpur: Islamic Book Trust, p. 22. The translator refers to
physicists; however, in the original context it refers to those who reject God’s
providence.
17
The Qur’an, Chapter 10, Verse 99.
18
The Qur’an, Chapter 2, Verse 256.
19
Idris, J. (2012). An Islamic View of Peaceful Coexistence. Available at:
www.jaafaridris.com/an-islamic-view-of-peaceful-coexistence [Accessed 1st October
2016].
20
Bremmer, J. N. (2007). Atheism in Antiquity. In: M. Martin, ed., The Cambridge
Companion to Atheism, 1st Edition. New York: Cambridge University Press, p. 11.
21
Hyman, G. (2007). Atheism in Modern History. In: M. Martin, ed., The
Cambridge Companion to Atheism, p. 29.
22
Addison, J. (1753). The Evidence of the Christian Religion. London, pp. 224-223.
23
Hyman, G. (2007). Atheism in Modern History, p. 31.
24
Bradlaugh, C. (1929). Humanity’s Gain from Unbelief and Other Selections from
the Works of Charles Bradlaugh. London: Watts & Co. The Thinkers Library, No. 4.
25
Ibid, p. 23.
26
Ibid, p. 1.
27

Modernizing the Case for God. Time Magazine, 7 April 1980, pp. 65-66. Available

at: http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,921990,00.html [Accessed
2nd October 2016].
28
Crick, F. (1982). Life Itself: Its Origin and Nature. London: Futura Publications,
pp. 117-129.
29
Hitchens, C. (2007). God Is Not Great: The Case Against Religion. New York:
Atlantic Books, p. 13.

365

30

Harris, S. (2006). The End of Faith: Religion, Terror and the Future of Reason.
London: The Free Press, p. 227.
31
Dawkins, R. (2006). The God Delusion, p. 20.
Cited in William, P. S. (2009). A Sceptic’s Guide to Atheism. Milton Keynes:
Paternoster, p. 41.
33
Ibid p. 44.
34
Office for National Statistics. (2011). Religion in England Wales 2011.[online]
Available at: http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/census/2011-census/key-statistics-for32

local-authorities-in-england-and-wales/rpt-religion.html#tab-Changing-picture-ofreligious-affiliation-over-last-decade. [Accessed 1st October 2016].
35
Biotechnology Report. Fieldwork January 2010 – February 2010. Bruxelles: TNS
Opinion & Social, p. 203. Available at:
http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/ebs_341_en.pdf [Accessed 1 st
October 2016].
36
The history of atheism in China has its own complexities and cannot be equated
with Western atheism. Chinese atheism is not due to Darwinism or a Dawkins type
of new atheism. Atheism in China is based on a unique set of cultural, political and
intellectual factors. It has to be studied on its own.
37
Zuckerman, P. (2007). Atheism: Contemporary Numbers and Patterns. In: M.
Martin, ed, The Cambridge Companion to Atheism, p. 61.
38
Ibid, p. 55.
39

WIN-Gallup International. (2012). Global Index of Religiosity and Atheism, p. 16.
Available at: http://www.wingia.com/web/files/news/14/file/14.pdf [Accessed 2nd
October 216].
40

Some of ideas in this chapter have been inspired by and adapted from Craig, W.L.

The absurdity of life without god. Available at: http://www.reasonablefaith.org/theabsurdity-of-life-without-god [Accessed 23rd November 2016].
41
Schopenhauer, A. (2014). Studies in Pessimism: On the Sufferings of the World.
[ebook] The University of Adelaide Library. Chapter 1. Available at:
https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/s/schopenhauer/arthur/pessimism/chapter1.html
[Accessed 2nd October 2016].

366

The Qur’an, Chapter 12, Verse 87.
The Qur’an, Chapter 99, Verses 6 to 8.
44
The Qur’an, Chapter 45, Verse 22.
42
43

The Qur’an, Chapter 50, Verse 35.
The Qur’an, Chapter 10, Verse 26.
47
The Qur’an, Chapter 36, Verses 55 to 58.
48
The Qur’an, Chapter 17, Verse 70.
49
The Qur’an, Chapter 3, Verse 191.
45
46

The Qur’an, Chapter, 32, Verse 18.
Nasr, S. H. (2004). The Heart of Islam: Enduring Values for Humanity. New
York: HarperSanFrancisco, p. 275.
52
The Qur’an, Chapter 57, Verses 20 to 21.
50
51

53

Cited in BBC (no date) Radio 4 - in our time - greatest philosopher - Ludwig
Wittgenstein. Available at:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/history/inourtime/greatest_philosopher_ludwig_wittgen
stein.shtml [Accessed 1st October 2016].
54
Cited in Pollan, S. M. and Levine, M. (2006). It’s All in Your Head: Thinking
Your Way to Happiness. New York: HarperCollins, p. 4.
55
Williams, M. (2015). The Life Cycle of the Sun. Available at:
http://www.universetoday.com/18847/life-of-the-sun/ [Accessed 2nd October 2016].
56
The Qur’an, Chapter 3, Verse 191.
57

Dawkins, R. (2006). The Selfish Gene. 30th Anniversary edition. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
58
The Qur’an, Chapter 7, Verse 128.
59

The Qur’an, Chapter 39, Verse 29.

60

Mogahed, Y. (2015). Reclaim Your Heart. 2nd Edition. San Clemente, CA: FB
Publishing, p. 55.
61
The Qur’an, Chapter 11, Verse 105.
62
The Qur’an, Chapter 25, Verse 75.
63
The Qur’an, Chapter 59, Verse 19.

367

64

Dawkins, R. (2001). River Out of Eden: A Darwinian View of Life. London:
Phoenix, p. 155.
65
BonJour, L. (1998). In Defense of Pure Reason. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, pp. 100-102.
66
BonJour, L. (1995). “Toward a Moderate Rationalism.” Philosophical Topics 23,
no. 1: 50.
67
Basic assumptions of science (no date) Available at:
http://undsci.berkeley.edu/article/basic_assumptions [Accessed 14th November
2016].
68
Darwin Correspondence Project (2016) Available at:
https://www.darwinproject.ac.uk/letter/DCP-LETT-13230.xml [Accessed 4th October
2016].
O’Hear, A. (1997). Beyond Evolution: Human Nature and the Limits of
Evolutionary Explanation. New York: Oxford University Press, p. 60.
70
Gray, J. (2014). The Closed Mind of Richard Dawkins. Available at:
https://newrepublic.com/article/119596/appetite-wonder-review-closed-mindrichard-dawkins [Accessed 4th October 2016].
69

71

Francis, C. (1994). The Astonishing Hypothesis: The Scientific Search for the
Soul. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, p. 262.
72
Pinker, S. (1997). How the Mind Works. New York: W. W. Norton, p. 305.
73
Harris, S. (2010). The Moral Landscape. New York: Free Press, p. 66.
Sage, James. “Truth-Reliability and the Evolution of Human Cognitive Faculties.”
Philosophical Studies: An International Journal for Philosophy in the Analytic
Tradition 117, no. 1/2 (2004): 102.
74

75

Ibid, p. 104.

76

Ibid.
Ibid.
78
Tzortzis, H. (2019). Can evolution adequately explain our truth-reliable cognitive
faculties? Available at: http://www.hamzatzortzis.com/can-evolution-adequatelyexplain-our-truth-reliable-cognitive-faculties. [Accessed 30th September 2019].
77

79

The Qur’an, Chapter 41, Verse 53.

368

The Qur’an, Chapter 47, Verse 24.
The Qur’an, Chapter 11, Verse 51.
82
The Qur’an, Chapter 3, Verse 190.
80
81

83

Tallis, R. (2014). Aping Mankind: Neuromania, Darwinitis and the
Misrepresentation of Humanity. New York: Routledge, p. 87.
84
Taken and adapted from Searle, J. (1989). Reply to Jacquette. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, 49(4), 703.
85
The response to this objection has been inspired by and adapted from Kane B.
(2014) Philosophy of mind 4.2 - objections to functionalism. Available at:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZmEk1lq_Wgk [Accessed 24 th October 2016].
86
Searle, J. (1984). Minds, Brains and Science. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard
University Press, pp. 32-33.
87

Searle, J. (1990). Is the Brain’s Mind a Computer Program? Scientific American,
262: 27.
88
Ibid, p. 30.
89
Ibid. For responses to other objections and more detail on this topic please see:
Searle, J. (1980) Minds, Brains, and Programs. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3, pp.
417-424; Searle, J. (1980) Intrinsic Intentionality. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3,
pp. 450-456; Searle, J. (1989). Reply to Jacquette. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 49(4), pp. 701-708; Searle, J. (1990). Is the Brain's Mind a Computer
Program? Scientific American, 262, pp. 26-31; Searle, J. (1992). The Rediscovery of
the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
90
Hasker, W. Metaphysics. Downer’s Grove, Ill: InterVarsity, 1983, p. 49, and see:
“The Transcendental Refutation of Determinism,” Southern Journal of Philosophy,
11, 1973, pp. 175–83.
91

BBC Today. (2008). Available at:
http://news.bbc.co.uk/today/hi/today/newsid_7745000/7745514.stm [Accessed 1 st
October 2016].
92
Ibn Taymiyyah, A. (1991). Dar’ Ta’arud al-‘Aql wan-Naql. 2nd Edition. Edited by
Muhammad Rashad Salim. Riyadh, Jami’ah al-Imam Muhammad bin Saud alIslamiyah. Vol 8, p. 482.

369

93

Al-Isfahani, Al-Raghib. (2009). Mufradat al-Qurʾan al-Karim. 4th Edition. Edited
by Ṣafwan Dawudi. Beirut: al-Dar al-Shamiyya, p. 640.
94
Petrovich, O. (1997). Understanding the Non-Natural Causality in Children and
Adults: A Case Against Artificialism. Psyche en Geloof, 8, pp. 151-165.
95
Zwartz, B. (2008). Infants ‘Have Natural Belief In God’. Available at:
http://www.theage.com.au/national/infants-have-natural-belief-in-god-200807253l3b.html [Accessed 4th October 2016].
96
Bloom, P. (2007). Religion is Natural. Developmental Science, 10, pp. 147-151.
Kelemen, D. (2004). Are Children “Intuitive Theists”? Reasoning About Purpose
and Design in Nature. Psychological Science, 15(5), pp. 295-301.
98
Järnefelt, E., Canfield, C. F. & Kelemen, D. (2015). The Divided Mind of a
Disbeliever: Intuitive Beliefs About Nature as Purposefully Created Among
97

Different Groups of Non-Religious Adults. Cognition, 140, pp. 72-88.
99
Ibid, 74.
100
Ibid.
101
Ibid, 79.
102
Ibid, 81.
103

Ibid, 82.
Ibid, 83.
105
Ibid, 84.
106
Ibid.
104

107

Corriveau, K. H., Chen, E. E. and Harris, P. L. (2015), Judgments About Fact and
Fiction by Children From Religious and Nonreligious Backgrounds. Cogn Sci, 39,
pp. 353–382.
108

Barrett, J. L. (2012). Born Believers: The Science of Children’s Religious Belief.

New York: Free Press, pp. 35-36.
109
Al-‘Asqalani, A. (2000). Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari. 3rd Edition. Riyadh:
Dar al-Salam, p. 316.
110
Narrated by Muslim.
111
Al-Ghazali. (2007). Kimiya-e Saadat: The Alchemy of Happiness. Translated by
Claude Field. Kuala Lumpur: Islamic Book Trust, p. 10.

370

Ibn Taymiyyah, A. (2004). Majmu’ al-Fatawa Shaykhul Islam Ahmad bin
Taymiyyah. Madina: Mujama’ Malik Fahad. Vol 16, p. 324.
113
Ibid. Vol 6, p. 73.
112

Ibn Taymiyyah, A. (1991). Dar’ Ta’arud al-‘Aql wan-Naql. Vol 7, p. 219.
The Qur’an, Chapter 16, Verse 69.
116
The Qur’an, Chapter 10, Verse 24.
117
The Qur’an, Chapter 52, Verses 35 and 36.
118
The Qur’an, Chapter 28, Verse 56.
114
115

119

The Qur’an, Chapter 14, Verse 10.
Farfur, M. S. (2010). The Beneficial Message and The Definitive Proof in The
Study of Theology. Translation and notes by Wesam Charkawi. Auburn: Wesam
Charkawi, pp. 85-86.
120

121

Gwynne, R. W. (2004) Logic, Rhetoric and Legal Reasoning in the Qur’an: God's
Arguments. Abingdon: Routledge. 2004, p. ix.
122
Ibid, p. 203
123
Cited in Hoover, J. (2007). Ibn Taymiyya’s Theodicy of Perpetual Optimism.
Leiden: Brill, p. 31.
124

The Qur’an, Chapter 52, Verses 35 and 36.
Mohar, M. A. (2003). A word for word meaning of the Qur’ān. Vol III. Ipswich:
JIMAS, p. 1713.
126
This argument has been inspired by and adapted from Idris, J. (1994) The
125

Contemporary Physicists and God’s Existence. Available at:
http://www.jaafaridris.com/the-contemporary-physicists-and-gods-existence/
[Accessed 23rd November 2016].
127

Hilbert, D. (1964). On the Infinite. In: P. Benacerraf and H. Putnam (eds),

Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
p. 151.
128
Quine: Terms explained. Available at:
http://www.rit.edu/cla/philosophy/quine/underdetermination.html [Accessed 23rd
October 2016].

371

129

American Physical Society. (1998). Focus: The Force of Empty Space. Available
at: http://physics.aps.org/story/v2/st28 [Accessed 23rd November 2016].
130
Leibniz, G. W. (1714). The Principles of Nature and Grace, Based on Reason.
1714. Available at: http://www.earlymoderntexts.com/assets/pdfs/leibniz1714a.pdf
[Accessed 4th October 2016].
131
Krauss, L. M. (2012). A Universe from Nothing: Why is there Something Rather
Than Nothing. London: Simon & Schuster, p. 170.
132
Ibid.
133

Ibid, p. 105.
Albert, D. (2012). ‘A Universe From Nothing,’ by Lawrence M. Krauss.
Available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/25/books/review/a-universe-fromnothing-by-lawrence-m-krauss.html?_r=0 [Accessed 1st October 2016].
134

135

Craig, W.L. (2012). A Universe from Nothing. Available at:
http://www.reasonablefaith.org/a-universe-from-nothing [Accessed 9th October
2016].
136
Analogies adapted from Craig, W.L. (2012). A Universe from Nothing. Available
at: http://www.reasonablefaith.org/a-universe-from-nothing [Accessed 9th October
2016].
137
Krauss, L. A (2012). Universe from Nothing, p. 174.
138
Sober, E. (2010). Empiricism. In: Psillos, S and Curd, M, ed, The Routledge
Companion to Philosophy of Science. Abingdon: Routledge, pp. 137-138.
139

Krauss, L. (2012) A Universe from Nothing, p. xiii.
Ibid p. 147.
141
iERA. (2013). Lawrence Krauss vs Hamza Tzortzis - Islam vs. Atheism Debate.
140

Available at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uSwJuOPG4FI [Accessed 10 th
September 2016].
142
Tony Sobrado. (2012). How the Universe Came from ‘Nothing’, Richard
Dawkins and Lawrence Krauss discuss. Available at:
https://youtu.be/CXGyesfHzew?t=921 [Accessed 2nd October 2016].

372

143

Wali-Allah, S. (2003). The Conclusive Argument from God (Hujjat Allah alBaligha). Translated by Marcia K. Hermansen. Islamabad: Islamic Research
Institute, p. 33.
144

Cited in Al-Bayhaqi, A. (2006). Kitab al-Asma was-Sifat. Edited by Abdullah AlHashidi. Cairo: Maktabatu al-Suwaadi. Vol 2, p. 271.
145
This example has been taken from Green, A. R. The Man in the Red Underpants.
nd
2 Edition. London: One Reason, pp. 9-10.
146
This example has been adapted from Idris, J. (2006). Contemporary Physicists and
God’s Existence (part 2 of 3): A Series of Causes. Available at:
http://www.islamreligion.com/articles/491/ [Accessed 2nd October 2016].
147
Idris, J. (2006). Contemporary Physicists and God’s Existence (part 2 of 3): A
Series of Causes. Available at: http://www.islamreligion.com/articles/491/ [Accessed
2nd October 2016].
148
Cited in Goodman, L. E. (1971). Ghazali's Argument From Creation (I).
International Journal of Middle East Studies, 2(1), 83.
149
Flew, A. (2007). There is a God: How the World's Most Notorious Atheist
Changed His Mind. New York: HarperOne. 2007, p. 165.
150

Narrated by Bukhari.
Cited in Al-Bayhaqi, A. (2006). Kitab al-Asma was-Sifat. Vol 2, p. 270.
152
The Qur’an, Chapter 112, Verses 2 and 3.
153
Lennox, J. C. (2009). God’s Undertaker: Has Science Buried God? Oxford: Lion
151

Books, p. 183.
154
Hoover, J. (2004). Perpetual Creativity in the Perfection of God: Ibn Taymiyya’s
Hadith Commentary on God's Creation of this World. Journal of Islamic Studies
15(3), 296.
The Qur’an, Chapter 42, Verse 11.
The Qur’an, Chapter 58, Verse 7.
157
This is an estimate based on the number of hydrogen atoms that are contained in
the estimated total number of stars in the observable universe. The number is higher
if other atoms are included.
155
156

158

The Qur’an, Chapter 24, Verse 45.

373

159

Al-Tahawi. (2007). The Creed of Imam Al-Tahawi. Translated from Arabic,
Introduced and Annotated by Hamza Yusuf. California: Zaytuna Institute, p. 50.
160
The Qur’an, Chapter 2, Verse 20.
Al-Qurtubi, M. (2006). Al-Jaami’ al-Ahkaam al-Qur’an. Edited by Dr. Adullah
Al-Turki and Muhammad ‘Arqasusi. Beirut: Mu’assasa al-Risalah. Vol 1, pp. 338-9.
162
Inspired and adapted from Craig, W. L. The coherence of Theism - part 2.
Available at: http://www.bethinking.org/god/the-coherence-of-theism/part-2
[Accessed 13th November 2016].
161

163

Swinburne, R. (2004). The Existence of God. 2nd Edition. New York: Oxford
University Press, pp. 52-72.
164
The Qur’an, Chapter 11, Verse 107.
165
Al-Ghazali, M. (2005). Ihyaa ‘Ulum al-Deen. Beirut: Dar Ibn Hazm, p. 107.
Rizvi, A. (2016). The Atheist Muslim. New York: St. Martin’s Press, p. 127.
The answer to this objection has been inspired by and adapted from Craig, W.L.
#148 Causation and Spacetime. Available at:
https://www.reasonablefaith.org/writings/question-answer/causation-and-spacetime/
[Accessed 27th September 2019].
166
167

168

Huemer, H and Kovitz, B. (2003). Causation as Simultaneous and
Continuous, The Philosophical Quarterly, 53 (213), 556.
169
This is example is adapted from Immanuel Kant. See Kant, I. (1965) Critique of
Pure Reason. Translated by N. Kemp Smith. New York: St Martin’s Press, A203.
Wolchover, N. (2016). Quantum Gravity’s Time Problem. Available at:
https://www.quantamagazine.org/quantum-gravitys-time-problem-20161201/
[Accessed 26th September 2019].
170

171

Adapted from Craig, W. and Sinclair, D. (2009). The Kalam Cosmological

Argument. In: Craig, W. L. and Moreland, J. P. The Blackwell Companion to
Natural Theology. West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, p. 196.
172
Wolchover, N. (2019). Physicists Debate Hawking’s Idea That the Universe Had
No Beginning. Available at: https://www.quantamagazine.org/physicists-debatehawkings-idea-that-the-universe-had-no-beginning-20190606/ [Accessed 26th
September 2019].

374

173

Randhawa, S. (2011). The Kalam Cosmological Argument and the Problem of
Divine Creative Agency and Purpose. Draft version. Available at:
http://www.academia.edu/29016615/The_Kal%C4%81m_Cosmological_Argument_
and_the_Problem_of_Divine_Creative_Agency_and_Purpose [Accessed 22 nd
October 2016].
174
Many concepts of the argument presented in this chapter have been adapted from
and inspired by the Islamic scholarly tradition and contemporary Christian
philosophical work. See Al-Ghazali, A. (2003). Al-Itiqaad fi Al-Iqtisaad. Beirut: Al
Maktabah Al Sharqiyah; Ibn Sina, A. (1957). Al Ishaarat wa Al-Tanbihaat. Cairo:
Dal al Mar’rif; Ibn Sina, A. (1982). Kitaab Al Najaat fi Al Hikmah Al Muntiqiyah
wa Al Tabia wa Ilahiyah. Beirut: Dar Al Afaaq; Taymiyyah, I. (2009). Sharh AlIshbahaniyah. 1st Edition, Riyadh: Maktabah Dar Al-Minhaaj; Craig, W. L. (2011).
Contingency Argument for God. Available at:
https://www.youtube.com/view_play_list?p=A7CE655E55212940. [Accessed 20 th
October 2019].
175
For an in-depth discussion on necessity please see Pruss, R. and Rasmussen, J. L.
(2018). Necessary Existence. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 11-32.
176

This section is inspired by adapted from Craig, W. L. (2011). Contingency
Argument for God - Part 4 - William Lane Craig.
Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lb275fbEpic [Accessed 20th
October 2019].
177

Analogy adapted from Wainwright, W. J. (1988). Philosophy of Religion. 2nd.
Edition. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing.
178
The Qur’an, Chapter 3, Verse 97.
179

The Qur’an, Chapter 35, Verse 15.

Ibn Kathir, I. (1999). Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Adheem. Edited by Saami As-Salaama.
2 Edition. Riyadh: Dar Tayiba. Vol 6, p. 541.
181
Hossein, S. (1993). An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines. Albany:
State University of New York Press, pp. 197-200.
182
Al-Ghazali, M. (1964). Fada’ih al-Batiniyya. Edited by Abdurahman Badawi.
180

nd

Kuwait: Muasassa Dar al-Kutub al-Thiqafa, p. 82.

375

183

Craig, W. L. (2008). Reasonable Faith: Christian Truth and Apologetics. 3 rd
Edition. Wheaton, Illinois: Crossway Books, p. 109.
184
Godwin, S. J. (no date). Transcript of the Russell/Copleston radio debate.
Available at: http://www.scandalon.co.uk/philosophy/cosmological_radio.htm
[Accessed 4th October 2016].
185
Adapted from Craig, W. L. (2011). Contingency Argument for God - Part 2 William Lane Craig. Available at:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iTCbQnVlYSo& [Accessed 20th October 2019].
186

Parts of the answer to this objection has been adapted from and inspired by
Rasmussen, J. (2017). 8 best objections to the "contingency" argument (episode 10
of 20). Available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=asCqyTCaoNM. [Accessed
20th October 2019].
187

Pruss, R. and Rasmussen, J. L. (2018). Necessary Existence. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
188
Hijab, M. (2019). Kalam Cosmological Arguments. Independently Published.
189
Eaton, G. (2001). Remembering God: Reflections on Islam. Lahore: Suhail
Academy, pp. 18-19.
190

New Scientist: The Collection. The Big Questions. Vol I, Issue I, p. 51.
Koch, C. (2012). Consciousness: Confessions of a Romantic Reductionist.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, pp. 23-24.
192
Chalmers, D. (2010). The Character of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University
191

Press, p. 5.
193
Alter, T. (2014). Hard Problem of Consciousness. In: Bayne, T., Cleeremans, A.,
and Wilken, P. (ed.). The Oxford Companion to Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, p. 340.
194

The following 5 points have been taken and adapted from Chalmers, D. (2010)
The Character of Consciousness, pp. 11-13.
195
Discover Magazine. (2016). What is Consciousness? | DiscoverMagazine.com.
Available at: http://discovermagazine.com/1992/nov/whatisconsciousn149.
[Accessed 1st October 2016].

376

196

Revonsuo. A. (2010). Consciousness: The Science of Subjectivity. Hove, East
Sussex: Psychology Press, p. 202.
197
Manzoti, R. and Moderato, P. (2014). Neuroscience: Dualism in Disguise. In:
Lavazza, A. and Robinson, H. (ed.). Contemporary Dualism: A Defense. Abingdon:
Routledge, p. 82.
198
Ibid.
199
Chalmers, D. (2010). The Character of Consciousness, p. 105.
200
Levine, J. (2011). The Explanatory Gap. In: Bayne, T., Cleeremans, A., and
Wilken, P. (ed.). The Oxford Companion to Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, p. 280.
201
Stoljar, D. (2016). “Physicalism”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Edward N. Zalta (ed.). Available at:
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2016/entries/physicalism [Accessed 4 th October
2016].
202
Jackson, F. (1986). What Mary Didn't Know. The Journal of Philosophy, 83, 5,
pp. 291-295.
203
Chalmers, D. (2010). The Character of Consciousness, p. 108.
204

Ibid, p. 109.
Loar, Brian. (1997). “Phenomenal Consciousness”, in The Nature of
Consciousness: Philosophical Debates. ed. by Ned Block et al. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press.
205

206

The above discussion has been taken and adapted from the relevant lecture and
seminar discussion that was held during my postgraduate degree (Masters in
Philosophy). Patterson, S. (2016). Week 6: Responses to the Modal and Knowledge
Arguments. Lecture notes distributed in Philosophy of Mind at Birkbeck College,
University of London on 16th November 2016.
207
Tye, Michael. (2009). Consciousness Revisited: Materialism without Phenomenal
Concepts. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, pp. 49-51.
208
Demircioglu, Erhan. (2013). “Physicalism and Phenomenal Concepts.”
Philosophical Studies: An International Journal for Philosophy in the Analytic
Tradition, 165, 1.

377

Polcyn, Karol. (2007) “Brian Loar on Physicalism and Phenomenal Concepts.”
Diametros, 11, pp. 10-39.
210
Chalmers, D. (2007). Phenomenal Consciousness and the Explanatory Gap. In:
209

Alter, T. and Walter, S. (ed). Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge:
New Essays on Consciousness and Physicalism. New York: Oxford University
Press. A version of this essay can be found online at: http://consc.net/papers/pceg.pdf
[Accessed 21st November 2016].
211
Chalmers, D. (2010). The Character of Consciousness, p. 111.
212

Churchland, P. (1988). Matter and Consciousness: A Contemporary Introduction
to the Philosophy of the Mind. Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 43-39.
213
Ibid.
214
Ibid.
215

Nave, Carl. HyperPhysics. Kinetic Theory. Accessed August 30, 2017.
http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/Kinetic/kinthe.html.
216
Jackson, Frank, Pettit, Philip and Smith, Michael, Mind, Morality and
Explanation: Selected Collaborations (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004), p.
30.
217

Ibid, 31.
Ibid, 30.
219
Revonsuo, A. (2010). Consciousness: The Science of Subjectivity, pp. 180-181.
220
Ibid, p. 21.
218

221

Ibid, p. 22.
Ibid, p. 24.
223
Lund, D. (2014) Materialism, Dualism and the Conscious Self. In: Lavazza, A.
222

and Robinson, H. (ed.). Contemporary Dualism: A Defense. Abingdon: Routledge, p.
57.
224
Solomon, R. (2005). Introducing Philosophy: A Text with Integrated Readings.
th
8 Edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 416.
225
Block, N. (1980). Troubles with Functionalism. In: Block, N. (ed.). Readings in
the Philosophy of Psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Vol 1, pp.
268-205.

378

226

Van Gulick, R. (2008). Functionalism and Qualia. In: Velmans, M. and
Schneider, S. (ed.). The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Oxford: Blackwell
Publishing, p. 381.
227

Revonsuo, A. (2010). Consciousness: The Science of Subjectivity, p. 39.
Ibid, p. 26.
229
Ibid, pp. 29-30.
230
Ibid, p. 30.
231
Sober, E. (2010). Empiricism. In: Psillos, S. and Curd, M. The Routledge
228

Companion to Philosophy of Science, pp. 137-138.
232
Eccles, J. C. (1989). Evolution of the Brain, Creation of the Self. Abingdon:
Routledge, p. 241.
233
Sober, E. (2000). Philosophy of Biology. 2nd Edition. Boulder, CO: Westview
Press, p. 24.
234
Seager, W. and Allen-Hermanson, S. (2015). “Panpsychism”, The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2015 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.). Available
online at: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2015/entries/panpsychism/.
235
Feser, E. (2006). The Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: OneWorld, p. 138.
236

Moreland, J. P. (2008). Consciousness and the Existence of God: A Theistic
Argument. Abingdon: Routledge, p. 35.
237
Ibid, p. 192.
238
Taliaferro, C. (2006). Naturalism and the Mind. In: Craig, W. L. and. Moreland, J.
P. (ed.). Naturalism: A Critical Analysis. Abingdon: Routledge, pp. 148-9.
239
Ibid p. 150.
240
The Qur’an, Chapter 2, Verse 255.
241

The Qur’an, Chapter 67, Verse 14.

242

Taliaferro, C. (2014). The Promise and Sensibility of Integrative Dualism. In:
Lavazza, A. and Robinson, H. (ed.). Contemporary Dualism: A Defense. Abingdon:
Routledge, pp. 202-203.
243
The Qur’an, Chapter 17, Verse 85.
244
The Qur’an, Chapter 30, Verse 8.

379

245

Analogy adapted from Collins, R. (2002). God, Design and Fine-Tuning. Adapted
version. Available at: http://home.messiah.edu/~rcollins/Finetuning/Revised%20Version%20of%20Fine-tuning%20for%20anthology.doc
[Accessed 24th October 2016]
246
The Qur’an, Chapter 55, Verses 5 to 7.
247
The Qur’an, Chapter 3, Verse 190.
248
The Qur’an, Chapter 16, Verse 12.
249
Tibawi, A.L. (ed. and tr.). (1965). Al-Risala al-Qudsiyya (The Jerusalem Epistle)
“Al-Ghazali’s Tract on Dogmatic Theology”. In: The Islamic Quarterly, 9:3–4
(1965), 3-4.
250
Ibn Abi Al-‘Izz. (2000). Commentary on the Creed of At-Tahawi. Translated by
Muhammad ‘Abdul-Haqq Ansari. Riyadh: Institute of Islamic and Arabic Sciences
in America, p. 9
251
Collins, R. (2009). The Teleological Argument. In: Craig, W. L. and Moreland, J.
P. The Blackwell Companion to Natural Theology. West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell,
p. 212.
252
Ibid.
253

John Leslie. (2001). Infinite Minds: A Philosophical Cosmology. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, p. 205.
254
Collins, R. The Teleological Argument, p. 212.
255
Cited in Jammer, M. (1999). Einstein and Religion. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, p. 150.
256
Dawkins, R. (1999). Unweaving the Rainbow. London: Penguin, p. 4.
257
Ward, P. D. and Brownlee, D. (2004). Rare Earth: Why Complex Life Is
Uncommon in the Universe. New York, NY: Copernicus Books, p. 16.
258

Ibid, pp. 221-222.
‘No Jupiter, no advanced life? ’ - Evolution May Be Impossible in Star Systems
without a Giant Planet. (2012). Available at:
http://www.dailygalaxy.com/my_weblog/2012/11/would-advanced-life-beimpossible-in-star-systems-without-a-jupiter-.html [Accessed 2nd October 2016].
259

380

260

Rasio, F.A. and E.B. Ford. (1996). Dynamical instabilities and the formation of
extrasolar planetary systems. Science, 274, pp. 954-956.
261
Ward, P. D. and Brownlee, D. (2004). Rare Earth: Why Complex Life Is
Uncommon in the Universe. New York, NY: Copernicus Books, pp. 238 – 239.
262
Ibid, p. 227.
263
Ibid, p. 223.
264
Ibid.
265
Inspired by and adapted from Collins, R. The Fine-Tuning Design Argument.
PowerPoint Presentation. Available at: http://home.messiah.edu/~rcollins/Finetuning/Fine-tuning%20powerpoint%20final%20version%2010-3-08.ppt [Accessed
24th October 2016].
266
Ibid.
267

Craig, W. L. (2008). Reasonable Faith: Christian Truth and Apologetics, p. 161.
Davies, P. (1993). The Mind of God: Science and the Search for Ultimate
Meaning. London: Penguin, p. 169.
269
Cited in Flew, A. (2007) There is a God, p.119.
270
Ibid.
268

271

Barnes, L. A. (2011). The Fine-Tuning of the Universe for Intelligent Life.
Sydney Institute for Astronomy. Available at:
http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/arxiv/pdf/1112/1112.4647v1.pdf [Accessed 5 th October
2016].
272

Adapted from Collins, R. (2009). The Teleological Argument, pp. 262-265.
I am grateful to Abu Hurayra for his contribution in responding to these
objections.
273

274

Dawkins, R. (2006). The God Delusion, p. 158.

Both points have been adapted from Professor William Lane Craig’s treatment on
the issue. Craig, W. L. (2009). Dawkins’s Delusion. In: Copan, P. and Craig, W. L.
(ed.). Contending with Christianity’s Critics: Answering New Atheists & Other
Objectors. Nashville, Tennessee: B & H Publishing Group, p. 4.
276
The Qur’an, Chapter 112, Verses 1 to 4.
275

277

Flew, A. (2007). There is a God, p. 111.

381

278

Collins, R. (2002). God, Design and Fine-Tuning. Adapted version. Available at:
http://home.messiah.edu/~rcollins/Fine-tuning/Revised%20Version%20of%20Finetuning%20for%20anthology.doc [Accessed 24th October 2016].
279

Adapted from Collins, R. (2009) The Teleological Argument, p. 276.
Ibid.
281
Markham, I. S. (2010). Against Atheism: Why Dawkins, Hitchens, and Harris are
Fundamentally Wrong. West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell, p. 34.
282
Pölzer, Thomas. Moral Reality and the Empirical Sciences. New York:
280

Routledge, 2018, pp. 2 - 4.
283
The arguments presented in this chapter, including some of the ideas, have been
inspired by and adapted from Craig, W. L. Can We Be Good Without
God? Available at: http://www.reasonablefaith.org/can-we-be-good-without-god
[Accessed 24th October 2016]; Craig, W. L. (2008). Reasonable Faith: Christian
Truth and Apologetics Wheaton. Illinois: Crossway Books, pp. 172-183.
284
Ibid.
285
The Qur’an, Chapter 52, Verse 28.
286
The Qur’an, Chapter 7, Verse 28.
287

Mackie, J. L. (1990). Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong. London: Penguin. 1990,
p. 15.
288
Akhtar, S. (2008). The Qur’an and the Secular Mind. Abingdon: Routledge, p.99.
289
The Qur’an, Chapter 2, Verse 163.
The Qur’an, Chapter 59, Verses 22 to 24.
Darwin, C. (1874). The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. 2 nd
Edition, p. 99. Available at: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/2300 [Accessed 4 th
290
291

October 2016].
292

National Geographic. (1996). Sharks in Love. Available at:
http://video.nationalgeographic.com/video/shark_nurse_mating [Accessed 24th
October 2016].
293
Cited in Linville, M. D. (2009). The Moral Argument. In: Craig, W. L. and
Moreland, J. P. (ed.). The Blackwell Companion to Natural Theology. West Sussex:
Wiley-Blackwell, p. 400.

382

The Qur’an, Chapter 21, Verse 22.
Al-Mahalli, J. and As-Suyuti, J. (2007). Tafsir Al-Jalalayn. Translated by Aisha
Bewley. London: Dar Al Taqwa, p. 690; Mahali, J. and As-Suyuti J. (2001) Tafsir al294
295

Jalalayn. 3rd Edition. Cairo: Dar al-Hadith, p. 422. You can access a copy online at:
https://ia800205.us.archive.org/1/items/FP158160/158160.pdf [Accessed 1 st October
2016].
296
Avveroes. (2001). Faith and Reason in Islam. Translated with footnotes, index
and bibliography by Ibrahim Y. Najjar. Oxford: One World, p. 40.
The Qur’an, Chapter 7, Verse 28.
For more on the Divine nature of the Qur’an, please read: Khan, N. A. and
Randhawa, S. (2016). Divine Speech: Exploring the Qur’an as Literature. Texas:
Bayyinah Institute and Zakariya, A. (2015). The Eternal Challenge: A Journey
297
298

Through The Miraculous Qur’an. London: One Reason.
299
The Qur’an, Chapter 29, Verse 46.
300
Narrated by Tirmidhi.
301
The problem of evil and suffering argument has been expressed in a number of
different ways. Some of the arguments use the words good, merciful, loving or kind
interchangeably. Despite the varying use of words, the argument remains the same.
Instead of using the word good, terms such as merciful, loving, kind, etc., can also be
used. The problem of evil assumes that the traditional concept of God must include
an attribute that would imply God does not want evil and suffering to exist. Hence,
using alternative words such as merciful, loving and kind do not affect the argument.
302
The Problem of Evil, University of Notre Damme slides. Available at:
https://www3.nd.edu/~dpattill/Courses/Intro%20Fall%2015/Slides/Problem%20of%
20Evil%20Slides.pdf [Accessed 1st October 2020].
303

Ibid.
Ibid.
305
Ibid.
306
Ibid.
307
This assumption has been adapted from Professor William Lane Craig’s treatment
304

on the problem of evil. Moreland, J. P. and Craig, W. L. (2003). Philosophical

383

Foundations for a Christian Worldview. Downers Grove, Ill, InterVarsity Press. See
chapter 27.
308
Shaha, A. (2012). The Young Atheist’s Handbook, p. 51.
This part of the story shows God’s mercy. All children enter paradise—which is
eternal bliss—regardless of their beliefs and actions. Therefore, God inspiring the
man to kill the boy is to be understood through the lens of mercy and compassion.
310
The Qur’an, Chapter 18, Verses 65 to 82.
311
Ibn Kathir, I. (1999). Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Atheem. Vol 5, p. 181.
309

312

Ibid.
Ibn Taymiyyah, A. (2004). Majmu’ al-Fatawa Shaykhul Islam Ahmad bin
Taymiyyah. Vol 14, p. 266.
314
Ibn Taymiyyah, A. (1986). Minhaj al-Sunnah. Edited by Muhammad Rashad
313

Salim. Riyadh: Jami’ah al-Imam Muhammad bin Saud al-Islamiyah. Vol 3, p142.
315
Cited in Hoover, J. (2007). Ibn Taymiyya’s Theodicy of Perpetual Optimism.
Leiden: Brill, p.4.
316
The Qur’an, Chapter 51, Verse 56.
317
The Qur’an, Chapter 67, Verse 2.
The Qur’an, Chapter 39, Verse 7.
Narrated by Tirmidhi.
320
The Qur’an, Chapter 2, Verse 214.
321
The Qur’an Chapter 2, Verse 286.
318
319

The Qur’an, Chapter 5, Verse 100.
Al-Bayhaqi’s Shuʿab al-Iman, traced back to Al-Hasan Al-Basri, who ascribes it
to the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬. The scholars have graded this Prophetic tradition as
322
323

hasan; its level of authenticity is good.
The Qur’an, Chapter 57, Verse 20.
Narrated by Muslim.
326
Narrated by Bukhari.
327
Narrated by Muslim.
328
Narrated by Bukhari.
324
325

384

329

Anyone that attempts suicide bombing or engages in terrorism and dies as a result
is not considered a martyr. These evil acts are forbidden in Islam.
330
Narrated by Muslim.
331

Narrated by Ahmad.
Narrated by Muslim.
333
Ibid.
334
Ibid.
335
Gauch, H. G, Jr. (2012). Scientific Method in Brief. Cambridge: Cambridge
332

University Press, p. 98.
336
Farhad, A. (2013). Richard Dawkins - science works bitches! Available at:
https://youtu.be/0OtFSDKrq88?t=73 [Accessed 2nd October 2016].
337
Russell, B. (1935). Religion and Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 8.
338

Adapted from DPMosteller. (2011). Has science made belief in god unreasonable,
J. P. Moreland. Available at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TU9iiCqHxbE
[Accessed 2nd October 2016].
339
Sober, E. (2010). Empiricism. In: Psillos, S and Curd, M, ed, The Routledge
Companion to Philosophy of Science, pp. 137-138.
340

Darwin, C. The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. 2 nd Edition, p.
99. Available at: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/2300 [Accessed 4th October
2016].
341
iERA. (2013). Lawrence Krauss vs Hamza Tzortzis - Islam vs. Atheism Debate.
Available at: https://youtu.be/uSwJuOPG4FI?t=4161 [Accessed 18th October 2016]
342
Johnson, R. (2013). Rational Morality: A Science of Right and Wrong. Great
Britain: Dangerous Little Books, pp. 19-20.
343

Craig, W.L. (2011). Is Scientism Self-Refuting. Available at:

http://www.reasonablefaith.org/is-scientism-self-refuting [Accessed 4th October
2016].
344
McMyler, B. (2011). Testimony, Truth and Authority. New York: Oxford
University Press, p. 3.
345
Lackey, J. (2006). Introduction. In: Lackey, J. and Sosa, E. (ed.). The
Epistemology of Testimony. Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 2.

385

346

McMyler, B. (2011). Testimony, Truth and Authority, p 10.
Coady, C. A. (1992). Testimony: A Philosophical Study. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, p. 82.
347

348

See Shapiro, J. A. (2011). Evolution: A View from the 21st Century. New Jersey:
FT Press; Pigliucci, M. and Muller, G. B. (ed). (2010). Evolution: The Extended
Synthesis. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press; and Godfrey-Smith, P. (2014). Philosophy of
Biology. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
349
Barker, G. and Kitcher, P. (2013). Philosophy of Science: A New Introduction.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2014, p. 17.
350
Annas, J. and Barnes, J. (1994). Sextus Empiricus: Outlines of Scepticism. New
York: Cambridge University Press, p. 123.
351
Hume, D. (2002). Of scepticism with regard to reason. In: Epistemology:
Huemer, M, ed, Contemporary Readings. Abingdon: Routledge, pp. 298-310.
Originally published in Hume, D. (1902) Sceptical doubts concerning the operations
of understanding. In: Selby-Bigge, L. A., ed, An enquiry concerning human
understanding. In: Enquiries concerning human understanding and concerning the
principles of morals, 2nd edition. Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 298-310.
352

Ibid, p. 305.
Ibid, pp. 304-5.
354
Rosenburg, A. (2012). Philosophy of Science: A Contemporary Introduction.
New York: Routledge, p. 182.
353

355

Okasha, S. (2002). Philosophy of Science, A Very Short Introduction. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, p. 77.
356
Stewart, R. B. (2007). Intelligent Design: William A. Dembski & Michael Ruse in
Dialogue. Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, p.37.
357

Moreland, J. P. (2009). The Recalcitrant Imago Dei. London: SCM Press, p. 4.
Todd, Scott. C. (1999). A View from Kansas on that Evolution Debate.
Correspondence to Nature. 401 (6752): 423, 30 Sept. Available at:
https://www.nature.com/articles/46661 [Accessed 10th May 2018].
358

386

359

iERA. (2013). Lawrence Krauss vs Hamza Tzortzis - Islam vs. Atheism Debate.
Available at: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uSwJuOPG4FI#t=7247 [Accessed
2nd October 2016].
360

Hume, D. (1902). An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, section 88.
Available at: http://www.gutenberg.org/files/9662/9662-h/9662-h.htm [Accessed 4th
October 2016].
361
Fricker, E. (2006). Testimony and Epistemic Autonomy. In: Jennifer Lackey, J
and Sosa, E, ed, The Epistemology of Testimony. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
p. 244.
362
Lehrer, K. (2006). Testimony and Trustworthiness. In: Jennifer Lackey, J and
Sosa, E, ed, The Epistemology of Testimony, p.145.
363
Ibid, p.149.
364

Ibid, p.150.
Ibid.
366
Ibid.
367
Ibid, p.151.
368
Ibid, p.156.
365

369

Ibid, pp. 156-157.
McMyler, B. (2011). Testimony, Truth and Authority, p 66.
371
Ibid, p 69.
372
Hume, D. (1902). An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, section 91.
370

Available at: http://www.gutenberg.org/files/9662/9662-h/9662-h.htm [Accessed 4th
October 2016].
373
Ibid, section 99.
374

Lipton, P. (2004). Inference to the Best Explanation. 2nd ed. Abingdon:

Routledge, p.56.
375
Ibid, pp. 64-65.
376
Harman, G. (1965). The Inference to the Best Explanation. The Philosophical
Review, 74(1), pp. 88-95. Also available at:
http://people.hss.caltech.edu/~franz/Knowledge%20and%20Reality/PDFs/Gilbert%2
0H.%20Harman%20-

387

%20The%20Inference%20to%20the%20Best%20Explanation.pdf [Accessed 4th
October 2016].
377
The Qur’an, Chapter 96, Verse 1.
The Magnificent Qur’an: A Unique History of Preservation. (2010). London:
Exhibition Islam, pp. 145-204.
379
Al-Suyuṭi. J. (2005). Al-Itqan fi ‘Ulum al-Qur’an. Madina: Mujamma Malik
Fahad, p. 1875.
380
Shafi, M. (2005). Ma’riful Qur’an. 2nd Edition. Translated by Muhammad Jasan
378

Askari and Muhamad Shamim. Karachi: Maktaba-e-Darul-Uloom. Vol 1, pp. 139149.
381
Usmani, M. T. (2000). An Approach to the Quranic Sciences. Translated by Dr.
Mohammad Swaleh Siddiqui. Revised and Edited by Rafiq Abdur Rehman. Karachi:
Darul Ishaat, p. 260.
382
Cited in Irwin, R. (1999). The Penguin Anthology of Classical Arabic Literature.
London: Penguin Books, p. 2.
383
Ibn Khaldun, A. The Muqaddimah. Translated by Franz Rosenthal. Chapter 6,
Section 58. Available at:
http://www.muslimphilosophy.com/ik/Muqaddimah/Chapter6/Ch_6_58.htm
[Accessed 9th October 2016].
384
Ibn Rasheeq, A. H. (2000). Al-‘Umda fee Sina’atu al-Sh’iar wa Naqdihi. Edited
by Dr. Al-Nabwi Sha’lan. Cairo: Maktabu al-Khaniji, p. 89.
Al-Qutaybah, A. (1925) ‘Uyun al-Akhbar. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-Arabi. Vol 2,
p. 185.
386
Kermani, K. (2006). Poetry and Language. In: Rippin, A. (ed.). The Blackwell
385

Companion to the Qur’an. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, p. 108.
Abdul-Raof, H. (2003). Exploring the Qur’an. Dundee: Al-Makhtoum Institute
Academic Press, p.64.
388
Personal interview with Professor Angelika Neuwrith in German. A copy of the
recording is available on request.
387

388

Islahi, A. A. (2007). Pondering Over the Qur’an: Tafsir of Surah al-Fatiha and
Surah al-Baqarah. Vol 1. Translated by Mohammad Saleem Kayani. Kuala Lumpur:
Islamic Book Trust, pp. 25-26.
389

Cited in Islahi, A. A. (2007). Pondering Over the Qur’an: Tafsir of Surah alFatiha and Surah al-Baqarah. Vol 1, p. 26.
391
Palmer, E. H. (tr.). (1900). The Qur’an. Part I. Oxford: Clarendon Press, p. lv.
392
Draz, M. A. (2000). Introduction to the Qur’an. London: I. B. Tauris, p. 90.
393
Zammit, M. R. (2002). A Comparative Lexical Study of Qur’anic Arabic. Leiden:
390

Brill, p. 37.
394
Waliyyullāh, S. (2014). Al-Fawz al-Kabīr fī Uṣūl at-Tafsīr. The Great Victory on
Qur’ānic Hermeneutics: A Manual of the Principles and Subtleties of Qur’anic
Tafsīr. Translated, Introduction and Annotated by Tahir Mahmood Kiani. London:
Taha, p.160.
395
Arberry, A. J. (1998). The Koran: Translated with an Introduction by Arthur J.
Arberry. Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. x.
396
Usmani, M. T. (2000). An Approach to the Quranic Sciences, p. 262.
397
Al-Suyuṭi. J. (2005). Al-Itqan fi ‘Ulum al-Qur’an. Madina: Mujamma Malik
Fahad, p. 1881.
398
Ibid.
399
Lawrence, B. (2006). The Qur’an: A Biography. London: Atlantic Books, p 8.
400
Gibb, H. A. R. (1980). Islam: A Historical Survey. Oxford University Press, p.
28.
401
Van Gelder, G. J. H. (2013). Classical Arabic Literature: A Library of Arabic
Literature Anthology. New York: New York University Press, pp. 31-33.
402

McAuley, D. E. (2012). Ibn `Arabi’s Mystical Poetics. Oxford: Oxford University

Press, p.93.
403
Ibid, p. 94.
404
Cited in D. E. (2012). Ibn `Arabi’s Mystical Poetics. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, p.94.
405
Bonebakker, S. A. (1984). Hatimi and his Encounter with Mutanabbi: A
Biographical Sketch. Oxford: North-Holland Publishing Company, p.47.

389

406

Ibid, p.15; and see Ouyang, W. (1997). Literary Criticism in Medieval Arabic
Islamic Culture: The Making of a Tradition. Edinburgh University Press.
407
Ibid, p. 44.
408

Mabillard, A. (1999). Shakespearean sonnet basics: Iambic pentameter and the
English sonnet style. Available at: http://www.shakespeareonline.com/sonnets/sonnetstyle.html [Accessed 5th October 2016].
409
Holland, P. (2013). Shakespeare, William (1564–1616). Oxford Dictionary of
National Biography. Oxford University Press. Available at:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ref:odnb/25200 [Accessed 9th October 2016].
410
Cited in Abdel Haleem, M. (2005). Understanding the Qur’an: Themes & Styles.
London: I. B. Tauris, p. 184.
411
Abdul-Raof, H. (2003). Exploring the Qur’an. Dundee: Al-Maktoum Institute
Academic Press; Abdul-Raof, H. (2001). Qur’an Translation: Discourse, Texture and
Exegesis. Richmond, Surrey: Curzon.
412
Abdel Haleem, M. (2005). Understanding the Qur’an: Themes & Styles, p. 185.
413
Ibid, p. 188.
414
Chowdhury, S. Z. (2010). Introducing Arabic Rhetoric. Updated Edition. London:
Ad-Duha, p. 99.
415
Ibid.
416
The Qur’an, Chapter 108, Verses 1 to 3.
417
Robinson, N. (2003). Discovering The Qur’an: A Contemporary Approach to a
Veiled Text, 2nd Edition. Washington: Georgetown University Press, p. 254.
418
Cited in Qadhi, Y. (1999). An Introduction to the Sciences of the Qur’an.
Birmingham: Al-Hidaayah, p. 269. The original translation has been amended; the
name Allah has been replaced with God.
419

Kermani, K. (2006). Poetry and Language. In: Rippin, A. (ed.). The Blackwell
Companion to the Qur’an. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, p. 110.
420
The Qur’an, Chapter 16, Verse 103.
421
Ibn Kathir, I. (1999). Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Atheem. Vol 4, p. 603.

390

422

Vanlancker–Sidtis, D. (2003). Auditory recognition of idioms by native and
nonnative speakers of English: It takes one to know one. Applied Psycholinguistics,
24, pp. 45–57.
423

Ibid.
Hyltenstam, K. and Abrahamsson, N. (2000). Who can become native-like in a
second language? All, some, or none? Studia Linguistica, 54, pp. 150–166.
425
Ali, M. M. (2004). The Qur’an and the Orientalists. Ipswich: Jam’iyat Iḥyaa’
Minhaaj Al-Sunnah, p. 14.
424

426

Kermani, K. (2006). Poetry and Language, p. 108.
Usmani, M. T. (2000). An Approach to the Quranic Sciences, p. 261.
428
Draz, M. A. (2001). The Qur’an: An Eternal Challenge. Translated and Edited by
Adil Salahi. Leicester: The Islamic Foundation, p. 83.
427

429

Lings, M. (1983). Muhammad: his life based on the earliest sources. 2 nd Revised
Edition. Cambridge: The Islamic Texts Society, pp. 53-79.
430
Islamic Awareness. (no date). The text of the Qur’an. Available at:
http://www.islamic-awareness.org/Quran/Text/ [Accessed 1st October 2016].
431
Arberry, A. J. (1967). Poems of Al-Mutanabbi. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 1-18.
432
For example these can include reproductions of Picasso’s art. Available at:
http://www.sohoart.co/artist/Pablo-Picasso.html [Accessed 6th October 2016].
433
See Textual Integrity of the Bible. Available at: http://www.islamicawareness.org/Bible/Text/ [Accessed 7th October 2016].
434
The Qur’an, Chapter 18, Verse 109.
435
The name Muhammad is mentioned four times and Ahmad (another one of his
names) is mentioned once. See http://corpus.quran.com/search.jsp?q=muhammad
and http://corpus.quran.com/search.jsp?q=ahmad [Accessed 24 th October 2016].
436
“Muhammad is not the father of any one of you men; he is God’s messenger and
the seal of the Prophets: God knows everything.” The Qur’an, Chapter 33, Verse 40.
437
The Qur’an, Chapter 81, Verse 22.
438
The Qur’an, Chapter 53, Verse 2.
439

The Qur’an, Chapter 48, Verse 29.

391

440

Lings, M. (1983). Muhammad: His Life Based on the Earliest Sources, p. 34.
Ibid, p. 52.
442
Ibid, pp. 53 – 79.
441

443

Watt, W. M. (1953). Muhammad at Mecca. Oxford: Oxford University Press, p.
52.
444
Narrated by Bukhari.
445
Narrated by Muslim.
446
Narrated by Muslim.
447

Zarabozo, Jamaal al-Din. Volume 1. (1999). Commentary of the Forty Hadith of
An-Nawawi. Al-Basheer Publications and Translations, p. 270.
448
Burj Khalifa. (2016). Facts & figures. Available at:
http://www.burjkhalifa.ae/en/the-tower/factsandfigures.aspx [Accessed 1st October
2016].
449
Carrington, D. (2014). Saudi Arabia to Build World’s Tallest Tower, Reaching 1
Kilometer into the Sky. Available at:
http://edition.cnn.com/2014/04/17/world/meast/saudi-arabia-to-build-tallestbuilding-ever/ [Accessed 1st October 2016].
450

Zakariya, A. (2015). The Eternal Challenge: A Journey Through The Miraculous
Qur’an. London: One Reason, pp. 69-70.
451
Narrated by Ibn Abi Shaybah. The chain of this narration stops at a companion of
the Prophet Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬. Scholars maintain that this narration is sound due to its
chain of transmission and the fact that it refers to knowledge of the unseen. Some
scholars maintain that, in general, a companion of the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬would not make a
statement concerning eschatology without reference to revealed knowledge, such as
the words or teachings of the Prophet ‫ ﷺ‬himself.
452

Draper, J. W. (1905). History of the Intellectual Development of Europe. New
York and London: Harper and Brothers Publishers. Vol 1, pp. 329-330.
453
See M. M Azami. (1978). Studies in Early Hadith Literature. Indianapolis,
Indiana: American Trust Publications.
454
Narrated by Abu Dawud and Tirmidhi.
455

Narrated by Bukhari in Al-Adab al-Mufrad.

392

456

Narrated by Tirmidhi.
Narrated by Bukhari.
458
Ibid.
457

459

Narrated by Muslim.
Narrated by Tirmidhi.
461
Ibid.
462
Narrated by Bukhari and Muslim.
463
Narrated by Tirmidhi.
460

464

Narrated by Bukhari, Muslim, Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah.
Narrated by Muslim.
466
Narrated by Ibn Hibban.
467
Narrated by Ibn Majah.
465

468

Narrated by Ahmad.
Ibid.
470
Narrated by Abu Dawud and Tirmidhi.
471
Narrated by Bukhari, Tareekh al-Kabeer.
472
Narrated by Tabarani.
469

473

Narrated by Bukhari.
Ibid.
475
Narrated by Ahmad and Tirmidhi.
476
Narrated by Bukhari.
474

477

Narrated by Bukhari, Muslim and Ahmad.
Narrated by Bukhari and Muslim.
479
Narrated by Bukhari.
478

480

Narrated by Muslim.

481

Narrated by Bukhari.
Ibid.
483
Narrated by Ibn Majah.
484
Narrated by Muslim.
485
Narrated by Tirmidhi.
482

486

Narrated by Muslim.

393

487

Ibid.
Ibid.
489
Narrated by Bukhari.
488

490

Narrated by Bukhari and Muslim.
Narrated by Bukhari.
492
Ibid.
493
Ibid.
494
Narrated by Bukhari and Muslim.
491

495

Narrated by Bukhari.
Narrated by An-Nasai.
497
Narrated by Muslim.
498
Narrated by Ahmad.
496

499

Cited in Ibn Musa Al-Yahsubi, Q. I. (2006). Muhammad Messenger of Allah:
Ash-Shifa of Qadi ‘Iyad. Translated by Aisha Abdarrahman Bewley. Cape Town:
Madinah Press, p. 55.
500
Narrated by Bukhari and Muslim.
501
Ibid.
Narrated by Al-Bayhaqi, Ibn Hibban, Tabarani and Abu Nu’aym.
Narrated by Muslim.
504
As-Sallabee, M. A. (2005). The Noble Life of the Prophet. Vol 3. Riyadh:
Darussalam, pp. 1707 & 1712.
502
503

505

Narrated by Tirmidhi.
Ibid.
507
Narrated by Tirmidhi.
506

508

Ibid.

509

Ibn Qayyim, S. (1998). Zaad al-Ma’ad. Edited by Shuayb Al-Arnaout and Abdul
Qadir Al-Arnaout Vol 3. Beirut: Mu’assasa al-Risalah, pp. 50-51. An online copy
can be accessed at: http://ia801308.us.archive.org/0/items/FP37672/03_37674.pdf
[Accessed 1st October 2016].
510
Narrated by Bukhari.
511

Narrated by Bukhari, Muslim and Ahmad.

394

512

Narrated by Bukhari and Muslim.
Narrated by Ibn Maajah and al-Haakim.
514
Narrated by Tirmidhi.
513

515

Narrated by Bukhari and Muslim.
Narrated by Tirmidhi.
517
Ibid.
518
The Qur’an, Chapter 5, Verse 8.
519
The Qur’an, Chapter 4, Verse 135.
516

The Qur’an, Chapter 90, Verses 12 to 18.
Ibn Hisham, A. (1955) as-Sira an-Nabawiyya. Cairo: Mustafa Al-Halabi & Sons.
Vol 1, pp. 501-504.
522
Armstrong, K. (1997). A History of Jerusalem: One City Three Faiths. New York:
520
521

Ballantine Books, p. 245.
523
Cohen, A. (1994). A World Within: Jewish Life as Reflected in Muslim Court
Documents from the Sijill of Jerusalem (XVIth Century). Part One. Philadelphia:
The Center for Judaic Studies, University of Pennsylvania, pp. 22-23.
524
Tabari, M, S. (1967). Tarikh Tabari: Tarikh ar-Rusul wal- Muluk. Edited by
Muhammad Ibrahim. Vol 3. 3rd Edition. Cairo, Dar al-Ma’aarif, p. 609. On online
copy can be accessed at:
https://ia802500.us.archive.org/21/items/WAQ17280/trm03.pdf [Accessed 1st
October 2016].
525

Cited in Walker, C. J. (2005). Islam and the West: A Dissonant Harmony of
Civilisations. Gloucester: Sutton Publishing, p. 17.
526
Narrated by Yahya b. Adam in the book of al-Kharaaj.
527

Reported by Al-Tabarani in Al-Mu’jam Al-Awsat.

528

Al-Qaraafi, A. (1998). Al-Furuq. Vol 3. 1st Edition. Edited by Khalil Al-Mansur.
Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyyah, p. 29. An online copy can be accessed at:
http://ia600203.us.archive.org/27/items/Forwq_Qarafy/Forwq_Qarafy_03.pdf
[Accessed 1st October 2016].
529
The Qur’an, Chapter 21, Verse 107.
530

The Qur’an, Chapter 7, Verse 156.

395

531

Cited in Walker, C. J. (2005). Islam and the West: A Dissonant Harmony of
Civilisations, p. 17.
532
Dozy, R. (1913). A History of Muslims in Spain. London: Chatto & Windus, p.
235.
533
Arnold, T. (1896). The Preaching of Islam: A History of the Propagation of the
Muslim Faith. Westminster: Archibald Constable & Co., p. 56.
534
The Qur’an, Chapter 2, Verse 256.
535
Bonner, M. (2006). Jihad in Islamic History. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, pp. 89-90.
536
Hallaq, W. B. (2009). Sharia: Theory, Practice and Transformations. New York:
Cambridge University Press, p. 332.
537
Ibn Zanjawiyah, H, S. (1986) Kitab al-Amwaal. Edited by Shakir Fiyadh.
Makkah: Markaz al-Malik Faisal, pp. 169-170.
538
Mansel, P. (1995). Constantinople: City of the World’s desire, 1453-1924.
London: Penguin Books, p. 15.
539
The Qur’an, Chapter 49, Verse 13.
540
Hafiz ibn Hibban reported in al-Sahih, via his isnad, from Fadalah ibn Ubayd and
Baihaqi.
541
Gibb, H. A. R. (2012). Whither Islam? A Survey of Modern Movements in the
Moslem World. Abingdon: Routledge, p. 379.
542
Toynbee, A. J. (1948). Civilization on Trial. New York: Oxford University Press,
p. 205.
543
Robinson, V. (1936). The Story of Medicine. New York: Tudor Publishing
Company, p. 164.
544

Sabry, W. M., & Vohra, A. (2013). Role of Islam in the management of

Psychiatric disorders. Indian Journal of Psychiatry, 55(Suppl 2), S205–S214.
http://doi.org/10.4103/0019-5545.105534.
545
Badri, M. (2013). Abu Zayd Al-Balkhi’s Sustenance of the Soul: The Cognitive
Behavior Therapy of a Ninth Century Physician. Surrey: International Institute of
Islamic Thought.
546

Narrated by Bukhari.

396

The Qur’an, Chapter 10, Verse 24.
The Qur'an, Chapter 96, Verses 1 to 5.
549
The Qur’an, Chapter 39, Verse 9.
547
548

The Qur’an, Chapter 88, Verses 17 to 20.
The Qur’an, Chapter 3, Verses 190 and 191.
552
See Steffens, B. (2007). Ibn Al-Haytham: First Scientist. Greensboro, NC:
Morgan Reynolds Publishing.
553
Lindberg, David C. (1992). The Beginnings of Western Science. Chicago: The
550
551

University of Chicago Press, pp. 362-363.
554
Steffens, B. (2007). Ibn Al-Haytham: First Scientist, p. 27.
555
For details see Al-Djazairi, S. E. (2005). The Hidden Debt to Islamic Civilisation.
Oxford: Bayt Al-Hikma Press; Saliba, G. (2007). Islamic Science and the Making of
the European Renaissance. Massachusetts: MIT Press.
556
Saliba, G. (2007). Islamic Science and the Making of the European Renaissance.
Massachusetts: MIT Press, p. 1.
557
Arnold, T. (1896). The Preaching of Islam, p. 112.
558
Hewlett Packard. (2001). Carly Fiorina Speeches. Technology, Business and Our
Way of Life: What’s Next. Available at:
http://www.hp.com/hpinfo/execteam/speeches/fiorina/minnesota01.html [Accessed
10th September 2016].
559
Smith, A. (1869). The Essays of Adam Smith. London: Alex Murray, p. 353.
Ibn Qayyim, S. (2005). Al-Wabil al-Sayib. Edited by Abdullah Qaa’ir and Bakr
Abu Zayd. Makkah: Dar Alim al-Fawa’id, p. 109. You can download an online copy
at: http://www.ajurry.com/vb/attachment.php?attachmentid=26489&d=1363130186
560

[Accessed 1st October 2016].
The Qur’an, Chapter 47, Verse 19.
The Qur’an, Chapter 7, Verse 180.
563
The Qur’an, Chapter 4, Verse 48.
564
The Qur’an, Chapter 25, Verses 68 and 70.
565
The Qur’an, Chapter 23, Verses 99 and 100.
561
562

566

The Qur’an, Chapter 3, Verse 117.

397

The Qur’an, Chapter 3, Verse 182.
This is based on the following authentic tradition narrated by Ahmad and Ibn
Hibban: “There are four (who will protest) to God on the Day of Resurrection: the
567
568

deaf man who never heard anything, the insane man, the very old man, and the man
who died during the fatrah (the interval between the time of Jesus (upon whom be
peace) and the time of Muhammad ‫ﷺ‬. The deaf man will say, ‘O Lord, Islam came
but I never heard anything.’ The insane man will say, ‘O Lord, Islam came but the
children ran after me and threw stones at me.’ The very old man will say, ‘O Lord,
Islam came but I did not understand anything.’ The man who died during the fatrah
will say, ‘O Lord, no Messenger from You came to me.’ He will accept their
promises of obedience, then word will be sent to them to enter the Fire. By the One
in Whose hand is the soul of Muhammad, if they enter it, it will be cool and safe for
them.” There are other hadiths and verses of the Qur’an that indicate that God will
not allow anyone to enter hell until people have been given the correct message of
Islam.
569
Al-Ghazali, M. A. (1993). Fayasl al-Tafriqa Bayn al-Islam wa-l-Zandaqa. Edited
by M. Bejou. Damascus, p. 84. An online copy is available at:
http://ghazali.org/books/fiysal-bejou.pdf [Accessed 21st November 2016].
570
Ibid.
571
The Qur’an, Chapter 3, Verse 113. This verse refers to the ‘people of the book’.
However, the principle applies to all groups of people.
572

Ibid.
Narrated by Bukhari.
574
The Qur’an, Chapter 7, Verse 55.
573

575

The Qur’an, Chapter 40, Verse 65.

The Qur’an, Chapter, 20, Verse 14.
The Qur’an, Chapter 2, Verse 29.
578
The Qur’an, Chapter 7, Verse 191.
579
The Qur’an, Chapter 35, Verse 3.
580
The Qur’an, Chapter 96, Verses 6 and 7.
576
577

581

The Qur’an, Chapter 92, Verses 8 to 12.

398

The Qur’an, Chapter 14, Verse 34.
Fromm, E. (1956). The Art of Loving. New York: Harper & Row, pp. 58-59.
584
Al-Ghazali. (2011). Al-Ghazali on Love, Longing, Intimacy & Contentment.
582
583

Translated with an introduction and notes by Eric Ormsby. Cambridge: The Islamic
Texts Society, p. 25.
585
The Qur’an, Chapter 7, Verse 156.
586
The Qur’an, Chapter 55, Verses 1 and 2.
587
The Qur’an, Chapter 85, Verse 14.
588

Narrated by Abu Dawud.
Al-Ghazali. (2011). Al-Ghazali on Love, Longing, Intimacy & Contentment, p.
23.
590
The Qur’an, Chapter 3, Verse 31.
589

The Qur’an, Chapter 51, Verse 56.
Obedience to the Prophet Muhammad ‫ ﷺ‬is a consequence of obeying God, as He
commands us to do so.
593
The Qur’an, Chapter 3, Verse 132.
594
Al-Ghazali. (2011). Al-Ghazali on Love, Longing, Intimacy & Contentment, pp.
591
592

120-121.
595
Ibid, p. 123.
596
Mahali, J and Al-Suyuti J. (2001). Tafsir Al-Jalalayn, p. 302.
597
The Qur’an, Chapter 11, Verses 118 and 119.
The Qur’an, Chapter 25, Verses 43 and 44.
Twenge JM & Kasser T. Generational changes in materialism and work
centrality, 1976-2007: Associations with temporal changes in societal insecurity and
598
599

materialistic role modeling. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 2013, 39 (7)
pp. 883-897.
600
Opree SJ, Buijzen M, & Valkenburg PM. Lower life satisfaction related to
materialism in children frequently exposed to advertising. Pediatrics. 2012, 130 (3)
pp. 486-e491.
601
The Qur’an, Chapter 59, Verse 19.
602

The Qur’an, Chapter 39, Verse 29.

399

603

Cited in Riffat, H. (1968). The Main Philosophical Idea in the Writings of
Muhammad Iqbal (1877 – 1938). Durham theses, Durham University. Available at:
http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/7986/2/7986_4984-vol2.PDF?UkUDh:CyT [Accessed 6th
October 2016].
604
The structure and content of this chapter have been adapted from Reminders
From Yusuf, H. (2016). Best of Hamza Yusuf. Available at:
https://youtu.be/KUzjHU-g7E0 [Accessed 24th October 2016].
605
The Qur’an, Chapter 82, Verse 6.
The Qur’an, Chapter 20, Verse 44.
Al-Qurtubi, M. (2006). Al-Jaami’ al-Ahkaam al-Qur’an, p. 65.
608
The Qur’an, Chapter 16, Verse 125.
609
Al-Zamakhshari, J. (2009). Tafsir al-Kashshaaf ’an Haqa’iq at-Tanzil. Edited by
606
607

Khalil Shayhaa. Beirut: Darul Marefah, p. 588.
610
The Qur’an, Chapter 14, Verses 24 to 27.
611
The Qur’an, Chapter 41, Verse 34.

400

