Summary

of
THE

UNSHEATHED

SWORD

Against the One who Insults the Messenger 2:

By Shaykh Al-Islam
Ibn Taymiyyah

PILLARS
PUBLISHING

هه
و

1 ai) all

LIZ.
BALES

The Summary of

THE UNSHEATHED SWORD
Against the One who Insults the Messenger #8

BY
SHAYKH UL-ISLAM
IBN TAYMIYYAH

a

Summarized by
\-Allamah Muhammad AI-Ba’ali Al Hanbali

Hwed on the tahqiq of Al bin Muhammad Al ‘Imran
Under the supervision of Al-‘Allimah Bakr Abu Zayd

PUBLISHING

PILLARS

THE SUMMARY OF
THE UNSHEATHED SWORD AGAINST THE ONE WHO
INSULTS THE MESSENGER 4

1st Edition © 5 Pillars Publications 2013 C.E. / 1434 A.H.
ISBN: TBA

‘A catalogue record for this book is available from
The British Library

Alll rights reserved. No part of this publication may be re-produced,
photo-copied, scanned, stored or transmitted in any other shape or form
without the prior permission of the copyright owners.

Published by 5 Pillars Publications
London
W: www. 5pillarspublishing.com
E: contact@5pillarspublishing.com

Cover design & typesetting:
Thsaan Design
www.ihsaandesign.co.uk

Translated by Abit Salih Eesa Gibbs
Edited by Aba Fatimah Azhar Majothi

Dischimer: The contents of this book are primarily related to the
theological and jurisdictional rulings related to cursing the Prophet
Muhammad 2%. Therefore one should read the text accordingly and not
apply sentences on to specific individuals, in particular those which cat
only be implemented by an Islamic government. As the author of this
book dealt with the subject in a concise manner, it is advisable for thow
who wish to learn more about this subject to refer to reputable scholaty
and relevant books.

CONTENTS

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION. sesesscssessssssesersneensees 7

THE FIRST ISSUE

Whoever insults the Prophet 4 is to be killed whether they
are Muslim or a disbeliever.........cssssesssecessesesseseeseseees 13

I HE SECOND ISSUE

\\illing is prescribed on him (the one who insults the
l'rophet 4) and it is not permissible to imprison or show
favour to him or to ransom him ‏ململ ممم لومم ممه‎ 67

Hit THIRD ISSUE

\ny Muslim or non-Muslim (who insults the Prophet %) is
73

to he killed and repentance is not sought from him ..

Hit FOURTH ISSUE

1 }iilying, the insulting that has been referred to and the
‏ملا ءايلل‎ between it and between that which is not

5 Pillars Publishing — Publications 2012

Forthcoming titles for 2013:

1. In Defence of The Quran -
‘The translation of Ash-
Shanqiti’s 'Da f Tham Idtinab
‘An Ayat ALKitab)

2. The Foundations of the
Knowledge of Usitl, Shaykh
Muhammad bin Salih ‏عله‎
‎“Uthaymin

Please visit www.5pillarspublishing.com to learn more about
our publications, read samples and find out about future
releases

TRANSLATOR'S INTRODUCTION

2 it

The perfect praise and thanks are due to Allah who guides
whoever He wills to the straight path and I bear witness that
there is no true God, who alone is worthy of worship except
Allah. And I bear witness that Muhammad is His servant
and Messenger, the most noble and generous of the
worshippers who was sent with the guidance and true
religion to make it apparent over all the over religions even if
those who are stubborn dislike it.

lhe contents of this book concern the Islamic ruling upon
those who insult the final Prophet and Messenger,
Muhammad 48. The purpose of this book is not to elucidate
the excellence and unparalleled status of the Prophet, nor to
elute the distortions and fabrications of the enemies of
{slau concerning him.’

1 nwiler though how there are even non-muslim scholars who have spoken
1 highly of him. For example: LaMartine said in 1854:"If greatness of
smallness of means, and astounding results are the three criteria of
luis yentus, who could dare to compare any great man in modern history
‏تللام‎ Mulwnmad? The most famous men created arms, laws and empires only.

‘Wey founded, if anything at all, no more than material powers which often
‏لضان ااا‎ uway before their eyes. This man moved not only armies, legislations,
soy peoples and dynasties, but millions of men in one-thitd of the then
ollie wild; and more than that, he moved the altars, the gods, the religions,
1) Glew. (he beliefs and souls... the forbearance in victory, his ambition, which
+» seiivly devoted to one idea and in no manner striving for an empire; his

y/o ponyers, his mystic conversations with God, his death and his triumph

upon any person who insults the Prophet or any of the other
Prophets.'

The Arabic summary which this book is based upon is
100 pages excluding the introduction of the verifier and the
indexes etc. Unauthentic narrations have been omitted,
whilst a number of the verifier’s footnotes have been utilised

the Prophet 38 said: ‘I disown any muslim who lives with the polytheists, they
should not see each others fires’ (Reported by At-Tahawi in Mushkil Al-Athar
8/274; declared sahih by Shaykh Muqbil in Al-Jami As-Sahih mimma laysa fi as
vathihayn 5/201).

ven though there are to be found scholarly sayings (such as what follows)
jeyarding the carrying out of prescribed punishments by people other than the
muslim rulers:

Imam Ash-Shawkani said when explaining the saying: "Ic is obligatory upon
the [mam and his ministers to establish them (prescribed punishments) outside
| the masjid if it occurs in the time and place in which he has authority". "This

\yement is based on the understanding that the prescribed punishments
\iwluud) are for the Imams and that no one else can implement them upon
thease who deserve them, But this has no basis whatsoever! There is no doubt that
id his ministers are more deserving of implementing them than the
ve already mentioned, but to say that no one can implement them
‏أن‎ the Imams, or that they are to be dropped if they occur in a time when
‏عرولا‎ is no Imam, in a place that he is not in authority over...that is falsehood!
‏از أبن‎ means dropping the obligation of the huduud which is mentioned by
‘lh ‏ذا‎ His Book, Islam is here. The Book and the Sunnah are also here. And
of knowledge and righteousness are also here. So how can the huduud
| lv Shariah be dropped due simply to the absence of ONE of the
{olinod!"(As-Sail Al Jarrar 4/311)
‏ناد‎ Sluykh Uthaymin said in explanation of the saying of Al Hajawi
1 lh) the apostate: So if they do not become muslim they are to be killed
yy she qword: "The scholars say they are not to be killed excepe by the Imam or
‏إلا‎ juiien cup to his words: "The scholars say: Except if the person joins a land
| 4), waning that this apostate and Allahs refuge is sought, due to apostating
silyl the sword so they leave for the land of disbelief. They say: Then it is
‏الللاكنات ل‎ to kill them. This is because there is no Islamic ruler in the
‏لاريم‎ ol luhelict and they only rule by the rulings of disbelief, And also because
Nees tw awhority for the disbelievers over the muslim in this’ (Sharh Al
yt ‏عرو‎ Hlukm Al Murtad 6/276 Dar Al-Ifkar edition)

‘Nie bean

Fst nw ave

he pray

Neither is this book a call to those who reside in non-
Muslim countries' to implement any prescribed punishment

after death; all these attest not to an impostute but to a firm conviction which
gave him the power to restore a dogma. This dogma was twofold, the unit of
God and the immateriality of God; the former telling what God is, the latter
telling what God is not; the one overthrowing false gods with the sword, the
other starting an idea with words. Philosopher, orator, apostle, legislator, warrior,
conqueror of ideas, restorer of rational dogmas, of a cult without images; the
founder of twenty terrestrial empires and of one spiritual empire, that is
Muhammad. As regards all standards by which human greatness may be
measured, we may well ask, is there any man greater than he?” Lamartine -
Histoire de la Turquie, Paris 1854, Vol II, pp. 276-77:

Reverend. Bosworth Smith said in 1874: "He was Caesar and Pope in one;
but he was Pope without Pope's pretensions, Caesar without the legions of
Caesar: without a standing army, without a bodyguard, without a palace,
without a fixed revenue; if ever any man had the right to say that he ruled by the
right divine, it was Mohammed, for he had all the power without its instruments
and without its supports” Mohammed and Mohammadanism, London 1874, pg
92.

George Bernard Shaw said: “I believe that if a man like him were to assume
dictatorship of the modern world, he would succeed in solving the problems in a
way that would bring the much needed peace and happiness. Europe is
beginning to be enamored of the creed of Muhammad. In the next century it
may go further in recognizing the utility of that creed in solving its problems” (A
Collection of writings of some of the eminent scholars, 1935)

Montgomery Watt said in 1953: "His readiness to undergo persecutions for
his beliefs, the high moral character of the men who believed in him and looked
up to him as leader, and the greatness of his ultimate achievement - all argue his
fundamental integrity. To suppose Muhammad an impostor raises more
problems than it solves. Moreover, none of the great figures of history is so
poorly appreciated in the West as Muhammad” Mohammad at Mecca, Oxford,
1953, page 52.

١ Eyen though Allah says: Verily as for those whom the angels take (in death)
while they are wronging themselves, they (angels) say (to them): ‘In what
condition were you2” They reply: “We were weak and oppressed on the earth

They (angels) say: ‘Was not the earth of Allah spacious enough for you to
emigrate therein?” Such men will find their abode in Hell - what an evil
destination! Except the weak ones among men, women and children who cannot
devise a plan, nor are they able to direct their way. Surah An-Nisa:97-98. And

سه
‎(Be‏

1 ‏"للم‎
‎KIA ANS

The Summary of
THE UNSHEATHED SWORD

Against the One who Insults the Messenger #8

in this translation in addition to supplementary footnotes
from other sources.

Shaykh ul-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah mentioned in his very
short introduction to 'As-Sarim Al-Maslil' that the objective
of this work of his was to clarify the Islamic ruling on this
subject. He also said that this subject is based upon four
issues, namely:

The First issue: That the one who insults him (the
Prophet) whether Muslim or disbeliever is to be
killed,

The Second issue: That they are to be killed even if
they pay a protective tax in a Muslim state,!

The Third issue: Concerning the Islamic ruling if
they repent.

The Fourth issue: Clarification of what constitutes
insulting.

"The word dhimmi refers to a non-Muslim citizen of an Islamic state. Dhimma
allows rights of residence in return for taxes. As citizens in an Islamic state, the
dhimmi has certain restrictions. They are excused or excluded from specific
duties assigned to Muslims, but are otherwise equal under the laws of property,
contract and obligation.

THE FIRST ISSUE
“& See.
0

WHOEVER INSULTS THE PROPHET %# IS TO BE
KILLED WHETHER THEY ARE MUSLIM OR A
DISBELIEVER

‘This is the general view of the scholars. Ibn Al Mundhir
said!:
‘The generality of the scholars have consensus that
whoever insults him is to be killed. Malik, Layth, Ahmad,
Ishaq and Ash-Shafi’i also said this.

|) is narrated from An Nu’man? that the dhimmi is not
killed.

And it is narrated from Abu Bakr Al-Farsi? from the
companions of Ash-Shafi’t that the Muslims have
\Wunimous agreement upon killing whoever insults the
Hrophev ‏كك‎ as it is the ruling that whoever insults other than
lity ts (0 be lashed.

Avul this consensus is taken to be the consensus from the
thin und the Companions of Allah’s Messenger % as
‘Wyhh ul-lslam Ibn Taymiyyah said or that what is meant is

HAL ‏"لالط‎ 2/682, ‘AL-Ishraf 2/244, ‘Al-Igna’” 2/584 and refer to ‘Al Ijma”
Ped ‏ا‎

Mou ‏اأوانسهاا‎

+)» ‏اناق‎ bin Al Husayn bin Sahl, one of che Shafi’ Imams, This speech of
©) tt tis book: “AL-Ijma” refer to “Fath Al-Bari’ 12/293

THE FIRST ISSUE

Hanbal, Abu Saqr, Al-Khallal, Abdullah and Abu Talib
narrated that the Muslim and disbeliever are to be killed. It
was said to Ahmad: ‘Is that in the hadith?’ He replied:
Yes, in several hadith; from them: the hadith of the blind
man who killed a woman when he heard her insulting the
Prophet ‏يك‎ and the hadith of Husayn.'

Imam Ahmad said:
And repentance is not to be sought from them. Abu Bakr
reported it in (the book) ‘Ash Shafi’i?.

So there is no difference of opinion narrated from him
voncerning the killing and that it breaks the covenant
(between the dhimmi and the Muslim state).

And Al 03017 mentioned in a narration concerning the
ihinmi that it doesn’t break the covenant, following in this
١ ‏نامير‎ from the companions (of Ahmad) like Ash-Shareef,
thu Agil, Abu Al-Khattab and Al-Huluwni. So they
inentioned two narrations concerning the actions which
‏عم كمف‎ a belittlement of the Muslims or one of them,
soneerning their selves, or their property or religion, such as
‏عيضا اانا‎ the Messenger 38, along with their agreement that
tiv covenant is broken due to that according to the
fwdhhab,

{yee ly Masdad in his Musnad, Al-Harith bin Abu Usamah in his Musnad
ve) Al Mhallil in ‘ALJami, AIL of its narrations are via Husayn bin Abdur
Solon Ay Salami on the authority of a man who was not named, and with Al-
Stollel A shaykh. And in the narration of Al-Harith: ‘(from) Husayn thar Ibn
oe) without Guention of) an intermediary and Husayn did not hear from Ibn.
eh ee ‏تاتلاها‎ Ae’'Tadhib, 2/381,

‘hoe \bu Nuke Abdul-Aziz bin Ja’far. Refer to Tabagat Al-Hanabilah, 3/213

11) Mle ‏لمآ‎ Tbe Al Para’, che shaykh of the Hanbalis.

THE FIRST ISSUE

their consensus upon the obligation of killing such a person
if he is a Muslim, and Al Qadi ‘Iyad restricted it to this.

And Ishaq bin Rahawayh said:

The Muslims have a consensus that whoever insults Allah
or insults His Messenger 38 or rejects anything from what
has been revealed by Allah, or kills a Prophet, then such a
person is a disbeliever, even if he affirms everything that
what was revealed by Allah.

Al-Khattabi' said:
I do not know anyone who differed concerning the
il obligation of killing such a person.

0 Muhammad bin Sahniin said:

The scholars have consensus that whoever insults the
Messenger (attributing a defect to him), then such a
person a is a disbeliever and that whoever doubts such a
persons disbelief, they too are guilty of disbelief

And the saying that the Muslim who insults is killed, there
being no disagreement concerning that, then this is the view
of the four imams and other than them. And the dhimmi is
to be killed also according to Malik and the people of
Madinah. This is also the view of Ahmad and those with
undertanding of the hadith (Fuqaha ul-hadith); there being
numerous texts from Ahmad upon this.

"Tn ‘Ma’alim As-Sunan’ 6/199

THE FIRST ISSUE

As for Ash-Shafi’i then it is reported from him that
insulting the Prophet ‏يك‎ breaks the covenant and that such a
person is to be killed’. And as for his companions, then two
viewpoints have been mentioned concerning when Allah or
His Messenger or His Book are mentioned in an evil way:
from them are those who make a distinction between
whether the dhimmi’s not speaking evil about them was
made a condition of the covenant or not. And from them are
those who narrated the first view and supported in their
books about differences of opinion that insulting the
Prophet 38 breaks the covenant and necessitates that they be
killed.

As for Abu Hanjifah and his companions, they say: the
covenant is not broken due to insulting and the person who
docs that is not to be killed, rather they are to be given a
(liscretionary punishment for manifesting evil in public. And
lrom their principles is that whatever matter in which there
\s no death penalty on them, such as due to
oppression/oyertaxing (mithqqal) or sodomy when a person
(loes this repeatedly then it is for the Imam to kill them and
‏ل‎ increase upon the fixed punishment that is prescribed (by
the Shariah) if they see a benefit in doing that. They (the
\linal) also take that which comes concerning the Prophet ‏يك‎
‎iim! his Companions of killing due to the likes of these
iewons to be according to a perceived benefit in doing that.
| hey call this: the political killing.

Vhey also hold that it is for the Imam to give a
lin retionary punishment with killing in those matters made
‏انالا‎ offfensive by there repeated occurrence. And the

\I Ui’ 4/208-211

THE FIRST ISSUE

Then all of them mentioned that the one who insults the
Messenger #8 is to be killed, even if they are a dhimmi and
that this breaks their covenant.

Shaykh ul-Islim said: And this is what is closest to the
truth from these routes of transmission and according to the
narration that says: ‘their covenant is not broken due to
that,’ then it is only the case when that is not made a
condition upon them (the dhimmis), then if it is made a
condition, concerning that there are two views:

The first of them: that they break their covenant by
that, as Al Khiraqi said and as was held to be correct
by Al-Amidi.

| The second: thar it does not break their covenant, as

Al Qadi said.

And that which the generality of those who preceded from
our companions and from those who followed them from
those who came later on is the affirmation of the texts
concerning that case. And there are texts from them that the
one who insults the Messenger 3 is to be killed and that this
necessitates the breaking of their covenant, like their spying
upon the Muslims, or committing fornication or adultery
with a Muslim woman or by killing a Muslim or committing
highway robbery. And from them also that slandering a
Muslim or committing sorcery upon them does not
constitute a breach of their covenant.

Shaykh ul-Islam said: And this is what is compulsory, to
affirm what they related as nothing is excluded from it due
to the distinction between its texts.
THE FIRST ISSUE

jizyah. Also it is known that their paying the jizyah is while
submitting it in a humbled state and that their state of being
subdued is throughout their duration (in the Muslim state).
So whoever insults Allah or His Messenger then they are not
in a subdued state. That is because the one who is subdued is
lowly and this action is an action of one with power.

The second place is in the saying of the Most High:

‘But if they violate their oaths after their covenant, and

attack your religion with disapproval and criticism

then fight the leaders of disbelief for surely their oaths

are nothing to them.”

‎negated a covenant for them unless their oaths to us‏ &4 اناا
‎temain, So we know that the covenant of a polytheist/idol‏
‎woishipper does not remain unless they adhere to their‏
‎And it is known that by (such) incidents occurring‏ كاتنت
‎voncerning our Lord, our Prophet, our Book and our‏
‎‘lipion it violates the establishment (of the covenant) just as‏
‎(hey were to go to war with us. Rather, that is more severe‏ |\
‎upou us if we are believers.‏

‎Su then indeed, it is an obligation upon us to sacrifice our
Nlood and wealth until the word of Allah is uppermost and
(Were appears nothing in our lands that is harmful to Allah or
Hl) Messenger, And that is clear in His (Allah’s) saying:

‎tlow that when you are overpowered by them, they

‎teyard not the ties, either of kinship or of covenant

‎with your”?

‎Hel Ay ١ ‏ءاسا‎ 2
‏بأو‎ AU Lawbal 8

‎THE FIRST ISSUE

‎majority of them gave the religious verdict that the dhimmi
who insults the Messenger #8 on numerous occassions is to
be killed, even if they (repent and) become Muslim.

‎The evidence for the obligation of killing the one who
insults

‎The evidence for the obligation of killing the one who
insults Allah or His Messenger #, or His religion, or His
Book, and that such behaviour breaks the covenant is in the
Qur'an, the Sunnah and the consensus of the Sahabah and
Tabi’in. Also it is based on reflection.

‎” As for the Qur'an: the first place is in the saying of Allah, the
Most high:

‎‘Fight against those who believe not in Allah, nor in
the last day, nor forbid that which has been forbidden
by Allah and His Messenger and those who
acknowledge not the religion of truth among the
people of the book (Jews and Christians) until they
pay the jizyah' with willing submission and feel

‎themselves subdued.”

‎So the order is to fight them until they pay the jizyah and
feel themselves subdued, so it is not permissible to leave
them alone until they are in a subdued state and pay the

‎1١ A tax taken from the Jews and Christians who are under the protection of

‎Muslim government,
3 Surah At Tawbah 29

THE FIRST ISSUE

assurance of safety is given and that a covenant is made with
those from whom only a violation of their oaths came, but as
for those who criticised the religion or something from it,
then indeed it is prescribed that they are to be fought. And
this is the way (sunnah) of the Messenger of Allah #8 that he
would spill the blood of whoever harmed Allah and His
Messenger and criticised the religion or something from it.

So if it is said: this is according to the understanding that
whoever criticises the religion and violates the oath it is
obligatory to fight them. As for whoever criticises the
religion only, then what is understood from the verse is that
this by itself does not necessitate this ruling (of fighting).
liecause the ruling is attached to two attributes, so it is not
lor when only one of these attributes exist.

(hen we say: without doubt, there is no escape from the
fact that the existence of any of the attributes effects the
juling, as it is not permissible to make the ruling conditional
on an attribute which is absent. So every description
/\wibure independently effects the ruling, as would be the
vine iL it was said: ‘Zaid is to be killed as he is an apostate
sl adulterer’, which gathers two separate things, And every
\ibute has an effect due to its part being present. Like the

‎of Allah:‏ بصتو

‎And those who invoke not any other god along with

‎Allah, nor kill such person as Allah has forbidden,

‎except for just cause, nor commit fornication/adultery

‎jul whoever does this shall receive the punishment.”

‎Hl AL Virypnne68

‎THE FIRST ISSUE

‎That is, how can there be a covenant for them when, if they
over power you, they pay no regard to the ties of
kinship/relation nor covenant! So we know that whoever's
condition is such that if they were to over power us they
would not regard that which is between us and them from
the covenant, then there is not a covenant for such people.
Also, that whoever makes apparent their criticism of our
religion that is evidence that if they were to overpower us
they would not regard the covenant.

‎So indeed, when lowly people exist who do this, then
how would it be if they had power?! And this is different to
the case of those who do not make apparent to us the likes of
this (bad) speech.

‎The third place is the saying of He the Most High:

‎‘But if they violate their oaths after their covenant, and

‎attack your religion with disapproval and. criticism

‎then fight the leaders of disbelief.”

‎And this verse is evidence from a number of perspectives:

‎The first of them: that violation of their oaths by itself
necessitates fighting them and criticism concerning the
religion is a specific and stronger reason for the obligation of
fighting. Or that is mentioned by way of clarifying the
reason for fighting or because of it fighting was obligated in
this verse, with His saying: ‘Then fight the leaders of
disbelief and with His saying: ‘Will you not fight a people
who have violated their oaths and intended to expel the

‎messenger” so according to that, it is permissible that ar

‎1 Surah At Tawbah:12
? Surah At Tawbah:13

‎0

‎00

THE FIRST ISSUE

the text of the verse and this is a strong and fine evidence. So
if we discover those who have broken their oaths and
criticised our religion, the Qur’an obligates the killing of
whoever has broken it (the oath) and criticised our religion.

The third perspective: That is their being called the leaders
of disbelief due to their criticising the religion (of Islam) and
a second reason is because there is no oath for them, so they
are those who combine the breaking of their oaths and
criticising the religion. And the one who is a leader of
disbelief calls to it and has only ended up being a leader (of
ilisbelief) due to their criticising of the religion and calling to
that which opposes it. And this is how a leader is, so whoever
criticises the religion then he is a leader in disbelief and his
being fought against has been obligated with the saying of
Allah: “Fight the leaders of disbelief.’

lhe fourth perspective: And that is His saying:

Will you not fight a people who have violated their

oaths and intended to expel the Messenger while they

did attack you first?”

‎their intending to expel the Messenger is from the least of‏ نذا
‎{le reasons to fight them and that is due to the harm of him‏
‎sontuined in it, And insulting him is more offensive than‏
‎co expel him because he pardoned those people‏ جرم ا فلالا
‎lil intended to expel him on the day of the conquest‏ تلم
‎f Makkah) and did not pardon those who insulted him.‏

‎(hw [i/th perspective: His saying:

‎lM | ‏تانناسناسر‎

‎THE FIRST ISSUE

‎And the description necessitates everything from it, and
brings into effect the ruling (i.e punishment) whether one of
these things is done independently of the other things
(mentioned) or is combined with another thing.

‎Likewise is the saying: ‘They disbelieve in Allah and His
Messenger’ and ‘disobey Allah and His Messenger’ so doing
one of these things necessitates that part even without the
other part.

‎Likewise is the saying of the Most High:

‎‘Verily, those who disbelieve in the verses/signs of

‎Allah and kill the prophets without right, and kill

‎those men who order just dealings, then announce to

‎them a painful torment;” and this verse obligates
torment due to whichever part is committed.

‎So indeed, breaking the covenant permits their being fought;
and criticising the religion or any part of it, is an emphasised
part that obligates it (fighting). So we say that when there is
offensive criticism (of the religion) we fight whoever we
don’t have a covenant with and that is what is obligated.
And as for whoever we have a covenant with, the fighting is
obligated due to the need to subdue them even more so.

‎The second perspective: That if a dhimmi insults the
Messenger or insults Allah or finds faule with Islam publicly
then they have broken their oath and have criticised our
religion. This is because there is no difference of opinion
amongst the Muslims that they are to be punished for that
and taught a lesson. So we know that there is no covenant
based on that and it is compulsory to kill them according to

‎١ Surah Al Imran:21

‎my

THE FIRST ISSUE

The fourth place: The saying of the One free of all
imperfections:

‘Know they not that whoever opposes and shows

hostility to Allah and His Messenger, certainly for him

will be the fire of hell to abide therein. That is the

extreme disgrace.”

So indeed that is evidence that whoever harms the Prophet
has opposed and shown hostility to Allah and to His
Messenger because this verse follows His saying:
“And among them are men who annoy the Prophet
and say: “He is (lending his) ear (to every news)”. Say:
“He listens to what is best for you, he believes in
Allah, has faith in the believers and is a mercy to those
of you who believe”. But those who annoy Allah’s
Messenger will have a painful torment.”

‘wl the reason for this verse being revealed was as an
)|ionishment to whoeyer insulted him from the polytheists
uul hypocrites,

Ile filth place: The saying of the One free from all
Hnperlections:

‘Indeed those who annoy Allah and His Messenger,

Allah has cursed them in this life and the hereafter.”?

Yl this necessitates that whoever harms Allah and His
Sf ‏عبر‎ iy killed and we do not make a covenant with

HAY Lawhalis
HOM ‏اساسا‎
‎eM Abia ve

THE FIRST ISSUE

‘Fight against them so that Allah will punish them by
your hands and disgrace them and give you victory
over them and heal the breasts of a believing people”

So He 4% commanded the fighting of those who broke their
oaths and criticised the religion and within that, if we do it,
they will be punished and disgraced and we will be given
victory over them; also that the chests of the believers who
have been hurt by their violating their covenant will be cured
and the anger in their hearts will leave. So this is evidence
that the one who criticises is deserving of all of that and that
the one who insults the Messenger, violating and criticising

‎him, deserves to be killed.‏ إن
‎The sixth perspective: That His saying:‏
‎‘And heal the hearts of a believing people and remove‏ 5

‎the anger of their hearts.”

‎Is evidence that healing the breasts is from being hurt by the
violation of the oath and the criticising, and that the
removing of the anger is what is achieved (a matter sought
by the divinely prescribed law). So whoever insults the
Messenger, then indeed it angers the believers and hurts
them more than their blood being shed and their property
being taken so indeed this effects hatred for the sake of Allah
and His Messenger. Then Shaykh ul Islam mentioned that
this anger does not leave except with the killing of the one
who insulted and that belongs to the fourth perspective.

‎1 Surah Ar Tawbah:14
2 Surah At Tawbah:14-15

THE FIRST ISSUE

And in a hadith it states that a man insulted the Prophet
so he 3 said: “Who will suffice me concerning my enemy?"!

And also Allah’s saying:

‘You will not find any people who believe in Allah and

the last day loving and making friendship with those

who oppose Allah and His Messenger.”

' Iv is reported by Abdur Razzaq in ‘Al Musannaf’ 5/237, 307 on the authority of
Ikrimah the servant of Ibn Abbas in mursal form and it contains a man who is
unnamed, And itis reported by Abu Nu’aym in ‘Al Hilyah’ 8/45 via the path of
(brahim Ibn Adham on the authority of Mugitil bin Hayyan on the authority of
{krimah on the authority of Ibn Abbas, then he mentioned it. Abu Nu’aym said:
he hadith of Ibrahim is gharib and we did not record it except from this
iteetion’, And it is also reported by Abdur-Razedq 5/307 and from this route
ln Hazm reports it in ‘Al-Muhall’ 11/413 from Simak bin Al Fudayl that he
\lormed me that Urwa bin Muhammad - and he is As Sa’di - concerning a man

with its like, And the one who killed the person here is Khalid bin Al-Walid
wnul in the first narration it is Zubayr bin Al ‘Awwam.

Ali Tbn Al Madini used it as proof and Ibn Hazm declared it sahih saying:

Nhe chain of narration of this hadith is sahih’, And conceming Urwa bin
Muhammad As Sa’di no one declared him to be reliable other than Ibn Hibban.
١١ 111305 said concerning him in At-Taqrib: ‘He is acceptable.

Surah Al Mujadilah:22,

Allah also says: ‘O you who believe! Take not the Jews and the Christians as
Awliya’ (Giends, protectors, helpers), they are but Awliya’ of each other. And if
ny amongst you takes them (as Awliya’), then surely, he is one of them, Verily,
Alluh guides not those people who are the Zalimiin (polytheists and wrongdoers
awl unjust)? [al-Ma’idah :51[

Shaykh al-Shangiti said: In this verse Allah tells us that whoever takes the Jews
\W)| Christians as friends is one of them, Elsewhere Allah states that taking them
٠١ Irlends incurs the wrath of Allah and residing in His punishment, and that if
\lie one who takes them as friends was a believer he would not have taken them
» fricuds, Allah says: *You see many of them taking the disbelievers as their
\wliya’ (protectors and helpers), Evil indeed is that which their ownselves have
wnt forward before them; for that (reason) Allah’s Wrath fell upon them, and in
\wrment they will abide. And had they believed in Allah, and in the Prophet
(Muhammad) and in what has been revealed to him, never would they have
uhew them (the disbelievers) as Awliya’ (protectors and helpers); but many of
\lieu are the Fasiqiin (rebellious, disobedient to Allah), [al-Ma’idah:80-81]

THE FIRST ISSUE

them based upon this harm. And this is made clear in the
Prophet’s saying: “Who will (kill) K’ab bin Ashraf for indeed
he has harmed Allah and His Messenger?”

The numerous evidences that the one who insults has
disbelieved and is killed, even if he displays Islam
Such as the saying of the Most High:
‘And among them are men who annoy the Prophet
and say: ‘He is (lending his) ear (to every news)” - up
to-: ‘But those who annoy Allahs Messenger will have
a painful torment.’—up to His saying:- ‘Know they not
0 that whoever opposes and shows hostility to Allah and
im) His Messenger, certainly for him will be the fire of
Hell to abide therein.”

01
So we know that annoying the Messenger of Allah is to

oppose and show hostility to Allah and His Messenger
because the mention of annoying necessitated the mention
of opposing and showing hostility so it must enter into it. So
ic is evidence that the annoying, opposing and showing
hostility is disbelief because we are informed that for such a
person is the fire of Hell to abide therein®. Rather the
opposing and showing hostility means the person is an
enemy and that is disbelief and waging war. So the one who
annoys the Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎ is a disbeliever, an enemy
of Allah and His Messenger who is waging war against them.

1 The hadith comes shortly after in this book and is found in Sahih Bukhari 8
Muslim

? Surah At Tawbah:61-63

3 And the Shaykh said: ‘And it was not said: “That is his reward’ and there is a
distinction between this speech and that (i.e that he will ‘reside therein’)

THE FIRST ISSUE

The second evidence: Allah’s saying:

‘The hypocrites fear lest a chapter should be revealed
about them, showing them what is in their hearts. Say:
(Go ahead and) mock!’ - up to-; ‘Say: Was it at Allah
and His verses/signs and His Messenger that you were
mocking? Make no excuses; you have disbelieved.”'

Uhis is a text that states that mocking Allah, His signs and
I lis Messenger is clear disbelief. So this verse indicates that
whoever ascribes a defect to the Messenger of Allah whether
lieing serious or joking then they have disbelieved.
The third evidence: The saying of the One who is free
liom all imperfections:
‘And of them are some who accuse you (O
Muhammad) in the matter of (the distribution of) the
alms (as sadaqat);? and accuse means to find a
(aule/defect and to criticise.

\nd Allah said:
‘And among them are men who annoy the Prophet.”

vw that is evidence that everyone who accuses and annoys
‏راطا‎ is from them. So due to the information that those who
tise the Prophet 3% and annoy him are from the
‏رمع نتن زجنا‎ the evidence of their hypocrisy is established,

"he fourth evidence: Allah’s saying:

iwbah: 64-66

woth AC

THE FIRST ISSUE

So when it is the case that whoever loves and makes
friendship with the one who opposes (Allah and His
Messenger) is not a believer, then how about the one who is
in that state of opposition (of Allah and His Messenger)
itself?!

And it is said that the reason for this verse being revealed
is that Abu Quhafah insulted the Prophet #% so Abu Bakr
intended to kill him, So it is established that the one who
opposes is a disbeliever and his blood is allowed to be spilled’

Elsewhere Allah forbids taking them as friends and explains the reason for
thar, as He says:‘O you who believe! Take not as friends the people who
incurred the Wrath of Allah (ie. the Jews). Surely, they have despaired of
(receiving any good in) the Hereafter, just as the disbelieyers have despaired of
those (buried) in graves (that they will not be resurrected on the Day of
Resurrection).” [al-Mumtahanah:13]

In another verse Allah explains that this is so long as they are not taken as
friends because of fear or taqiyah (i.c., being friendly with them in order to avoid
harm); if that is the case then the one who does that is excused. Allah says: “Let
not the believers take the disbelievers as Awliya’ (supporters, helpers) instead of
the believers, and whoever does that, will never be helped by Allah in any way,
except if you indeed fear a danger from them.’[Al ‘Imran:28]

This verse explains all the verses quoted above which forbid taking the kafirs
as friends in general terms, Whar thar refers to is in cases where one has a choice,
but in cases of fear and to protect ones self it is permissible to make friends with
them, as much as is essential co protect oneself against their evil. That is subject
to the condition that one’s faith should not be affected by that friendship and the
one who behaves in that manner out of necessity is not one who behaves in that
manner out of choice. It may be understood from the apparent meaning of these
verses thar the one who deliberately takes the kuffar as friends by choice and
because he likes them, then he is a disbeliever like them. [Adwa’ al-Bayan,
2/98,99)

1 Reported by Ibn Al-Mundhir via Ibn Juraiy who narrated thar Abu
Quhafah. ..the report. See “Ad-Dar Al-Munthir’ 6/274 and ‘Asbab An-Nuzal’ pg
478 of Al-Wahidi. And it is said that the reason for this verses revelation is other
than that.

١

|

THE FIRST ISSUE

you see the hypocrites turn away from you with
aversion.”

So it is made clear that whoever is called to refer judgement
to the Book of Allah and to His Messenger, then they turn
away, then they are a hypocrite. Alongwith His saying:
‘The only saying of the faithful believers, When they
are called to Allah and His Messenger to judge
between them, is that they say: “We hear and we

obey”.”

So whoever is called to obedience to the Messenger and
jesists his judgement then he is a hypocrite and not a
licliever’, Rather, the believers are whoever says: ‘We hear
ind we obey.’

41 Nisa:60-61
\y Nur: 51
Sluwkh Salih Al Ash Shaykh said regarding judging by other than what Allah
‏را‎ loyislated: “There are four citcumstances: Concerning the legislator and the
‏نار‎ who obeys him in making the permissible forbidden and the forbidden
jwiiuissible and in contradiction with the law of Allah, this one is a disbeliever,
\W| whoever obeys him in this, he has taken him as a lord besides Allah.
(Su concerning) the ruler with this legislation, then there is a distinction (to

hw prude):
|) If he rules once or twice or more times, but this is not a habit, and he
Knows that he is a sinner, meaning from the direction of the judge who
juilyes, he knows that he is a sinner and he judges without the law of Allah,
then he has the ruling of his similar sinners, he is not declared a disbeliever
innit he declares it permissible to do so, This is why you see some people of
\nowledge say that judging with other than the law of Allah is not disbelief
until one makes it permissible, and this is correct but this condition does not
‏تلض‎ the condition of making a law and legislation. So the ruler, as said by
Jn ‘Abbas (is guilty of): “Disbelief less than disbelief, not the one they ate
jwiity, to, this is lesser disbelief, meaning the one who ruled in a case or two
vis by his desire with other chan the law of Allah and he knows he is a

THE FIRST ISSUE

‘But no, by your Lord, they can have no faith, until
they make you (O Muhammad) judge in all disputes
between them.”

The one free of all imperfections swears by Himself that they
do not believe until they make the Prophet the judge in the
controversies/disagreements which occur between them,
then find no resistance in their souls regarding his judgement
but rather submit to it outwardly and inwardly,”
And He said before that:

‘Have you seen those who claim that they believe in
that which has been sent down to you, and that which
was sent down before you, and they wish to go to for
judgement (in their disputes) to the taghut (false
judges)?” - up to-: ‘And when it is said to them: “Come
to what Allah has sent down and to the Messenger,

١ An Nisa:65, Shaykh ‘Uthaymin said: This oath begins with the words Fa la
(But no) which is used for emphasis, then Allah swears by the most specific type
of Lordship — which is the Lordship of Allah to His Messenger 38 - that the one
who does not do the following things has no faith:
1 - Referring for judgement to the Messenger 48, because He says “until they
make you )0 Muhammad) judge”. ‘The one who seeks judgement from
anyone other than Allah and His Messenger is not a believer, and is either a
kkafir who is beyond the pale of Islam or a kafir in the sense of lesser kufr.
2 - Contentment with and acceptance of his ruling, so that they do not find
in themselves any resistance against what he has decreed, rather they accept it
and are content with what the Prophet #8 has decreed.
3— That they accept with full submission, ‏يبعا‎ submic totally.
Beware, O Muslim, of cancelling out your faith. (Sharh al-Wasitiyyah by Ibn
“Uthaymin, ‏.م‎ 181/182]
2 Shaykh ul Islam said: ‘And as for whoever adheres to the judgement of Allah
and His Messenger inwardly and outwardly, but they disobeyed and followed
their desires then their starus is like that of whoever is sinful/disobedient.
[Minhaj As-Sunnah 5/131]

iil
™

mi)

THE FIRST ISSUE

Some people of knowledge however say that he is a polytheist even if the right is
with him,

‘The fourth circumstance: the status of the country that rules by other than the
liw of Allah, which judges with the man made laws, according to the speech of
Shaykh Muhammad ibn Ibrahim and the detailed speech about this topic in his
‏ممه ذا‎ or what is obtained and derived ftom it: rejecting the man made laws is
«ww obligation, and ruling by the man made laws in a country:

1) Ifivis hidden and rate, the land is a land of Islam, meaning the country is
a Muslim country, and ie will have the ruling of its like from polytheism
occurring in its land.
2) He (Shaykh Muhammad ibn Ibrahim) said: If it is apparene and
overwhelming, the land is a land of disbelief, meaning the country is a
country of disbelief.

‘w the ruling upon a country will retum to this distinction, if ruling by man
‘wie law is litde and hidden, i will have the similar ruling of unjust countries
ilin has sins and disobedience and the appearance and presence of some
juilviheism in it, And if it is apparent and overwhelming, its appearance
vwitradicts it being hidden and it being overwhelming contradicts being litte,
\livn the kand isa land of disbelief,
U hiv distinction is what is correct, because we know that there are in Muslim
\iwntties legislations nor in accordance with the law of Allah, and the scholars in
lint times did not rule upon the land that it is a land of disbelief nor on these
\viwiities thar they ate countries of disbelief, And this because polytheism has an
illhence upon the land, when we say land we mean country, so when it is
‏ترا‎ and overwhelming, the country is a country of disbelief, and when ic is
{ile apparent and it is objected, the land is a land of Islam, and in consequence
‏الا‎ country isa country of Islam,’ [At-Tambhid Sharh Kitab At-Tawhid]

Siuykh Muhammad Ibrahim said: ‘As for thac which is described as lesser
\ilolict itis when he refers the dispute to other than the Book of Allah knowing
‘liv he is disobeying Allah by doing so, and that the ruling of Allah is the truth,
\iu| hie does it once. Such a person would not be committing major disbelief. As
li» thowe who legislate laws and make others obey them, this constitutes

\Wilolity, even if they claim that they made a mistake and that the laws of Allah
‏ثلا‎ qinte just; such is considered as an disbelief which entails apostasy”

‘wl he also said in his Farawa (6/No. 1451): ‘Maybe you want to say: if the
ules by che man made law says: I believe that ie is falschood, then it has
ei ‏يتان‎ rather it is a temoval of the law. Ie is like if someone was to say: 1 am

viii an idol and I believe that itis falsehood.’ (Translated Umm-ul-Qura,
upi//docs.umm-tl-qura.org/Taghut.pdf)

THE FIRST ISSUE

sinner and he does not make it permissible, this is lesser disbelief.
2) As for the ruler who does not rule with the law of Allah at all, and always
rules and makes other than the law of Allah incumbent upon the people,
then some people of knowledge said that he is declared disbeliever absolutely,
like the legislator. As Allah said: “They wish to go for judgement (in their
disputes) to the Taghut (False judges, etc.)” so they established the one who
rules by other than the law of Allah absolutely as a taghut and He said:
“While they have been ordered to reject it.” Some from the people of
knowledge said: even this category, he is nor declared a disbeliever until he
declares it permissible because he can do this and rule by it and he is in
himself a sinner, so he has a rule similar to those who remain upon sins and
do not repent from it.

‘And the first saying, thar the one who always rule by other than the law of Allah
and makes it incumbent on people, then he is a disbeliever, and this is what is
correct for me, and this is the saying of my grandfather Shaykh Muhammad ibn
Ibrahim 4 in his Risilah Tahkim Al-Qawanin, because in reality this is not done
except by someone whose heart has not rejected the Taghut, rather it is nor done
except by someone who respects the man-made laws and respects ruling by the
man made laws.

‘The third circumstance is the circumstance of the one who refers (to these
laws), meaning the one who goes with his litigant and they refer to the man made
law, and there is a distinction to be made with in this as well:

1) If he desires to refer judgement with desire in this and considers that the
ruling with such is permissible, and he desires to refer the judgement to the
Taghut and he does not dislike this, this one is a disbeliever as well, because
he is included in this verse, and as said by the scholars, the desire to-refer the
judgement to the Taghut cannot be combined with faith in Allah, rather this
negates the other, and Allah says: “Hlave you seen those who claim that they
2) The second case is that he does not desire referring the judgement, but
either he is forced to as it happens in other countries, to come with his
litigant to a judge who will judge by the man made laws, or he knows that
the right is with him in the Shar’, so he refers the matter to the judge in the
man made law because he knows that he will agree with the ruling of the
Shar’, so he is the one wha refers his matter in his claim against his litigant to
the judge of the man made law because of his knowledge that the Shar’ gives
him his right and that the man made law is in accordance with the Shar’ in
this, and this is the most correct for me, that itis permissible.

THE FIRST ISSUE

Allah. This is because he is the intermediary between Allah
and between the creation! and there is not for a single one of
ihem a path other than his, And He has established Him as
vn establisher himself with regards to His orders,
lorbiddances, informing and explaining. So it is not
permissible that we make a distinction between Allah and
| lis Messenger in anything from these matters.

And also, if he makes a distinction between annoying
\lluh and His Messenger and between annoying the
believing men and believing women, then he will bear the
(cine of slander and carry a great sin and Allah’s curse will
he on him in this life and the next and He has prepared for
‏نالا‎ a humiliating punishment. And it is known that for
\noying the believers lashing is prescribed, so it is from the
‏ثانالا‎ sins, and there is nothing above it except disbelief and
2

\nd also, indeed He curses them, and the curse refers to
{iy Luv removed from the mercy of Allah and there is none
‘Ws expelled from the mercy of Allah in this life and the
\ivvilict except for the disbeliever. So there is no right with

yon! to their blood, rather it is permissible to spill. This is
‏د ©( نايل‎ wemendous mercy being witheld, and that which
ports this is His saying:

\cctited, wherever found, they shall be seized and
Nilled with a (terrible) slaughter.”

Helle the one whos ‘places between himself and between Allah an

© tis soaking: ‏كناك‎ to them, asking them for intercession and trusting
1 ‘hip ou lien, then they have disbelieved by unanimous agreement (of the

+t hwaqid Al-Islam, of Shaykh ul-Islam1 Muhammad Ibn Abdul
eT

ee Aliant

THE FIRST ISSUE

So when hypocrisy is established by their resisting the
judgement of the Messenger 38 alone, then how about the
case of one who attributes defect to him and insults him and
the like?!
The fifth evidence: Allah’s saying:
‘Indeed those who annoy Allah and His Messenger;
‘Allah has cursed them in this life and the hereafter and
has prepared for them a humiliating torment. And
those who annoy believing men and women
undeservedly, bear on themselves the crime of slander
and plain sin.”

So He linked annoying the Prophet with annoying Himself
as He linked the obeying of the Prophet with obedience to
Himself, So whoever annoys him has annoyed Allah and that
has been textually stated. And whoever annoys Allah is a
disbeliever whose blood it is permissible to spill. It is also
abundantly clear that He has placed the love of Allah and
His Messenger, the pleasure of Allah and His Messenger, the
obedience to Allah and His Messenger as one thing. Likewise
He has placed the opposition of Allah and. His Messenger
and hostility towards Allah and His Messenger, the annoying
of Allah and His Messenger and the disobedience of Allah
and His Messenger as one thing. So in that is the
datification for the necessity of adhering to two rights and
that concerning Allah and His Messenger they come fro’
one direction. So whoever annoys the Messenger hi
annoyed Allah, and whoever obeys the Messenger has obey.

١ Surah Al Azhab:57

| اا
انا

00

THE FIRST ISSUE

wa dhimmi and she had a husband or child who was a
imuhsan they are to be punished due to ascribing shame to
her child or husband who were muhsan.

So this verse is specifically concerning whoever slandered
the wives of the Prophet #, then whoever seeks to attribute a
(ule or defect to the Prophet 2% by attributing a fault to his
wives then they are a hypocrite. As for the person who
iweuses a (chaste) Muslim woman of fornication/adultery
then they are defiantly disobedient as Allah says, unless they

iepent.
And the definite article (in arabic- Al) in this verse refers
tothe wives of the Prophet as this speech is concerning the
Miner (of A’ishah).!
And the saying of the Most High:
‘And as for him among them who had the greater
share therein, his will be a great torment.”

So we know that the one who slanders the mothers of the
‏عن انا‎ attributes a faule/defect by that to the Messenger of
‏انالا‎ and the one who had the greatest share therein is
‘yncerning the story of the hypocrite Ibn Ubayy. So
‏باتكل او‎ them is hypocrisy which makes the spilling of blood
}einissible when the intent behind that is to annoy and hurt

Yul 6/163 of Sharh Al Mume? ‘Ala Zad Al Mustaqni’ by Shaykh ‏للف‎

shonin

‘il sys concerning ‘A’ishah: ‘Allah forbids you from it (slander) and warns

‎repeat the like of it forever, if you are believers,’ [Surah An Nurl7]‏ ذا ‎Wu‏ لز

‎fy Flue suid in his Tafsir: ‘The scholars ‏بك‎ unanimously agreed thar whoever
i) ‏اند‎ slinders her after the revelation of this verse is a disbeliever, because

‎Pee Nive tejected the ‏"مدعب‎

‎we We Nur tt

‎THE FIRST ISSUE

‎And this is also supported by the fact that the rest of those
who are cursed by Allah in His Book are either: disbelievers

‎or those whose blood is permissible to be spilt.
So if it is said, you are refuted by His saying:
‘Verily, those who accuse chaste women, who never
even think of anything touching their chastity and are
good believers, are cursed in this life and in the
Hereafter, and for them will be a great torment;”
alongwith the fact that this is only slander and not

‎disbelief.

‎Then the answer to this is from a number of perspectives:

‎The first of them: That this verse was revealed concerning
‘Mishah as Ibn Abbas? and other than him said. So in that
slander of her was criticism and harming of the Prophet. Ifa
man’s wife was to actually commit adultery then it would
hurt and annoy him, and for this reason (Imam) Ahmad was
of the view, in one narration from him, that whoever
slandered a woman who was not a muhsan’ like a slave girl

‎Surah An Nur:23

‎Reported by Ibn Abi Hatim and Al-Hakim, and he declared it sahth, also ‏مطل‎
‎Mardawiyyah as in ‘Ad-Dar Al-Munthar’ 5/64. And in its chain of narration is
Sa’id bin Mas‘ud (and he is Al-Marwazi) he was mentioned by Ibn Hibban in;
‘Ath Thiqat’ 8/271 and it occurs as ‘narrates it from Yazid bin Matwan’ and this
isa distortion concerning: ‘Yazid bin Haran’.

‎3 There are 5 conditions that need to be fulfilled for a person to be considered i
muhsan:

‎1) Consummation of the marriage (jc that they had sexual intercourse)

‎2) That the martiage was-a valid one

‎3) That the married couple had both reached the age of puberty

‎4) That they were of sound mind

‎5) Thar they were free and not slaves

‎36

‎mM)
‏إن‎

‏| لبن

‏لا

THE FIRST ISSUE

whoever slanders a believing woman to divert (people) from
(\rue) faith and censures the believing women in order to
inake people flee and have a distaste for Islam, as was done
hy K’ab bin Al-Ashraf.

So based upon this, whoever does that is a disbeliever and
his station is that of whoever insults the Prophet 38.

And it is said that the verse is general and absolute but
| lis saying: “Are cursed in this life and in the Hereafter”! does
jot name who is doing the cursing. So it is possible chat the
one cursing is other than Allah from the angels and
iinkind, And it is possible that Allah curses them during a
(particular) time or curses some of them but not others. Also
(\\ is possible that) some of his creation curse them during a
(particular) time and Allah only curses those whose slander
ow in criticism of the religion,

And as for the some of the creation cursing others then
(hut is with the meaning of making du’a (praying) against
‘hem with the meaning that they are far from the mercy of
‏انالا‎ And that which supports this is is that when a man
‏معد‎ his wife of adultery he invokes a curse’. And similar

ty that is His saying:

weal Mn Nur:23,

‎lor those who accuse their wives, but have no witnesses except themselves,‏ اناا
‎the teathinony of one of them be four testimonies (i.e. testifies four times) by‏ لا
‎Mlb hat he is one of those who speak the truth. And the fifth (testimony)‏

‎Mivaihd he) the invoking of the Curse of Allah on him if he be of those who tell a
lve (qquinst her). Bur it shall avert the punishment (of stoning to death) from her,
Wi we heats witness four times by Allah, that he (her husband) is telling a lie. And
‘We (ih (Westimony) should be that the Wrath of Allah be upon her if he (her
fooled) speaks the truth,’ (Surah An Nur:6-9)

‎THE FIRST ISSUE

‎the Prophet # or to hurt/annoy them after knowing that
they are the wives of the Prophet #% in the hereafter.

‎And due to this is the saying of the Prophet in that which
is established in Sahih Bukhari and Muslim: “Who will
excuse me (help me) concerning a man who I have heard is
speaking in an offensive manner about my family? By Allah,
I know nothing but good about my family.’

‎And concerning this Sa’d bin Mu’adh said: “Indeed we
will excuse you concerning him, if he is from the tribe of Al-
Aws we shall strike his neck.’ And the Prophet 3 did not
disapprove of Sa’d for saying that.

‎And there were those from the people of the slander who
did not make that accusation due to hypocrisy and the
Prophet #8 did not kill any of them concerning that insult,
rather they disagreed concerning lashing them, so indeed
they did not intend to harm or annoy the Prophet # and.
there is no apparent evidence of that. This however is
different from the case of Ibn Ubayy whose only intention
by that was to harm the Prophet #8.

‎And it was not established with them that his wives in
this life will also be his wives in the hereafter and the
occurrence of that concerning his wives is possible to be
understood. And due to this the Prophet 3 dropped (the
incident concerning them).

‎The second perspective: That the verse is general and
narrated concerning other perspectives: that accusing 3
chaste woman of fornication/adultery is from the major sins.
And it is also said that it is concerning the polytheist Arabs

‎from Makkah, who when a women emigrated to the
Messenger of Allah 2% would slander her. So this concerns

THE FIRST ISSUE

‘And for the disbelievers there is a humiliating

torment.’!

And as for His saying:
‘And whosoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger
(Muhammad), and transgresses His limits, He will cast
him into the Fire, to abide therein; and he shall have

(lahu) a disgraceful torment.” Then that is concerning
whoever rejects che obligations, taking them lightly.

(Also) upon the fact that He did not mention that He has
picpared it for them (those who disobey Allah and His
Messenger) and that the punishment is only prepared
(idda) for the disbelievers, then indeed the hellfire was
‘sued for them because there is no escape for them from
whoever amongst them enters it unlike those who will be
tiken out,

\nd as for the people guilty of major sins from amongst
tle believers, then it is possible for them that they do not
‘uur itacall if they are forgiven. And if they do enter it then
‏اانا‎ they will be taken out of it, even if that is after a long
fine

Ile sixth evidence: The saying of the One who is far
© moved from all imperfection:

Raise not your voices above the voice of the Prophet,

hor speak aloud to him in talk as you speak aloud to

jl) MI Hagarah:90. And in many other verses,
vill Mtv Nisitz 14

THE FIRST ISSUE

‘Then we pray and invoke (sincerely) the Curse of
Allah upon those who lie.”

So from that which the one who slanders is cursed with is
that he is lashed and his testimony is rejected and he is
declared to be defiantly disobedient (a fasiq) so indeed there
is punishment for him, yet he still remains a citizen who is
granted protection and acceptance and this is from the
mercy of Allah, This is in opposition to those whom Allah
informs us He has cursed in this life and in the hereafter. So
indeed this cursing by Allah necessitates that support is lifted
from the person from every perspective and they are far away

from the causes of mercy.

And what strengthens this is that He says here: ‘And has
prepared for them a humiliating torment” and a humiliating
torment does not come in The Qur'an except for the
disbelievers, like His saying:

1 Surah Al Imran: 61. Prior to this Allah says in verses 59, 60 & then verse 61:
‘Verily, the likeness of Jesus before Allah is the likeness of Adam. He created him
from dust, then (Ele) said to him: "Be!” - and he was. (This is) the truth from
your Lord, so be not of those who doubt. Then whoever disputes with you
concerning him [Jesus] after (all this) knowledge that has come to you, [i.e
Jesus} being a slave of Allah, and having no share in Divinity) say: (O
Muhammad) “Come, let us call our sons and your sons, our women and your
women, ourselves and yourselves - then we pray and invoke (sincerely) the Curse
of Allah upon those who lie,’

Shaykh u-lslam Ibn Taymiyyah said in ‘As-Sarim’ 2/108: ‘Allah ordered His
Messenger that He calls those who argue concerning Jesus after what has come 1
him of knowledge, that they pray for the curse of Allah to be on the liats so this lt
from what the slanderer is cursed with,”

3 Surah Al Azhab:57

THE FIRST ISSUE

is due to bad manners and underestimating him and taking
him lightly and that is without realising! So how about the
case of whoever insults him, belittles and takes him lightly
and harms him intentionally?! So such a person is a
disbeliever even more so.
The seventh evidence: The saying of the One who is free
of all imperfection:
“Make not the calling of the Messenger among you as
your calling of one another. Allah knows those of you
who slip away under shelter (of some excuse without
taking the permission to leave, from the Messenger).
And let those who oppose the Messenger's
commandment beware, lest some Fitnah befall them
or a painful torment be inflicted on them.”

So He ordered that those who oppose His order beware of a
ficnah befalling them, and that is apostasy and disbelief due
to His saying:
‘And fight them until there is no more Fitnah and (all
and every kind of) worship is for Allah (Alone).’*

Imam Ahmad said*: “The fitnah is ash-shirk (polytheism)’
because it is feared that if he refuses some of his (the
Prophets) sayings some deviation will enter his heart and he
will be destroyed. And Allah followed it with this verse:

١ Surah An-Nur: 63
Surah Al-Bagarah:193
‘In the narration of Al-Fudayl bin Ziyad

43

THE FIRST ISSUE

one another, lest your deeds may be rendered fruitless
while you perceive not.”!

So the perspective of the evidence is that Allah forbade them
to raise their voices above the Prophet's # voice and speak
aloud to him as the people would speak aloud to each other.
The reason for that is because it would lead to their good
deeds being wiped out without them realising. Therefore it is
obligatory to abandon whatever would wipe out the good
deeds. And the good deeds are wiped out due to disbelief
(Al-Kufr) due to His saying:

‘And whoever denies the faith - his work has become

worthless,”

And nothing wipes out all of the good deeds except for
disbelief (Al-Kuft), because whoever dies as a believer, they
will undoubtedly enter paradise and if all of their good deeds
had been wiped out they would not enter it. This is although
they may have some of their good deeds wiped out due to
the existence of that which spoiled them such as reminders
of a person’s generosity or by injury.

So when that is established concerning raising voices
above his and speaking aloud with him, then it is to be
feared that a person may disbelieve while not realising, This

١ Surah Al Hujurat:2
2 Surah Al Ma’idah:5

3 "0 you who believe! Do not render in vain your Sadaqah (charity) by reminders
of your generosity or by injury, like him who spends his wealth to be seen of
men, and he does not believe in Allah, nor in the Last Day. His likeness is the
likeness of a smooth rock on which is a little dusts om it falls heavy rain which
leaves it bare. They are not able to do anything with what they have earned. And
Alllah does not guide the disbelievers.’ (Surah Al Baqarah:264)

42

THE FIRST ISSUE

that would entail. And Allah regards such a thing as an
enormity. So if anyone was to have married one of his wives
or servant girls, his punishment would be to be killed due to
what they would have violated from that which is
prohibited. So the one who insults him is even more
deserving of that (being killed).

And the evidence for that is in what Muslim narrates in
his Sahih on the authority of Anas that a man was charged
with fornicating with the slavegirl of Allah’s Messenger 38,
lhereupon Allah's Messenger said to ‘Ali: ‘Go and strike his
neck,” ‘Ali came to him and he found him in a well cooling
down his body, ‘Ali said to him: ‘Come out,’ and as he took
liold of his hand and brought him out, he found that his
penis had been cut. ‘Ali refrained from striking his neck. He
came to Allah's Prophet #8 and said: ‘Allah's Messenger, he
«loesnt even have a penis.’

As for the proofs from the Sunnah

lhe first hadith: Reported by Ibn Abbas that a blind man
had a freed concubine who used to insult the Prophet 38 and
say bad things about him. He told her not to do that but she
did not stop, and he rebuked her but she did not heed him.
One night, when she started to say bad things about the
!'rophet and insult him, he took a short sword or dagger, put
it on her belly and pressed it and killed her. The following
inorning that was mentioned to the Messenger of Allah 3%.
IIe called the people together and said, ‘I adjure by Allah the
nan who has done this action and I adjure him by my right
over him that he should stand up.’ The blind man stood up
and said, “O Messenger of Allah, I am the one who did it;

45

THE FIRST ISSUE

‘But no, by your Lord, they can have no Faith, until
they make you (O Muhammad) judge in all disputes
between them.”!

And He (Imam Ahmad) said’: I find it amazing that a people
know the chain of narration and the authenticity (of a
hadith) yet they go to the opinion of so-and-so or so-and-
so... He (Allah) says: “And let those who oppose the
Messenger's commandment beware, lest some Fitnah befall
them or a painful torment be inflicted on them.” Do you
know what this fitnah is? It is disbelief, So they decline the
hadith and their desires over take them and they take an
(opposing) opinion,’

So when the one who opposes His command is warned
from disbelief or a painful torment and is led to disbelief
only by what he has combined of taking the Prophet’s ‏يك‎
‎right lightly as Iblis did, then how about whoever does that
which is even more serious than that of insulting him,
attributing defect to him and that which is similar?!

The eighth evidence: That the One who is free from all
imperfection says:

‘And it is not for you to harm the Messenger of Allah

or to marry his wives after him, ever. Indeed, that

would be in the sight of Allah an enormity.”

So it was prohibited upon this nation that they marry the
Prophet’s wives after he died due to the harm/annoyance

"Surah An-Nisa:65
2 In the narration of Abu Talib Ahmad bin Hamid
3 Surah Al-Ahzab:53.

44

in

“Mh

‘THE FIRST ISSUE

is no proof for that in the hadith. Rather, what is apparent is
that she was a disbeliever. Then within the hadith is that her
inaster repeatedly forbade her from insulting the Prophet 38,
and if she was an apostate then why would it be possible to
leave her to be for a long duration.

The second. hadith; Which Ash Shafi’i used as evidence
that if a dhimmi insults the Prophet they are to be killed,
and it is the famous and well known story of K’ab bin
Ashraf, And the Prophet ‏يك‎ said concerning that: “Who will
kill Kab bin Al Ashraf for indeed he has hurt Allah and His
Messenger?’ So Muhammad bin Maslama got up saying: ‘O
Messenger of Allah, would you like that I kill him?’ The
l'rophet said: ‘Yes.’ Muhammad bin Maslama said: “Then
illow me to say something (i.e to deceive K’ab).’ The
l'rophet said: ‘You may say it.’ So he went to him (K’ab) and
said: “That man (the Prophet) demands charity from us and
lic has troubled us.’ So due to what K’ab heard, he said: ‘By
Allah you will get tired of him...’ etc. Then they killed him.'

And it is a narration that is agreed upon, and K’ab had
spoken poetry that defamed the Prophet so the Messenger of
Allah #8 deputised people to kill him. And K’ab had a
covenant but due to his insulting the Prophet, this covenant
was broken. And in this hadith is the words: ‘For indeed he
lias hurt Allah and His Messenger,’ so everybody who hurts
Allah and His Messenger is to be killed; and the insulter has
‏نا‎ Allah and His Messenger by agreement of the Muslims
anc it is compulsory to kill them.

' Iukhari (2510), Muslim (1801) and other than them from the hadith of Jabir
(in Abdullah 2.

THE FIRST ISSUE

she used to insult you and say bad things about you. I
forbade her, but she did not stop, and I rebuked her, but she
did not give up her habit. I have two sons like pearls from
her, and she was kind to me. Last night she began to insult
you and say bad things about you. So I took a dagger, put it
on her belly and pressed it till I killed her.’ Thereupon the
Prophet said: “Bear witness, there is no blood money due for
her.”! Ahmad used it as proof.

So it is possible that this is the incident of the Jewish
woman’ and this was the saying of Al-Qadi Abee Ya’la and
other than him. So they regarded those two narrations as
being about the same incident, and it is also possible that
this is a separate incident.

Al-Khattabee said®; ‘Within this narration is that the one
who insults the Prophet is to be killed because insulting him
is apostasy.”

So this is evidence that he firmly believed that the woman in
this incident who was killed, was a Muslim. However there

١ Reported by Abu Dawud (4361), An-Nasa’i (7/107), Ad-Daraqutni (3/112) via
the path of Abu Dawud and Al Hakim (4/354) and Al-Bayhaqi (7/60) all via the
path of Utbman Ash Shaham on the authority of Ikrimah on the authority of Ibn
Abbis with it. The hadith was declared sahih by Al-Hakim and Ibn Haje said in:
‘Bulugh Al-Maram’ (2/138) its narrators are reliable, Al-Albani said it is sahih in
Sahih Abu Dawud (3655).

* The hadith in Abu Dawid (4362) narrated from ‘Ali that a Jewish woman used
to insult the Prophet and say bad things about him, so a man strangled her untill
she died, and the Prophet ruled that no blood money was due in this case, Ibn
Taymiyyah said in As-Sarim al-Maslal (1/162); “This hadith is jayyid.’ However
this hadith is narrated from Ash-Sha’bi from Ali, and though Ash-Sha’bi narrated
from ‘Ali in Sahih Al-Bukhari (6812) some of the scholars refuted this and Ad-
Daraqutni held that Ash Sha’bi did not hear from Ali any hadith except for that
one. See ‘Fath Al-Bari’ 12/121,

3 Ma‘alim As Sunan 6/199

=

4_-
ا

ل

THE FIRST ISSUE

licart, 0 Messenger of Allah. Why did you not gesture to us
with your eyes?” He said, “It is not befitting for a Prophet to
letray a person with a gesture of his eyes.”!

And the Messenger of Allah wanted his blood spilt and
lic (Ibn Abi Sarh) was Uthman’s foster brother so he
jntereced for him with the Messenger of Allah, so he left him
he. And this Ibn Abi Sarh became Muslim then apostated
id joined the polytheists and he used to write down the
revelation for the Messenger of Allah but when he
\postatized he claimed that he used to add whatever he
wanted to the Revelation, This was a lie and a fabrication
\tinst the Prophet and was a kind of insult,

And it is said* that concerning it the following verse was
tevealed:

‘And who is more unjust than one who invents a lie
about Allah or says, “It has been inspired to me,”
while nothing has been inspired to him, and one who
says, “I will reveal [something] like what Allah
revealed”?

‎there was another person who invented a lie against him‏ انالا
‎‘inuilarly. Anas narrated that; ‘There was a Christian who‏
‎embraced Islam and read Surah Al-Bagarah and Al-Imran‏

‎Wojuiried by Abu Dawud (2683, 4359), An-Nasa’ (7/105-106), Al-Hakim
10) and ALBayhagi (7/40). Declared Sahih by Al-Hakim, Adh-Dhahabi
‏,اناي‎ thn Taymiyyah and Albani (As Sahihah 1723) declared it sahith also.
Julsiv At-Tabari 5/268. Ibn Kathir mentions that: ‘Ikrimah and Qatadah
vil hut this verse was revealed concerning Musaylimah the liar’ Shaykh Mugbil
il The narration of ‘Ikrimah is with At-Tabari 11/533 and is da’if, And the
isnt of Qaeadah bas an authentic chain of narration up to him, reported by
\) [shart also” (Tahgiq Ibn Kathir, 3/367)
wah ‏يستكي‎

‎49

‎THE FIRST ISSUE

‎The third hadith: It was narrated that Abu Barzah said a
man spoke harshly to Abu Bakr As Sideeq and I said: ‘Shall 1
kill him?’ He told me off and said: “That is not for anyone
after the Messenger of Allah #8.’ Reported by An Nasa’i.!

‎And a group of the scholars have used this as evidence
that the one who insults the Messenger is to be killed. From
them: Abu Dawud, Isma’il bin Ishag, Abu Bakr Abdil Azeez,
Al Qadi Abu Ya’ala and other than them.

‎And in the hadith is thar whoever insults him ir is
permissible to kill them and this is general concerning the
Muslim and the disbeliever who does that.

‎The fourth hadith: The hadith of Ibn Abi Sarh, and it is
from that which the people of knowledge have agreed upon.

‎Sa’d ibn Abi Waqqas said: ‘On the Day of the Conquest
of Makkah, the Messenger of Allah 38 granted safety to the
people except for four men and two women, and he named
them, and Ibn Abi Sarh... As for Ibn Abi Sarh, he hid with
“Uthman ibn ‘Affan, and when the Messenger of Allah called
the people to give their allegiance to him, he brought him to
stand before the Messenger of Allah, He said, “O Prophet of
Allah, accept the allegiance of “Abdullah.” He raised his head
and looked at him three times, refusing him, then he
accepted his allegiance after the third time. Then he turned
to his companions and said: “Was there not among you any
smart man who could have got up and killed this person
when he saw me refusing to give him my hand and accept
his allegiance?” They said, “We do not know what is in your

‎"No. 4076-4082. It was declared hasan by Al Hafith Az Za’i in his checking of
Sunan An Nasa’i. [bn Taymiyyah declared one of its chains of narrations to be
sahth also.

‎48

‎wat

‎My

THE FIRST ISSUE

clear lie! For indeed the Prophet 3& did not have anything
tecorded other than what Allah revealed to him and he

‘Shaykh ul-Islam Tbn Taymiyyah discussed this matter at length and mentioned
\ we suling on one who tells lies about the Prophet verbally, the ruling on one who
wily lies about him in a report and the ruling on one who narrates a hadith
\nowing it to be false. He was of the view that the one who tells lies about him
vibully is a-kafir, He said in al-Sarim (2/328-399), after quoting the hadith of
Nuraydah (which was omitted here due to its being da’if): ‘A clan of Banu Layth
in) Madcenah was of two minds. A man had proposed marriage to one of their
womenfolk during the Jahiliyyah but they did not accept his proposal. He came
\ them wearing a hullah (a suit of clothing) and said: “The Messenger of Allah
yuve me this hullah to wear and told me to rule over your wealth and your
blood.” Then he went and stayed with that woman whom he loved. The people
wit word to the Messenger of Allah 38 and he said: “The enemy of Allah is
\ying.” Then he sent a man and said: “If you find him alive — although I do not
think that you will find him alive - then strike his neck (kill him). And if you
liad him dead then burn him with fire.” He said: This is what the Messenger of
\llih said concerning “one who tells lies about me deliberately.”
Shaykh al-Islam said: “This is a sahih isnad according to the conditions of al-
Sahih and we do not find any faule in it.”
|“ TN: Adh-Dhahabi said in Siyar An-Nubula (7/373-374): ‘Our shaykh Abul
\bbhas (Ibn Taymiyyah) has relied upon the hadith of Salih bin Hibban in the
hook As-Sarim Al-Maslul and he was upon delusion in this.” Ibn Adi also
\vported it in Ad-Dw’afa in the biography of Salih bin Hibban (4/5453)]
hen he (Ibn Taymiyyah) said: ‘There are two opinions concerning this
Navlith:
1 — That the apparent meaning should be followed and the one who
deliberately tells lies about the Messenger of Allah #8 should be killed.
Among those who were of this view were some who said that the one who
does that becomes a disbeliever due to that. This was the view of several
including Abu Muhammad al-Juwayni. Ibn ‘Aqil quoted his Shaykh, Abu'l-
Fadl al-Hamdani, as saying: “The innovators, liars and fabricators of hadith
are worse than the heretics because the heretics want to attack Islam from
without but these people want to attack it from within. They are like people
who ery to destroy a city from within whilst the heretics are like those who
are laying siege to it from without, and those who are inside open up the
fortress. So they are more dangerous to Islam than those who do not appear
outwardly to be Muslims.”

51

THE FIRST ISSUE

and he used to write the revelation for the Prophet. Later on
he reverted to Christianity and used to say: “Muhammad.
knows nothing but what I have written for him,” Then Allah
caused him to die and the people buried him but in the
morning they found that the earth had thrown out his body.
They said: “This is the deed of Muhammad and his
Companions. They have opened the grave of our companion
and. took his body out because he ran away from them.” So
they again dug the grave deeper for him, but in the morning
they again found that the earth had thrown the body out.
They said: “This is a deed of Muhammad and _ his
companions,” So they dug a third grave for him as deep as
they could, but in the morning they found that earth had
thrown the body out. Then they believed that what had
befallen him, was not by a man, and they had to leave the
body on the ground.”!

So this is from the clearest evidences that Allah takes
revenge on His Messenger’s ‏و2‎ behalf upon anyone who
criticizes him.

So the blood of Ibn Abi Sarh was permissible to be spilt
after he came back to Islam repentant. And the fact that the
Prophet 38 forgave him after is evidence that he had the
option to have him killed or to pardon him. And it is also
evidence that he could kill whoever insulted him even if they
repented and returned to Islam.

Then know that the lie upon the Messenger of Allah #8
invented by Ibn Abi Sarh and the other Christian writer is a

' Bukhari (No. 814) and it is also in Muslim.

50

THE FIRST ISSUE

If someone claims that Allah enjoined fasting of another month other
than Ramadan, or a sixth prayer, ete, or that bread and meat are haram,
\nowing that he is lying, then he is a disbeliever according to scholarly
sonsensus,

Whoever claims that the Prophet % enjoined something that he did not
enjoin, or that he forbade something that he did not forbid, has told lies
shout Allah, like the one described (in the paragraph) above, with the
\ulditional factor that he clearly says that the Messenger said that. He is
issuing a fatwa without pointing our that this is ijtihad, In conclusion,
whoever deliberately tells a blatant lie about Allah is like one who deliberately
slishelieves in Allah and is even worse. It is obvious thar the one who tells lies
about the One Whom he should venerate is mocking Him and disregarding
His sanctity.

The one who tells lies about him (the Propher 3) is inevitably seeking ‏ف‎
‎dishonour and belittle him by lying, Tt is well known that the one who lies
about him as Ibn Abi Sarh did when he said, “He used to learn from me,” or
hy attributing evil actions and foul words to him, becomes a disbeliever due
‏ذا‎ that. The same applies to the one who tells lies about him, because he is
\iuiibuting to him a command or a narrative or an action. IF he attributes to
hin a command that he did nor issue, he has added something to his
ree’ah, which cannot be part of it and which he could not have uttered, as
: “T have not omitted anything that will bring you closer to. Paradise
liut 1 have enjoined it upon you, and there is nothing that will keep you
further from Hell but I have commanded you to do it.” If he did not enjoin
ii, then it is not permissible to enjoin it, Whoever narrates that he did enjoin
i\ has attributed to him something that it is not permissible to enjoin and
{hat is tantamount to attributing foolishness to him.

Similarly, if he transmits a narrative from him, if this was something that
he should haye told us he would have told us, because Allah completed the
religion, If he did not tell us of it then it is not something that he should
have told us. Similarly with regard to actions that are falsely attribured 10
him; if the action is something that he should have done then he would have
sone it, but if he did not do it then it is better not to do it.

‘The point is that the Propher ‏يك‎ is the most perfect of mankind in all
senses. Whatever he did not say or do, it is better not to say or do it, and
whatever he did do, it is better to do it than not to do it. If a man
deliberately tells a lie about him or narrates something from him that did not
happen, then whatever he says is tantamount to attributing shortcomings to
lim, because if it was something good he would have done it, and whoever
‘ituributes shortcomings to the Messenger 3 is a disbeliever.

THE FIRST ISSUE

The main point of this opinion is thac telling lies about him is
tantamount to telling lies about Allah. Hence he said: “Telling lies abour me
is not like telling lies about one of you.” What the Messenger # commanded
is whac Allah commanded, and it must be followed just as the commands of
Allah must be followed. Whatever he told us must be believed, just as
whatever Allah told us must be believed. Whoever rejects what he told us or
refuses to follow his command is like one who rejects what Allah told us or
refuses to follow the command of Allah. It is well known that the one who
tells lies about Allah by claiming to be a Messenger or Prophet of Allah, or
tells false things about Allah, such as Musaylimah and other fabricators of his
ilk, is a kafir whose blood may be shed, and the same applies to one who tells
lies about the Messenger of Allah #8.

‘Thus ic is clear that telling lies about him is tantamount to disbelieving in
him. Hence Allah mentions the two things together in the verse where He
says: “And who does more wrong than he who invents a lie against Allah or
denies the truth, when it comes to him?”[al-“Ankabut:68]

Indeed, telling lies about him may be a greater sin than disbelieving in
him, so Allah mentioned that first, just as the one who is sincere towards him
is higher in status than one who believes what he says. If the liar is like the
denier, or worse, then the one who tells lies about Allah is like the one who.
disbelieves in Him, and the one who tells lies about the Prophet is like the
one who disbelieves in him.

Thus it becomes clear thar disbelieving in him is akin to lying, because
denying what he says implies that one thinks that what he says is not true,
which is tantamount to saying that the religion of Allah is false. It makes no
difference whether one rejects one thing or everything that he says. Rather
the person who does that becomes a disbeliever because that implies that he
thinks that the message and religion of Allah are false. And the one who tells
lies about him deliberately introduces into the religion something that is not
part of it, and claims that the ummah is obliged ‏م‎ believe this report and
follow this command because it is the religion of Allah, knowing that it is not
part of the religion of Allah.

Adding something to the religion is like taking something away from it.
There is no difference between rejecting a verse of the Qur'an ‏عه‎ deliberately
adding some words and saying that this is a surah of the Qur'an.

Moreover, if a person deliberately tells lies about him meaning to mock
him or belittle him, by claiming that he issued commands that he did not
issue, and that it is not permissible for him to issue, this is tantamount to
attributing foolishness or false statements to the Prophet ‏يك‎ and claiming that
he isa liar, and this is blatant disbelief.

THE FIRST ISSUE

ilelivered it as Allah, the Most High willed without any
changes to it!

Thereafter the scholars differed: did the Messenger ‏أن‎
‎Allah 48 give him consent to write something other than
what he commenced, and did he say anything to him? ‘I'heve
ire two opinions:

1. The Christian and Ibn Abi Sarh lied about the whol

incident and he did not issue any consent to write atlier

than what he said in the first place, and they only lied
about this in order to make the people turn away [ion
him.

2. The Prophet # did tell him something; he said and

dictated the words “The Hearing, the Seeing”, bur he

(Ibn Abi Sarh) wrote “The Hearing, The Knowing". So

the Prophet told him to remove it’.

And both of these modes had been revealed, so he (is) ‏الث‎
‎io him: ‘Write this, and if you wish, write that’ for they ave
both correct; and a declaration of the Prophet ‏كلا‎ has been
velated that he said: ‘The Qur’an was revealed in seven
inodes; all of them are decisive, sufficient. If you say “Whe
Mighty, the Wise” or “The Forgiving, the Merciful”, thon It
is similar to the verse of mercy which does not end with (ihe

١ Allah says: ‘And if he [Muhammad] forged a false saying concerning, Us {Alli},
We surely would have seized him by his right hand (or with power and might),
und then certainly should have cut off his life artery? (al-Haqqahii-40) nl
‘Verily We: It is We Who have sent down the Dhike (Quran) and surely, We
will guard it (from corruption).’ (Al Hije:9)

Recorded by Ahmad (3/245-246) from the route of Thabit, from Anasy he sls
svcorded something similar to it in (3/120-121), (it was also recorded by) Ih
Hibban in “al-Thsan” (2/62), from the route of Humayd, from Anas. Shuybli al
Islam authenticated it (2/242),

55

THE FIRST ISSUE

It should be noted that this view is very strong but a distinction should be
made between the one who tells lies about him verbally and the one who tells
lies about him that he claims to have heard from someone else, such as
saying: “So and so the son of So and so told me such and such from the
Prophet” In this case he is telling lies about that man and attributing the
hadith to him. Bue if he says “This hadith is sahih” or “It was proven that he
said that”, knowing it to be false, then he is telling lies about the Prophet.
But if he fabricates it and narrates it in silly manner, this is subject to further
discussion, especially since the Companions are regarded as being dignified
and of good character and if one of them were to lie it would cause a great
deal of harm to the religion, Therefore the Prophet 38 wanted to kill the one
who told lies about him and he hastened to punish him so that would be
means of preventing any of the hypocrites being counted as one of the
Companions of good character.

But if'a person narrated a hadith knowing it to be false, this is haram, as it
was narrated in a sahth hadith that the Prophet 38 said: “Whoever narrates a
hadith from me that he knows is false is one of the liars.” But he is noc a
disbeliever unless he adds to that narration something that implies disbelief,
because he believes that his Shaykh narrated it, but he knows that his Shaykh
is lying and it is not permissible for him to narrate it. So he is in the same
position as one who witnesses a deal, a testimony or a contract knowing it to
be invalid. This testimony is prohibited but he is not bearing false witness
per se (shahadae al-zir),

‘Then he mentioned the second view and said:
2 - The liar is to be punished severely, bur he is not regarded as a disbeliever
and it is not permissible to kill him, because the factors that determine who
isa disbeliever and isto be killed are well known and this is not one of them.
Iris nor permissible to affirm something for which there is no basis. Whoever
says that he is not to be executed has to stipulate thar telling lies about the
Prophet # does not imply any criticism or defamation of him. But if he says
that he heard him say something that implies beliteling the Prophet 38 ‏عه‎
‎criticizing him, such as the hadith about “the sweat of horses” and other such
silly fabrications, this is obviously mocking him, and the one who says this is
undoubtedly a disbeliever whose blood may be shed. Those who were of the
view that such a person is not to be executed responded to this hadith by
saying that the Prophet 3 knew that he was a hypocrite so he killed him for
that and not for lying, but this answer does not count for anything,

54

THE FIRST ISSUE

wid)” or “taPalun (they did)”?? So he (#8) replied: “Write
whichever of them you wish.’ And thus, Allah gave him
siiccess in writing what was correct, and he wrote what was
the more beloved of the two modes to Allah, if they were
jorh revealed; or he only wrote what Allah revealed. And this
choice demonstrated by the Prophet # indicated the scope
‏أن‎ the revelation, and trust in Allah in the preservation of the
(Quran, and knowledge that he would not write down except
what was revealed; and this is not a reason to deny a Book
which Allah took upon Himself to protect, in which no
| lschood can approach it from any angle.

And some have mentioned a third scenario: that he heard
‘lic verse from the Prophet # and nothing remained of it
rscept a word or two, so he completed it by what he
sleluced from what he read from it, as the discerning and
intelligent do. Thus he wrote it down and read it to the
l"\ophet 3 who said: “It was revealed accordingly” just as it
Ws approved to ‘Umar bin al-Khattab the saying of Allah
the Most High:

‘(Allah) said: “In a little while, they are sure to be

regretful,” (al-Mu’minun:14)

‘huykh al-Islam said: The first saying is the most probable.
(he fifth hadith; That on the day of the conquest, the
Nrophet ‏يك‎ entered Mecca, wearing a helmet on his head.
When he took it off, a man came and "said, Ibn Khatal is
linging, to the curtain of the Ka'ba.’ The Prophet said, ‘Kill

hin!

‎and Muslim (1357) from the hadith of Anas 2.‏ )1846( سانانا

‎57

‎THE FIRST ISSUE

‎mention of) punishment, or an ayah mentioning
punishment which does not end with (the mention of)
mercy.”

‎Thus, the hadiths illustrate that according to the seven
modes in which the Quran was revealed in, the end of a
single verse can end by various names of Allah the Most
High according to the substitute. The reciter may choose
whichever of them he wishes. And the Prophet # chose to
dictate whatever he wished from those modes and perhaps,
the Prophet 3% recited a particular mode, and it was said to
him: ‘or (shall I write) such-and-such?’ due to the many
times he heard him give him the choice between two modes.
So he (the Prophet #8) would say to him: ‘Yes, both of them
are the same’, because a verse may have been revealed in two
modes together, so he confirmed that. Thereafter Allah
abrogated some of those modes during the times when Jibril
would present (a reading of) the Quran to the Prophet #
every Ramadan. And the final presentation is according to
the mode recorded by Zayb bin Thabit, which is recited by
the people today, and is the one which “Uthman and the
Companions compiled for the people.

‎And another viewpoint has been reported”: namely, that
he said to the Prophet #8: ‘Should I write “ta’malun (they

‎"This hadith is oft-narrated, and from the mutawatir ahadith. The scholars of
the Sahih, Sunan and Musnad collections concorded in recording it, and note
that some of its routes contain additional words. ‘The wording mentioned (by
Shaykh al-Islam) is fabricated in multiple reports. See “Qatf ath-Thamar”
(p.163) and “al-Murshid al-Wajiz” by Abu Shamah (p.77-95).

‎2 Recorded by Imam Ahmad in “an-Nasikh wa'l-Mansukh”, as occurs in the
(original) as-Sarim (2/245) and he recounted it's isnad, as well as Ibn Abi Hatim,
as stated in ad-Durr al-Manthur (3/55) in summary; and the isnad, along with
the Fact that it is mursal, is extremely weak.

‎56

THE FIRST ISSUE

them to either kill him or pardon him or take blood money
from him.

Also it is not possible that he was killed for apostasy alone
4 repentance is sought from the apostate, so it is established
therefore that he was only killed due to ridiculing and
insulting the Prophet 38.

‎for the consensus of the Companions of the Prophet #8‏ نار
‎Ilat is narrated from them in numerous judgements‏
‎wattered far and wide, and no one from among them has‏
‎lisapproved or rejected that so it has become a consensus.‏

‎Shaykhul Islam said: And know that it is not possible for
false claim of consensus of the companions, upon a
sihsidiary issue when it has reached us via these paths.

‎So from them: What Harb narrates in his ‘Masa’il’ on the
withority of Layth on the authority of Mujahid who said: ‘a
jn came with Umar who had insulted the Prophet #8 so he
killed him and then said: “Whoever insults Allah or His
\lessenger or anyone of the Prophets, then kill them.”

‎And Mujahid said on the authority of Ibn Abbas ‏:كك‎
‎Whichever Muslim insults Allah or His Messenger or
iiyone of the Prophets then they have lied and rejected the
Messenger of Allah. And that is apostasy, their repentance is
tu be sought, so then they either repent or are killed. And
whichever (non Muslim) who has a covenant insults anyone
‏أن‎ the Prophets, then they have broken their covenant so kill

‎59

‎THE FIRST ISSUE

‎There were three crimes for which the blood of Ibn
Khatal was made permissible: Killing a soul (unjustly)',
apostasy and ridiculing (the Prophet).?

‎Then it is not possible that his killing was due to
retaliation (ie. life for a life) as his surrender to the
guardians/allies of the killed man would be required, for

‎١ Ina narration recorded by Ibn Ishaq it is mentioned thar Ibn Khatal killed a
man and apostated afterwards. There is no mention of its authenticity in ‘As
Sarim’ of Ibn Taymiyyah nor in the Mukhtasar. It is said that he (Ibn Khatal)
was deputed by the Prophet along with a man from the ansar to collect zakat,
whereupon he apostated and killed che ansari, stole the zakat money and fled to
Makkah.

‎NB: Ibn Ishaq was called a liar by Imam Malik. Imam Ahmad discounted the
reliability of Ibn Ishaq if he alone narrates a hadith. Also, Imams Yahya Ibn
Ma‘in (in another narration from him), An-Nasa’i and ad-Daraqutni stated that
Tbn Ishaq was weak in hadith. The great Imam of Sunnah, Imam Ahmad, also
added that Ibn Ishaq's narrations are not accepted if they are about the Sunan
stating that even [in the rare occasions] where Ibn Ishaq clearly stated thar he
heard a Hadith from his teacher, he would often contradict other narrators.
‘Therefore, and as Imam Ahmad stated, if Ibn Ishaq alone reports a Hadith, then
that narration is not accepted. Adh-Dhahabi also stated that if a narration thar
Tbn Ishaq reports contradicts other [more established] narrators, then Ibn Ishaq's
narration is rejected.

‎Ibn Taymiyyah said: ‘Ie is well known thar most of what was reported in
aspects of Tafsir (commentary on the Qur'an) is similar to narrations reporting
Maghazi (or Sirah) and battles, causing Imam Ahmad to state that three matters
do not have Isnad: Tafsir, Mala’him, and Maghazi. This is because most of their
narrations are of the Marasil (plural of Mursal)* type, such as narrations reported
by Urwah Ibn az-Zubayr, ash-Shalbi, az-Zubri, Musa ibn Uqbah and Ibn Ishaq.’
[Majmu' Al Fatawa, 13/345]

‎* The mursal hadith is not a valid proof as Imam Muslim said: “In our basic
view and the view of the scholars of narrations, the mursal hadith is not a valid
proof, neither in our view nor in the view of the learned scholars of hadith.”
[Mugaddimah, Bab Sihhat Al-lhtijaj Bil-Hadith Al-Mu'an'an]

‎2 In Fat’h Al Bari Sharh Sahih Bukhari in ‘Kitab Al Maghazi’ Ibn Hajr mentions
a narration on the authority of Malik that says: ‘And Ibn Khatal ridicules the
Messenger of Allah with poetry.”

‎58

THE FIRST ISSUE

And that is clarified in His saying:
‘And strive hard with your wealth and your selfs in the
cause of Allah.” And striving concerning our selfs is by
the tongue as it is with the hands.

Secondly: We give them a concession regarding what they
believe from disbelief and it is (also) a concession upon what
they conceal of hostility. But as for their making apparent an
insult to Allah and His Messenger 8 and his religion then
ihat is waging war (against Allah and His Messenger) which
hreaks their covenant.

Thirdly; That in absolute terms the covenant between us
and them necessitates that they suffice us from displaying
criticism and insulting (of The Prophet #8 etc.), just as it
necessitates the refraining from spilling blood. However,
insulting is even more serious than spilling blood. This is
licause we give our wealth and lives upon honouring the
Messenger 38 and making the religion uppermost and they
know this from our religion, so if they oppose us in this then
their covenant is broken.

Fourthly: That the covenant which ‘Umar made with
them contained a clarification concerning that and made it a
condition upon them. As is narrated by Harb with an
authentic (Sahih) chain of narration from AbdurRahman bin
Ghanm.?

Fifthly: That the covenant with the people of dhimmah is
‘spon them residing with us in a place which is ruled by
Islam and that they are a people who are subjugated and

١ Surah At Tawbah:41
‘At the time of Salih the Christian of Ash-Sham.

THE FIRST ISSUE

And it is reported by Harb also that ‘Umar said to the
Nabatean man! who wrote books for him when he entered
Ash-Sham and (bad) things occurred from him: ‘I will not
allow you to enter upon us in our religion and I will not give
you a covenant of protection to enter upon us in our religion
and verily if you return we will strike your neck’.? So by this
it is known that the Companions had consensus that there is
no coyenant for the one who makes apparent his opposition
to our religion and that their blood is permissible.

And indeed from that which is most serious in opposition
is insulting the Prophet 38 and this is apparent not hidden.

And Ibn Mubarak mentions with his chain of narration
that Gharahfah bin Al-Harith Al-Kindi heard a Christian
insulting the Prophet # so he struck him on his nose. So the
incident was taken to ‘Umar who said: ‘Indeed we have
given them a covenant.’ So Gharafah said: ‘Allah’s refuge is
sought that we give a covenant to a person who insults the
Messenger of Allah.’ So Umar said: ‘He has spoken
truthfully.”

As for reflection, then from it’s perspectives

Firstly: That attributing defect or fault to our religion and
insulting our Prophet % is striving against us and waging war
against Allah and His Messenger %. So it breaks the
covenant like waging war with the hands, and even more so.

' Nabatene -the borderland between Arabia and Syria, from the Euphrates to the
Red Sea.

3 Reported by Ibn Asakir in his ‘Tarikh’.

4 Reported by Al-Bukhati in 'Ac‘Tarikh Al-Kabit’ (7/110) and Abu Ya'la in his
musnad and Al-Bayhaqi in 'Al-Kubra’ (9/220), Al-Bosayri declared its chain of
narration sahth (5/210)

THE FIRST ISSUE

warrants their being lashed and like that, if they insult che
Messenger #8, that warrants their being killed.

Tenth: That clear analogy necessitates that when they
uppose anything from that which the covenant was made
upon, this breaks their covenant, as is the view of a group of
the jurists. And if they dont meet their agreement their
covenant is nullified, just like their business transactions and
other than that, when they do not meet any condition from
that which they made the covenant upon. And the wisdom
i this is apparent. So the adherence is only that they adhere
\ the conditions (set) upto the last part/the end of it, so if
they don’t do that, they are not adherents. So indeed the
ruling is attached to the condition and is not established if
ubsent by agreement of those with intellect.

So if that is made clear, then it is deserving that the one
who made the covenant does their upmost to obey even
without a condition (being made) and the covenant is not
wullified if that (condition) is missing or expires, but they
inay dissolve it, just as if a mortgage was made a condition in
« business transaction.

And even if the right was belonging to Allah (that the
covenant be fulfilled), or for other than Him from those
whom He authorises, then it is not permitted to execute the
contract, rather, it is revoked due to the condition being
absent, or it becomes obligatory to revoke it, in the same way
us when a marriage is made conditional that the wife be a
(ree Muslim woman, but then it becomes clear that she is an
idolatrous.

And the covenant of security is not a right belonging to
the imam, rather, it is the right of Allah and the Muslims as

63

THE FIRST ISSUE

upon this they make a coyenant and make
peace/rectification. So if they manifest insulting the
Messenger ‏يك‎ and criticising the religion that negates their
being lowly and subdued.

Sixthly: That Allah has obligated us to strengthen and
honour His Messenger ‏ريك‎ to assist him and defend him and
that necessitates preserving his honour from every angle.

Seventh: That assiting the Messenger of Allah 2% is an
obligation upon us, because that is from strengthening him
and is from the greatest jihad and Allah -the Most High says:

‘If you do not aid the Prophet - Allah has already

aided him.”

Rather it is compulsory to assist any one of the Muslims,
then how about asssiting the leader of the sons of Adam?

Eighth: That the disbelievers made a covenant with us
that they would not manifest anything of evil from their
religion/way of life. So when they manifest anything evil
from it they are punished. Likewise, if they manifest
insulting of the Messenger 38, they deserve punishment for
that, and that is to be killed,

Ninth: That there is no difference of opinion amongst
the Muslims that they are prohibited from manifesting
insulting and that they are to be punished if they do that
after having being forbidden from it. So it is known that
they were not given a concession concerning that, so if they
do that which they were not given a concession for from
offences, then they deseve to be punished by unanimous
agreement. Then insulting other than the Messenger 3%

" At Tawbah:40

62

THE FIRST ISSUE

seek it just as they seek refrainment from fighting them, and
cven more so, for it is from the greatest forms of harm.

If it is said: We accepted about the people under security
that they follow their own religion, but that includes the
lawfulness to curse. So if they agree (to the covenant) then
they are not saying other than what we accepted about them.

We respond: From their religion is the lawfulness to fight
Muslims, take their wealth and go to war with them in any
manner, but along with this fact, its not something they may
do after the covenant is made, and if they do (any of those
things), cheir covenant is nullified. And that is because, even
though we accepted that they believe differently, and they
conceal things (such as hatred for the Prophet #8), we do not
accept these things to be manifested or spoken off among
Muslims. We do not view the nullification of the curser’s
covenant until we hear him (curse) or the Muslims testify to
it, for if that happens, then they have manifested it (in which
the covenant is nullified).

And if we were to accept them based on their religion
(both inwardly and outwardly), it would mean accepting
them destroying the masjids, burning the Quran and killing
the scholars and righteous ones, for this is what their religion
teaches, and there is no difference of opinion that they do
not admit to this at all.

THE FIRST ISSUE

a whole. If they differ in anything which has been made
conditional upon them, then it is said: It is obligatory upon
the Imam to revoke the contract; and its revokation is to
locate his place of security and remove him from dar al-
Islam. And this (view) is weak because the condition is a
right belonging to Allah, so the contract is revoked due to its
(the agreements) absence and not due to the revokal itself,
and there are conditions of security which are a right
belonging to Allah.

And if permission for their confirmation, without it being
a condition, was to be imposed, then that would only be in
that which there is no harm upon the Muslims; and as for
that which would harm the Muslims, then their
confirmation is not permitted in any case. And if their
confirmation was imposed in that which would harm the
Muslims in their selfs and wealth, their confirmation would
not be permitted as it would be based on trying to corrupt
the religion of Allah, and insulting His Book and His
Messenger 7

The covenant of security is on the basis that they do not
openly curse the Messenger (38), just like the security in the
thing bought (as it is on the basis that) it is free from defect
or adjustment in price, and the security of the woman and
the husband being free from injunctions — and the Islam of
the husband and his being free (and not a slave) is from the
absolute and necessary requirements of the (marriage)
contract, for its requirement is apparent according to
custom, even if it is not spelled out verbally. And abstinence
from insulting and cursing is acknowledged as part of what
the Muslims intend by the covenant of security, and they
THE SECOND ISSUE

ea Se
aS om

KILLING IS PRESCRIBED ON HIM (THE ONE
WHO INSULTS THE PROPHET #) AND IT IS
NOT PERMISSIBLE TO IMPRISON OR SHOW
FAVOUR TO HIM OR TO RANSOM HIM

As for if they are Muslim then that is by unanimous
agreement, as such a person is a type of apostate or hypocrite
(zindeeq) and killing is prescribed for the apostate and
likewise the hypocrite (zindeeq) regardless of whether they
are male or female. If they are a person who had a convenant
of safety then it is prescribed to kill them also, regardless of
whether they are male of female. This is the view of the
generality of the jurists from the righteous predeccesors
(salaf) and those who followed them.

In this regard the saying of Ibn Mundhir has preceded:
‘The generality of the people of knowledge unanimously
agree that killing is prescribed for the one who insults the
Prophet #8.”

From those who said this are Malik, Al-Layth, Ahmad,
Ishaq and it is the school of thought of Ash-Shafi’i. As for
An-Nu’man: ‘The dhimmi is not killed.’

This is speech that is evidence of the obligation to kill
such a person according to the generality of the scholars.

THE SECOND ISSUE

with regard to the captives/prisoners. So they included this
one who insults (the Prophet #) in the generality of the
speech (of having a choice regarding the one who nullified
their convenant), however the verifiers such as Al-Qadi' and
other than him restricted that to other than the one who
insults (the Propher 38). As for the one who insults, then it is
prescribed that they are killed.

So it is either that there is no opposition related
concerning it being prescribed for such a person to be killed,
this being due to those who made an absolute statement
restricting that statement in another place. Therefore it does
not enter into the general speech (of the Imam having a
choice regarding the one who broke their agreement).

Or, it is the case that it is related from an angle that is
weak (da’eef) due to those who spoke with such a saying in
one place having a different saying in another place.

The companions of Ash-Shafi’i also differed (on this),
with some of them saying: ‘What is prescribed is for them to
be killed,’ and others saying that which opposes it: “They are
like those other than them,’? and that it is permissible to kill
such a person. They said: “They are like the ptisoner/captive
and it is an obligation upon the Imam to do what he sees as
most befitting concerning them.’

And the speech of Ash-Shafit necessitates that the one
who nullifies their covenant has the ruling of one at war (al-
harbi) and in one place the order for them to be killed is
stipulated instead of giving the Imam a choice.

"Abu Ya'ala Al Farra’

* i.e from those who nullified their covenants,

69

THE SECOND ISSUE

Furthermore, due to this killing, two things can be
deduced:
1( That it nullifies the convenant of safety
2) That it is a prescribed punishment as the jurists of
hadith say.

Ibn Rahawayh said: ‘They made it apparent that they killed
the one who insulted (the Prophet 4) and regarded as
mistaken the one who said: “Their being polytheists is more
serious than their insulting the Prophet 3’. Ishaq said they
are killed because they have broken their convenant of safety
and Umar bin Abdul-Azeez acted likewise, so there is no
doubt in that. Ibn Umar also killed Ar-Rahib who insulted
the Prophet # and he said: ‘There is no making peace with
them over this.’

Likewise, there are texts from Imam Ahmad on the
obligation of killing such a person and that it nullifies their
convenant of safety. Some of these texts from him have
preceded. Similarly there are texts from the generality of his
companions that he mentioned this specifically in places and
also while speaking about the one who niullifies his
convenant of safety. Then those who came earlier and a
group of those who came later! said: “What is
fixed/prescribed is their killing and killing whoever else
nullified their covenant,’ just as the speech of Ahmad
indicated.

A group from them mentioned that the Imam is to
choose what he regards as the best option regarding the
dhimmi who nullified his covenant, just as he has the choice

‘ ‏ع.ز‎ From the Hanbalis

68

THE SECOND ISSUE

in another place that they are to be killed without the Imam
having a choice which is apparent.

As for the saying of those that: ‘The Imam has the right
to choose regarding every breaker of their covenant,’ then we
have already mentioned that they said: ‘They are to live up
to the rights of the convenant such as killing, the prescribed
and discretionary punishments because the covenant of the
dhimmi is that we carry out our rulings upon them and these
are our rulings’. Then when we have met an agreement, the
Imam is entitled to choose what he sees as most befitting
concerning it like in the case of the captive.

Then according to this saying, it is possible to say thar the
killing of the insulter is a prescribed punishment, as would
be the case if they broke their covenant by fornication,
adultery or by highway robbery. So indeed, they would be
killed if killing was necessitated by that’.

Rather, the killing of the dhimmi is a prescribed
punishment even if they haven’t broke their covenant, as
would be the case if they killed another dhimmi. From this
angle it is possible to accomodate the madhab of Malik if
there is amongst them those who say: ‘They do not break
their covenant.’

Therefore the saying that the imam has a choice to do
what he sees as most suitable concerning them, then this is
only indicated by the general speech of some of the jurists or

in an absolute sense, like their saying: ‘If he joins a land of
war.”

‘UN: Not all highway robbery warrants killing as a punishment for the one
jiuiley of it, just as not all zina warrants killing of the one guilty of that, such sis
‘he one who fornicated but who has never been married. Hence the conditional
iW’ in the statement ‘if killing is necessitated by that’.

71

THE SECOND ISSUE

As for Abu Hanifah then in this nothing comes according
to his foundation, which is that the covenant of the dhimmis
is not broken unless they become a mighty force that stands
up against the Imam so that ir is not possible to carry out
our rulings upon them.

And in the school of thought of Malik: “The covenant of
safety is not broken unless they rebel and prevent us from:
taking the protective tax (jizyah) without oppression or they
join a land of war (dar al-harb). However, it is obligatory on
the ruler to kill the one who insults the Messenger ‏كك‎

And he said: ‘If a dhimmi forces a Muslim woman to
commit fornication or adultery then he is to be killed if he is
one of their noble people; if however, he is a comm
person amongst them he is to be given a severe punishment.

So therefore, it is prescribed for the one who insults that
they are to be killed as the texts from the Imams state. ‘This
is either upon the saying of those who say: Ik is prescribed
for everyone who breaks their covenant and is in our hands,
or: ‘It is fixed to kill everyone who breaks their covenant
with that which is harmful to the Muslims,’ as is mentioned
from the school of thought of Imam Ahmad, Likewise the
saying of Ash-Shafi’i which is used as evidence with regards
to this. Or that; ‘It is prescribed to kill everyone who breakay
their convenant by insulting the Messenger 3% alone;
as was mentioned by Al Qadi and a group from the
companions of Ash-Shafi’. : 1

It was also mentioned by the generality who mentioned it
as a breaker of covenants who said that the Imam has a
choice concerning the one who breaks their covenant, whicki
they mentioned in a general sense. However, they mentioned

70

THE THIRD ISSUE
# if

ANY MUSLIM OR NON-MUSLIM (WII
INSULTS THE PROPHET #) IS TO BE KILLED)
AND REPENTANCE IS NOT SOUGHT FROM HIM

Imam Ahmad said: ‘Every person who insults the Prophet ©
whether Muslim or disbeliever is to be killed and | view that
they are to be killed and that repentance is not to he souls
from them’; along with the reports from hin that seh
person apostates if they are Muslim and that they break (hel!
covenant if they are a dhimmi.

Likewise, the overwhelming majority of his companlatts
were certain that such a person is to be killed wel they ail
no mention of seeking their repentance. ‘T'o the polit thi)
whoever slanders the nation of the Prophet #, thew they
were certain that such a person is to be killed anil i
repentance should be sought from him.

As regards to killing apostates other than thew whe
insulted (the Prophet 38) and whether it is an obligation iy
seek their repentance or recommended then (hei) ay!
narrations.

If a person repents from insulting in that they herve
Muslim again or they return to their covenant if they ate
non-Muslim and give up this insulting, then in that ce, Ml

THE SECOND ISSUE

And taking from these generalizations of the madhhabs
has led to them being wrongfully accused of making a
mistake, so we must therefore take the detailed speech of the
madhhabs and with this sentence, even if it is affirmed that
there is a difference of opinion in this issue, then this
opposition is weak and we have already brought the evidence
that killing (the one who insults the Messenger 8) is
prescribed, this coming from the sayings of the Companions,
the Tabi’in, the Sunnah and from verses of the Qur’an.

72

THE THIRD ISSUE

concerning this not being dropped due to repentance via a
person becoming Muslim or other than that.

ALQadi said in Al-Jami’ As-Saghir. “Whoever insults the
Prophet # is to be killed and their repentance is not
accepted, even if they are a disbeliever who repents and.
becomes Muslim, And concerning this there are two
narrations.’

Likewise, Abu Al-Khattab mentioned concerning the one
who insults his nation that their repentance is not accepted,
even if they are a disbeliever, and there are two narrations
concerning this. It is narrated via some of our companions
thac a Muslim’s repentance is accepted, also in one
narration', that they become Muslim (again) and return
from this insulting. Likewise this is narrated from Abu AL
Khattab in ALHidayah and those who came later imitated
him likewise in this. So in summary they narrated three
different sayings concerning the repentance of the insulter:

1) That their repentance is not accepted and that is what is
supported.

2) That it is accepted,

3) That a distinction is made between the disbeliever and the
Muslim. So the repentance of a disbeliever is accepted but
the Muslim’s is not. And the repentance of a dhimmi if we
say it is accepted, then it is by their becoming Muslim and as
for if they give up (their insulting) and seek a second
covenant then they are not protected according to one of the
narrations as has preceded.

١ Meaning from Imam Ahmad.

THE THIRD ISSUE

Qadi and other than him! said: “The repentance of whoever
insults the Prophet 38 is not accepted due to the dishonour
and disgrace being attached to him.’ Similarly, Ibn Aqil said:
“And it is his human right which we do not know to be
forfeited/ waived.’

The generality of the companions said: ‘Their repentance
is not accepted rather they are to be killed even if they
repent’. By this they differed with Abu Hanifah and Ash-
Shafi in their saying: ‘If they are Muslim then their
repentance is to be sought, so either they repent or are
killed,’

As for if they are dhimmis then Abu Hanifah said: “They
do not break their covenant.’ The companions of Ash-Shafi'i
also differed concerning this.

‘Ash-Sharif said in AL-Irshad: ‘And it is from those whose
narration is depended upon that whoever insults the Prophet
42 is to be killed and their repentance not sought, Also thar
whoever insults him from the dhimmis then they are to be
killed even if they become Muslim.’

And Abu ‘Ali bin Al Bana’ said in A/-Khisal: ‘It is
compulsory to kill whoever insults the Prophet 3, and to not
accept their repentance, even if that person is a disbeliever
who then becomes Muslim. So that which is correct from
the madhhabs is that they/ are also to be killed and
repentance is not to be sought\from them.”

And the madhhab of Malik is like our madhhab and the
generality of them did not mention any difference
concerning the obligation to kill the Muslim and non-
Muslim. There is also no difference mentioned by them

١ And it is reported in a text concerning Ahmad.

74

THE THIRD ISSUE

and without doubt, when it is obligatory to apply the
prescribed punishment to them then it cannot be lifted by
their Islam, just like the case is with the remaining prescribed
punishments.

So in summary, their repentance (Muslim and kafir) is
not sought in the well known texts transmitted to us, so if
they repent then their repentance is not accepted as is well
known also. And it is narrated concerning the dhimmi if
they become Muslim then the killing is suspended, even if
repentance is not sought from them.

It is also narrated that the Muslims repentance is sought
and accepted and derived from that is that the dhimmis
repentance is also sought, and this is far from being correct.

And know that there is no distinction to be made
between the insults which are slander and other than it. For
this there are texts and the generality of the companions (of
Ahmad) have mentioned it as have most of the scholars,

And Ash-Shaykh Abu Muhammad' has made a
distinction between slander and insult, so he mentioned two
narrations concerning the Muslim and likewise the
disbeliever concerning that which is slander, then he said:
‘And similar to that is the insulting of him (the Prophet 4)
with other than slander except that that would be
suspended/dropped by a person becoming Muslim,’ and
words concerning that will soon come.’

‘As for the madhhab of Malik, then the one who insults is
killed and his repentance is not sought, this being well
known from his madhhab. Also that the repentance of a

‘Ibn Qudamah, the author of ‘Al Mughni?
' See the fourth issue

77

THE THIRD ISSUE

And according to our saying that the Imam has a choice
to do that which he sees as most befitting concerning them
as in the case of the prisoner/captive, then it is legislated to
seek their repentance by a return to their covenant, however
this seeking of repentance is not obligatory according to one
narration.

‘And according to that which is mentioned by Abu Al-
Khattab, then indeed, if the dhimmi becomes Muslim the
killing is dropped from them. And according to the saying of
the one who says that it is obligatory to call every disbeliever
(to repent) then it is obligatory to seck the repentance of the
dhimmi. ;

‘As-Samri mentioned: “There are two narrations
concerning the repentance of the Muslim and as for the
repentance of the disbeliever, then it is not accepted’. This
being the opposite of what was reported from what his
companions mentioned regarding a distinction being made
(). And the matter is not like that, rather, this is a defective
saying. So without doubt, if we say that the repentance of
the Muslim is accepted with their becoming Muslim again,
then the repentance of the dhimmi via their becoming
Muslim is more deserving of acceptance as Shaykh ul-Islam
mentioned’.

Then he said: And it has come via the angle As-Samri
mentioned in that the one who insults (the Prophet 38) isa
Muslim but that this error is without belief in what he or she
said, this is when they are young/like children in speech and
writing, then in that case their repentance. is accepted.
However, as for the dhimmi their insulting is purely harmful

SSS
Meaning Ibn Taymiyyah in ‘As-Sarim’, 3/564-565

76
THE THIRD ISSUE

Hook (Of Allah) the Sunnah, the consensus and the speech
concerning these evidences that it is not possible for anyone
to reject."

‘Tb Taymiyyah mentioned 70 ways that indicate that the killing of the dhimmi
and muslim who insult the Prophet —Sallallahu alayhi wa sallam is imperative in
As Sarim’ 3/709-862 then he answered the arguements of those who differ and
\heir objections, which number 55 in ‘As Sarim’ 3/864-940.

79

THE THIRD ISSUE

Muslim is not accepted when he insults (the Prophet 3) and
that his ruling is that of the hypocrite (zindiq).

And the killing remains a prescribed punishment with
them and not disbelief if repentance of the insulter is made
apparent. And it is narrated from him that he regarded it as
apostasy, his companions saying: ‘So based upon this, the
persons repentance is sought, so if they repent we refrain and
if they refuse to repent they are killed.’

‘As for the dhimmi, if he insults then becomes Muslim
then is the killing prevented? There are two narrations
concerning this issue. These two narrations were mentioned
by Abdul Wahhab! and other than him.*

As for the Shafi’i madhhab, then there are two angles on
the issue of the one who insults:

1) That the person is like an apostate, so if they repent
the killing is dropped

2) That it is a prescribed punishment in every situation

And As-Saydalani mentioned a third saying: That the who
insults by way of slander is killed due to apostasy. So if he
repents the killing is lifted and he is given 80 lashes due to
this slander. And if it is by other than slander than a
discretionary punishment is given according to that which is
deemed appropriate.

Then he mentioned? evidence for those who say that their
repentance is not accepted and mentioned what opposes
that, replying to these oppositions with evidence from the

1 ALQadi Abdul-Wahhab bin ‘Alf bin Nasr Al-Baghdadi Al-Maliki
2 See ‘Ash-Shifi’, 2/488
3 This is summarized speech from the last paragraph

78

THE FOURTH ISSUE

0 se

CLARIFYING THE INSULTING THAT HAS BEEN
REFERRED TO AND _ THE _ DISTINCTION
BETWEEN IT AND BETWEEN THAT WHICH IS
NOT DISBELIEF

And before that it is appropriate to precede it by saying:
Insulting Allah or His Messenger 28 is disbelief, outwardly
and inwardly regardless of whether the one who insulted
believed that such an act was forbidden or whether they
regarded it as permissible or whether they were distracted
concerning their belief. This is the madhhab of the fuqaha
and the rest of Ahl us-Sunnah who say that faith is speech
and action.

Ishaq bin Rahawayah, who is one of the Imams praised
by Ash-Shaf’i and Ahmad, said: “The Muslims have
consensus that whoever insults Allah or insults His
Messenger (38) or rejects anything that was revealed by Allah,
or kills a Prophet, then such a person is a disbeliever even if
they affirm every revelation of Allah.”

Accordingly, Sahniin said: ‘And whoever doubts the
disbelief of such a person has disbelieved and there are texts
on this from more than one of the imams. Ahmad, Ash-
Shafi’i and other than them said: “Every person who makes
fun of anything from the verses of Allah is a disbeliever.”

THE FOURTH ISSUE

and he took the narrations of these people on the
understanding that these people are not known for
knowledge and explained their verdicts to be due to this.

Shaykh ul-Islam said: Those narrations which were
mentioned from some of the fuqaha, that a person
disbelieves if they regard such acts (of insulting) permissible,
otherwise they don’t have no basis for them. And it was only
mentioned by Al-Qadi' from the books of some of the
people of theological rhetoric (Al-Mutakallimin) who
narrated it from some fuqaha. And it is a lie and mete
conjecture that is in accord with their principles, so do not
think that there is in this issue a (real) difference of opinion
as this is only a mistake.

Then returning to what was sought by discussing this
(fourth) issue we say:

It is established that the blood of every person who insults
is permissible to be spilt and that this is disbelief, even if
every disbelief is not an insult. And we shall mention the
speech of the scholars:

Imam Ahmad said: ‘Whoever insults the Messenger 38 or
attributes a defect to him whether Muslim or disbeliever
then they are to be killed and their repentance is not to be
sought.’

And he said: ‘Whoever mentions something which
conficts with what the Lord (Allah) has mentioned then they
are to be killed.”

And our companions said: ‘Opposition due to insulting
Allah or insulting His Messenger is apostasy like the
declarations (of disbelief) and there is no difference of

Meaning Abu ‏هلا‎

83

THE FOURTH ISSUE

And likewise our companions and other than them said:
“Whoever insults Allah or His Messenger 38 has disbelieved
if they were joking or serious in that.” And this is what is
correct.”

Al-Qadi! said: “Whoever insults Allah or His Messenger
4%, then indeed they have disbelieved whether they regarded
such an act permissible or didn’t regard it as permissible. So
if he says: “I did not regard it as permissible” that is not
accepted from him with regards to the outward ruling in one
narration, and such a person is an apostate and the ruling
upon his disbelief is only outwardly. As for inwardly, if he is
truthful chen he is a Muslim as we have said concerning the
hypocrite (az-zindiq).’

And Al-Qadi mentioned that some fugaha said
concerning the one who insults the Prophet ‏يك‎ that if they
regard that as permissible then they are guilty of disbelief
and if they don’t regard it as permissible, then they are
merely an evil doer (a fasiq) and are not declared guilty of
disbelief like in the case of one who abuses the Companions
(of the Prophet #%). And ir is narrated concerning some of
the people of Iraq concerning the one who insults the
Messenger # that they are to be lashed. So Malik rejected
that and refuted this opinion,

‘And Ibn Hazm narrated that some of the people didn’t
regard it as disbelief. Al-Qadi ‘lyad mentioned after refuting
these narrations from some of the fugaha of Iraq and this
opposition which was mentioned by Ibn Hazm, that which
has been natrated of consensus from more than one (scholar)

١ Abu Ya'la in his book: ‘That which is relied upon in the foundations of the
religion’.

82

THE FOURTH ISSUE

And ‘Iyad mentioned the responses of a group of the
famous Maliki fugaha with killing and no seeking of
repentance in their judgements, From them:

‎A man who a people heard was mentioning the‏ »م
‎attributes of the Prophet when a man with an ugly‏
‎face and beard walked past them, so he said: ‘Do you‏
‎desire to know his (the Prophet's) attribute? It is the‏
‎same as this man who walked past.’‏

‎® Aman who said that the Prophet # was black.

‎e And from them a man to whom it was said: ‘No by
the right of the Messenger of Allah!’ So he said:
‘Allah did such a thing to him.”

‎e And from them: that a tax collector said: ‘Pay and
complain to the Prophet.”

‎Abu Muhammad ibn Abi Zayd gave a fatwa to kill a man who was listening to
some people discussing what the Prophet looked like, When a man with an ugly
face and beard walked by, he said to them, "You want to know what he looked
like? He looked like this passer-by in physique and beard.’ Abu Muhammad said,
‘His repentance is not accepted. He lied, may Allah curse him. That could not
come out of a heart with sound belief.’ (En. translation of Ash-Shifa)

‎Ahmad ibn Abi Sulayman, the companion of Sahnun, said, ‘Anyone who says
that the Prophet was black should be killed.’ (Ash-Shifa)

‎‘ He was told about a man to whom someone said, ‘No, by the right of the
Messenger of Allah,’ and he replied, ‘Allah did such a thing to the Messenger of
Allah,’ mentioning some ugly words. People said to him, ‘What are you saying,
enemy of Allah?’ Then he said some even hatsher things and added, ‘I wish for a
scorpion for the Messenger of Allah,’ When someone asked him for fatwa about
this man, Ibn Abi Sulayman said, “Testify against him and I will be your partner,’
‏د‎ killing him and getting the reward. Habib ibn ar-Rabi' said that because

‎uying to explain away the literal expression is not accepted because it is clear
contempr and lack of respect for the Messenger of Allah. His blood is permitted.
(Ash-Shifa)

‎' Abu ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Attab gave a fatwa about a tax-collector who said to a man,
Pay and complain to the Prophet. If I ask or am ignorant, the Prophet was
ignorant and asked,’ to the effect that he be killed. (Ash-Shiff)

‎85

‎THE FOURTH ISSUE

‎opinion amongst our companions that whoever defames or
slanders his nation then this is from the insults that
necessitate being killed and is even fouler.’

‎And Al-Qadi ‘Iyad said: ‘Every person who insults him,
finds fault or attributes deficiency to him in his person, his
lineage, his religion, his qualities or objects or suspects
anything about him which is from the paths of insulting him
and contempt of him and finding fault or defect concerning
him then such a person is an insulter of him who is to be
killed whether he voices this or does it by making signs.
Likewise is the case for whoever curses him or wishes harm
for him or makes prayer against him or attributes to him that
which is not attributable to him by way of censure or
attributes defect to him concerning his distinctive rank,
supporting foolish, obscene, evil, denounced and false speech
or blaming him with anything that comes from this evil
scourge and obscene language or belittling or under valuing
him due to the typical, permissible human symptoms he
has.’

‎He said: ‘And all of this is according to the consensus of
the scholars and the imams of religious verdict from the
Companions.”

‎And Malik said: ‘Whoever insults him is to be killed and
repentance is not to be sought from them.”

‎Tbn Al-Qasim said: “Whoever insults him or attributes a
defect to him is to be killed like the heretic (az-zindiq).’

‎And some of the Milikis mentioned that whoever
designated upon the Prophet anything from the disliked
matters then they are to be killed and their repentance is not
to be sought.

‎84

THE FOURTH ISSUE

And Abu Hanifah and his companions said about anyone
who disparages or attributes a defect to the Prophet 4%,
proclaims himself free of him or calls him a liar that he is an
apostate.

So the texts of the scholars are in agreement from the
various groups that attributing deficiency to him is disbelief
which makes the blood permissible, and they were in
disagreement as preceded concerning the seeking of
repentance from such a person.

And there is no distinction between the one who
intended to attribute a defect to him and those who did not
intend that.

And whoever says something of a curse or a disparagment
against him (4) then he has offended Allah and His
Messenger, and he is seized for harming the people with such
offensive words, even if he did not intend to offend them,
Have you not heard the saying of Allah the Most High:

“We were only talking idly and joking...”.'

Therefore whoever quarrels with another and investigates
with him a decision (made by the Prophet 38), and it leads
him? to mention the Messenger of Allah to the extent that he
uses obscene language (about the Messenger #), then he is a
disbeliever according to the revealed text, due to the
statement of Allah:

“But no, by Your Lord, they can have no Faith, until

they make You (O Muhammad ) judge in all disputes

1 Surah Tawba: 9.
* i.e. he feels restricted until it leads him to mention him (#8) and he feels obliged
to.

87

THE FOURTH ISSUE

٠ And from them: that a man called him ‘the orphan’
and ‘the in-law of the lion (ie Ali)’ and claimed that
his abstinence from the worldly things (zuhd) was
not intentional and that if he had been able to have
good things, he would have eaten and drunk them
and that which resembles this.’

Ash-Shafi’l said: “Every thing in which he is made susceptible
to being made light of or under rated or scorned is an insult.’

The fugaha’ of Andalusia gave a fatwa that Ibn Hatim, the scholar of Toledo,
be killed and crucified because there was testimony that he made light of what is
due to the Prophet 3. In the course of a debate, he called him ‘the orphan’ and
the ‘in-law of the lion (ie. ‘Ali,’ and claimed that his doing-without (zuhd) was
not intentional. He alleged that if he had been able to have good things, he
would have eaten them. He said other similar things.

Qadi Iyad said: Know that all who curse Muhammad, or blame him or
attribute imperfection to him in his person, his lineage, his deen or any of his
qualities, or alludes to that or its like by any means whatsoever, whether in the
form of a curse or contempt or belittling him or detracting from him or finding
faule with him or maligning him, the judgement regarding such a person is the
same as the judgement against anyone who curses him. He is killed as we shall
make clear. This judgement extends to anything which amounts to a curse or
disparagement. We have no hesitation concerning this matter, be it a clear
statement or allusion.

‘The same applies to anyone who curses him, invokes against him, desires to
harm him, ascribes to him what does not befit his position or jokes about his
mighty affair with foolish talk, satire, disliked words or lies, or reviles him
because of any affliction or trial which happened to him or disparages him,
because of any of the permissible and well-known human events which happened
to him. All of this is the consensus of the ‘scholars’ and the imams of fatwa from
the time of the Companions until today.

‘And he said: This is also my position regarding the judgment of anyone who
belitiles him or insults him about having been a shepherd, oversight,
forgetfulness, sorcery, any wound he received, the defeat of one of his armies,
injury by an enemy, the intensity of his illness or his being attracted to his wives.
‘The judgement of all this is that the one who intends to disparage him by it is
killed, (Ash-Shifi)

86

THE FOURTH ISSUE

and these views are all rejected and whoever ponders this
does not have misgivings that he deserved to be killed.

If it is said: in an authentic narration it states that he was
from the people of Badr, and it is not said about a
participant of Badr that he disbelieved.

Then it is said: this addition (stating that he was a
participant of Badr) was mentioned by Abu al-Yaman, from
Shu’ayb, but the majority of the narrators did not mention
this, therefore it is conjecture;' just as it occurs in a hadith
that Ka’b and Hilal bin Umayyah? were from the
participants of Badr while the historians did not differ that
they did not witness Badr.?

And due to this, Ibn Is*haq did not mention this in his
report from Az-Zuhri, however it is apparently authentic.

So we say then: there is no indication in the hadith that
the incident occurred after Badr; and perhaps it was before
Badr and the man was called a participant of Badr (badri)
because Ibn az-Zubayr related the incident after the man
became a ‘badri’, And if it happened after Badr then the man
repented and sought forgiveness, for repentance cancels what

happens before it.“

١ Ibn Taymiyyah did not (in the original) assert that it was conjecture, for he
said: ‘therefore it is possibly conjecture.’

3 This is how it reads, as with the original (3/987). But in the reference is an
ommission: ‘just as it occurs in the hadith of Ka’b regarding Mirarah bin ar-Rabi’
and Hilal bin Umayyah...’. Therefore this addition is necessary because Ka’b
clarified that he did not participate in Badr but in his hadith, it is mentioned that
Mirarah and Hilal were from the participants of Badr.

3 Look at the difference regarding this in Fat‘h al-Bari (7/361-362 and 724-725),
Zad al-Ma’ad (3/577); al-Hafiz (Ibn Hajt) inclined to the view that they both
participated in Badr and Ibn Qayyim viewed the opposite, and they both have
proofs and evidences.

“As occurs in as-Sirah an-Nabawi (2/534).

89

THE FOURTH ISSUE

between them,” and he is not excused intending to
merely respond to this opponent.

And from this subject, the statement: “this is a portion in
which the Face of Allah was not intended by,”’ and the
words “be just, for you have not been just!”? and the words
of the Ansari who said: “that was your cousin!”; for these are
clear words of kufr yet he was pardoned, just like the one
who said “Indeed this is a portion in which the Face of Allah
was not intended by,” and like the one who said: “be just!”
And we mentioned? from “Umar ‏كم‎ that he killed a man who
was not pleased with the decision of the Prophet 38 and then
something of the Quran was revealed in agreement to this‘,
then what of the one who makes insults about his decisions!?

And a group (of scholars) mentioned, including Ibn ‘Aqil
and the companions of Ash-Shafi’i, that his (the insulter’s)
punishment is chastisment, and then some of them said he is
not chastised, because it is not obligatory; and from them
were those who said he is pardoned, because the right
belongs to him. And from them were those who said that he
is to be punished because Az-Zubayr was commanded to
irragate the water and prevent it until it returned to the wall;

‘The one who said it was Dhu al-Khuwaisirah, and his story was recorded by al-
Bukhari (6150), Muslim (1062) ftom the hadith of Ibn Mas’ud # and ir is has
also been related from others.

3 ie, Az-Zubayr bin al-Awwam in the story of the Shiraj al-Hirrah; recorded by
al-Bukhart (2362).

3 je. in the original book (2/85) and not the summary.

* This story is recorded by Is‘hag bin Rahawayh in his tafsir, Ibn Duhaym in his
tafsir, Ibn Jarir (4/162) and Ibn Abi Hatim in his tafsir, See as-Sarim (2/81-85),
Fat’ h al-Bari (5/46) and ad-Durr al-Manthur (2/322) and Ibn Taymiyyah and
Ibn Hajr inclined to the view thar it is reliable.

88

THE FOURTH ISSUE

of chastisment or a punishment, for it is considered as
cursing the Prophet 3%, just like defamation, profanity, etc.

As for what is specific to vilifying prophethood, then if it
entails nothing but the mere absence of belief in it, then it is
pure kufr, and if it entails disdaining and making light of the
matter, without disbelief (in it), then it is a type of cursing.

And these are issues of ijtihad which the scholars of figh
have fallen into indecisivness over: is it a type of cursing, or
pure apostasy? Then, for what is affirmed as not cursing,
then if its doer tries to conceal it, then it is counted as
heresy, and the ruling on him is that of a heretic, otherwise,
he counted as a pure apostate; and the investigation of the
types and the differences between them are mentioned
elsewhere.

Chapter’

As for the dhimmi, then it is an obligation to differentiate
between his mere disbelief and his cursing, for if he
disbelieves in the Prophet (#8), then this does not nullify the
covenant and the blood of the covenantor is not made lawful
by agreement, and as for his cursing, then (if he does so), it
nullifies the covenant and it is obligatory to execute him as
has preceded.

Al-Qadi said: ‘The contract of security is obligatory to
offer to them, accepting their denial of him (the Prophet)
but not their cursing of him 36.’

Thus we say: The narrations of the Companions and the
Salaf are all absolute regarding the one who curses (the

1 As-Sarim (3/994).

51

THE FOURTH ISSUE

Chapter!

If ic is confirmed that every clear or indirect curse
necessitates execution, then it is necessary to pay attention to
the difference between the curse for which repentance is not
accepted and disbelief for which repentance is accepted. We
say:

This ruling is linked in the Book and Sunnah to the term
‘offending Allah and His Messenger’, and in some hadiths
the words swearing and cursing are mentioned, as well as in
the speech of some of the Companions and fuqaha. And a
term, if it does not have a restriction in the (Arabic)
language, like the terms earth and heavens, nor in the
Shari'ah, like the terms Salah, Zakah, Kufr and Iman, then it
returns to the restriction if it is known in the custom of the
people, such as gabd and hirz.

Therefore it is obligatory to refer the restrictions of the
terms ‘offending’, ‘curse’ and ‘swear’ to the custom of the
people, therefore whatever the people (of custom) count as a
curse, a disparagement, a censure, insult or its like, then it is
from the types of cursing and whatever they do not count as
such [and it is kufr] then it is counted as kufr and not
cursing. [And consideration is to it being a curse and offence
to the Prophet 4# even if it is not a curse or offence to other
than him.*] Then accordingly, if any of these things are said
to other than the Prophet #, then it necessitates some kind

١ "The word “chapter” is not present in As-Sarim (3/992).
2 A qualifying addition from as-Sarim,

90

THE FOURTH ISSUE

(Allah), then he is to be killed, be it a Muslim or a kafir,”
and this is the madhhab of the people of Medina.’

And Ahmad said regarding a Jewish man who heard the
muazzin perform the call to prayer and remarked: ‘you have
lied!’; ‘He is to be killed for he has cursed (Allah and His
Messenger #8)!"

And Tbn al-Qasim said regarding the one who curses the
Prophet by saying ‘he is not a Prophet #8’ or “a Messenger’ or
that ‘the Quran was not revealed to him and he is only a
man’; ‘he is to be killed.” And if the man says: “He was not
sent to us as a Messenger, he was only sent to the Muslims,
and our only Prophets are Misa and ‘Eesa,” then there is no
punishment on them for that.”

And if the person says that his religion is better than our
religion, then he is reprimanded, and imprisoned for a
lengthy period. This is the view of Muhammad bin
Sukhnun, and he related it on the authority of his father.
And they opined that if he was to curse with a particular
curse by which he disbelieves, then he is not killed, but if it
is by other than (something kufr), he is killed unless he
accepts Islam.?

And he said regarding the Jew: If he says to the muazzin
when he calls out the testimony (of faith): ‘you have lied’,
then he is punished and imprisoned. The record of Imam
Ahmad similar to this situation has preceded and states he
should be killed because he cursed,’

١ See Ash-Shifa (2/485)
? See Ash-Shifa (2/486)
3 See Ash-Shifa (2/486)

93

THE FOURTH ISSUE

Prophet 3), be he Muslim or a covenantor; they did not
differentiate between one insult and another, nor did they
differentiate whether the curse was repeated or not, or
whether it was made in public or private — and | mean by
my saying ‘private’ that it is not said among a gathering of
Muslims, for if it is not, then the punishment is not applied
until two Muslims testify that they heard him cursing or
admitting that he did so, except if it was assumed that he
said the curse while alone in his house, and his Muslim
neighbours heard him or eavesdropped.

Malik and Ahmad said: ‘All those who curse him or
belittle him, be it a Muslim or kafir, then he is to be killed.’
And likewise, all our companions said in absolute terms: if
one belittles him, be he a Muslim or kafir, then he is to be
killed.

And Al-Qadhi and Ibn ‘Aqil said: ‘All that which nullifies
faith is what is manifested,’ And Ibn ‘Aqil' dismissed the
analogy made with all that which nullifies faith from
dualising and tripalising,’ like the statement of the Christians
that God is one of a trinity; and similarly, the dhimmi, when
he publicises what he learnt of his religion which contains
shirk, then his covenant is nullified.

Al-Qadi stated: ‘And it is recorded that Ahmad [bin]
Hanbal said in a report: “Anyone who mentions something
by which he insinuates something (evil) abouc the Lord

١ Im as-Sarim, it reads: “And al-Qadhi and Ibn ‘Aqil dismissed...”

2 Dualising, as in the creed of the Majus who believe the management of affairs,
and benefitting and harming occurs from light and darkness, and tripalising, as
in the creed of the Christians is well known as believing in the father, the son and
the holy ghost.

92

THE FOURTH ISSUE

only does so because it is something they believe in
(religiously), irrespectively, they are instructed to be killed.

And this differentiation is utterly erroneous'.

Also, if we were to say that such-and-such is not a curse
as long as it is not something religious for them, everyone
who curses him is in a position to say ‘I believe in this
religiously’ in which case, we say:

Talking about cursing him hypothetically and
mentioning the description of it weighs down on the heart
and tongue; and we consider it grave to utter these things,
however, due to the need for speaking about it, we postulate
about the types of curses in general without specificying
them, such is how the fagih takes part in this.

There are two types of curses: supplication and
description. The example for this is the saying of a person to
another: ‘may Allah curse him,” or ‘may Allah disfigure him’,
‘may Allah shame him’, ‘may Allah not have mercy on him’,
‘may Allah not be pleased with him’, ‘may Allah destroy
him’, etc. These are curses whether they are made at
Prophets or others, likewise, if one was to say about a
Prophet: ‘may Allah not bless him or send upon him peace’,
or ‘may Allah not increase his mention’, or ‘may Allah erease
his name’, and so on from the supplications which contain
harm either in life, religion or the hereafter. Any of this, if it
stems from a Muslim or a covenantor, then it considered a
curse, and the Muslim is to be killed in any case, and the
dhimmi is to be killed if he publicises it; and as for if he
supplicates against him in public or disguises the

١ ‘The original mentions three reasons why they are etronous and what the
summariser has mentioned here is the third reason.

95

THE FOURTH ISSUE

Similarly, the companions of Ash-Shafi’i differed over the
curse which nullifies the dhimmi’s covenant and for which
he is executed, if this is what we are to adopt, according to
two opinions:

1. The covenant is nullified by the sheer cursing of our
Prophet and/or disparaging our religion in public,
even if that is their religious creed, and this is the
view of the majority.

2. If they mention what they believe religiously’, that
he is not a Messenger and that the Quran is not the
speech of Allah, then it is similar to them publicising
their view in the Messiah and their belief in the
trinity. They (the companions of Ash-Shafi’i) viewed
that this did not nullify the covenant if it was not
done so frequently, and they they should be rebuked
for publicising it, And if they were to mention
something without believing it religiously, such as
insulting the Prophet's lineage, then that is what is
viewed as a nullification of the covenant. This was
the preferred view of As-Saydalani, Abu al-Ma’al?
and others.

And the evidences indicate that cursing, whether it be
something they believe in religiously or not, are the same,
and the sheer cursing necessitates execution. And this has
been covered sufficiently. Therefore, whoever ridicules the
Prophet (#8), faults him and turns people away from him and

"The phrase in as-Sarim was mistated as ‘if they publicise ic, even if they believe
in it religiously that...’ and it was a slip of the eye of the line before it.

2 The mention of As-Saydalani has preceded, as for Abu al-Ma’ali, he is ‘Imam al-
Haramayn’, Al-Juwayni (d. 478h),

94

THE FOURTH ISSUE

The second type! of curse is the description, Therefore
anything which the people consider an insult, curse or
belittlement, then it is obligatory to carry out the execution
(on the one who does so against the Prophet 34), as has
preceded. This is because kufr is not an implication of
cursing. For a single word can be a curse in one situation and
not in another. Thus it is known that the ruling differs
according to the people, the situation and the statement.
And since the curse does not have a linguistic or Shariah
restriction, the matter is referred to by what is customary. So
whatever is considered a curse in the custom of the people,
then the speech of the Companions and scholars is applied,
and if not then it is not applied. We will mention categories
from this as follows:

Undoubtedly, publicising a belittlement and mockery
among Muslims is considered a curse, such as calling
someone a donkey or a dog, or describing him as poor,
humiliated, shamed, or announcing that he will be damned,
and he is from the most sinful of creations, and likewise,
publising a lie in the form of a insult about the person, such
as describing him as a decieving and crooked magician, one
who harms whoever follows him, and if this is eulogised in
poetic form, then it is a far-reaching curse for it may be
memorised (by the people).

As for declaring one’s belief about a person without
insulting him, such as ‘I don’t follow him’, ‘I don’t believe
him’, ‘I don’t like him’ or ‘I’m not happy with him’ without

there being any indication of belittling him, then he is

١ As-Sarim (3/1009).

7

THE FOURTH ISSUE

supplication in a manner which is recognised by the sound
of it, whereby some people understand it and not others,
such as the words ‘as-sam alaykum (death be upon you all)’
in place of the Islamic greeting, but apparently he said ‘as-
Salam (peace)’, then regarding this there are two views:

1, It is a type of curse due to which he is killed, and
the Prophet # only pardoned the Jew who greeted
him likewise because at the time, Islam was in a
weak state during which he was commanded to
pardon much, And this is the view of a group of
Maliki, Shaf?i and Hanbali scholars.!

2. It is not a type of curse by which a covenant is
nullified because the sayers have not manifested the
curse or made it audible, and they have only
uttered the greeting of peace and ommitted the
letter ‘/@m’ in a subtle manner which troubles some
people and not others’; due to this, we are
commanded to not reply to them, and it has
remained as a Sharia rule among us. And this is the
view of a group of scholars from our companions
(the Hanbalis) who have passed, and others. It is
not said that the supplication for death contains a
truth and is not a curse, for the supplication
against the Muslims to die and leave their religion
is from the gravest of curses, whereas the
supplication for health and security is honourable.

١ See ash-Shifa (2/415-416) and Fat’h al-Bari (12/293-294).
*In as-Sarim (3/1007) it reads: ‘but the majority are nor troubled by it?

96

THE FOURTH ISSUE

Section: The one who insults Allah, the Most High

So if they were Muslim it is compulsory to kill them by
unanimous agreement. This is because they become a
disbeliever (by this), rather, they are of the worst type (of
disbeliever).

Then our companions and other than them differed upon
two sayings regarding the acceptance of their repentance,
meaning: Is their repentance sought like the apostates, and
should the killing be suspended if they make their
repentance apparent after (their affair) has been raised to the
ruler?

The first saying: Their station is that of the one who
insults the Messenger concerning which there are two
narrations just like there are two narrations concerning the
one who insults the Messenger 8. This is the path of Abu
Al-Khattab and those who followed him from those who
came later on, and they use as evidence the speech of
Ahmad. This is also the view of the people of Madinah.

And according to this path, that which is apparent in the
madhhab is that the killing is not suspended due to
repentance after the person has been apprehended, as we
mentioned concerning the one who insults the Messenger #8.

As for the second narration, then they are apostates. And
Malik, Layth and Ibn Al-Qasim spoke according to the first
narration, that is, that indeed they are to be killed and
repentance is not sought from them.'

١ Ash Shifa 2/491

99

THE FOURTH ISSUE

merely stating what he believes, and it occurs due to his
ignorance, or his stubborness, jealousy and imitation of
fools.

And if a person says ‘he is neither a Messenger or a
Prophet’ then this is considered a clear cut lie, and every lie
leads it to be attributed to its sayer and he is then described a
liar. However, between the words ‘he is not a Prophet’ and
‘liar’ is a difference since it only contains a lie by way of us
knowing that the Prophet 3 said ‘Indeed 1 am the
Messenger of Allah’. And not everything negated about a
person regarding some of his attributes is an absolute
negation, such as the one who negates it (the prohethood of
Muhammad 38) to suit his own denial of his claim (of
prophethood) and a single meaning can be carried out by
several uses of speech, some of which may be considered a
curse while others are not.

98

THE FOURTH ISSUE

has preceded. Likewise, our companions, the school of Malik
and his companions as well as Ash-Shafii and his
companions (view the matter).

However there are two issues here:

The first issue: That the one who insults Allah is of two
categories:

1) Insulting with that which is not from their religion
but is rather from disregard on the part of the
speaker and other than him, such as cursing (Allah)
and this is insulting without a doubt.

2) That it is from their religion but they believe they are
glorifying Allah by it, for e.g. the saying of the
Christian that He (Allah) has a son and a
companion, Then this is from that which there is a
difference of opinion concerning, if they make it
apparent.

So Al-Qadi and Ibn Aqil viewed that this breaks the
covenant. Whereas Malik and Ash-Shafi't say that that which
is from their religion is not meant as an insult. And this is
apparent from the speech of Ahmad and that is that the
disbeliever does not say that as an insult, rather, according to
them it is glorifying (Allah).

‘And the second issue: Concerning the seeking of
repentance from the dhimmi, then the majority of our
companions accept their repentance. And this is well known
from the school of Ash-Shafi’, Ibn Al-Qasim and other than
him from the Malikis say: ‘Indeed, their repentance is
sought.” And it is textually reported from Malik: “Their

THE FOURTH ISSUE

As for the second saying: Their repentance is sought and
is accepted and their station is that of the apostates, and this
is the saying of Al-Qadi, Ash-Sharif', Ibn Al-Banna and Ibn
‘Aqil alongwith their saying: ‘If they insult the Messenger #8,
their repentance is not sought.’ And this is the saying of a
group from Madinah. Likewise, this was mentioned by the
companions of Ash-Shafi’i who said: ‘Insulting Allah is
apostasy.’ This is also the view of Abu Hanifah.

And as for the path of those who seek the repentance of
the one who insulted Allah and His Messenger, they say this
is apostasy.

‘And whoever makes a distinction says: Insulting Allah is
pure disbelief which is attached (solely) to the right of Allah,
and we know that He 4% drops His right concerning the one
who repents. And that doesn’t lessen the sanctity of Him in
the heart of the servant and is not a humiliation or a
degrading of the One who is far greater than that anyone
should have the nerve to dishonour Him,

And with this the distinction between Allah and His
Messenger # is made apparent, and his human right is not
dropped by repentance.

‘And with this consideration to that which is the right of
Allah, then for those who have the nerve to commit the
prohibitions of Allah, then we do not remedy that except
with the prescribed punishment for that. So it resembles
fornication, theft and drinking alcohol.

‘And even if the one who insults Allah is a dhimmi, then
it is like if he had insulted the Messenger, and the text from
Ahmad that he is to be killed, whether Muslim or dhimmi,

1 Abu Ja’far Al Hanbali

100

THE FOURTH ISSUE

Muslim who insults (Allah), rather, perhaps this is
more severe. However he is like the dhimmi when
they commit fornication/adultery, kill or steal and
then become Muslim.

So if we say the repentance of a Muslim who insults Allah is
not accepted, then it is even more deserving that it is not
accepted from the dhimmi, alongwith the difference
concerning the one who insults the Messenger 38, and that
resembles the one who commits fornication/adultery with a
Muslim woman.'

And the jurists have differed concerning this level with
three sayings:

1. That repentance is sought from the dhimmi and
likewise the Muslim.

2. That repentance is not sought, but if they become
Muslim they will not be killed. And this is the saying
of Ash-Shaf?i and it is in a narration from Ahmad, It
is also the saying of Ibn Al-Qasim.

3. That they are killed in every circumstance, and this is
the apparent speech of Malik and Ahmad as we said,

“When it is forbidden in his religion, but if he becomes Muslim, ic (killing) is
not dropped from him.

Benefit: As regards to drinking alcohol and the prescribed punishment
connected to it, Shaykh Al-Uthaymin said commenting on the words of Al-
Hajawi: ‘And when the muslim drinks it,’; ‘This is the first condition thar needs
to be fulfilled, and the non-Muslim is excluded from it even if they are under
obligation like the dhimmi. So indeed they are not given the prescribed
punishment, because the Muslim is the one who believes in its prohibition, as for
other than the Muslim, they do not believe that itis prohibited. And due to this
they are not given the prescribed punishment if they drink alcohol, but they are
prevented from doing that openly in the lands of the Muslims.’ (6/199)

103

THE FOURTH ISSUE

repentance is not sought, rather they are killed.’ And this is
apparent from the speech of Ahmad.

So with this, the one who insults Allah is of three levels:

1) That which is from their religion, like the saying of
the Christians concerning Jesus and that which is
similar to it. So the ruling on this one is the ruling of
the remaining types of al-kufr (disbelief), And we
have mentioned the difference of opinion concerning
the breaking of the covenant when this is made
apparent/displayed. And when it is said that the
covenant is broken by it, then killing is suspended
concerning it if they (the insulter of Allah) becomes
Muslim, and this is the saying of the majority.

2) That they mention that which is from their religion
and it is an insult to the religion of the Muslims.
Like the saying of the Jews to the Muazzin: ‘You
have lied’ and like what the Christian said to Umar.
Likewise, if they find fault with any of the rulings of
Allah. So the ruling upon this one is the ruling of the
one who insulted the Messenger % in that their
covenant is broken by it, and it is that which the
jurists were referring to with their saying: “Speaks
bad about Allah or His Book.’ And as for the
suspension of their killing due to them becoming
Muslim, then that is like the case of the one who
insults the Messenger 38.

3) That insulting Allah is with that which is not from
their religion, but rather it is prohibited in their
religion, like cursing, So there is no apparent
distinction between such a doer and between the

102

THE FOURTH ISSUE

Sheeth and other than them from the Prophets although
they did not intend (to insult) them,

And likewise, the saying of Ibn Abee Zayd concerning
those who said: ‘May Allah curse Bani Israeel and Bani
Adam’ intending only the wrongdoers from them and not
the Prophets. Then it is for him to be disciplined according
to what the ruler sees as correct (ijtihad) and some people
were of the view that they should be killed.

And that is the analogy of one of the perspectives of our
companions concerning the one who said: ‘I will disobey
Allah in everything He orders me with.’

Section

The ruling concerning the remaining Prophets is like the
ruling concerning our Prophet 3 and it is not known that
anyone made a distinction between one Prophet and another
and there is no doubt that the crime of insulting is more
serious than the insulting of other than him.

Section

As for insulting the wives of the Prophet ‏ركه‎ then whoever

slanders ‘A’ishah concerning that which Allah has declared

her innocence then they have disbelieved. Consensus has

been relayed concerning that by more than one scholar.’
And as for whoever insults other than her from the wives

of the Prophet then concerning that there are two sayings:

1 [vis mentioned in As-Sarim that from them is: Isma’tl bin Ishaq.

105

THE FOURTH ISSUE

taking from it the prescribed punishments for
fornication/adultery and theft because it is forbidden
with him and with the Muslims. And the evidences
for this are numerous.

Section

So if they insult an attribute or name of Allah’s or of some of
His Messengers, however it is apparent that the person did
not intend that and that was not what they meant, then this
speech is prohibited in totality. The repentance of such a
person is to be sought if they did not know that what they
said was prohibited and they are to receive a discretionary
punishment if they did know (it was prohibited), however
they do not disbelieve by that nor are they killed.

For example, a person abuses time! as the Prophet * said:
‘Do not insult time for indeed Allah is time.”* And likewise,
whoever insults a man and says: ‘O son of so-and-so’ up
until it reaches Adam, then they have come with a grevious
thing alongwith the fact that that includes Nuh, Idris,

١ Shaykh AL“Uthaymin said: ‘When a person insults or speaks bad against time as
the cause of events, as if he means thar time is what causes things to alternate
between good and bad, this is major shirk. Becasue when @ person artributes
events to something other than Allah, this means that he believes there is another
creator besides Allah,

When a person insults or speaks against time but believes that the one who
causes things to happen is Allah but he insults or speaks against it because of the
bad things that happened, this is prohibited because it is contrary to having
patience, but it is not disbelief because the person does not directly speak against
Allah. If he were to do thar, he would be a disbeliever.’ (Fatawa Al-‘Aqidah,
1/197)

* Muslim (2246) from the hadith of Abu Hurayrah.

104

THE FOURTH ISSUE

And the wording of some of them: ‘If they insult them
with that which is a slander or defamation concerning their
religion or their uprightness and integrity, they have
disbelieved. And if the insult is not a slander or defamation,
for e.g that they insult the father of one of them or out of
being angry with one of them, then they have not
disbelieved.

And Ahmad said concerning a man who insulted
Uthman: ‘This one is a heretic (zindeeq).’ And he said in a
narration from Hanbal: ‘Whoever insults a man from the
sahabah of the Prophet, I do not view that they are upon
Islam.”

And Al-Qadi said: ‘Then Ahmad has unrestricted sayings
that the one who insults anyone of the Companions has
disbelieved and in the narrations of Abdullah and Abu Talib
he has refrained concerning their being killed. And the
completion of the prescribed punishment and affirming of
the discretionary punishment necessitates that they are not
ruled to be guilty of disbelief.’

He said: ‘So it is likely that the saying of Ahmad: “I do
not view that they are upon Islam” means whoever regards
that as permissible, so indeed they disbelieve (by that) with
no difference of opinion.’

And to take the saying regarding suspending their killing
to refer to the one who does not regard that as permissible,
and that whoever insults them, criticising them concerning
their uprightness and integrity, then they are killed. And
whoever insulted them not due to criticism then they are not
to be killed. For example his saying: “They had little

107

THE FOURTH ISSUE

1. That it is like insulting anyone of the Sahabah based
upon what will soon follow

2. And it is what is correct, that whoever slanders or
defames anyone of the mothers of the believers then
it is like slandering ‘A’ishah.

Section

As for whoever insults any of the Companions ‏رك‎ then
Ahmad stated unrestrictedly (mutlaq) that we refrain
concerning declaring their disbelief and killing them.
However, he said: “They are to be punished and lashed and
put in confinement until they die or return from that (ie.
repent)’ and this is famous from the school of Malik.

Ibn Al-Mundhir said: ‘I do not know of anyone who
obligated their killing.”'

Qadi Abu Ya’l said: ‘Whoever insults the Companions
regarding that as permissible, then they have disbelieved,
otherwise they are defiantly disobedient (fasiq) whether that
was declaring them guilty of disbelief or criticising them in
their religion, The jurists affirm this.’

A group from the jurists excluded themselves and held
that whoever insults the Companions is to be killed and they
declared the Rafidah disbelievers and many of our
companions were explicit in that.

Abu Bakr bin ‘Abdul-Aziz said in ‘Al-Muqni’ about the
Rafidah: ‘If they insult them then they have disbelieved so
they are not to be married,’

١ “Al Ishraf ‘ald Madhahib ‏لطخ‎ ul-Ilm’ 2/245

106

THE FOURTH ISSUE

And His saying:
‘And those who annoy believing men and women
undeservedly, bear on themselves the crime of slander

and plain sin.”

And His saying:
‘Indeed Allah was pleased with the believers when they
gave their pledge of allegiance to you (O Muhammad)
under the tree.”

And the Most High says:
‘Allah has forgiven the Prophet, the Muhajirun and

the Ansar.?

And He says:
‘And those who came after them say: Our Lord forgive
us and our brethren who have preceded us in faith and
put not in our hearts any hatred against those who
have believed. Our Lord you are indeed full of
kindness, Most Merciful.”

So we know that seeking forgiveness for them and purifying
our hearts from hatred (towards them) is a matter beloved to
Allah and He praises the one who does that.

And it is established in As-Saheeh (Muslim): ‘No one
who made the pledge of allegiance beneath the tree will enter
the fire.’

' Al Ahzab:58
? Al Fath:18

> At Tawbah:117
4 Al Hashr:10

109

THE FOURTH ISSUE

knowledge and good in politics and courage and they had
stinginess and love for this worldly life.’

He said: ‘And it is likely that this speech is to be taken
upon what is apparent from it.’ So concerning the insulting
of them there are two narrations:

1) That they disbelieve
2) That they are defiantly disobedient (a fasiq)

Shaykh ul-Islam said: And according to this the saying of Al-
Qadi and other than him is established, there being two
narrations concerning the declaration of their disbelief
(takfir);

Al-Qadi said: ‘So whoever slanders or defames ‘A’ishah
with that which Allah declared her innocent of then they
have disbelieved with no difference of opinion concerning
that.’

Shaykh ul-Islam said: And this speech we put into two
seperate sections:

1) Concerning the ruling on the one who insults
unrestrictedly,

2) Concerning that where there is a distinction in the

ruling upon the insulrer.

So as for the first, then insulting the Companions of the
Prophet 38 is prohibited, according to the Book and the

Sunnah.
As for the Book, then it is because that is backbiting, and
Allah says:
‘And do not backbite one another.”
١ ‏له‎ Hujuraes12

108

THE FOURTH ISSUE

their description in the Injeel (Gospel) is like a (sown)
seed which sends forth its shoot, then makes it strong,
it then becomes thick, and it stands straight on. its
stem, delighting the sowers that He may enrage the
disbelievers with them. Allah has promised those
among them who believe and do righteous good
deeds, forgiveness and a mighty reward (i.c.
Paradise).”

Therefore whoever is enraged by them, he has sided with the
disbelievers whom Allah has debased, disgraced and subdued
for doing, and whoever is coupled with the disbelievers in
what they have been subdued in as a recompense for their
disbelief, then such a person is a disbeliever like them
because a believer is subdued as a recompense for disbelief.

Allah clarifies that He has connected the ruling with an
appropraitely selected description, as kufr is fitting because it
diminishes its doer. Since it is necessary (the ruling of kufr)
because its doer is enraged by the Companions of
Muhammad 48, therefore anyone whom Allah diminishes by
them, then it is found to be rightful that it necessitates kufr,
and this is the saying of Imam Ahmad: “they are not viewed
to be following Islam,” i.e. the Rafidah,

And in relation to this is the statement of the Prophet 38:
“Whoever hates them, then he has hated me, whoever harms
them, then he has harmed me, whoever curses them, then
upon him is the curse of Allah, the Angels, and all of
mankind, Allah will neither accept from him repentance or

"Al Fath:29

111

THE FOURTH ISSUE

And other than that from the Sunnah.

And if insulting them is established with this then the
least thing concerning that is for there to be a discretionary
punishment. And this is from that which we know of no
difference of opinion amongst the people of jurisprudence
(figh) and knowledge from the companions of the Prophet
and those who followed them in goodness. And the rest of
Ahl us-Sunnah wal Jama’ah are unanimous upon the fact
that is obligatory to praise them and ask for them to be
forgiven, for (Allah) to have mercy on them and to be
pleased with them, to love them, have allegiance to them and
punish whoever ill treats and insults them.

Then whoever says: “The person is not to be killed due to
insulting them,’ this is due to His (the Prophet's #8) saying:
‘A Muslims blood is not permissible except in one of three
(cases)',..’ and because maybe some of them insulted others
and no one was charged with disbelief due to that.

And whoever said: “The insulter is killed or declared to be
guilty of disbelief, then they use a number of things as proof;
from them: Allah’s saying:

‘Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and those who

are with him are severe against disbelievers, and

merciful among themselves. You see them bowing and
falling down prostrate (in prayer), seeking Bounty
from Allah and (His) Good Pleasure. The mark of
them (i.e. of their Faith) is on their faces (foreheads)
from the traces of (their) prostration (during prayers).
This is their description in the Taurat (Torah). But

١ Reported by Bukhari and Muslim from the hadith of Ibn Mas’ud se and the
hadith is related from a group of the Sahabah.

110

THE FOURTH ISSUE

And in the two Sahihs': “The sign of faith is having love
for the Ansar, and the sign of hypocrisy is hate for the
Ansar.’

And in the two (Sahihs)?: ‘[None loves the Ansar but a
believer, and none hates them but a hypocrite], whoever
loves them, Allah loves him, and whoever hates them, Allah
hates him.’

Thus, whoever curses them, he has increased in hating
them, so it necessitates that he is a hypocrite. And the
Prophet #8 only specified the Ansar because they took charge
of the state and faith from the Muhajiriin, and they
accomodated the Messenger of Allah 3%, supported him and
helped him; they extended their selfs and wealth in service of
his religion and made war against the nations for him; they
consoled the Muhajiriin with wealth as they were small in
number, strangers, impoverished and weak. The Messenger
3% sought to impart to the people the worth of the Ansar,
due to his knowledge that the people would grow in number
and the Ansar would diminish and the authority would be in
the hands of the Muhajiriin; therefore whoever sides with
the Ansar in supporting Allah and His Messenger ‏يك‎ in
whatever possible way, then he is their partner in truth; And
hating the one who supports Allah and His Messenger ‏يك‎ is
hypocrisy; this applies to every Companion who supported
the religion, and the one who hates them is a hypocrite
disbeliever according to what we have mentioned.

i, no.17 and Muslim, no.74 from the hadith of Anas 4,
? Al-Bukhari, no.3783 and Muslim, no.75 ftom the hadith of Bara’ ‏بعك‎

113,

THE FOURTH ISSUE

ransom’'. And insulting Allah and His Messenger ‏يك‎ is kufr,
and by this the difference is made apparent between
insulting them before the companionship was affirmed as
well as other Muslims and insulting them after the
confirmation of companionship; indeed whoever is a
Companion to the Prophet #€ and dies in that state and then
he is insulted, the one he was a Companion to is also
insulted. Ibn Mas’ud ‏كه‎ stated: ‘Consider people according
to their friends; just as it is said:

Do not ask about a man but rather ask about his friend,

For every friend takes after the one he accompanies.>

And Malik said: ‘They (the Rafidah) are a people who wish
to vilify the the Messenger ‏يلك‎ but are unable, so they vilify
his Companions, till it is said: “An evil man is the one who
has evil companions.”

Tbn “Umar stated: ‘Do not curse the Companions of
Muhammad, for indeed the station of one of them is better
than your actions [entirely].’4

And ‘Ali said: “Indeed it is a vow which the Messenger of
Allah promised me: “None loves you but a believer, and
none hates you but a hypocrite.” It was recorded by
Muslim.’

١ Tts reference has preceded on page 120.

* Tbn Battah records it in al-Ibanah (2/439), edited by Rida’ Na’san.

3 ‘The couplet is by ‘Adi bin Zayd al-Ibadi. See ‘Uyun al-Akhbar (3/79) and
Bahjat al-Malabis” (1/2/705).

4 ‏مط]‎ Majah recorded it in the introduction to his Sunan (162), Imam Ahmad in
al-Fada’il (1/57) and Ibn Abi ‘Asim in As-Sunnah (2/470, no.1006) and its isnad
is authentic.

5 No. 87.

112

THE FOURTH ISSUE

Likewise, for the one who claims that the Qur'an is
incomplete and that it has been concealed, or that it has
hidden interpretations which eliminate Shariah based
actions, and its like. And this is the saying of the Qaramitah
and Batiniyyah, and from them the Tanasakhiyyah; there is
no difference of opinion regarding the kufr of these groups.

As for the one who curses the Companions in a way
which does not disparage their trustworthiness or religion,
such as describing some of them as stingy, or cowardly, or
short of intellect, unabstinent, etc. then such a person
requires disciplining and punishment, and he does not
disbelieve thereby, and according to this is how the speech of
those scholars who did not make takfeer of them is
understood.

As for the one who curses them and disparages them
outright, then this is a case of differing opinions. The matter
wavers between the angry curse and the religiously-motivated
curse.

As for whoever surpasses that and claims that they
apostated after the death of the Messenger of Allah 28 except
a small contingent who did not pass 10 in number, or that
they behaved criminally, then there is no doubt also in the
disbelief of the one who says this, moreover, there is no
doubt about the kufr of the one who witholds from making
takfir of him.

These are people whom Allah has made examples of, and
their faces have repeatedly been transformed into that of pigs
in life and death’.

1 See what Shaykh al-Islam mentioned in Minhaj as-Sunnah (1/485).

THE FOURTH ISSUE

Imam Ahmad reported', with an authentic isnad from
Tbn Abi Laylah who said: ‘They dispute about Abu Bakr and
“Umar. So a man commented: “Umar is better than Abu
Bakr” and Al-Jarud? said: “Rather Abu Bakr is better than
him.” So the dispute reached “Umar and so he gave him a
severe beating with a stick until his legs quaked. Then he
turned to Al-Jarud and said: “Leave me be!” He then said:
“Abu Bakr is the best of all men, after the Messenger of
Allah 38 in such-and-such...” then he said: “Whoever says
other than this, we will establish upon him the punishment
of the slanderer.””

Thus, if the two rightly-guided caliphs ‘Umar and ‘Ali,
may Allah be pleased with them, would lash those who
preferred ‘Ali over Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, or ‘Umar over Abu
Bakr, and that does not constitute cursing, it is deduced that
the punishment for cursing according to the two of them
would have been much greater.

Chapter’
And the details of this view is as follows:

Whoever couples his cursing with the claim that ‘Ali is a
god, or that he is a Prophet, or that Jibreel erred, then there
is no doubt that this is kufr, moreover, there is no doubt
about the kufr of the one who witholds from making takfir
of him.

‘In al-Fada'il (1/300) as well as his son in as-Sunnah (2/579),

* Al-Jarud bin al-Mu’ali was the chief of ‘Abdul-Qays. He accepted Islam in the
year of the delegations and was martyred in Nahawund. See Al-sabah (1/216).

3 As-Sarim (3/1107).

114

THE FOURTH ISSUE

And in summary, from the categories of people who curse
is the one who undoubtedly disbelieves, one who is not ruled
| to have disbelieved, and one who it is wavered in respect to,
and this is not the place for examining it for it is very
lengthy, this is only in respect to what the situation

necessitated.

| And Allah knows best,

| 116
