THE

MODERNIST

MENACE
TO ISLAM

A Muslim Critique of Modern -Isms

Th e

Modernist

Menace
to Isl am

A Muslim Critique of Modern -Isms

DANIEL HAQIQATJOU
Bachelors in Physics and Philosophy

HARVARD UNIVERSITY

In Loving Memor y of My Sister

Donna

Published by:
Dakwah Corner Bookstore (M) Sdn. Bhd.
No. 7, Jalan Dato Abdul Aziz, Section 14,
46100 Petaling Jaya, Selangor Darul Ehsan,
MALAYSIA
T: +603-7956 4664

Published:
2021

ISBN:
978-967-5699-67-2

Typesetting:
Every Edition Sdn. Bhd.

Title:
The Modernist Menace
to Islam

Director:
Farid Ullah Ahmed Hussain

Printed by:
Firdaus Press Sdn. Bhd.

Cover Design:
Fadhli Mat Razi

For suggestions and
comments:
dakwahcornerpublications
@gmail.com

MALAYSIA

SAUDI ARABIA

NIGERIA

Dakwah Corner Bookstore
Ampang Point Shopping
Centre
Tel: +603- 4266 9692

Dawah Corner Bookstore
Makkah Commercial
Center, Holy Makkah
Tel: +966 125311 895

Dawah Islamic Bookshop
UAC Building , Abuja
Tel: +234 805 603 7779

Author:
Daniel Haqiqatjou

Showroom Outlets

Dakwah Corner Bookstore
G15 (Ground Floor)
Amcorp Mall, Petaling Jaya
Tel: +60 3 7932 0079

PHILIPPINES
Dakwah Corner Bookstore
Falcatan Street, Tetuan,
Zamboanga City
Tel: +63 926 5384

Distributors
Darussalam
Australia
Australia
Tel: +61 2 9740 7188

Salaam Media
International
Singapore
Tel: +65 63964121

Darussalam
Darussalam Books
Publishers
(London Central Mosque),
USA
UK
Tel: +1 860 224 2400 Tel: +44 2077231234

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

Copyright © 2020 Dakwah Corner Bookstore (M) Sdn. Bhd.
No part of this publication may be produced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of
the Publisher.

CONTENTS

About the Author viii
!"#$%&'()*( +,-./012-3/,( 4
!"#$%&'(5*( #-67389( 44

The Self Worship of Hawking and Physics 11
Anything Except God 13
“I Love Science!” and Other Confusions 14
The Self-Defeating Nature of Atheism 17
Unintended Implications of Atheism 18
Where is the Evidence for God? 19
!"#$%&'(:*( ;721<=.389(>(?79/2.=2@(( AB

Secularism is Not Neutral. It is
Suppression 23
The Void of the Secular 26
Banning the Hijab in Germany 27
Down with the Separation of Church and
State 30
Shaking Hands in Switzerland 32
Only Tyrants Want to Replace Sharia with
Religious Freedom 35
Wrapping Our Language in a Liberal Veneer
Gets Us Nowhere 38

i

Is Democracy Better Than Islamic
Governance? 40
Secularism Cannot Square the Circle 46
!"#$%&'(C*( D.770/9E(&F1=<3-@(=,0(G3H7.-@( IJ

Religious Indoctrination and Religious
Freedom 49
Islam Does Not Respect Freedom of
Religion 51
The Golden Rule, Self-Worship, and
Satanism 53
Freedom of thought 55
Alcohol and Freedom 56
Hadith on Hudud, Corruption, and
Equality 60
Je Suis Hypocrite 62
Is Islam About Liberty? 63
Shouldn’t We All Support Freedom of
Choice? 64
Does Islam Promote Equality? 66
Spreading Religion vs. Spreading Human
Rights 68
Freedom to Pursue Your Desires 69
!"#$%&'(K*( D793,389( L4

The Grave Implications of Feminist Islam 71
The Logic of Patriarchy 92

ii

Is Feminism the Cause of Women Leaving
Islam? 94
Who Wants to Debate Patriarchy? 99
Islamic Law Makes it Easy for Husbands to
Oppress Wives 106
Criticizing Feminism the Right Way 108
Women’s Wellbeing, Not Feminism 109
The Political and Social Power of
Motherhood 109
Triple Talaq 111
!"#$%&'(M*( "3N=H( 44O

What is Oppressive about Hijab
Requirements in Some Muslim
Countries? 115
Productive Ways to Discuss the Hijab 117
The French and the Hijab 120
Fallacies Regarding Hijab 121
There is No Practical Purpose for the
Hijab 122
Hijab and Empowerment Cliches 126
“Hijab is About Choice” and Other
Confusions 129
Stop Saying Dumb Things About Hijab 130
Non-Muslims Love Burkinis, But Why? 131
How Not to Argue Against the Burkini
Ban 132
Wearing Hijab as Disobedience 134
iii

Feminism and Hijab (or the Dangers
of Uncritically Adopting Modernist
Discourse) 136
!"#$%&'(P*( ;237,27(>(

;237,-389( 4BJ
Common Misconceptions About Scientific
Miracles in the Quran 139

Do Islam and Science Ever Conflict? Yes. 147
There is No “Pluralism” in Science 148
The Reality of Science 150
Islam and Science in Conflict: Describing
Reality 152
!"#$%&'(Q*( G3H7.=<389E(G3H7.=<("@R/2.38@( 4OL

Liberalism doesn’t See Anything Wrong with
Incest 157
Liberal Moral “Progress”: The Consent
Taboo 159
The Fake Tolerance of Liberalism 161
Liberalism Is Not Merely Irrational. It Is
Sheer Madness 162
Liberal Secularism’s Biggest Deceit 162
Liberal Faux-Theology 163
!"#$%&'(S*( $./T.7883U389E(V/.=<3-@( 4WO

Progressivism and the Inheritors of the
Pharaohs 165
The Incoherence of Moral Progress 166
iv

We are the Latest and Greatest (Famous Last
Words) 170
Modern vs. Traditional Conceptions of
Knowledge 172
Muslim Savages Cannot Keep Up with Social
Progress 173
Is Islam Relevant? 175
Who Is the Real “Free thinker”? 176
The Logical Direction of Morality 178
Good Without God? Do We Need Religion to
be “Good People”? 179
!"#$%&'()X*( '7Y/.938-8E(V/07.,38-8( 4ZL

“Traditional” Muslims vs. the
Modernists 187
Communist Islam – What We Can Learn
From that Travesty 188
Is Islam the Reason the Muslim World
Is “Backwards”? Latin America Begs to
Differ 190
The Hypocrisy of “Islamic Reform” 194
Progressive and Modernist Muslim
Reform 195
The Insight of the Faux-Traditionalist 196
The Modernist Playbook 197
Hypocrisy on Gender Separation 199
Knowledge vs. the Appearance of
Knowledge 200
v

“American Islam” 202
The Western Strategy for Dominating the
Muslim World 203
Hadith and Epistemology: Adam’s
Height 205
The Progressives vs. the
Faux-Traditionalists 208
The Multi-Headed Hydra of Muslim
Reformism 208
Lizard Hole Cometh 210
!"#$%&'())*( ;7[(>(\3,=( A44

Sex Sells, The Same Way Drugs Sell 211
The Sexual Misery of the Western World 212
There is Only One Kind of “Safe Sex” 218
Premarital Sex is Not a “Victim-less
Crime” 219
“Sex is Taboo in Islam” 222
The Purpose of “Sex Education” 222
“Child Marriage” in Bangladesh 224
Ikhtilat 226
!"#$%&'()5*( "/9/87[1=<3-@(>(G]^%( AB4

Gay Equality 231
Is Islam’s Prohibition of Same-Sex Behavior
Discriminatory? 231
If We Don’t Support LGBT Rights, We Will
Lose Muslim Rights? 236
vi

Extrasexual Rights Now! 238
Are There “Gays” in Islam? 239
This Moment in History 241
!"#$%&'():*( V=<=387( AIB

Keeping You Misinformed is Their Job 243
Consuming Content and Its Effect on the
Heart 244
The Single Eye of Modern Politics 245
How Capitalism Destroys Contentment 246
The Corporate Virus 247
Positive Psychology, Self Help, the Science
of Happiness 248
The Reality of Baraka 249
Ramzan vs. Ramadan 250
!"#$%&'()C*( V18<39(;_7R-32( AOL

The Value of Destruction to Modern Islamic
Scholarship 257
Purifying the Mind 259
What Does it Mean to be a “Muslim
skeptic”? 260
What is the Mission of the Muslim
Skeptic? 261
Why be a Muslim Skeptic? 262
A Foundational Principle for Understanding
Islam in Light of Modernity 263
Confessions of a Muslim Skeptic 267
vii

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Daniel Haqiqatjou is the founder of Alasna Institute, an
online learning institute dedicated to teaching Muslims
how to fight doubts about Islam and strengthen their faith.
He was born in Houston, Texas, USA and comes from
a liberal secular Muslim background but rediscovered a
commitment to Islam in his youth. He studied physics as
an undergraduate at Harvard University and completed
graduate studies in philosophy, studying with some of the
top physicists and philosophers in the world, including
Nobel Prize winners. He also studies Islam traditionally with
respected scholars of Islam.
Through Alasna Institute, he writes and lectures on
contemporary issues surrounding Muslims and modernity
and has spoken at universities, mosques, and madrasas
around the world.

viii

CHAPTER

1

INTRODUCTION
All praise and thanks are due to Allah, the Master and King
of existence, the All-Merciful, Beneficent, who has power
over all things. May peace and blessings be upon His
final Messenger, Muhammad ձ, and his Family, and his
Companions.
Modernity is a menace to Islam. It is a menace to the human
race. But to understand this, we have to take a step back.
Historians generally identify the sixteenth century as the
beginning of modernity. This was a century that saw great
upheaval in Europe, as the Reformation pitted Christian
sects in a bitter conflict from which the secular age was born.
War, tribalism, and bloodshed did their part to disenchant
intellectuals from religion and scripture, which were
increasingly seen as sources of ignorance and suffering. But
what would replace God and scripture? What else could be
the source of morality? What else could be the source of
knowledge about the nature of existence and of humanity’s
ultimate destiny?
The early modernists elected their own minds to this
position of metaphysical and worldly authority. The mind
alone, they argued, could guide mankind. The success of
the mathematical sciences and Isaac Newton’s empirical
philosophy seemed to bolster this conclusion. Through
reason and empirical observation, the human mind could

2

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

become a god. The mind, it seemed, had infinite ability to
reason, calculate, and discover. All the mysteries of the
universe and of human nature would be solved like an
equation. It was simply a matter of time.
But knowledge was only half of the story. What distinguished
mortals from gods was not only knowledge but also power,
i.e., the ability to enact one’s will and, thereby, refashion the
world accordingly. This need could be met by technology,
which could be continuously developed and advanced.
To the modernists, this meant that technology promised
infinite power and, therefore, godhood. Finally, man could
recreate himself in his own image. Here again, achieving
unlimited power was simply a matter of time.
This focus on time is the hallmark of modernism and
modernism’s chief characteristic: Progressivism. As time
marches forward, humanity improves in its knowledge
and power. Civilization grows in rationality and morality
as it races to a utopian future that resembles the heavenly
paradise described in many religious texts. The humanity
of tomorrow is better than the humanity of today. The
humanity of today is better than the humanity of yesterday.
This notion of progress became the grundnorm underlying
all modern thought and an unquestioned truth devoutly
held by layman and intellectual alike.
Here we begin to see the basis of modernity’s menacing
nature. Progress means that change becomes a virtue all
unto itself. Constancy, in contrast, becomes the greatest
vice. To resist change is seen as a literal assault on the
human race. Modernity’s number one enemy, therefore, is
tradition since devotion to tradition means, among other
things, resistance to change.

INTRODUCTION

3

Tradition, in whatever form, calls to consistency over time. A
basic commitment to tradition means accepting that some
principles are timeless. Some values cannot be updated.
To be devoted to a tradition requires reliance on the past
in one way or another, and that requirement by itself pits
tradition against modernity. Cultural traditions, linguistic
traditions, and especially religious traditions are constantly
under threat of being bulldozed by modern innovation and
reform.
Religious tradition has no place in the modern world.
Modern or modernized religion amounts to nothing more
than a garnish on the side of the main course. The piece
of parsley sits on the edge of the plate, inconsequential
in every way. Modernity can tolerate parsley as long as it
doesn’t affect anything. At the end of the day, modernity
requires everyone stuff themselves with its steaming pile
of entree. If some choose to nibble on parsley as well, who
cares? But if anyone rejects modernity’s main course in
favor of religion, this is not allowed. Those religions that
want to be more than garnish will not be tolerated.
The question that sits at the back of the modernist mind
is: Who needs religion when all the main questions of
life are (supposedly) answered by modernity and its
epistemologies?

Where did humans come from?
Darwinism (supposedly) has the answer.

How does the universe work?
The physical sciences (supposedly) have the
answer.

4

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

What does it mean to be good?
Liberalism answers this; just treat others how you
want to be treated. Freedom and equality are the
ultimate goods.

What does it all mean?
There is no objective meaning. At best, we make
our own meaning. At worst we are just collections
ūĲîƥūŞƙǜūîƥĿŠĳĿŠƥĺĚǄūĿēūĲĿŠǛŠĿƥĚƙƎîČĚȦ
In this way, according to the modernist mentality,
humanity has no real need for religion, as religion adds
no substantive value. According to this mindset, the only
reason someone would be religious is out of some a-rational
cultural bias or, maybe, force of habit.
In the light of modernity, nothing could be more contrary
to progress than “closed-minded” believers “blindly”
reading one-thousand-year-old texts and maintaining
canonized religious law. Modernity, therefore, aims to
destroy this religious impediment to progress with a multifaceted assault involving media, education, law, and global
politics. This assault is as comprehensive in scope as it is
brutal.
Islam can rightly be described as the antithesis of
modernity. This is partly due to the fact that the European
Enlightenment thinkers in the 18th and 19th century, who
developed the main theoretical philosophy underlying
modernity, viewed Islam as a more brutish, less forwardthinking version of the same stagnant Church they had so
thoroughly neutered. Famous 18th century atheist French
philosopher Voltaire, for example, caricatured Islam as a
barbaric religion. He even wrote a play Mahomet satirizing

INTRODUCTION

5

the Prophet Muhammad ձ, portraying him as a fanatical
tyrant and depicting his enemies, the pagan Arabs, as
freethinking saints of reason. This bitter Orientalism colored
the thinking of many European philosophers. Islam, in their
minds, was despotic while modernism meant freedom.
Islam was irrational while modernism put a premium on
the mind. Above all, to them Islam meant stagnation and
decay while their modern outlook represented continuous
change and renewal.
Beyond that intellectual history, the very nature of
modernity clashes with Islam. After all, Islam is the most
consistently traditional of all religions. Preservation of
the Prophetic Sunnah is paramount in Islam, and Islam’s
entire epistemology is built on the notion of preserving and
transmitting past knowledge, not only past knowledge from
the time of revelation but, indeed, past knowledge from
the very beginning of human existence, when Allah created
humanity and asked them, “Am I not your Rabb [i.e., Lord
and Master]?” And all of humanity responded, “Yes, we
testify,” as described in Surat Al-Ar’af (verse 17) in the Quran.
This primordial knowledge of the Creator, His Oneness,
and His right to be worshipped is preserved in the human
instinct known as the fitra. This is the instinct that drives
mankind to goodness, purity, and righteousness unless it
becomes corrupted due to the vicissitudes of the dunya,
corrupted whether due to idolatry (shirk), arrogant egoism
(nafs), lust (shahwa), the whispering of satan (shaytan), or
false whims and prejudices (hawa). The practice of Islam
functionally serves as preservation of the fitra in the sense
of ensuring constancy in one’s worship to the Creator alone
without partner. Constancy of will is equally paramount,
as the believer must ensure that he brings his will and his

6

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

desires into utmost congruence with the Divine will, always
intending Allah’s good pleasure (ridwan).
All of these values and this entire existential framework
immediately and uncompromisingly conflict with
modernism as well as all its concomitant -isms.
But the hostility between Islam and modernity did not
remain theoretical. The first clash between Muslims and
the adherents of modernity occured in the early nineteenth
century as European colonization of the Muslim world
began. The colonial powers first and foremost desired to
expand economic power and control and, secondly, to bring
the light of modernity and progress to the “savage” Muslim
populace “stuck in the seventh century.” Islam stood in the
way of both goals. In response, the colonizers developed
a sophisticated strategy to weaken the influence of Islam
over the Muslim mind. From North Africa to South Asia to
Indonesia, the colonial project attacked Islamic religious
institutions and scholars by systematically defunding
them and replacing them with pro-European alternatives.
In terms of religious practice, everything from Islamic
language (Arabic) to Islamic dress to Islamic family structure
was targeted by the colonizer and systematically dismantled
in many parts of the Muslim world. The Caliphate itself
continued to suffer from the modernizing influence until
it was completely abolished in 1924. This top-to-bottom
overhaul of Muslim society often meant nothing short of
annihilation and, at times, outright genocide, as those
Muslims who resisted the colonial threat and “stood in the
way of progress” were summarily exterminated. In the final
analysis, tens of millions of Muslims were brutally killed,
sacrifices to the Western god of progress and enlightenment.

INTRODUCTION

7

Those Muslims who survived and their children were
brainwashed over time to adopt modernity and its -isms.
The formulation of “modern = good” was branded on the
Muslim consciousness through a Westernized educational
system as well as media, literature, and political influence.
The fundamental paradox which few modernized Muslims
could resist was the idea that modernism held the key to
reviving the lost glory of the Muslim peoples. To return to
the global dominance that Muslims historically enjoyed,
they must, paradoxically, follow the modernized West, learn
its science, adopt its way of life, embrace its technology,
emulate its economy, etc. This lie is as powerful today
as it was two centuries ago. It is a lie, of course, because
adopting modernism means abandoning Islam. Therefore,
even if Muslims were to attain civilizational ascendance by
aping modernity and the West, by the end, they would no
longer be Muslims. It would be, at best, a hollow “victory.”
In the end, no true victory can come from other than Islam
as mentioned in the following verse.
“...and victory is not except from Allah, the Exalted in
Might, the Wise.”
Ali ‘Imran (Q3:126)

This we hold as a sacred, inviolable truth.
Once we understand the toxic nature of modernism,
it becomes easy to recognize its effect on the Muslim
mind. How can the progressiveness of modernism and
the traditionalism of Islam coexist in the same mind and
heart? How can one simultaneously believe the progressive
narrative—viz., that the present day is the peak of continuous
human moral and intellectual advancement—whilst also
believing that the best generation was the generation of

8

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

the Prophet ձ and then the righteous Salaf? Logically,
one cannot. Yet, the colonized mind will twist and contort
in order to reconcile the two. Perhaps the answer lies in
reforming Islam, bringing the religion up to date and up to
code. Perhaps everything in Islam that is anti-liberal, antisecular, anti-feminism, anti-materialism, anti-scientism,
etc., can be expunged from the religion.
Such thoughts constitute the source of numerous
doubts in Islam that are plaguing some Muslims in this
day and age. In response to this tension, the tendency—
nurtured by an environment polluted with the heavy
stench of modernism—is to distort Islam, bending it to the
mold set by modernism. Muslims who have such doubts
would be better served by breaking that modernist mold
rather than attempting to warp the Straight Path that is
Islam. Successfully breaking this modernist mold requires
debunking the -isms and disenchanting these Muslims from
the false gold modernism sells. Once the Muslim mind is
deprogrammed, decolonized, demodernized, and cleared
of the radioactive waste products of the West, then once
again the pure light of Islam can shine through.
This book collects short essays and reflections I have
written over the years critiquing these -isms. I have
written primarily for a Muslim audience but non-Muslims,
many of whom also recognize the scourge of modernity,
can also understand most of the arguments, save for a
few Islamic terms they might not know. The book can be
read in any order as each chapter and section can be read
independently of everything else. The critiques themselves
are not comprehensive, though they are meant to pack a
punch against some of the more persistent dogmas of the

INTRODUCTION

9

day. But the hope is that this book is the first volume in a
series that, as a whole, will provide the reader plenty of
food for thought and, if Allah wills, a paradigm shift towards
understanding that the modernist emperor has no clothes.
And Allah is the King of kings.
May Allah accept this work and forgive its faults. May He
shine the light of sincerity and guidance onto our hearts
and let us and our children not die except as Muslims and
as submissive slaves to Him. Amin.

CHAPTER

2

ATHEISM
THE SELF WORSHIP OF HAWKING AND PHYSICS
I read Stephen Hawking’s A Brief History of Time in middle
school and thought it was great. I also got a chance to see
him speak in person when I was in high school. He was one
of the populizers of science who sparked my interest in
studying physics that eventually led to receiving my degree
in the subject from Harvard.
What was always clear about Hawking was that he was
a man of great faith. Not faith in God, though. He was a
staunch atheist. He put his faith in the human mind’s ability
to discover the “Grand Unified Theory of Everything.” Does
such a theory exist? Hawking strongly believed so, and like
Einstein and many other physicists, he dedicated his life to
attempting to discover it.
How do we know such a theory exists? And how do we
know it can be discovered at all? These were questions
that troubled me as a student of physics. And none of
my professors had compelling answers. The most that
they could say is that the universe is so intricate and
demonstrates such complexity and sublime order that
there must be something that underlies it all. There must
be a deeper truth! There must be a reason why this order,
this “Grand Design” exists! And the reason, Hawking

12

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

surmised, is that an all-encompassing theory, perhaps even
one all-explanatory equation, a “God equation” as some
physicists call it, underpins it all.
The shirk explicit in this mentality is clear, especially for
those like Hawking who militantly reject God in lieu of this
kind of metaphysical speculation about the world and its
history. Rather than recognize that the order of the universe
and its comprehensibility to the mind in the first place are
due to an all powerful Creator of both the universe and
the human mind, Hawking obstinately turned away from
the obvious to insist on a figment of his imagination, the
blasphemously-named “God equation.”
What folly it is to imagine that one’s mind is powerful
enough to not only comprehend the secrets and grandeur
of the universe but also to systematize it in a theoretical
framework of one’s making! This is nothing but self worship,
the kind of shirk seen from the likes of Iblis and Pharoah.
I find the first several verses of Surat al-Mulk in the Quran
very relevant to Hawking and his demise and the demise of
those like him who worship their whims, thinking they are
enlightened geniuses, but deluding none but themselves.
“Blessed is He in whose hand is dominion, and He is
over all things powerful, who created death and life to
test you [as to] which of you is best in deed—and He
is the Exalted in Might, the Forgiving. Who created
seven heavens in layers. You do not see in the creation
of the Most Merciful any inconsistency. So return
‫ܡ‬ǢŻƿƢ‫ܢ‬ǛŎƪŎŻű‫ܡ‬ƷŻƷŉĩƪţǢ‫ܗܢ‬ĢŻǢŻƿƪĩĩþűǢĚƢĩþţƪ‫ܓ‬ȃĩű
return [your] vision twice again. [Your] vision will
return to you humbled while it is fatigued. And We
ŉþǛĩěĩƢƷþŎűŦǢĚĩþƿƷŎȀĩĢƷŉĩűĩþƢĩƪƷŉĩþǛĩűǜŎƷŉƪƷþƢƪ

ATHEISM

13

and have made [from] them what is thrown at the
devils and have prepared for them the punishment
of the Blaze. And for those who disbelieved in their
Lord is the punishment of Hell, and wretched is the
destination.”
Al-Mulk (Q67:1-6)

ANYTHING EXCEPT GOD
Naturalists and atheists will propose any theory no matter
how outlandish to avoid having to admit the existence of
God.

Is the universe a massive computer simulation
created by aliens?
“Very likely!”

Is the universe just one instantiation of an
ĿŠǛŠĿƥĚŠƭŞċĚƑūĲūƥĺĚƑƭŠĿǄĚƑƙĚƙĿŠîŞƭČĺ
larger but undetectable multiverse?
“Seems reasonable!”

Is the universe one massive, integrated
consciousness that controls itself?
“Probably!”

Is the universe just the disembodied intelligence of advanced alien life forms?
“Sounds cool!”

14

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Is the universe the creation of an All Powerful
Divine Creator?
“Wow, how irrational? How silly? Is this the stone
age? You believe in fairy tales?”
Why are the world’s leading scientists proposing these
far-fetched theories in the first place?
Because they realize that a purely physicalist explanation
of the world cannot be adequate. They realize that a purely
naturalistic picture cannot answer the biggest, most
pressing questions. They recognize that the universe has
all the appearances of being designed, created, as if there
is some intentionality and will behind it all.
But they refuse to admit that what they really have in
mind is God. So they have to come up with aliens, computer
simulations, and other just-so stories to make sense of what
is nonsensical as far as a strict materialism is concerned.
Maybe one day they will unbury the truth that they have
worked so hard to cover.
“I LOVE SCIENCE!” AND OTHER CONFUSIONS
When the NASA New Horizons pictures of Pluto were recently
published, many people online reacted with declarations of:
“I LOVE SCIENCE!” and of how amazing, awe-inspiring, and
praiseworthy science is. There is nothing inherently wrong
about appreciating science, loving it even. But, do people
realize that science did not create Pluto? That science has
nothing to do with the existence of Pluto?
You might think that this phenomenon of people
declaring their love of science has nothing to do with shirk
and is absolutely harmless. And in many cases, I would

ATHEISM

15

agree. But in our cultural circumstance, where people
are increasingly leaving religion, becoming agnostic and
atheist, and generally denying the relevance and power of
God, these statements are not without a deeper significance.
The universal human response upon seeing the sublime
wonders of nature is to be in awe, to be dumbfounded with
the splendor that is the natural world. Also, universally it is
human to feel that someone, some agent, is responsible for
this splendor — that it did not just come from nothing, that it
didn’t just create itself — and then to praise and appreciate
that agent. For those who do not believe in God, these
involuntary sentiments have to be directed somewhere.
So people divert their declarations of adoration to science
or “Mother Nature,” etc. Obviously, these people do not
believe that there is an actual entity or deity of Mother
Nature. And they do not and could not believe that science
is responsible for the creation or preservation of natural
phenomena (science does not have agency or will, after
all). So in what sense should the sight of Pluto elicit that
kind of glee, joy, adoration, excitement, and love toward a
man-made academic discipline?
Or put another way, if people show this much love and
appreciation toward science for its ability to produce
images of or to discover details about the natural world,
then what about the Creator of those details and the objects
of those images?
How utterly stupid and senseless is it for humans to praise
science for what they see in the natural world, in essence
praising their own minds, without at least acknowledging,
if not being certain about, the possibility of a Creator?

16

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

You could imagine a person who does not show any
appreciation for nature. You show him these pictures of
Pluto, take him to see the most beautiful sunset, etc., and
he says, “So what? What’s the big deal? These are not
impressive.” That would be a more intellectually consistent
attitude.
Also, more intellectually consistent would be to praise
and love Pluto itself. And that is what nature worship
throughout history has been. It is no coincidence that all
the planets in our solar system have the names of Greek and
Roman gods. But since, according to modern materialism,
it would make little sense to praise, love, or show devotion
to a lifeless, unconscious rock in outer space, that option
is also closed. So people praise science instead, as if that
makes any sense.
And the rest of us are left wondering, how idiotic to deny
a Creator but also praise science. At most, science is a lens.
If you were to read a food photo blog or architectural design
blog and were particularly impressed with what you saw
therein, you wouldn’t gush over the photographer and
ignore the chef or the architect, would you? That would
be completely illogical. And if you believe that there is
no chef or architect, that the cuisine or the architectural
marvel built itself, then, still, why praise anything? The
photographer or photography in general has nothing to do
with the object of the photograph. If photography is what
is spurring this adoration, read a book on photography. If
science is what is really praiseworthy, go read Newton’s
Principia. Don’t browse space photos and spurt on about
how mindblowingly amazing science is.

ATHEISM

17

THE SELF-DEFEATING NATURE OF ATHEISM
Do we have a good reason to think that supernatural entities
exist?
Here is a reason. The vast majority of human beings
throughout time have explicitly believed in some
supernatural entity or entities. The fact that not everyone
has agreed on what those supernatural entities are does
not diminish the fact that these people all believe in some
supernatural entity or other. Furthermore, these beliefs
are held by people across the world and across time
independently of each other.
The burden is on the materialist atheist to explain this
phenomenon. If these beliefs have not been induced
by actual experiences, then they must be the result of a
state of delusion humans almost universally and naturally
suffer from or a predisposition humans have in making big
mistakes about what does and does not in fact exist in the
world. The delusions must be so strong, in fact, that they
drive all these people to great lengths of religious devotion.
In other words, these are not simply passing hallucinations.
This delusion, i.e., the “God delusion,” must be deeply and
consistently felt to such an extent that the people suffering
from it don’t even have the slightest clue about their
mentally disturbed condition.
But by claiming that human beings are prone to suffer
from such deep and abiding delusions and are liable to
make such significant cognitive errors, this does nothing
other than impeach the human mind itself and its ability
to accurately recognize and understand the world. But
this, of course, undermines the very minds and hence
the conclusions of the materialist atheists themselves,

18

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

who put ultimate stock in the ability of the human mind
to understand its place in the universe and discover its
greatest secrets.
In other words, the recognition of the supernatural
is so universal and hence so inherent to what it means
to be human and the human mind’s experience of the
world around it that, to discredit that general notion of
the supernatural is to discredit the human mind itself and
humanity’s capacity to be in and experience the world as it
really is. That is what materialistic atheism has committed
itself to, not realizing the self-defeating nature of its
program.
UNINTENDED IMPLICATIONS OF ATHEISM
Materialists, naturalists, and atheists have a long history
of denying the existence of things that do not fit into their
very narrow, limited conception of existence. God is always
number one on their list of targets for denial.
But what the public does not realize and atheists do not
publicize is that their naturalistic, materialistic philosophy
requires the denial of much more than God. They do not
want the public at large to be aware of this because then,
the people will wake up and see what a silly picture of the
world these philosophies commit one to.
For example, the strict scientific empiricism required by
new atheists — the idea that the only things that exist are
those observable/detectable by science — also requires
denying the existence of the mind and certainly the minds
of others. Science has not detected the mind. Only electrical

ATHEISM

19

signals in the brain can be detected, but that is not the same
thing as the mind.
Have you ever seen someone else’s mind? Have you
experienced their inner thoughts? Have you felt their
emotions? No. All we can see is external behavior. The
internal mind of others is inaccessible to our perceptual
faculties. So does that mean that we disbelieve that others
possess consciousness like our own? If we consistently apply
the standards of scientific empiricism used by atheists, that
would be the inescapable conclusion.
Doing so is preposterous. Which is why we reject scientific
empiricism and the simple-minded atheism that relies on it.
WHERE IS THE EVIDENCE FOR GOD?
Where is the evidence for God? Where is the evidence for
the truth of Islam? There is evidence, lots of evidence. But
what counts as evidence depends on a lot of factors. This
is a basic truth about the way reason and rationality work
and it is just as true about religious claims as it is about
scientific (or mathematical) claims.
Imagine you are a scientist living in a world that is
bitterly anti-science. The masses are taught from a very
young age to distrust science, to look down on scientists,
and to view science itself as charlatanism at best, a violent
death cult at worst. In this world, of course, there is no
institutionalized science education. The vast majority of
people have zero exposure to science in the classroom
growing up. This results in a severe lack of scientific literacy
in the general population. But the ignorance runs deeper
than that because even universities are anti-science. The

20

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

vast majority of university professors and the cognoscenti
worldwide view science with snarky contempt. The only
way to study science is in small, underfunded, understaffed
independent schools scattered around the world. To study
at those schools requires great personal and financial
sacrifice on the part of students, which means that very
few legitimate scientists are trained relative to the size of
the population.
Now, for some reason in this world, the public believes
that burning forests is great for the world’s climate. As a
scientist, you know better. You tell people that actually
burning the world’s forests will cause environmental
disaster. Most people laugh at you and ignore everything
you have to say given that you are just a kooky scientist.
Others are more respectful and tell you that you have the
right to believe whatever you want as long as you don’t try
to impose your beliefs on others by, for example, insisting
that they are true beliefs. But there are also some science
skeptics who enjoy trolling scientists.
So they start a dialogue with you. And they demand
evidence. How do you know burning forests will lead to
disaster? Where’s the evidence?
Now, you might be inclined to explain to them about
greenhouse gases. But, of course, these people know
absolutely nothing about chemistry or physics or biology.
You could try to explain to them how CO2 traps heat, but
they have no idea what chemical elements are, let alone
CO2. You could tell them about how trees trap CO2 and give
off oxygen and how living things like humans need oxygen,
but then they would ask you for the evidence of all that. So
you might try to explain some basic chemistry, but of course,

ATHEISM

21

that is not enough because ultimately chemistry as a body
of empirical knowledge relies on molecular physics. So you
would have to explain and justify why that is epistemically
reliable. And when it comes to understanding molecular
physics, a working knowledge of nuclear physics and even
quantum mechanics is required, and on and on.
Obviously, these skeptics are going to understand very
little of anything you might explain, let alone assume
that what you are saying is true. After all, these people
had doubts about your initial claim as a scientist. There
is nothing that would make them less doubtful about any
of the other claims you would have to make about the
supporting science that justifies that initial claim.
Now you might tell them: Look, if you want to know with
certainty how I know burning forests is a bad idea, you need
to get a thorough science education and then do some basic
experiments and then go onto advanced studies, etc., etc.,
and then you will have the evidence you need. To which the
skeptics laugh uproariously.
The lesson here is that what counts as evidence, i.e.,
compelling evidence that justifies belief, requires a gigantic
body of contextual knowledge. In discussions about science,
that body of contextual knowledge is simply assumed on
the basis of scientific authority. People trust scientists to
know what they are talking about, so they won’t press them
too far to justify every single thing. But when those same
people talk about God, the skepticism is turned up to a
whole different level because religion has no intellectual
or epistemic authority in the secular world we live in. There
is plenty of evidence for God, evidence far more compelling,
consistent, and “objective” than anything in empirical

22

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

science. But two things impede people from recognizing
this.
First, the contextual knowledge is not there. Islamic
education is nonexistent for most of the world, including
Muslims. Instead, Muslims worldwide are educated through
secular models of learning. Obviously, that will impact
Muslims’ ability to intellectually arrive at conviction in
the existence of Allah and the truth of Islam. And if that
wasn’t bad enough, the second impeding factor is a very
active anti-religion, anti-Islamic current that permeates
the culture, the media, the academy, etc. The state of iman
and conviction of Muslims around the world is severely
impacted by these two factors.
The evidence for Allah and the truth of Islam comes from
different sources that mutually reinforce each other. This is
the way any body of knowledge works, including scientific
knowledge, as the example above was meant to show. A
skeptic can undermine any specific point of knowledge, but
he can do this only in virtue of an ignorance of the larger
context or paradigm or episteme or plausibility structure or
web of belief (or whatever other philosophical/sociological
term you want to use).

CHAPTER

3

SECULARISM &
DEMOCRACY
SECULARISM IS NOT NEUTRAL. IT IS SUPPRESSION
No version of secularism is the neutral space that it claims
to be. Once we accept that, we can move on to more
productive conversations.
In a 2015 op-ed, Anglican priest Giles Fraser wrote on the
history of secularism:
“At the end of the 18th century, France’s war against
the Catholic church reached its bloody conclusion.
By Easter 1794, the same revolution that once
proclaimed freedom of conscience had forcedly
closed down the vast majority of France’s 40,000
churches. What began with the confiscation of
church property and the smashing of crosses and
chalices, ended with forced conversions and the
slaughter of priests and nuns at the guillotine.”

“It is in this period, the so-called Reign of Terror, that the
modern English word terrorism – deriving from the French,
‘terrorisme’ – has its origins. ‘Terror is nothing but prompt,
severe, inflexible justice; it is therefore an emanation of
virtue,’ argued Robespierre, in what now sounds like a sick
press release from ISIS. Over in the Vendée, those who

24

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

remained loyal to their centuries-old faith were massacred
in what historian Mark Levene has called ‘an archetype
of modern genocide.’ The systematic de-Christianisation
of France was not the natural and inevitable collapse
of sclerotic religion and the natural and inevitable rise
of Enlightenment rationality. It was murderous, statesponsored suppression.”
A great example of how secularism is just as imposing as
theocracy in enforcing its moral prescriptions on the public
based on specific metaphysical beliefs comes from Belgium.
In 2017, Belgium’s Wallooon region voted to ban kosher
and halal meat by outlawing the slaughter of unstunned
animals. As of today, seven European countries have
banned kosher and halal slaughter: Norway, Sweden,
Denmark, Slovenia, Austria, Iceland, and Belgium.1
The justification for the ban is that animals that are
not stunned suffer and that that is inhumane, therefore
slaughter without stunning is banned. But how do we know
any of that? No animal can testify to its internal state. No
animal can tell us, “Hey! This really hurts, please stop!” We
can only make assumptions about what an animal may
experience in the slaughter process. It is far from clear
how a bolt blast to the skull or electric shock is less painful
than a slit throat. If anything, the former seem much more
agonizing. But there is no way to tell.
Nonetheless, the legislators in these countries made a
decision based on what they believe to be morally correct
and then forced others to abide by those beliefs. This is not
!"# $%%&'())*+,-.,/"0+1)*++/)2!3456).778%$989:,+&9.;80+:;%,<9'8-$9,98
=+'$9,8.;/8$.7.7819.%8&,+/:0%<+;8.,98;+-)

SECULARISM & DEMOCRACY

25

something avoidable. This is the nature of law, whether in
a secular or a theocratic state.
But Islamic states are singled out for not upholding
“religious freedom” when they allow their moral positions
and beliefs, viz., Islam, to inform the law. “For legislation
to be based on Islam and the Sharia is barbaric theocracy!”
they shout. “But for our legislation to be based on our
liberal materialist beliefs, that’s fair and neutral.”
The hypocrisy is clear.
So, it is ineffective to argue against this halal ban by
saying it is “racist,” “bigoted,” “anti-Muslim,” “islamophobic,”
etc., though these biases probably did factor into the bans.
It is ineffective because the secular legislators will simply
defend themselves by claiming to be legislating on the basis
of reducing harm, pain, etc.
A more effective line of argument would be this:
On one level, we cannot fault Belgians for legislating
according to their deepest beliefs about right and wrong.
We can, however, criticize the beliefs themselves. We can
say, “You are wrong on this, and we are right.” We can say,
“Our beliefs on the matter come from the Creator of the cows,
sheep, chickens, and you and me, whereas your beliefs are
based on nothing but hot air.” That would be a meaningful
dialectic that could develop and be substantive.
Sadly, substantive dialect is not on people’s radars
nowadays. Nowadays, the only spark that starts the
engines of many people’s moral reasoning, the only moral
argument that they can wrap their heads around, is: “That’s
bigotry!” Meanwhile, the deception of secularism proceeds
undetected.

26

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

THE VOID OF THE SECULAR
Secularism is all about the means and actively distracts
people from the ends. Because the ends are the domain
of religion.
Secularism will tell you the importance of action but will
only give you vague assertions about the results. Because
results are the domain of religion.
Secularism will tell you that you have to vote but won’t
give you a substantive ethical vision on the basis of which
to vote. Because substantive ethical visions are the domain
of religion.
Secularism will tell you to respect everyone equally but
won’t tell you what it means to be respectable. Because the
core of respect and respectability is the domain of religion.
You might think that all this implies that as people
become more secular, they become more neutral, more
detached from anything of ethical substance, more
disconnected from anything of meaning.
But you would be wrong because the heart can never
be empty. The emptiness created by liberal secular
vacuousness is quickly filled up with base cultural artifacts
produced by corporate conglomerates and disseminated by
a profit-driven mass media at the ready to broadcast and
normalize fahisha (obscene iniquity) and denigration. This
becomes the religion of the masses, the contents of their
character. This is the end, the purpose that secularism is
meant to produce by design: To make you an obedient slave.
“Actions are by intentions” is the antidote for this poison.
Constantly connecting your acts and your existence to their
Source. Deeply reflecting on your purpose and your ends.

SECULARISM & DEMOCRACY

27

This is something that only your Creator, the One who made
you, can provide. So cleanse your heart of the accretions
of base liberal secular consumerist culture and connect
yourself to the only thing of true worth. This is the wasila
(connection or means) that is sought.
BANNING THE HIJAB IN GERMANY
This is a perfect example of the contradictions inherent to
secularism. In 2016, it was reported:
“Two influential German legal associations are calling for
headscarves to be banned for judges and lawyers to uphold
‘neutrality’ in court.
“Robert Seegmüller, chairman of the Association of
German Administrative Judges, said the required uniform
of black robes, white shirt and white bow tie, cravat or
neckerchief is important to show that the outcome of a
case ‘does not depend on the person, but solely on what
the law says.’”2
What do you think are the origins of the black robe?
According to reserchers at the NY Times: “Although the
judicial robe’s origin remains uncertain, some believe it has
its origins in the church, when the clergy and judiciary were
one and the same. Robes appeared in the British judiciary
in the 14th century.”3
Could it be that, centuries ago, the robe was borrowed
from the Muslim thawb, which itself was considered a
>"# $%%&'())---"<;/9&9;/9;%"0+":=);9-')-+,7/)9:,+&9)?9,1.;8@:/?8
9'80.778*+,8$9./'0.,*8$<@.A8A.;8<;80+:,%87.-B9,'8%+8'$+-8;9:%,.7<8
%B8.C!5DE4!"$%17
6"# $%%&'())---";B%<19'"0+1)>DD5)D4)D3);B,9?<+;)D3,+A9'"$%17

28

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

garment of status, erudition, and religious prestige in our
tradition?
Regardless, it is clear that the robe which these German
secularists are insisting on has religious origins. And
even to this day, the long robe has religious significance
for Muslims, as both Muslim men and women will wear
it. Women in particular wear black robes, i.e., the jilbab.
Jewish and Christian religious figures also utilize the black
robe. Whether past or present, the black robe is permeated
with religious significance.
There are those who are arguing for the ban of the hijab
as well as other religious symbols and claim that they are
upholding “neutrality.” The straightforward objection is, of
course, who decided what is “neutral” dress?
This is the central conceit of secularism, namely that
if you subtract everything that is “religious,” what you
are left with is truly neutral and that is where secularism
ought to begin. In reality, however, there is no neutral core
that is completely free of the same metaphysicality and
normativity that is supposedly so objectionable about
religion.
The only way to get to this neutral, secular core is to create
it. You simply assert that a particular custom, cultural norm,
style of dress, normative commitment, etc., is “secular” or
“neutral” and everything else is “religious.”
This labeling process gains legitimacy through shared
cultural assumptions. Muslim practices and dress happen
to be relatively foreign, so they are easily seen by all as
distinctly “religious.” But more familiar Western modes of
dress, many of which also technically have religious origins
and significance, can be deemed “cultural” and hence

SECULARISM & DEMOCRACY

29

“secular” and hence “neutral.” These are just language
games.
So, this kerfuffle about black robes and the headscarf is
a perfect example of secularism fabricating neutral ground
in order to artificially maintain a hollow semblance of
impartiality.
I also want to mention something about religious
freedom. As Muslims, we should not resort to freedom
of religion arguments to defend ourselves against the
secular assault. We should instead point out the internal
contradictions of secularism (like the above) and force the
secularists to admit that their problem with the Muslim
headscarf is nothing more than a cultural bias. If they
can admit that, fine. But we should not allow them to get
away with pretending that their opposition to the hijab is
due to some rational commitment to neutrality and evenhandedness because, as we have seen, that is clearly not
the case.
At the end of the day, if they want to insist that their
objections to the hijab are due to cultural bias, Muslims
can live with that. Because in Muslim societies, we should
feel comfortable instituting our own standards of dress,
standards which are not due to ever-changing cultural
whims but based on our religious values and standards of
decency and modesty set by Allah. This is where we want
the discussion to end up.

30

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

DOWN WITH THE SEPARATION OF CHURCH AND
STATE
Separation of church and state. Is this a coherent idea or
not?
What is supposed to distinguish civilized countries from
uncivilized ones is respect for the rule of law.
Yet Trump, left wing activists, and pretty much everyone
else in secular countries appeal to the rule of law when it
serves their political ends but argue that the law should be
changed when it does not serve those ends.
The assumption is that just because something is legal,
doesn’t make it morally right and just because it is illegal,
doesn’t make it morally wrong.
So ultimately, it is those underlying morals that are all
determinative, not the rule of law.
But what are those morals supposed to be based on?
If those underlying morals have such an important role,
shouldn’t there be more discussion on the moral level, on
the level of good and evil, human purpose and aspiration,
sanctity and depravity?
But we do not find discussions happening on this level
because moralizing is what religion is about and we all
know that secular countries are not supposed to allow
religion to influence law.
But that brings us back to the original dilemma. What
morals should underlie the law?
There must be some morality down there somewhere.
But no one talks about it. It only comes up in context of
people protesting “unjust laws,’ but that only raises the

SECULARISM & DEMOCRACY

31

question of what is justice itself. And that is not a question
that can be answered without appealing to some theory of
right and wrong, good and bad, etc.
Of course, there are such theories. They’re called
“religion.”
To be fair, there are theories that are godless, but they
are no less dogmatic than theories that proceed from a
Godly source. Even without appealing to God, these godless
theories still prescribe what people should or should not do,
how they should or should not live their lives, etc.
So is there any functional difference—insofar as it
pertains to lawmaking—whether the law presupposes a
godless morality or a Godly one?
Personally, I prefer the latter. And I recognize that not
everyone will agree.
But at least do me the courtesy of recognizing that, as
someone living in a secular state, I have to submit to laws
and state structures dictated by a godless morality which I
have significant problems with, that I do not believe in, but
is nonetheless imposed on me with no less force than what
is imposed on nonbelievers in a theocracy.
If that simple fact can be recognized and all this empty
rhetoric about “freedom of religion,” etc., can be dropped
and not be used as a hammer to beat over the heads of
Muslims and their devotion to Sharia, that is all that I ask.
Separation of church and state is a farce.

32

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

SHAKING HANDS IN SWITZERLAND
In 2016, Switzerland began fining Muslim male students if
they refused to shake the hands of their female teachers.4
And not a small fine, either. Students could be fined up to
$5000.
Is this not a kind of sexual assault — to force a person
into bodily contact against his will? What happened to all
the secular feminist bluster about bodily integrity and the
centrality of consent? Guess none of that matters if you are
a Muslim man. If a Muslim man refuses to give you a shake,
it means he is trying to oppress you like he does with all the
female members of his family, right?
As a man, this reminds me of the women who feel
disrespected if you lower your gaze and do not stare into
their eyes and smile and laugh. Why is that disrespect? Just
because it does not accord with exactly what you are used
to in terms of social custom does not mean it is disrespect.
Don’t Western nations claim to be culturally tolerant and
open to diversity, yet incessantly accuse Muslim society of
intolerance? Or by “tolerance” do they just mean eating
“ethnic” food every now and then and dressing up in cultural
costumes for Halloween?
And the argument that refusing to shake hands reinforces
gender roles and gender separation — yeah of course it
does! That’s the whole point! If you believe those things to
be bad, fine. Can’t help it if you’re ignorant.
And if you want to force Muslims to violate their principles
in this regard, fine to do that too. But don’t point to Muslim
2"# $%%&'())---"-.'$<;?%+;&+'%"0+1);9-')-+,7/F<9-')-&)>D!3)DE)>E)
<;8'-<%G9,7.;/81:'7<18'0$++70$<7/,9;8-$+8,9*:'98%+8'$.=98%$9<,8
%9.0$9,'8$.;/81.B8A98H;9/8EDDD)

SECULARISM & DEMOCRACY

33

countries that have mandatory dress codes and mandatory
gender separation and cry foul because that would be
inconsistent. The West wants to enforce its cultural values;
Muslims want to enforce their Islamic values. Except Muslim
nations do not claim, hypocritically, to offer a neutral
secular land of religious freedom and tolerance for all.
Honestly, if the West wants to force Muslims to violate
Islamic norms, it will just be the latest thing that proves
how the supposed neutrality of secularism is a mirage.
There is no neutrality. It is just Western cultural norms that
underlie and inform everything. That is why I never appeal
to “religious freedom” in my arguments. This is because
the term “religious freedom” comes from a Western
philosophical context with a very particular definition
of “religion” based on Western cultural conceptions. If
the culture shifts enough, you can shove anything down
people’s throats and tell them it is consistent with “religious
freedom.”
Look at “homosexuality.” At first, it was something
universally condemned. Then the culture shifted a little and
it became a matter of religious doctrine — some religions
look down on it, other modernist hippy religions do not.
And then, it fell within the domain of religious freedom and
“agree to disagree.” Then another cultural shift happened
and now it is universally celebrated and those who fail
to join the jubilation are not doing so out of acceptable
religious conviction. No, they are doing so out of bigotry,
hate, and prejudice and these are all things that cause harm
and that is something that can be regulated and now you
have to bake a cake for the gay wedding, whether you like
to or not. JUST SHUT UP AND BAKE THE CAKE.

34

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Muslims have been able to live in the West and practice
their religion to a satisfactory extent not because of some
hallowed, magical principles of religious tolerance and
freedom and secularism blah blah blah. Absolutely not.
Please, please stop believing this nonsense. It is just a
coincidence that Western culture, which has its roots in
Christianity, is compatible enough with Islam for Muslims to
be able to get by. That has been a fortunate happenstance
for us alhamdulillah.
But that could change at any time. As the West moves
away from the influence of its Christian roots and continues
to adopt paganistic and satanic ideologies, the day will
come that the law of the land will make it impossible to
practice the Islamic religious obligations. And those laws,
when they are imposed, will be seen as perfectly consistent
with religious freedom. In fact, it will be said that religious
freedom is what justifies those laws in the first place. And
then there will be some Muslims who continue to drink the
kool-aid and believe they can live freely as Muslims, except
at that point what they think is “Islam” will be nothing like
what we know is Islam. And other Muslims, those Muslims
who are not asleep, will have a lot of trials and tribulations
to contend with at that time. It might not happen in our
lifetime. Or maybe it will. But if things continue to proceed
as they have been for the past decade in America and
Europe, it is a matter of time. Allah knows best.
I do not mean to be overly pessimistic, but I think we
have to give a lot of credit to our non-Muslim neighbors
who do sincerely tolerate us (with a real and not superficial
tolerance) and what for them must be a lot of weirdness. My
belief is that, it is that deep cultural memory from the days
when these were traditional Christian societies. Tolerance in

SECULARISM & DEMOCRACY

35

the real sense itself is a religious value, not a secular liberal
one. Our duty as Muslims is to be good neighbors in kind
and be true to our faith so that they can see that there are
some people left on the face of the earth who worship God
as He has been worshiped from the time of revelation. They
deserve that and we fail them and ourselves by abandoning
himma and istiqama (zeal/fortitude and steadfastness).
ONLY TYRANTS WANT TO REPLACE SHARIA WITH
RELIGIOUS FREEDOM
The Sharia was and is the source of so much justice and
mercy. Only tyrants want to do away with it.
In his essay “Ideas Were Not Enough,” economist Mark
Koyama gives an honest admission: Religious freedom is
not a revolutionary idea that took the Western world by
storm simply on the basis of its compellingness or virtue.
Rather, tolerance for different religious groups was purely
a practical matter politically and economically.5
How did this happen?
Koyama argues that, for various reasons, European
states in the early stages of Western modernity grew less
dependent on the Church for political legitimization.
Previously, these states needed to ally with the Church in
order to gain legitimacy in the eyes of the Christian masses,
which in turn led to political stability (something very
valuable to ruling state authorities). States allying with the
Church was bad for tolerance, however, since the Church
required the state to punish heretics for them.
E"# $%%&'()).9+;"0+).1&)9''.B')%$981+/9,;8'%.%98;+%8</9.'8A,+:?$%8
.A+:%8,97<?<+:'8*,99/+1

36

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Additionally, the author claims, states relied on the
religious institutions to contribute to public order. Churches
(and awqaf in the Islamic world) were better positioned and
capable to help the poor, provide education, and conduct
other public services relative to weak state institutions.
Furthermore, laws and social rules of these times depended
on religious identity as opposed to a general nationalistic
identity (e.g., citizenship) that applied equally to all people.
All this led to less tolerance for religious diversity. In this
world, “religious freedom was inconceivable.”
What changed?
State institutions started taxing more and became more
powerful, claims Koyama. This allowed them to forego a
quid pro quo arrangement with the Church. With increased
power, laws and social rules could be enforced more broadly
without depending on religious identities to function. As
far as the state was concerned, the Jew, Protestant, and
Catholic were all equal sources for taxes, so it became
unnecessary and a waste of bureaucratic resources to
discriminate based on religious identity. Ultimately, “As
they relied less on religious authority, states grew less
inclined to value enforcing religious conformity.”
The result?
Religious freedom born of convenience rather than
principle. Still a good thing, though, right?
Well, not if you look at it honestly. From beginning to
end, the aim of the state was to bend the people according
to its will in order to draw wealth from them. At first, the
Church was a convenient medium for this, but then, more
effective means were found that made the Church obsolete.
As Koyama notes, the most formidable state institution was

SECULARISM & DEMOCRACY

37

the military, which grew in power, size, and technological
ability throughout this historical era. What better tool for
controlling one’s own population than sheer military force?
No need to co-opt the idea of God’s wrath to exercise state
might. Just use the state military infrastructure.
Is this really an improvement? Did the waning of religious
institutions really lead to more “autonomy” and “freedom”
for the average person? Or was this simply the replacement
of one source of authority with another?
Well, as far as Jews and Christians are concerned, maybe
the brutal military-state was/is more benevolent than the
brutal Church. So the trade was/is still a net positive for
them, which is why “religious freedom” is appealing at all.
But this is not the case with Islamic Law. Historically,
we do not find the kind of brutality and oppression from
religious institutions in the Muslim world that were seen
from European Churches. Brutality, oppression, and mass
violence in the Muslim world were usually undertaken
in direct contradiction to Islamic Law and the opinion
of religious scholars. Simply consider the long history of
persecution of orthodox Islamic religious authorities over
the centuries. The tradition of ulama resisting co-option
by the ruling elite is well established. The ulama were very
careful to avoid mixing with power based on the statement
attributed to the Prophet ձ: “Whoever goes to the gates of
the ruler will be tried with fitna. A servant does not move
closer to the ruler except that he moves further away
from Allah.”6 Because of this principle, Muslim religious
orthodoxy was historically in an uneasy, if not outright
antagonistic, relationship with ruling authority, and it was
3"# I:';./#JK1./#53!4

38

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

often precisely because of the little regard many of these
rulers had for the Sharia. The Sharia was and is the source
of so much justice and mercy. Only tyrants want to do away
with it.
Up until the present day.
WRAPPING OUR LANGUAGE IN A LIBERAL VENEER
GETS US NOWHERE
We judge rulers and governmental institutions by their
actions and whether those actions conform with justice
as delineated by Allah. We do not hide our beliefs behind
superfluous and ultimately meaningless designations of
“democratic” or “undemocratic.”
If there were any doubt left about whether these terms
have any meaning, the Western reaction to the 2016 coup in
Turkey versus the reaction to the 2013 coup in Egypt should
have settled the issue conclusively.
Two coups, in two countries: Egypt and Turkey.
Depending on one’s personal commitments and religious
orientation, one coup was “certainly” democratic and
the other was “clearly” undemocratic. Why? Because one
coup “obviously” represented the will of the people and
the other “undoubtedly” did not. The people killed in each
coup were “martyrs” or “traitors” depending on who you
ask, depending on which coup you are talking about.
So we can debate democratic-ness till we are blue in
the face, but we will never get anywhere because this is an
empty, hopelessly subjective concept that can be projected
onto any political act or governmental structure.

SECULARISM & DEMOCRACY

39

By wrapping our language in this liberal veneer and
employing empty concepts like “democracy” to convey
our opinions, what we are really doing is postponing a real
discussion. The real discussion is: At the end of the day,
what does a governing authority owe its people and what
do the people owe it and, more importantly, how do we
know what is the right answer? Are we nihilists who do not
believe there is a right answer? Or do we believe that there
is a right answer, in which case, how do we determine it?
These are the kinds of questions that make us think
about human purpose and the nature of our existence and
our relationship to our Maker. But liberal secularism does
not want us to have a conversation on that level. Liberal
secularism does not want people to think on that level,
to bring God to mind. So it tells us that God is irrelevant.
Deeper metaphysical questions are irrelevant. The meaning
of your existence is irrelevant. Just busy yourself with these
artificial terms. Just bicker about what empty labels are
applicable to this or that regime. Submerge yourself in a
debate that, by design, has no fruitful end. Talking about
God is too uncomfortable, too childish. You might as well
argue about Santa Claus or the Easter Bunny. Instead, join
the ranks of the secular intelligentsia and have a “serious,”
“intellectual” conversation about democratic representation,
secularization, etc.

I think I’ll pass.

40

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

IS DEMOCRACY BETTER THAN ISLAMIC
GOVERNANCE?
Is democracy the ideal form of government? This is
something that Muslims have to think about very carefully.
We hear from our context in the modern day about how
democracy is supposed to be the best form of government,
the most just form of government, but this claim can
create doubt for Muslims. Why? Because democracy is not
something that is advocated explicitly within the Quran and
the Sunnah of the Prophet ձ.
The Prophet ձ did not establish a representational
democracy in Medina. The rightly guided caliphs did not
establish a kind of democratic system with branches of
government and so forth. So if this is the best form of
government, then why was it not revealed by Allah? Why
isn’t it a part of Divine Guidance? How could it be that
human beings could theorize and conceive a form of
government that is better than what came to the Prophet
ձ in the final revelation? How do we address this kind of
doubt?

Well, we have to, in my opinion, go and ask a very
fundamental question: Why do some today consider
democracy the best form of government?
If you take any kind of government class within grade
school or college, what you will hear is that one of the main
features of democracies that make them superior and more
just is the notion of checks and balances. What are checks
and balances?
The idea is that power is distributed across different
branches within the government and these three branches

SECULARISM & DEMOCRACY

41

check each other’s power so that no one group or one
individual can monopolize power and exercise unfettered,
unhindered authority over the rest of the nation. In the
United States, for example, you have the Executive branch,
the Judicial branch, and the Legislative branch, basically
the President, the Congress, and the Supreme Court. These
three branches check each other’s power and one single
branch alone cannot make decisions about what laws the
country should follow or what wars should be fought. All
of these major national decisions have to be made in light
of all three branches, not just one branch making decisions
for everyone.
This is checks and balances, and theoretically it seems
to make a lot of sense. In Islam, however, we also have this
notion of checks and balances, but the checks and balances
that we find in Islam are much more real and tangible than
what I consider to be fake or superficial checks and balances
found within Western democracies in the modern day. Let
me explain what I mean by this.
If we look at the US government or the government of any
democratic Western nation, we find great corruption, where
lobbyists and different political action groups manipulate
the branches of government in their favor. For example,
in the US context, health insurance companies lobby the
Congress and the President as they are trying to influence
these branches of government with money to make laws
that will benefit the insurance companies financially. This
is a type of corruption because these congressmen, the
president, senators, et al., are supposed to represent the
interests of the people, but because of money, they end
up representing the interests of the corporations that are
lobbying them and paying them.

42

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

It is very easy, as we see throughout US history, for interest
groups to lobby and influence the different branches of
government in this way, and this has a major negative effect.
And this is why we see so much injustice in the history of the
United States, e.g., the genocide of the Native Americans,
the oppression of African Americans, atrocities like the
bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, etc. More recently,
consider the invasions of Iraq, Afghanistan, and Libya. All of
these crimes happened with the branches of government
all in agreement. Thus, this idea that having three branches
prevents injustice or, at least, mitigates it, is completely
undermined by history itself. After all, not many injustices
are greater than genocide, yet secular democracies like the
US have overseen such crimes and even legislated them in
their halls of power, by agreement of mutually checking
branches of government.
Now democracy enthusiasts could say that these
historical examples should not be blamed on democracy
itself but rather “democracy gone wrong.” They argue that
democracy in the ideal case works, and, yeah, there are all
kinds of problems that can crop up, but those are not really
essential to what democracy is. They argue that, if we could
have an ideal situation and if we just implement a few more
anti-corruption laws or maybe anti-lobbying laws, then we
wouldn’t have these kinds of problems.
This is a counter argument, so as critical thinkers, we have
to anticipate this counter argument and give a response. My
response (and maybe you can have a different response if
you think about it) is: No, there is a fundamental problem
here with democracy because we have to ask: What are the
laws of a democracy going to be based on?

SECULARISM & DEMOCRACY

43

If they’re going to be based on popular opinion and
people who are voting for representatives in Congress or
the President, i.e., people who are going to implement
laws based on popular opinion, then who says that popular
opinion is going to be moral? Who says that popular opinion
is going to arrive at what is truly just? Why would we assume
that a mass of people voting would vote for what is actually
morally correct? Seems more likely that people would vote
based on individual self-interest, perhaps. And why would
this lead to morality or justice? We would expect the exact
opposite.
Beyond this question, we have to also recognize the fact
that it is very easy to manipulate a population and we see
this throughout American history and even to this day. If
you look at the way that mass media, social media, and
educational institutions are able to manipulate society
at large, you can see that public opinion is no check on
people’s baser instincts. In fact, popular opinion can lead
a nation quite astray in terms of justice and morality.
The glaring truth here is that democracy cannot be
a substitute for morality, and this is where religion is so
important, and this is where Islam—as the religion of truth
with true morality and God our Creator, Allah, sending
guidance, sending rules on right and wrong and what is
truly just—is so important. And that morality is what can
really be a check on a government. If one has a standard, an
objective standard of morality, then that can be used as a
check to basically identify whether a government or a leader
is making decisions that are good or bad, just or unjust.
Such a standard is necessary. If you do not have that
standard, as is the case with modern secular democracies,

44

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

then there can be no check or balance. What we see
today in the US, for example, is that all three branches of
government will more or less have the same opinions on
what they perceive as moral and just. It seems to always
boil down to the popular view of right and wrong in wider
society at the time. There is no independent standard to
judge whether those views of morality are just or unjust,
right or wrong, and so there is not really a check. Even
though you have different branches of government, they
can all collude. They can be all aligned and there is not a
true standard to hold against and to judge them by, and
that is why it is so easy for secular liberal democracies to
commit atrocities and to commit all kinds of crimes that we
see throughout their histories.
When we look at Islamic history, we see that this is not
the case because the objective standard of morality is
Islamic law. And who are the guardians of Islamic law and
that objective standard of morality? It is the ulama (Islamic
religious scholars), and the ulama were very careful not to
involve themselves with the sultan, the amir, or the khalifa.
This is because there is the recognition that power can
corrupt and that if a scholar is too close to the sultan, then
the sultan can negatively impact the scholar and corrupt
the scholar to make religious rulings that benefit the sultan.
So, this is a very strong check. It is a real check unlike the
superficial facade of a check that we find within democratic
systems.
And this distance between the ulama and the sultan is
something that the Prophet ձ explicitly mentions in the
aforementioned hadith: “Whoever goes to the gates of the
ruler will be tried with fitna. A servant does not move closer

SECULARISM & DEMOCRACY

45

to the ruler except that he moves further away from Allah.”7
Based on this hadith and many other examples from the life
of the Prophet ձ and his statements as well as the practice
of the Rightly Guided Caliphs and the majority of scholars of
history, the ulama came to the conclusion that there needs
to be a very big distance between the sultan and the ulama.
This is a real check and balance based on real morality.
While it is the case that the sultan or the khalifa can be
corrupt and he can manipulate a population or manipulate
an economy for his material gain, there is always the `alim
(scholar) who is going to call that out and object to that kind
of corruption and abuse of power.
And we see many examples of this within Islamic history
where scholars were tortured, imprisoned, and sometimes
even killed because they opposed the sultan. This is
something that is very unique about Islamic history and
Islamic governance, and it means that there is not this
notion of “separation of church and state” within Islamic
thought. The expectation was that the khalifa or the sultan
is going to implement Islamic law, and he is going to rule
according to Islamic ethics and jurisprudence. The entire
system of governance is based on that, but the bearers of
the objective standard of morality are people who remain
separate and independent ,i.e., the ulama who are not
involved directly with the sultan and, therefore, are shielded
from the corrupting influence of power and money.
That is a real check on power. That is a real check on
corruption. And that is something that we do not see within
secular democracies.

C"# I:';./#JK1./#53!4

46

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

There is a fundamental flaw in secular democracies
because who says that popular opinion is going to be right?
In most cases, mob rule is very wrong. Mob rule is very
unjust and even if you put limits on what the mob can do
with, for example, a Bill of Rights within your constitution,
that is still a very tenuous and unreliable system of morality
to base governance on. And that is why we see so many
changes in what is considered right and wrong within
Western history. Opinion about morality is constantly
shifting because popular views are constantly shifting. What
might appear to be just and reasonable today might turn
out to be considered an atrocity tomorrow, and vice versa.
As Muslims, we need to recognize this for what it is. We
need to recognize that we have a better system within our
tradition. Yes, we have wars in our history, we have corrupt
leaders, and even atrocities. But we also have consistent
morality, i.e., the Sharia, that provides that anchor
that keeps us as an Ummah on the Straight Path while
understanding what is justice. And that is true guidance
from Allah—a big blessing that we have to recognize
while not having an inferiority complex in thinking that
other people, other nations and their philosophers from
a particular part of the world have understood justice and
morality and government better than Allah, the Quran, and
the Prophet ձ.
SECULARISM CANNOT SQUARE THE CIRCLE
Contrary to what secularism claims, competing moral
visions cannot be reconciled within one legal system.
Example: Abortion.

SECULARISM & DEMOCRACY

47

I have talked to many Muslims who consider themselves
orthodox and “traditional” believers who accept the
consensus fiqh position that 120 days after conception,
barring threat to the mother’s life, termination of pregnancy
is tantamount to murder. But those same Muslims will
support a woman’s absolute “right to choose.” How is that
reconcilable?
The fiqh is based on an ontological fact, namely the point
at which the soul is breathed into a fetus, i.e., 120 days after
conception (or 40 days according to other opinions). That
fact does not vary based on whether the mother is Muslim
or kafir. Whether Muslim or not, 120 days after conception,
there will be a soul breathed into the fetus’ body. This means
that even if the mother is non-Muslim, abortion after 120
days is still the unjust taking of a soul, i.e., murder. So how
could Muslims who accept the ontological fact nonetheless
support a woman’s unconditional “right to choose”?
These Muslims are supporting murder and there are no
two ways about it. Murder is also not a “personal choice”
that can validly occur “behind closed doors.” Furthermore
no Islamic scholar ever held that, in a multi-faith polity under
Muslim rule, the Shar`i prohibition of murder only applied
to Muslims and could not be enforced upon a non-Muslim
“minority.” In other words, all the usual strategies modernist
Muslims today use to justify supporting liberal, un-Islamic
political positions spectacularly fail in the case of abortion.
The only way a woman’s unconditional right to terminate
pregnancy can be supported by Muslims is if they reject
scholarly consensus and the clear indicants in revelation
that support that consensus. Obviously some deviants
have no problem with that. As far as the politics go, Muslim

48

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

leaders have also opted to take a “neutral” stance despite
the fact that the Islamic morality of the situation is clear.
Every year, nearly 1 million abortions are documented
in the US alone. In order to avoid the label of “religious
fundamentalism” and being lumped in with the religious
right, these Muslim prefer to stay silent in the face of
rampant murder.
Often, these are the same people who will wax poetic
from the minbar about how Islam abolished the pre Islamic
practice of burying daughters. But because of myopic,
ill-informed political calculations, they stay silent about
the burying of daughters AND sons happening today all
around us. MashaAllah, how “prophetic.” How dedicated
to “social justice.”

CHAPTER

4

FREEDOM, EQUALITY
AND LIBERTY
RELIGIOUS INDOCTRINATION AND RELIGIOUS
FREEDOM
“Freedom is more important than la ilaha illaAllah because
without freedom we are not free to believe whatever we
choose.”
This is what one Syrian activist told me several years ago
regarding the Arab Spring. It seemed like he was setting up
a false dichotomy, but he was just trying to emphasize the
place of freedom as a value, as compared to everything else.
But freedom is a misunderstood concept. The truly free
person, according to liberal philosophy beginning with the
European empiricists of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, is the person who starts off with a blank slate,
i.e., the tabula rasa. This person has no prior beliefs or
commitments. His mind is not contaminated with falsely
imposed ideas about the world, about God, about the state
of nature. This person, with his free mind, is then able to
form his own authentic beliefs from scratch. Ideally, those
beliefs will be formed on the basis of sound scientific
investigation — that’s what the empiricists hoped for at least
in their philosophy of mind and epistemology. But, even if

50

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

a person does not develop beliefs scientifically, at least he
does so authentically and, hence, freely. In this way, it is OK
for a person to be religious so long as that person started
from a blank slate, which for all intents and purposes is a
starting point of non-religion.
It is interesting when you put it like that. If I was born
into a family with a certain religion and that family taught
me that religion from Day 1, and I grow up professing that
faith, does that mean I did not freely choose that faith
for myself? I might argue that, as an adult, I am making
a conscious choice and exercising my free will to commit
to my particular faith. But, then, how can I know that it is
really “me” making that choice and not the “me” that grew
up in a certain household and is a product of a certain kind
of “religious indoctrination”? Maybe I’ve been brainwashed,
in which case my “choice” is not really a choice at all.
But if that’s the case for children growing up in religious
households, then the same kind of indoctrination happens
in non-religious households too. It is just brainwashing of
the non-religious variety. If a child is raised to not believe in
a Higher Power and to not think much of faithful devotion,
then if he grows up and decides to be an atheist and mock
religion, etc., then was that truly a free choice? Or is he also
the product of his environment?
Point being that the tabula rasa does not exist and neither
does the neutral blank slate liberal thinkers imagined we
could freely develop our beliefs from. There is no blank slate.
We all are born into a certain condition and raised to believe
certain ideas and values that are imposed on us as children
and then throughout our adult lives. The only question is,
are those ideas and values true and just? If yes, who cares if

FREEDOM, EQUALITY AND LIBERTY

51

one arrives at them from a position of freedom, i.e., a blank
slate that, in reality, does not exist? And if those ideas and
values are false and unjust, then the only way to counter
that is with truth and justice, not with an abstract notion of
freedom, which again, is a figment of the Enlightenment’s
imagination. Either way, la ilaha illaAllah, as the ultimate
expression of truth and justice, comes out on top.
Put another way, freedom of religion in secular nations
assumes a starting point of non-religion. But why is
non-religion the starting point, the neutral ground? Why
are non-religious values the default? One might say, well,
there are a variety of religious beliefs so rather than prefer
or endorse one, the secular state chooses none. But this is
a gross mischaracterization of the reality. Non-religion is
also a particular set of beliefs. If the secular state chooses
non-religion, it has still preferred and endorsed a particular
belief system over others. This is essentially no different
from a theocratic state that also chooses one particular set
of beliefs over all others. The difference is, the theocratic
state does not delude itself into thinking it is neutral. And
of course, the primary difference is that the theocratic state
based on Islam is upholding truth and justice, which can
only be found in Islam.
ISLAM DOES NOT RESPECT FREEDOM OF RELIGION
Many (but not all) of those who have a problem with the
claim, “Islam does not respect freedom of religion,” actually
have a problem with the idea that God does not respect
freedom of religion. That is really the core of their problem.
The idea that there is only one religion acceptable to God is
inherently repulsive to them.

52

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

How could God not respect people’s freedom of
conscience? How could a merciful God not respect people’s
freedom of choice?
This is also why we see some Muslims who adopt a value
like religious freedom ultimately leave Islam because of that
value. Why? Well, why should tolerance for religious belief
end at death? If we demand, as a matter of principle, ethics,
and justice, that worldly rulers tolerate every and all beliefs
equally, then why wouldn’t we demand that of God as well?
But then we learn that, no, the reality is that it does
matter what a person believes. It matters to God as He has
informed us, not only in the last revelation, but also in all
previous revelations as well!
To maintain a principle like religious freedom for dunya
but salvific exclusivity for the akhira is, to say the least,
a major tension, if not an outright contradiction. Many
Muslims today, as they are living under the hegemonic
influence of liberal secularism, increasingly have opted to
abandon salvific exclusivity and to maintain that beliefs
neither matter in dunya nor in akhira. Such people preach:
“All religions are essentially the same,” “All religions are
paths to God,” “All religions lead to good,” etc. It might
appear that respecting the value of religious freedom is
merely a political and pragmatic issue that Muslims can
disagree about. In reality, political ideals have severe
consequences for the iman of the average Muslim. This
is how philosophical liberalism—from which the value
of religious freedom originates—is able to subtly but
significantly distort Muslim belief and misguide otherwise
faithful believers. May Allah protect us all.

FREEDOM, EQUALITY AND LIBERTY

53

THE GOLDEN RULE, SELF-WORSHIP, AND SATANISM
“Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the law.” This is the
central value of Satanism, as expressed by Aleister Crowley,
in his foundational book on Satanic belief, The Book of the
Law.
Question: How do you effectively control a person?
Methods can vary, but history has shown that one of the
most effective tools for this purpose is to tell people that
they are in charge, that they are the masters of their own
destiny. That they are their own gods.
Humans are predictable creatures. We make predictable
choices: We often submit to our desires, we do whatever we
can to preserve and bolster our egos, we wallow in shortterm pleasures, and we hoard shiny things. This is the base
core of the average human person.
If you tell people to be free, to do what they want, to
“follow their heart,” and all the other self-help, positive
psychology, liberal philosophy cliches and doctrines we
constantly are being fed — everything from the jingoistic
promise of “liberty, freedom, and empowerment for all” to
a commercial slogan like “Just do it” — then people are all
going to converge on that same basic core, all the while
believing that they are truly the masters of their own destiny
and firmly in control of who they are.
It is not unlike being a drug addict. Addicts feel like
they are in control and feel like they are making their own
decisions. And actually they are! But the problem is, those
decisions are predictably bad and lead to nowhere except
utter destruction. This is also how imperial powers used

54

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

the introduction of drugs and alcohol to destroy and gain
control of once powerful native peoples around the world.
Point being, reduce people to their base selves and they
can be effectively controlled for whatever purpose.
And here’s the kicker. The “Golden Rule” is nothing other
than, “Do what thou wilt shall be the whole of the law.”
“Do unto others what you would have them do unto you.”
This, by itself, is an empty principle. It has no content. It
cannot direct you to any action. It cannot help you make
a moral choice. Why? Because it leaves open the question:
what exactly would you have others do unto you? Treat
others how you want to be treated? Well, how exactly do
you want others to treat you? This is just another way of
putting yourself at the center of the equation. What matters
to you is all that matters. Your moral compass shall be your
own graven image projected onto the world. That is not
righteousness. That is idolatry.
Is it any wonder then that the Golden Rule is the central
pillar of liberalism?
And, yes, you will see those hackneyed posters about
how all religions have a form of the Golden Rule. But that
is deceptive because those versions of the Golden Rule
are not meant to stand alone. They come in conjunction
with religious law. So when the Prophet ձ is reported to
have said, “None of you truly believes until he wishes for
his brother what he wishes for himself,” he doesn’t mean
that if a person wishes for himself to be married to his gay
partner, for example, that he should wish that for others as
well. No. What is meant is that a person wishes goodness
for himself, and goodness is decided by Allah and not open
to anyone’s personal whims and interpretation.

FREEDOM, EQUALITY AND LIBERTY

55

So, by cutting off the Golden Rule from its religious
context and cleaving it from its place firmly embedded
in the edifice of Allah’s commands — i.e., the Sharia —
liberalism further propagates self-worship. And who was
the first being to worship himself?
ܹȃŻƿŉþƪƷěƢĩþƷĩĢůĩŁƢŻůȀƢĩ‫܌‬ǜŉŎŦĩȃŻƿŉþƪƷ
created him from clay.”
Al-A’raf (Q7:157)

FREEDOM OF THOUGHT
Freedom of thought is something all people assume they
have by default. No one thinks his thoughts are not his own.
In reality, the vast majority of people’s thoughts are heavily
dictated and outright controlled by larger societal forces.
Today’s loud and proud (and obnoxious) “free thinkers” are
no exception.
But here is a broader example. What if I were to tell you
that there are clear conflicts between Islam and American
(and Western) values?
I am not going to elaborate on this claim because that’s
not the point. The point is that even the thought that there
is a conflict between being Muslim and being American is
considered all but blasphemy to many American Muslims.
Now pause for a second. If you are reading the above and
feel annoyance, anger, incredulity, or you’re just thinking
about all the ways that that statement is wrong, stop and
ask yourself: Why?
Why should this simple claim cause you so much
discomfort? It’s not like the claim is actually blasphemous

56

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

or has anything to do with theology. Also, when you think
about the claim in the abstract, it is hardly peculiar or
worthy of outrage, even if it turns out to be wrong. To
understand this, ask yourself: Does Islam conflict with
Vietnamese values? Does Islam conflict with the cultural
values of Chile? You probably don’t know, but it is possible,
right? Why couldn’t it be? So why the sensitivity with
America or the West in particular?
I noticed this in myself. I noticed that I hesitated in even
articlating to myself the claim that Islam and American
values could potentially ever be in conflict. I felt a tinge of
discomfort and trepidation and that bothered me about
myself. It was a clear indication of how my thoughts are
deeply influenced by my context in ways that I am not even
aware of.
Now my point is not some relativistic, perspectival,
postmodern nonsense about how “We are all biased,” etc.
It is possible to transcend these cognitive biases. We do this
by bringing our thoughts and inner states in conformity with
the Higher Truth. And we do that by following the Sunnah.
The Messenger of Allah ձ is reported to have said,
“None of you truly believes until his desires are
subservient to that which I have brought.”8

ALCOHOL AND FREEDOM
One of the common lines you hear is that Islam does not
respect freedom of choice. This is highlighted by Islam’s
prohibition of alcohol, its consumption and sale. In the
5"# !"#!$%&'()#+*#L1.1#.78M.-.-<

FREEDOM, EQUALITY AND LIBERTY

57

freedom-loving West, alcohol flows freely. If you wish to
partake, you have that freedom of choice. If not, you can
choose to abstain. Ultimately, alcohol just affects your own
body and doesn’t cause anyone else any harm. So as an
adult, you can make that decision for yourself and it would
be oppressive for a person or a religion to prevent you from
exercising that choice.
Let’s investigate this.
All legal systems constrain choice in one shape or another
and there are justifications that are given for the laws of
that system. For example, US law requires a person to
have a driver’s license in order to operate an automobile.
That law severely constrains people’s freedom of mobility,
but it is seen as necessary for practical reasons. If people
are allowed to drive without a license, the number of car
accidents will skyrocket. Car accident fatalities will balloon.
Damage to people’s property will increase exponentially. So,
these are all practical reasons why we would want to have
such a law in place. It prevents harm.
Now, one theoretical point that can always be pursued
is: What is considered “harm” and what is considered
“practical” depend on the assumptions you make about the
world and your broader beliefs and commitments. But let’s
bracket that for now.
Let’s just assume common Western standards of
practicality and harm and take a closer look at alcohol
consumption. According to the most recent research, Fetal
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) affects at least 5% of
the population in the US and in some communities affects
40%. FASD causes all kinds of psychological and learning
disabilities and can result in severe anti-social behavior. A

58

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

lot of the kids affected by this have to go through special
education, many end up in prison, many are unemployable
and end up falling into drugs and crime. All of this is the
result of a disorder caused by pregnant women who
drink. Even a small amount of alcohol consumption can
be enough to cause an infant to be on this spectrum. The
thing is, sometimes women don’t realize they are pregnant
and continue their drinking habits not knowing that they
are potentially giving their unborn child FASD.
In any case, the harm that is caused to a child is
astronomical. There are fewer harms greater than causing
a person to have mental retardation. And beyond the harm
caused to the child, there is also the harm caused to society
overall. These children become wards of the state. It is state
institutions that have to take care of these kids or clean up
after them, police them, etc. This is a gigantic public cost
that is paid for with our tax dollars coming from our income.
All of these things restrict and attenuate the freedom that
Western culture so ardently claims to covet.
Given all these facts and from this perspective, US
law is not clearly more “freedom-loving” and “choicepreserving” than Islamic law as far as alcohol is concerned.
It is reasoning like this that shows us how vacuous and
ultimately meaningless these appeals to freedom and
choice really are. Yet, it is precisely these appeals that are
supposed to get us to realize how restrictive, backwards,
and contrary to human progress Islamic law is and how
empowering, forward-thinking, and conducive to human
progress secular law is. Don’t be a sucker.
And the human cost of alcohol is best illustrated with
human stories. One news article shared the following:

FREEDOM, EQUALITY AND LIBERTY

59

Susan Earl is still coming to terms with the partying
she did in her mid-20s, before she became a mother.
Back then, she used to spend most weekends at clubs
with friends. She usually had a few drinks. Her boyfriend
at the time encouraged her because it loosened her up.
She was about six weeks into a pregnancy when she
learned she was expecting.
“I stopped drinking as soon as I found out,” Earl said.
It wasn’t soon enough.
Quinton Mills, her son, born four weeks early, had the
characteristic facial features of fetal alcohol syndrome.
His speech was delayed, and in kindergarten he started
biting, kicking, and screaming. He was bullied by
classmates. He wet his bed until he was 12.9
I challenge you not to be heartbroken after reading about
this innocent child. Anyone with the slightest amount of
sense and compassion would know that something needs
to be done to further restrict people’s access to alcohol and
condition people not to drink. Islam and Islamic culture
have successfully maintained virtually alcohol-free societies
for centuries. Why can’t the rest of the world learn from
Islamic success?
In any case, it wasn’t until relatively recently after
colonization that this poison has been not only reintroduced
into Muslim societies but has been glamorized by Western
media and entertainment, such that Muslims from Tehran
to Karachi to Rabat see drinking as a form of liberation and
a mark of sophistication.
4"# NO$<'#P$<0.?+#/+0%+,#'%:1A79/#+;#.#$<//9;#9&</91<0#+*#*9%.7#A,.<;#
/.1.?9"Q# $%%&'())---"&A'"+,?);9-'$+:,)$9.7%$)%$<'80$<0.?+8/+0%+,8
'%:1A79/8+;8.8$<//9;89&</91<08+*8*9%.78A,.<;8/.1.?9

60

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

How liberating and sophisticated is a society actively
inducing mental retardation in its precious children? Is that
what you want? If you are not human enough to submit to
your Maker, at least be human enough to spare innocent
children.
HADITH ON HUDUD, CORRUPTION, AND EQUALITY
Equality is a crucial component of Islamic ethics. But not
all notions of “equality” are the same. The modern liberal
notion of equality, for example, significantly diverges from
the notion of equality propounded by classical liberal
thinkers. For example, according to America’s founding
fathers, barring women and blacks from voting or owning
property was perfectly consistent with their understanding
of equality.
Be that as it may, one very explicit expression of equality
as it relates to justice from the sayings of the Prophet ձ is
found in Sahih Bukhari as follows:
Usama approached the Prophet ձ on behalf
of a woman who had committed theft. The
Prophet ձ said, “The people before you were
destroyed because they used to inflict the legal
punishments on the poor and forgive the rich. By
Him in Whose Hand my soul is! If Fatima (the
daughter of the Prophet ձ) did that (i.e. stole), I
would cut off her hand.”
Another narration on the matter that provides further
details:
“The Quraish became very worried about the
Makhzumiya lady who had committed theft.

FREEDOM, EQUALITY AND LIBERTY

61

They said, “Nobody can speak (in favor of the
lady) to Allah’s Messenger ձ and nobody dares
do that except Usama who is the favorite of
Allah’s Messenger ձ.” When Usama spoke to
Allah’s Messenger ձ about that matter, Allah’s
Messenger ձ said, “Do you intercede (with me)
to violate one of the legal punishments of Allah?”
Then he got up and addressed the people, saying,
“O people! The nations before you went astray
because if a noble person committed theft, they
used to leave him, but if a weak person among
them committed theft, they used to inflict the
legal punishment on him. By Allah, if Fatima,
the daughter of Muhammad committed theft,
Muhammad would cut off her hand!”
Some non-Muslims may bristle at the idea of corporal
punishment, but I certainly don’t see why reasonable
non-Muslims should automatically disqualify the possibility
of such punishment as a deterrent for egregious theft.
Look at today’s world, where investment banks and
major corporations have no qualms committing fraud on
a global scale, literally stealing billions of dollars from the
public and causing all manner of financial crises that have
rocked the world over the past decades. Even when some of
these bankers were convicted of committing these crimes,
did they serve a day in jail? Absolutely not! At most they
were fined. Imagine that: you steal a billion dollars and only
have to pay a fine of a few million dollars. Sounds like a
great profit margin to me.
But look at how harshly the “justice” system in many
countries treats petty crime by the poor. Steal a cheap TV

62

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

and you could face years in prison. How is that proportional?
Where is the equality there? Corporate malfeasance and
illegality on the part of investment banks have resulted in
immeasurable suffering the world over as millions of people
lost their jobs, lost their homes, and lost their lives. These
are crimes that truly deserve hand-cutting.
In any case, the Prophet ձ forewarned the results of
such injustice and as citizens and residents of these nations,
that is bad news for all of us.
JE SUIS HYPOCRITE
This was my response to “je suis charlie” a year ago after
the Charlie Hebdo shooting in France. Charlie Hebdo is the
French satirical magazine that often publishes cartoons
insulting and mocking the Prophet Muhammad ձ as well
as other prophets.
I find these calls for “freedom of expression” and
“freedom to offend” so hollow and hypocritical. All these
people pining for blasphemous cartoons to be published
have nothing to lose because they are either not religious
or are a religious minority and feel the pressure to conform
to the dictates of the secular establishment. If these
people were real “freedom of expression” purists, instead
of going for the easy target, they would advocate for the
dissemination of something that really offends them, things
that go against mainstream liberal secular values.
You want to know what is really blasphemous in this
post-religious age? Let’s see cartoons that denigrate women
or their intelligence, cartoons lampooning the disabled,
anti-gay cartoons, cartoons that depict the President and

FREEDOM, EQUALITY AND LIBERTY

63

other elected officials as pedophiles and sexual deviants,
cartoons that mock military personnel as cowards, cartoons
that insult the memory of disaster victims, the Holocaust,
etc.
How willing are people to see these kinds of cartoons
in their mainstream publications, distributed across the
globe? Of course, I am not really advocating for such things
because I am consistent and reject the hollow liberal
ideology and empty slogans like “freedom to offend,” etc.
But, my point is, until you are willing to see something
that you find truly vulgar and utterly despicable plastered
everywhere for you, your children, and your family to see,
don’t tell me “je suis charlie” or whatever.
IS ISLAM ABOUT LIBERTY?
Both left and right wing critics of Islam appeal to
philosophical liberalism in their critiques of Islam,
employing concepts like freedom of religion, freedom of
speech, freedom of dress, gender equality, separation of
church and state, etc.
Please keep in mind that a losing strategy is to argue back
against these critics that these liberal concepts are indeed
Islamic and that Islam endorses these notions. (Yes, there
are Islamic positions that can be conceivably understood as
partially supporting some of these notions, but it’s a highly
conditioned endorsement at best.)
Even if Muslims accept every contemporary Western
practice related to freedom of religion, freedom of speech,
freedom of dress, gender equality, marriage equality, etc.,
it will never be enough. Even if Muslims start performing

64

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

gay weddings in Mecca today, tomorrow the West will ask
why there are no transvestite, cross dressing imams leading
prayers in the haram! And if tomorrow, they bring tranny
imams to the haram, the day after, there will be a new
criticism of Islam being “too restrictive” compared to the
ever-evolving, ever-progressing West.
This is the nature of progressivism, which is the pillar of
Western thought and culture. According to this philosophy,
constant change is necessary and good. To remain stagnant
is to fall behind and end up on the “wrong side of history.”
This philosophy, of course, is completely contrary to Islam
(and all traditions because traditions require depending on
the past). We know as Muslims that the best of times were in
the past, with the Prophet ձ and the salaf and things have
been deteriorating ever since. We can never win the battle
of “Who is more progressive? Who is more free?”
So we shouldn’t play a losing game.
Our winning strategy should be to say that these concepts
of liberty, freedom, etc., are incoherent for such and such
reasons and they don’t contribute to justice and goodness,
and Islam offers the best alternatives for humanity for such
and such reasons. This is the blueprint for all such debates
with modernist progressives.
SHOULDN’T WE ALL SUPPORT FREEDOM OF
CHOICE?
Question: Isn’t the main concept of liberal thought to
maximize individual choice and rights? Individual choice
and freedom is paramount, and by and large, there is

FREEDOM, EQUALITY AND LIBERTY

65

no absolute standard to judge that. So shouldn’t we as
minorities in the West support that paradigm?
Answer: The problem is that the existence of law precludes
individual choice in any and every society. All people are
constrained by laws. Everyone’s will and freedom of choice
is constricted by the law.
But what liberal secularism claims is that laws are only
justified when they prevent people from harming others.
That’s why secular law is acceptable in its restricting of
people’s unfettered freedom of choice whereas religious law
is unacceptable. The former merely prevents harm, which is
a universal interest of all human beings, while the latter is
aimed at religious devotion, which only some people who
belong to that religion care about and nobody else.
There are many conceptual problems with this purported
distinction between secular law and religious law. Chief
among them the fact that what is or is not considered
“harm” is highly debatable. Why is the secular conception
of harm the only valid conception?
What is or is not harmful depends on one’s greater
metaphysical commitments and beliefs about human nature
and the world. These commitments are not considered
“religion” per se, but are not categorically different from
religious theology. This is how secular liberalism smuggles
in its metaphysical and normative imperatives: by masking
them as universal features of human nature.
A simple and familiar example: Abortion. The issue of
abortion is often framed as a debate between a religious
and a secular side. Depending on what you think about the
fetus, its status as a “person,” the moral responsibilities of
the biological parents, etc., abortion is or is not immoral and

66

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

the subject of legal regulation. The position of the pro-life
faction is considered to be driven by religious commitments
(which it is), but the pro-choice side is seen as driven by
secular concerns and a pursuit of freedom and individual
autonomy, but their underlying beliefs about the fetus and
the female body, etc., are no less metaphysical than the
beliefs of their religious interlocutors.
But the debate is not framed in terms of one set of
metaphysical beliefs against another, one religion against
another. Rather, it is framed as religious conservatism vs.
secular liberty, religious conviction vs. freedom of choice.
Why?
If we understood the debate as a disagreement between
two sets of metaphysical commitments, then we would
naturally ask why should one set be automatically preferred
over the other. This is the precise question we should ask for
all secular laws. They are all based on metaphysical beliefs
that are fundamentally “religious” in nature, but are not
perceived as such. Those beliefs are enshrined in the law
and imposed on everyone. We are all forced to abide by
the secular religious order and the tyranny of the secular
theocratic regime.
DOES ISLAM PROMOTE EQUALITY?
There is major confusion on this question. In one sense, yes,
of course Muslims accept the principle of equality because
that is at the essence of all morality. How so?
Implicit in any and all moral systems is that two like
things ought to be treated equally. If Person A shoplifts at
a grocery story and we judge that as wrong, then if Person

FREEDOM, EQUALITY AND LIBERTY

67

B does the same thing, we should also judge that act as
wrong, all else being equal. The “all else being equal” part is
important because, in one sense, Person A and Person B are
never equal for the simple reason that Person A and Person
B are two different people with different circumstances,
different backgrounds, etc.
What is important from the standpoint of morality,
however, is that Person A and Person B are equal in a
relevant way and there are no differences that are morally
relevant. For example, if Person A has green eyes and
Person B has blue eyes, that is not morally relevant to the
fact that both men have committed theft, so we will treat
them as equal before the law. But if Person A is a millionaire
and Person B is a starving homeless person, then that is
a morally relevant difference and we should treat and
understand Person B’s actions differently.
What we learn from this is that our notion of equality is
highly dependent on these “morally relevant factors.” This
is important because people nowadays look at Islamic
law and say, “Look at how Islam treats women and men
differently! Clearly, Muslims reject equality!” Some Muslims
unfortunately also make this mistaken assessment.
In reality, however, Islamic law recognizes that there
are, in some circumstances, morally relevant differences
between men and women. Given that men and women
are in actuality very different in certain respects, it
would make sense that there are scenarios where those
differences would, morally speaking, come into play. From
this perspective then, it is not Islamic law that is unjust and
oppressive but rather any system of morality and law that
ignores these differences.

68

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Furthermore, cheering for and rallying behind the notion
of equality, as liberalism does, as if they discovered the
concept, is so silly and vapid. They are taking credit for a
value that literally everyone has.
Again, equality is implicit to normativity itself. Where
moral systems differ is how they understand and define
those morally relevant factors, and that is a discussion
that happens on the meta-ethical and metaphysical levels.
For example, instead of pointlessly debating meaningless
questions such as whether liberal secularism respects the
principle of equality more than Islamic law does, why not
debate what an ideal human life looks like? Why not debate
what human flourishing entails and what an ideal society
consists of? These are the real questions that will, among
other things, illuminate these morally relevant factors. But
liberal secularism, while hiding behind empty slogans of
“freedom” and “equality,” says these questions are irrelevant,
that people can decide for themselves, and that there is no
right or wrong answer. This, of course, is nonsense.
SPREADING RELIGION VS. SPREADING HUMAN
RIGHTS
Believe it or not, there is not much difference between –
1. Politically liberal Western powers who want to use military and diplomatic strength to bring the Muslim world
into the “light of freedom, democracy, and human
rights”
2. Politically conservative Western powers who want to
use military and diplomatic strength to bring the Muslim
world into the light of Christianity.

FREEDOM, EQUALITY AND LIBERTY

69

Yet, many Muslims seem to find the latter somehow more
offensive and objectionable, even when the reality on the
ground is the same regardless.
FREEDOM TO PURSUE YOUR DESIRES
Ibn al-Qayyim said, “Opposing base desires will allow the
servant to acquire strength in his body, his heart, and his
speech. Some of the righteous predecessors would say that
conquering base desires needs more strength than one who
could conquer a city by himself.”10
Modernity teaches people that depriving yourself of
what you desire can make you weak, ill, or even cause
psychological problems. But in reality, deprivation with
respect to our base desires is a source of strength for body,
heart, and mind.

!D"#R.-S.$#.78I:K<AAT;

CHAPTER

5

FEMINISM
THE GRAVE IMPLICATIONS OF FEMINIST ISLAM
I met my wife when we were both college students at
Harvard. We both considered ourselves feminists as
young adults. This is because we had seen firsthand and
heard about the damage done by domestic abuse against
women. We both felt a strong desire to fight against such
abuse and prevent other women from getting hurt, whether
emotionally or physically. We both felt a strong desire to
work towards a world where women and girls lived with
respect, kindness, love, support, and the full measure of
rights they deserve.
We still feel this way. We still feel this pressing desire.
From our perspective, then, feminism seemed to be the
best path towards that world. But with each passing year,
we realized that feminism was not a solution. In fact, it was
part of a much larger problem.
The problems with feminist philosophy are overwhelming.
From its very inception, feminism began as an anti-religious,
anti-family movement. It is not merely one strand of
feminism that is corrosive to Muslim faith. As difficult as
it is for some Muslims to hear, it is all strands. To see this,
simply read the writings of all the most notable feminist

72

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

theorists in history, from feminism’s “first wave” all the way
to its “third wave,” and this conclusion is undeniable.
Muslims need to understand these issues with feminism
because many Muslims today consider themselves feminists,
mostly for the same reasons that my wife and I adopted a
feminist identity in our youth. This is dangerous because,
as my wife and I discovered, feminism contains so much
within it that is antithetical to Islam and that endangers
Muslim faith. There are surface-level conflicts between
Islam and feminism, and there are deeper contradictions
as well. Meticulously detailing these problems is necessary,
but as far as Muslims are concerned, we can start by simply
judging a tree by its fruits. We have to ask ourselves: Why
do so many Muslim feminists end up leaving Islam?

The Numbers
Women who identify as feminists are far less likely to be
religious than the general female population.11 In the
general population, about 7 out of 10 women say they
are affiliated with an organized religion like Judaism,
Christianity, Islam, etc. Among feminist women, however,
only 1 out of 10 report any such affiliation.12
But does this indicate a trend of women leaving faith
due to feminism? Other statistics support this contention.
For example, between 1993 and 2013, the number of
nonreligious women tripled in the US.13 Nonreligious
!!"#J:;9U# V,<'%<;"# NI:0$# W9''# R97<?<+:'U# J# W<%%79# I+,9# X&<,<%:.7"Q# Y91<8
;<'%#R9F<9-U#F+7"#4CU#;+"#!U#I.,"#>D!!U#&&"#6>ZEE"
!>"#J:;9U# V,<'%<;"# N[$B# Y91<;<'%'# J,9# W9''# R97<?<+:'"Q# O$9# \:.,/<.;U#
\:.,/<.;# M9-'# .;/# I9/<.U# >4# I.,"# >D!!"
!6"#I.,0+%%9U#J1.;/."#NJ19,<0.#L'#W+'<;?#R97<?<+;(#[$B#I+,9#.;/#I+,9#
[+19;#J,9#]1A,.0<;?#M+;8^97<9*"Q#J7%9,;9%U#!2#I.B#>D!E"

FEMINISM

73

people in general increased in this time range, but what is
particularly telling is that the growth of the nonreligious
women demographic outpaced the overall increase. In
1993, 16 percent of atheists and agnostics were women, but
within 20 years, that number nearly tripled to 43 percent.14
Analysts contend that it is the spread of feminist and secular
ideology through mass media and increasingly the internet
and social media that is responsible for these jumps in
non-religiosity.15
Beyond the statistics, many of us have seen these trends
play out all around us in the Muslim community, so much
so that it has become a cliché. Nowadays, women and
men who have left Islam are writing about exactly what
led to their apostasy, so we do not even have to speculate
about the causes.16 They spell it out explicitly: Islam, the
Quran, and the Prophet ձ are enablers of patriarchy and
oppression. In other words, Islam is not compatible with
feminism, therefore how could a feminist be a Muslim?

Backlash
Self-described Muslim feminists will strongly dispute that
their feminism has put them on the path to apostasy. And,
to be clear, I am not claiming that everyone who considers
himself a Muslim feminist today will eventually apostatize.
To repeat, I am not claiming that everyone who considers
himself a Muslim feminist today will eventually apostatize.
That being said, not everyone who is thrown into sharkinfested waters will fall prey to sharks, but the odds are
!2"#N>D!E#X%.%9#+*#J%$9<'1#<;#J19,<0."Q#^.,;.#\,+:&U#>2#I.,"#>D!
!E"#J:;9U#V,<'%<;"#N[$B#Y91<;<'%'#J,9#W9''#R97<?<+:'"Q
!3"#^+7%U#J;/,9-"#N_;#W9.F<;?#L'7.1"Q#`9,.7/#X:;U#!5#a:;9#>D!

74

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

not favorable. The stronger swimmers might make it out
of the water bruised and bloody but still breathing, while
everyone else is shark food.
Feminism similarly has devoured entire swaths of the
Muslim community. If we care about iman in general and
the iman of the next generation in particular, we can no
longer afford to overlook this dynamic.
In order to address a problem, one first must recognize
that the problem exists. This has been the frustration of
myself and others. The Muslim community, especially in
the US, does not want to acknowledge that feminism is
noxious and a direct threat to faith. This is because, saying
as much is politically incorrect to such an extent that
misguided activists pounce with fury on anyone who fails
to satisfactorily toe the party line.
But, as uncomfortable as it may be, we must confront
the bullies. The silence must be broken and it is the
responsibility of religious leaders, imams, and scholars to
start calling a spade a spade. The stakes are too high and
the outcome of the feminist malaise of today won’t be fully
realized until later. In ten years or maybe even five, we will
look back and wonder what went wrong, but it will be too
late then. Action is required now.
My purpose here is to substantiate how feminism is a
path to apostasy. The hope is that if Muslims understand
this path, they will recognize it when they see it around
them (or within themselves) and will be inspired to speak
out against it (or reconsider their own path, much like my
wife and I did many years ago).
Without further ado, here is the Muslim feminist path to
apostasy.

FEMINISM

75

Stage 1
It all starts with legitimate grievances about the way that
some Muslim men treat some Muslim women. There are
violations of rights in our community against women. There
are Muslim institutions that ignore the needs and concerns
of women. In some of our cultures around the world, girls
are subjected to criminally unjust double standards vis-àvis boys. And the kicker is that sometimes the responsible
parties selfishly and ignorantly attempt to justify their
practices of abuse and outright neglect by citing the Quran
or certain hadith.
The solution to these problems is not feminism. The
solution is correcting the ignorance with Islamic knowledge.
And this is knowledge that comes from true scholars
(ulama), namely ulama that are not under the suffocating
influence of modernism, liberalism, and feminism itself.
But unfortunately, true knowledge is hard to find, so
Muslim women (and men) have turned to feminism as a
vehicle for expressing their frustration and their trauma.
This is how Muslims enter the feminist path. And the results
have been an unmitigated disaster.
If the abuse of women is a disease, then Islamic precepts
and ethics are the natural, “organic,” wholesome cure
whereas feminism is a harsh toxic chemical treatment,
which might get rid of the disease but only by nearly killing
the patient while creating ten more ailments in its place.
How does feminism conceptualize domestic abuse,
masjid neglect, etc.? By shouting: “Patriarchy!” It is men
as a category, we are told, who are the problem (as well
as those women who have “internalized” patriarchy). It is

76

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

men as a category, we are told, who inherently desire to
dominate women, to abuse them, and to take advantage
of them.
This is the illegitimate language used to address a
legitimate problem. But then, that language slowly takes
over…

Stage 2
In Stage 1, it was the tangible abuses of certain men (and
women) that were the problem. In Stage 2, the problems
become more abstract and conceptual.
Why does the panel at the Islamic conference not include
any women? Why does the event poster have photos of
the male speakers but only generic icons for the women
speakers? Why is a male imam talking about hijab and
what women should wear? Why are Muslim men concerned
about what women wear at all? Why does the masjid have
a partition between men and women? Why is gender
separation (derogatorily termed “gender apartheid”)
even relevant in this day and age? Why don’t Muslim men
recognize their male privilege? Why is modesty such a big
deal anyway? How dare men even talk about women’s
issues! How dare men even opine about feminism (despite
the fact that feminism accuses men of systematically
oppressing half the population, and one would think that
the accused should have a chance to address such grave
charges, but no, that would be “mansplaining”!). Etc., etc.
The automatic answer to all these questions is, of course,
the same as it was in Stage 1: “Patriarchy!”

FEMINISM

77

Unlike in Stage 1, Stage 2 problems are not defined by
a grounded understanding of Islam and its normative
tradition. They are defined and posed by Western feminist
and liberal discourse. This is evident by the fact that Stage
2 Muslim feminists will rail against things that have a
strong basis in Islamic law and its scholarship, like gender
separation, modesty, dress codes, limiting women’s visibility
to and interaction with non-mahram men, etc. But usually
Stage 2 feminists are ignorant of this scholarship. And when
they are informed that these practices are firmly rooted in
Islamic scholarship, that is when they progress to…

Stage 3
In Stage 3, it is Islamic scholarship itself that comes under
fire. In Stage 2, the grievances were about the practices
and attitudes of contemporary Muslims. But now, that ire
extends to Muslims historically, specifically the ulama.
If patriarchy as this overarching system is the source of
so much oppression of women today, the feminist muses,
then it only stands to reason that that oppression existed to
the same, if not greater, extent in the past. In other words,
the feminist in this stage asks himself, why wouldn’t the
scholars of Islam throughout history operate under those
same assumptions and through those same misogynistic
modes of thought that we see from scholars today?
And when we look at the writings of the giants of Islamic
scholarship, it is chock-full of material that feminism
considers to be the epitome of the most vile patriarchy
and misogyny. For this reason, you will find a lot of Muslim
women in Stage 3 who started out by enthusiastically
pursuing sacred knowledge (`ilm) with ulama or Islamic

78

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

studies at the university and then came across these texts
and were horrified by them such that they ultimately
became disenchanted with Islamic scholarship, considering
the whole thing tainted by nauseating patriarchy.
At this stage, the Muslim feminist contents himself with
the idea that the Quran and the Prophetic hadith are
solely to be relied upon because those are the only things
untainted and unfiltered by the ugly distortions of men. But
then, even that comes under fire…

Stage 4
Quran 4:34. Quran 2:228. Two witnesses. Inheritance.
Incomplete `aql and deen. The majority in the fire. If I were
to command anyone to prostrate. And on and on and on.
We know the ayat and the ahadith.
How can the Muslim feminist reconcile all this? How
could revelation from God contain not one, not two, but
multitudes of seeming expressions of misogyny? This
becomes a wellspring of delusion as the Stage-3-turningStage-4 feminist gropes for solutions:
Well, maybe these things have all been misinterpreted.
Maybe if we bend and contort and reach, we can explain this
verse or that hadith. Maybe we can reconcile the revelation
that was seen and understood as the pinnacle of eloquence
and wisdom and justice by people of the 7th century (and
8th, and 9th, and 10th, …) with the incoherent ramblings
of 20th and 21st century secular gender studies professors.
Maybe, just maybe! Anything is possible!
This naive attitude can only be sustained for so long and
only in light of ignorance of the sheer amount of Quranic

FEMINISM

79

ayat and hadith that fly in the face of modern feminism. The
more aware of these ayat and hadith the Muslim feminist is,
the more likely she is to proceed to Stage 4.
The Stage 4 Muslim feminist realizes that the only way
to square the circle and fully reconcile feminism with the
totality of Islam is to deny the divinity of the Quran and to
deny the applicability of the Prophetic Sunnah.
In Stage 4, you will find Muslim reformers who outright
say things like, “We must say no to the Quran.” You will
find reformers who go so far as to insult the prophets
and call them despicable names because, you guessed it:
“Patriarchy!”
In Stage 4, it becomes possible to casually utter blasphemy.
It also becomes possible to advocate for things like women
leading a mixed congregation in prayer, Muslim women
being able to marry non-Muslim men, same-sex behavior
being permissible, transgenderism being acceptable,
adultery and fornication (zina) being permissible, and
on and on. This is because those in Stage 4 have not only
renounced any and all scholarly precedent, they also do not
believe that there is anything like an objective, authoritative
Sharia or Sunnah that can even begin to dictate a Muslim’s
behavior. And anyone who claims to speak authoritatively
on “What God commands,” is immediately denounced as a
patriarchal oppressor (“authority” is a patriarchal concept
anyway according to them).
Now, there are not many Muslim feminists who stay in
Stage 4 because it becomes virtually impossible to justify all
these things and still consider oneself a Muslim. The level of
cognitive dissonance required to maintain one’s identity is
crippling and the fact that the Muslim community at large is

80

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

also (rightly) antagonistic to the blasphemy and disregard
for the symbols of Islam coming from these individuals
makes them increasingly bitter about being Muslim at all.
Which is how we get to…

Stage 5
The mental anguish and torment at Stage 5 is unbearable.
And it does not take much at this point to push someone
over the edge.
If God is gender-egalitarian, why would He refer to
Himself as “He” in revelation, as opposed to “She” or “It”?
Why was the first human being a man and not a woman?
Why are most of the historical narratives in the Quran about
men and not women? Why was the last Prophet of God ձ a
man and not a woman? Why did revelation from God come
to us via a man and not a woman?
This barrage of simple but maddening questions takes
them to the cliff’s edge of kufr and irtidad. And then the
same thought that drove them down this path in the first
place gives them a final push into the abyss:
Why does God allow patriarchy to exist at all? Did He not
care about the subjugation and rape of billions of innocent
women over the millennia?
The only answer feminism can provide at this stage is the
only answer it could ever provide at any stage: It was all a
lie made up by men to control women.

FEMINISM

81

The End
The danger of feminism is that it works like dominoes.
Once a person gets on the path of explaining everything
in terms of, “Patriarchy!” the rest is just a matter of time.
This is because the logic of analyzing every injustice by
invoking patriarchy is too all-encompassing (but no less
inaccurate, misleading, and destructive) of an explanation.
The feminists in Stage 5 are simply more honest, more
intellectually consistent than feminists in Stage 1, 2, 3, or
4. Stage 5 feminists have worked out the implications of
feminism to its bitter end.

From Its Very First Wave
The reader might ask, “What branch or flavor or definition
of feminism is really the problem here?” The truth is, it is
feminism itself at its core, in its generality that is the problem.
To draw an analogy, most of us will recognize that racism is
a problem and that racism against people of a certain skin
color or ethnicity is toxic to faith. In reality, however, the
racism within the ideology of the KKK is not exactly the
same as the racism within the ideology of Neo-Nazis or the
“Alt-Right,” etc. There are nuances. But does it really matter
when the core of racism is shared among all the disparate
groups?
To be clear, my point is not that the problem with
feminism is that it is a racist ideology. The problem, one
of many, with feminism is simply that adopting a feminist
outlook consistently and systematically leads Muslims
into crises of faith and the leaving of Islam entirely. And
this is not a coincidence or a statistical anomaly. When we

82

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

understand the process of Muslims progressing from Stage
1 to Stage 5, it is clear how this happens. And if we are still
not convinced, we can look to the roots of feminism itself,
as expressed by some of its most notable figures throughout
history.
From its very inception, feminism has been anti-religion.
In fact, the most prominent figures of each wave of feminism
have been viciously anti-religious.
From its beginning in the 19th century as a social
movement for women’s suffrage, feminism in its “first
wave” targeted traditional religion as the source of women’s
subjugation. The earliest feminist thinkers believed that
religious institutions not only contributed to attenuating
women’s rights but, indeed, were the original fount from
which anti-women beliefs and practices emerged. Susan B.
Anthony, one of the central figures in the women’s suffrage
movement, noted, “The worst enemy [women] have is in
the pulpit.”17
Anthony often railed against traditional religion and was
considered agnostic by those who knew her personally.
Among her statements on religion, included is: “What a
dreadful creature their God must be to keep sending hungry
mouths while he withholds the bread to fill them!”18 On the
idea of organized religion in particular, Anthony stated: “I
can not imagine a God of the universe made happy by my
getting down on my knees and calling him ‘great.’”19

!C"#I<0I<779;U# X.77B# .'# 0<%9/# <;(# NX9;90.# Y.77'# .;/# %$9# _,<?<;'# +*# %$9#
[+19;b'# R<?$%'# I+F919;%'"Q
!5"#*+,-./$0-1/$"2U#Y9A,:.,B#>U#!543U#c:+%9/#<;#3&$4+$-d!545Z!4D5eU#f+7"#
&&"# 5E5Z3D"
!4"#LA</"

FEMINISM

83

Another early first wave feminist from the 19th century,
Helen H. Gardener, wrote at length about the “crimes” and
“abuses” of the Bible and Christianity in their treatment of
women:
This religion and the Bible require of woman
everything, and give her nothing. They ask her
support and her love, and repay her with contempt
and oppression […] Every injustice that has ever
been fastened upon women in a Christian country
has been ‘authorised by the Bible’ and riveted and
perpetuated by the pulpit.²⁰

Gardener’s contempt for religion did not stop at
Christianity, however. She comments in her book Men,
Women, and Gods:
Even though a religion claims a superhuman origin
— and I believe they all claim that — it must be
tested by human reason, and if our highest moral
sentiments revolt at any of its dictates, its dictates
must go. For the only good thing about any religion
is its morality, and morality has nothing to do with
faith. The one has to do with right actions in this
world; the other with unknown quantities in the next.
The one is a necessity of time the other a dream of
Eternity. Morality depends upon universal evolution;
Faith upon special ‘revelation;’ and no woman can
afford to accept any “revelation” that has yet been
offered to this world.
That Moses or Confucius, Mohammed or Paul,
Abraham or Brigham Young asserts that his particular
dogma came directly from God, and that it was a
personal communication to either or all of these
>D"#\.,/9;9,U# `979;# `.1<7%+;"# 5+)6- 1/7+)6- &)2- 8/29"# X"7"U# Y+,?+%%9;#
^++='U# >D!C"

84

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM
favored individuals, is a fact that can have no power
over us unless their teachings are in harmony with
our highest thought; our noblest purpose, and our
purest conception of life. Which of them can bear
the test? Not one ‘revelation’ known to man to-day
can look in the face of the nineteenth century and
say, ‘I am parallel with your richest development; I
still lead your highest thought; none of my teachings
shock your sense of justice.’ Not one.²¹

We can find this animosity towards religion throughout
the writing and speeches of many of the most prominent
first-wave feminists, including Elizabeth Cady Stanton,
who spearheaded the writing of the highly subversive The
Women’s Bible. If Muslim feminists today wrote The Women’s
Quran, they would just be catching up to feminists from over
100 years ago who were part of the first wave, which was
supposedly the least extreme and the least objectionable
of the feminist waves.
But the anti-religious animus does not end there.
Consider the so-called “second wave.” The philosopher who
is said to have ushered in this glorious wave is Simone de
Beauvoir, who expressed her opposition to religion thus:
Man enjoys the great advantage of having a god
that endorses the code he writes; and since man
exercises a sovereign authority over women it is
especially fortunate that this authority has been
vested in him by the Supreme Being. For the Jews,
Mohammedans and Christians among others, man
is master by divine right; the fear of God will

>!"#LA</"

FEMINISM

85

therefore repress any impulse towards revolt in the
downtrodden female.²²

On religion, prominent second-wave feminist Gloria
Steinem contends, “It’s an incredible con job, when you
think of it, to believe something now in exchange for life
after death. Even corporations, with all their reward systems,
don’t try to make it posthumous.”23
In a recent interview, Steinem was asked, “What do you
think the biggest problem with feminism today is?” to
which she remarked, “What we don’t talk about enough is
religion. I think that spirituality is one thing. But religion is
just politics in the sky. I think we really have to talk about
it. Because it gains power from silence.”24
Within the third wave, the animosity towards organized
religion only intensifies, but this animosity takes many
forms including the form of devotion to “alternative religion”
and “non-denominational spirituality.” Professor of Women,
Gender, and Sexuality Susan Shaw argues that, in light of
traditional religious institutions like the Church, the Mosque,
and the Synagogue, “Patriarchy is the prevailing religion of
the planet,” and:
The world has a problem of gender of religious
proportions. We need a reformation, perhaps a
revolution, to tear down the altars to male power

>>"#^9.:F+<,U#X<1+;9#/9U#.;/#`"#I"#g.,'$79B"#:;+-<+=/)2-<+>"#X+:%$#h.,,.U#
f<0"U#W+:<'#^,.<779#g,+/:0%<+;'U#!454"
>6"#\7+,<.# X%9<;91"# Y,99/+1# Y,+1# R97<?<+;# Y+:;/.%<+;U# i,*"+,?);9-')
/.B)/.B<%91')<%91)!263>8?7+,<.8'%9<;91"# J009''9/# !># X9&%"# >D!C"
>2"#P.77+-.B8`.;.:9,U# a.1<9"# NL'# R97<?<+;# %$9# j^<??9'%# g,+A791b# Y.0<;?#
Y91<;<'1# O+/.BkQ# X+@+:,;9,'U# 3# I.B# >D!E

86

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM
and rebuild a global sanctuary of inclusion, equity,
justice, peace, and love.²⁵

Radical lesbian feminist philosopher Mary Daly believed
that religion was inherently oppressive towards women and
characterized this by saying, “Woman’s asking for equality
in the church would be comparable to a black person’s
demanding equality in the Ku Klux Klan.”26
Daly also noted in her provocative essay “Sin Big”:
The word ‘sin’ is derived from the Indo-European
root ‘es-,’ meaning ‘to be.’ When I discovered
this etymology, I intuitively understood that for a
[person] trapped in patriarchy, which is the religion
of the entire planet, ‘to be’ in the fullest sense is
‘to sin’.²⁷

In the essay, Daly encourages women to have the
“courage to sin,” where sinning in the religious sense is
conceived as the highest form of protest against patriarchy.
Subverting patriarchy goes hand in hand with subverting
religious norms. In fact, no distinction exists between the
two since religion is patriarchy and patriarchy is religion. To
destroy one is to destroy the other.
The feminist canon is saturated with similarly subversive
views, enough to fill multiple volumes. And of course we
see that religious subversion and blasphemy mirrored by
Muslim feminists themselves (especially those in Stage 5).
One learns from one’s teachers, even despite one’s self.
>E"#X$.-U#X:'.;#I"#NL'#g.%,<.,0$B#%$9#R97<?<+;#+*#%$9#g7.;9%kQ#O$9#`:i8
<;?%+;# g+'%U# O$9`:l;?%+;g+'%"0+1U# !# _0%"# >D!
>3"#NI.,B#m.7B"Q#[<=<&9/<.U#[<=<19/<.#Y+:;/.%<+;U#5#X9&%"#>D!CU#9;"-<=<8
&9/<."+,?)-<=<)I.,Bnm.7Bo0<%9n;+%98>J009''9/#!>#X9&%"#>D!C"
>C"#m.7BU#I.,B"#NX<;#^<?"Q#O$9#M9-#h+,=9,U#O$9#M9-#h+,=9,U#!4#a:;9#>D!CU#
---";9-B+,=9,"0+1)1.?.G<;9)!443)D>)>3)'<;8A<?"#J009''9/#!>#X9&%"#
>D!C"

FEMINISM

87

Given the sheer ubiquity of caustically anti-religious
sentiment across all strands of feminist thought throughout
history, how could we ever imagine that adopting such an
ideology in any way, shape, or form would do anything
other than decay a Muslim’s faith?

Another Path
Again, my wife and I considered ourselves feminists at
one point, but alhamdulillah we quickly realized where
the feminist path leads. Yet, abandoning our feminism
was small consolation given the reality that some women
endure severe injustice in life. Furthermore, how can the
fact that Islamic law has different provisions depending on
one’s gender be reconciled with an overall sense of justice
and egalitarianism? These were questions that bothered us,
but the beginnings of the answer came when we realized:
Maybe we need to recalibrate our sense of justice and
egalitarianism. And what better way to recalibrate than with
the Source of Justice and Mercy in His own Words:
Our Lord, indeed we have heard a caller calling to
faith, [saying], ‘Believe in your Lord,’ and we have
believed. Our Lord, so forgive us our sins and remove
from us our misdeeds and cause us to die with the
righteous. Our Lord, and grant us what You promised
us through Your messengers and do not disgrace us
on the Day of Resurrection. Indeed, You do not fail in
[Your] promise.” And their Lord responded to them,
“Never will I allow to be lost the work of [any] worker
among you, whether male or female; you are of one
another. So those who emigrated or were evicted from
their homes or were harmed in My cause or fought

88

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM
or were killed – I will surely remove from them their
misdeeds, and I will surely admit them to gardens
ĚĩűĩþƷŉǜŉŎěŉƢŎǛĩƢƪǴŦŻǜþƪƢĩǜþƢĢŁƢŻůŦŦþŉ‫܌‬þűĢ
Allah has with Him the best reward.” Be not deceived
by the [uninhibited] movement of the disbelievers
throughout the land. [It is but] a small enjoyment;
ƷŉĩűƷŉĩŎƢ‫ܡ‬ȀűþŦ‫ܢ‬ƢĩŁƿłĩŎƪNĩŦŦ‫܌‬þűĢǜƢĩƷěŉĩĢŎƪƷŉĩ
resting place.۫۱
Ali ‘Imran (Q3:193-197)

Furthermore, Allah says:
And We have revealed to you, [O Muhammad], the
ŻŻţŎűƷƢƿƷŉ‫܌‬ěŻűȀƢůŎűłƷŉþƷǜŉŎěŉƟƢĩěĩĢĩĢŎƷ
of the Scripture and as a criterion over it. So judge
between them by what Allah has revealed and do not
follow their inclinations away from what has come to
you of the truth. To each of you We prescribed a law
and a method. Had Allah willed, He would have made
you one nation [united in religion], but [He intended]
to test you in what He has given you; so race to [all
that is] good. To Allah is your return all together, and
He will [then] inform you concerning that over which
ǢŻƿƿƪĩĢƷŻĢŎǲŁĩƢ‫۫ܒ‬۲
Al-Ma’idah (Q5:48)

Allah will not waste anyone’s work, whether male or
female, and Allah will only judge us by what He has tested
us with, nothing more or less. Women will not be judged
according to what men have been given and men will not
be judged according to what women have been given. This
is the standard of gender justice that Allah gives us in the
>5"#X.$<$#L;%9,;.%<+;.7#O,.;'7.%<+;"
>4"#X.$<$#L;%9,;.%<+;.7#O,.;'7.%<+;"

FEMINISM

89

Quran. It is not the case that men and women are subject
to the same exact prescribed law. It is not the case that men
and women are tasked with the same exact responsibilities.
And it is not the case that men and women are endowed
with the same exact traits. Just like Allah created different
varieties of beings — angels, jinn, clouds, mountains,
animals, etc. — and gave each class of being its own station
and role in the Creation, similarly Allah has created men
and women differently, yet they are still “of one another”
(ba`dukum min ba`d). Muslim men and women must
support each other in these trying and confusing times.
Additionally, all the kinds of abuse and mistreatment of
women that those in Stage 1 are reacting to can fully be
addressed by Islamic norms and guidelines as established
by the Quran and Sunnah. The Prophet ձ summarizes
these guidelines with his statement: “The best of you are
those who are the best to their wives, and I am the best of
you to my wives.”30 Regarding physical abuse, the Prophet
ձ specifically remarked, “Many women have gone around
Muhammad’s family complaining of their husbands. Those
who do so, that is, those who take to beating their wives,
are not the best among you.”31
But the abuse many women endure is not limited to the
physical. Emotional abuse and neglect can be even more
devastating than physical blows. Many Muslim women do
not feel cherished by their husbands, much less respected.
Some feel as if they are nothing more than maids in their
own homes. Yet, in the Quran, in Surat al-Mujadila, Allah
Himself says that,
6D"#O<,1</$<"#f+7"#!U#^++=#23U#`./<%$#654E"
6!"#JA:#m.-:/"#^++=#!U#`./<%$#>C4"

90

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM
Certainly [He] has heard the speech of the one who
argues with you, [O Muhammad], concerning her
husband and directs her complaint to Allah.”32
Al-Mujadila (Q58:1)

Allah, Master of all that exists, manifests His Consideration
and Mercy in hearing the complaints of mistreated women.
How, then, could a Muslim husband be so callous and coldhearted as to ignore the emotional needs of his own wife?
Furthermore, a detailed look at the life of the Prophet ձ
and his Companions shows that nowhere did they resort
to belittling, insulting, or denigrating women, whether
their wives, sisters, or daughters. Many narrations relate
how these blessed men took extra care to be emotionally
sensitive to their wives and to fulfill their rights towards
them with ihsan, i.e., excellence.33
Much more can be elaborated on these points and more.
For now, as Muslims, we must redouble our confidence in
the power of Islam, not “feminist Islam,” to address injustice.
The Prophetic example is our model and standard for gender
justice, not the (often anti-religious) musings of Susan B.
Anthony, Simone de Beauvoir, Betty Friedan, Gloria Steinem,
or Bell Hooks.

6>"#p:,.;#E5(X.$<$#L;%9,;.%<+;.7#O,.;'7.%<+;"
66"#P+;'</9,#%$9#79;?%$B#;.,,.%<+;#-$9,9#q1.,#d,;e#/9'0,<A9'#%$9#g,+&$8
9%b'# ձ# A9$.F<+,# %+-.,/# $<'# -<F9'U# -$9,9# %$9B# -+:7/# +&9;7B# .,?:9#
-<%$# $<1# .;/# %$9# g,+&$9%# ձ# /</# ;+%# ./1+;<'$# %$91# *+,# %$.%# A:%#
%,9.%9/#%$91#-<%$#/:9#0.,9#.;/#0+;'</9,.%<+;"#O$<'#;.,,.%<+;#0.;#A9#
*+:;/#<;#X.$<$#.78^:=$.,<U#f+7"#6U#^++=#26U#`./<%$#325"

FEMINISM

91

And Finally
I implore imams, religious scholars, and leaders to take
more seriously the need to broach otherwise uncomfortable
subjects like feminism that have long been avoided.
Avoiding such subjects might have been fine in the days
before the internet and social media, when the average
Muslim could live without being inundated with anti-Islam
propaganda. But today, avoidance is only likely to feed
increasing dissatisfaction and disenchantment with Islam
and Islamic scholarship.
This is because one cannot hide the “controversial” ayat,
hadith, turath, etc., from the masses indefinitely. People
will find out primarily because atheists and liberal activists
alike are on a mission to “expose” Islam and are pushing
these traditions into the spotlight. As the Muslim masses
discover this information, they will feel deeply confused,
deeply betrayed, and will leave Islam in droves. This process
is already well underway. Simply peruse the prominent
Muslim feminist social media outlets and the websites
dedicated to Muslim women’s issues to see the rising
antagonism and furor against orthodox Islam.
Rather than give feminism carte blanche to wreak havoc
on the Ummah, we must redouble our efforts to critique and
deconstruct feminism on an intellectual and academic basis.
In the end, dismantling feminism will afford Muslims with
the intellectual and emotional room to properly understand
gender and gender relations in Islam and to see how far
superior in terms of justice and mercy it is to what feminism
has to offer.

92

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

THE LOGIC OF PATRIARCHY
One of the things I never understood about the idea of
patriarchy that feminism opposes is this: Why would men
throughout history across numerous patriarchal cultures
and civilizations systematically oppress their counterparts,
i.e., their wives, their sisters, their mothers?
To oppress someone means to prevent that person from
what she needs, what is her due, and to otherwise cause
harm. And I can understand how that happens in isolated
situations, e.g., domestic abuse where a husband abuses
his wife, etc. But I don’t understand how this can happen
globally or across an entire society. Why? Because men are
smarter than that and so are women. What I mean is, it
would be completely irrational for men to inflict this kind of
program within their own households. How do men benefit
by crippling their female companions and continually
frustrating their needs? That is simply not functional. Have
you ever known a family where the husband/father (or the
wife/mother) is a tyrant, wields all the control, rules with
an iron fist? Those situations are never sustainable and
everyone involved is miserable and looking for an exit. Are
we supposed to believe that it was only modern people that
realized, “Wow, constant dhulm (injustice) in the household
is neither optimal nor sustainable?”
Also, the idea that women have been the perpetual
victims of this scheme by men to oppress them over
thousands of years is really insulting to the intelligence
and capabilities of women. Again, are modern women the
only ones enlightened enough to understand that they are
being oppressed by patriarchy and to fight back, whereas

FEMINISM

93

past women were too stupid to notice or successfully effect
change? That makes no sense.
If you look at what is required to effectively oppress
a group of people, it is not a trivial task. Look at it from
a practical perspective. Look at the current state of the
Arab world. Dictators have had to marshal all kinds of
resources, military and police force, all kinds of programs of
monitoring and institutions of propaganda and intimidation
to maintain some semblance of (illegitimate) power and
control over their populations. They’ve been doing this for
60 or 70 years, and look at how much resistance they’ve
been getting and how much turmoil has resulted. The
same is the case throughout world history. Oppression
is inherently unstable and requires a lot of resources and
energy to maintain for any extended period of time because
the victims of oppression inevitably resist.
This casts doubt on the notion of oppressive patriarchy
on two counts. First, the idea that men have been
successfully keeping women down for millennia is absurd
in the sense that, if that were the program, why would men
put themselves through that incessant turmoil, constantly
battling “uprising” from their own family members,
presumably the same people they are sleeping next to in
their beds every night? Second, if that were indeed the
program, where would the resources for such a program
come from? On the family level, historically it would have
been difficult to keep money and means that are available
to a husband away from a wife. It is possible and did happen,
again in isolated cases, but not on a systematic level or
something that could be widespread.

94

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Now it is a historical fact that women and men played
different roles in maintaining their households. But it is only
modern feminism that imposes a hierarchy on these roles
and claims that the traditional roles of women have put
them at a disadvantage vis-a-vis men. But as I have argued
elsewhere, there is no basis for these determinations. For
example, it is not clear how a traditional female role like
raising and educating children is inherently less powerful
than roles involving commercial trade, etc.
Let me make the point like this: Feminism wants us to
believe that a man would choose other men to collude with
and establish systems of power with over his own family,
over his own wife and daughters and mother. This goes
against human experience and basic self interest. If you are a
woman, ask yourself: Is your father or your husband or your
brother going to privilege the interests of a strange man over
your interests, solely on the basis that “men stick together
against women”? If so, that just means your father, husband,
and brother are psychologically disturbed and possibly
insane, not representatives of this global conspiracy to
oppress one gender. And if you are a man, ask yourself:
Are you going to look out for strange men and prioritize
their interests over the interests of your wife, daughters,
and mother? If so, you are very likely mentally unstable, not
a patriarch who is part of this global brotherhood holding
back women.
IS FEMINISM THE CAUSE OF WOMEN LEAVING
ISLAM?
Yes. Without a doubt. The evidence is overwhelming.

FEMINISM

95

It’s really not hard to understand why. Feminism is a
liberal secular philosophy. In the same way that liberal
secularism attacks traditional religion, feminism attacks
traditional religion. Arguably, feminism is the main weapon
in liberal secularism’s attack on traditional religion. So it is
no surprise that those Muslims who adopt feminist ideas
will have deep problems with traditional religions like Islam.
To say that feminism has nothing to do with women
leaving Islam is like saying the KKK has nothing to do with
its members hating black people. If someone were to deny
that the KKK and hating black people go hand in hand, that
would mean that that person does not understand what
the KKK is.
And this is exactly the case with Muslims who defend
feminism. Those Muslims who want to deny feminism’s
corrosive effects on Muslim faith are simply ignorant of
what feminism is and its real history. If you ask them what
feminism is, they will give you a whitewashed history that
is peddled in establishment institutions of learning, e.g.,
grade school. And when you question them on this history,
they will appeal to mainstream, pro-feminist academic
works, e.g., schlock like No Turning Back: The History of
Feminism and the Future of Women.
This is like trying to get an understanding of American
history by reading some right-wing patriot’s history of the
US that extols the “brave Founding Fathers” who fought for
independence and inalienable rights while ignoring things
like the Native American genocide, the Transatlantic slave
trade, Jim Crow, etc.
The reality is, feminism has been instrumental in attacking
religion in general and Islam in particular.

96

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

But I also want to take the opportunity to respond to
some of the tired talking points we hear by feminists and
“white knights” on this question.
The main claim that we hear nowadays is that “Muslim
women are leaving Islam, not because of feminism but
because they are mistreated by Muslim men.” Those who
make this claim usually cite three things:
1. Anecdotes/personal experience with abusive Muslim
men
2. The lack of space/visibility of women at mosques
3. The lack of women in leadership roles
What people fail to notice is that none of these things
explain why we see more Muslim women today frustrated
with traditional Islam. Not even close.
If more Muslim women are frustrated with Islam or have
doubts about Islam or are taking off the hijab, etc., that
means that there must be more of 1, 2, and/or 3. If more
women are frustrated, then that must be because more
Muslim men are abusive or women have decreasing space/
visibility at mosques, or women have fewer and fewer
leadership roles.
But none of this is true.
There is no evidence to suggest that Muslim men are more
abusive now than they were, say, 5 years ago or 10, 20, 50, or
100 years ago. In fact, according to the feminist logic, Muslim
men should overall be less abusive now than they were in
the previous generation or two, since Muslim men now at
least have the light of intersectional feminism to inform
them of things like “toxic masculinity” and “mansplaining,”
etc., i.e., things of which our fathers and grandfathers were

FEMINISM

97

blissfully ignorant. Do feminists think that our fathers,
grandfathers, and great grandfathers were on average less
abusive than the current generation of Muslim males? If
the previous generation of men were more abusive, then
shouldn’t there have been more frustration in our mother’s,
grandmother’s, and great grandmother’s generations than
there is now? But there wasn’t more frustration then. So this
explanation makes no sense.
Similarly with the supposed lack of space/visibility and
leaderships points. Women are more visible than ever at
mosques (whether or not this is a good thing is a separate
issue). They are in more positions of leadership as well.
No one denies this. Yet the rate of Muslim women losing
faith is not slowing or reversing. By all appearances, it is
accelerating. So what gives?
Ironically, if space/visibility/leadership are in fact tied to
the rate of Muslim women leaving Islam, as the feminists
argue, then if we want to reverse the trend, basic logic
would dictate that we had better reduce women’s space/
visibility/leadership in mosques and roll things back to that
Golden, pre-feminist era of Muslim history, i.e., the vast
majority of Muslim history.
Be honest. How many Muslim women do you know —
friends, family, classmates, co-workers, etc. — who have, in
recent years, taken off their hijabs completely or have gone
the way of the turban (garish and off-putting as feminized
turbans are)?
Be honest. How many Muslim women do you know
who were by all considerations “pretty religious” not
more than two or three years ago but now are constantly

98

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

kvetching about the patriarchy and the “gendered” nature
of traditional Islam, Islamic law, Islamic scholarship, etc.?
Be honest. How many Muslim women do you know who
were serious students of knowledge, merrily learning about
Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya or perhaps Imam Al-Shafi`i,
perhaps wearing niqab and avoiding things like make-up
and mixing, but now are cheap Linda Sarsour clones with
genitalia hats ranting about intersectionality and trans
rights at the spoken word night at the local night club?
Let’s be honest.
Alhamdulillah, there are plenty of sisters who are holding
things down and rejecting the feminist tide. But outside of
them, things are getting worse and worse as far as some
Western Muslim women are concerned. To insist that this
has nothing to do with the adoption of feminist ideology is
sheer delusion. Irresponsible delusion.
So if abuse, space/visibility, and leadership don’t explain
the loss of modesty and faith, how exactly does adoption of
feminism explain apostasy among Muslim women?
Well, call me crazy, but it seems obvious to me that if a
Muslima adopts the feminist premise that genders must
be treated exactly equally, she is going to be disinclined
towards a religion, like Islam, that specifies very different
roles for each gender. If a Muslima adopts the feminist
premise that modesty and dress codes are a way for men to
manipulate women, she is going to be disinclined towards
a religion that emphasizes modesty and strict female
dress codes. If a Muslima adopts the feminist premise that
historically men have subjugated women through an evil
patriarchal cabal, she is going to be disinclined towards a
religion that teaches that “Men are authorities over women,”

FEMINISM

99

(Quran 4:34) and where the vast majority of its scholars and
religious authorities were and continue to be men. And so
on. This is not a mystery, folks.
Let me also say that the majority of the blame for this
crisis goes to white knights. White knights are those
religious men who give currency to feminist ideas. These
are the self-hating men who are constantly shouting about
how much, “Muslim men are trash!” and how “We do really
have a problem with patriarchy.” These men are dangerous
because they lend religious legitimacy to the feminist
project. These are the men who allow the feminist virus to
spread and to thrive. And whenever anyone points out the
problems with the feminist project, these white knights are
the loudest in shouting down objectors with red herrings
and other fallacies.
So, white knights are the real problem here, especially
the imams among them. The Muslim feminists would fizzle
out very quickly were it not for religious leaders constantly
pandering to them and legitimizing their garbage by
pretending to be “good Muslim men.” The only thing more
vapid and more dangerous than the Muslim feminist is the
Muslim white knight.
WHO WANTS TO DEBATE PATRIARCHY?
In 2015, I was asked to participate in a debate on patriarchy
and feminism at a local masjid. A month or so after the
date was set and announced on social media, the event
was abruptly canceled for reasons that were never made
clear to me.

10 0

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

I’ll be honest: This was not the first time that something
like this had happened and I’m sure it won’t be the last. I
am not going to speculate as to why this particular masjid
canceled this particular event. I don’t even know who was
responsible for canceling the event or exactly why he/she/
they did so.
In preparing for the debate, I put together some brief
notes on the basic thrust of my position (below). Obviously,
it is a position some find deeply offensive — offensive
enough to censor. But I think it is high time we ask these
important questions even though, for whatever reason, they
are considered politically incorrect. I think we should be
able to debate ideas in a respectful and academic fashion,
especially ideas that have such a major influence on the
Muslim community and the Muslim mind and are the source
of much doubt.
Unfortunately, there are those who do not want to see
such a conversation happen and will shut down anyone
who tries to have it.
In any case, what I had planned to do was defend my
position using a wide range of arguments and evidence
from historical and philosophical material as well as the
work of feminists themselves. I also had arguments lined
up in defense of classical scholars that Muslim feminists
have viciously attacked over the years.
There is a common perspective that has grown
increasingly more influential since the dawn of Second
Wave feminism that one of the primary power dynamics
within every society — in addition to the dynamics between
different socio-economic classes, races, tribal affiliations,
etc. — is the power dynamics between the genders. Just like

FEMINISM

1 01

different political factions and classes are vying for power
in every society, so are the genders, men against women.
All societies experience a power differential in this regard,
and universally it has been the case that men dominate
women — this is patriarchy.
In our times, this domination is not necessarily overt
such that men are consciously dominating women, though
in some instances, that may be true as well. Rather, we
have inherited a patriarchal system with ossified power
structures that continue to subjugate women. It is our moral
duty, argue feminists, to fight against these patriarchal
structures. All of this applies in spades to Islamic history.
Here feminists will have some disagreements. The default
feminist position as represented by their leading scholars
is that all religion is inherently patriarchal and therefore
oppressive to women.
Muslim feminists take issue with this and claim, to the
contrary, that God is not patriarchal and does not desire to
subjugate women to men. Rather, God’s revealed religion,
Islam, is fully egalitarian and it is only a patriarchal reading
of that religion by men which gives us rules and customs that
oppress Muslim women. From this point, different Muslim
feminists draw the line in different places. Are the rules
of polygyny, say, part of true Islam or are they patriarchal
accretions? Some say yes, some say no. Are certain hadith
on women true Islam or just patriarchal fabrications? Are
certain classical scholars opining on women presenting
an honest, valid understanding of true Islam, or is it just
a patriarchal bias coloring their views? There are over a
hundred “controversial” examples of where, from the
perspective of your average modern non-Muslim feminist,
Islam oppresses, or at least disenfranchises women. And

10 2

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

different Muslim feminists will take different strategies in
countering that perspective in defending the notion that
true Islam is egalitarian.
My view is that the entire feminist project, whether of the
secular or Muslim variety, is misguided. In reality, there are
major conceptual and evidential problems with the entire
notion of societal conflict based on gender. The idea that
men have constructed and maintained a universal structure,
namely patriarchy, to systematically take advantage of
women and prioritize men’s interests over women’s is not
substantiated by historical facts or theoretical scrutiny. Yes,
patriarchy exists in the sense that men have had authority
in every society of history. But that authority was for the
benefit of all, not merely the benefit of men at the expense
of women.
As far as what is at stake in this conversation, these are
some of the main questions that come to my mind.
What are the theological implications of understanding
1400 years of the Muslim scholarly tradition as being by
and large immersed in and, to at least some extent, guided
by patriarchal oppression? What are the ontological
implications of claiming that every society past and present
suffered from patriarchy, i.e., what does this mean for
human nature and, by extension, God Himself, who created
that human nature and that human history? Is patriarchy an
adequate or accurate explanation of the problems Muslim
societies face with regard to gender relations, domestic
abuse, etc. (i.e., problems that I do not deny exist)?
As these questions are meant to imply, the idea of
patriarchy as a universal system of male oppression against
women is extremely damaging to the Muslim mind. This

FEMINISM

1 03

is because the idea effectively renders all of religion and
religious authority as an arm of patriarchy, which means
that religion, either in its entirety or in large part, is a tool
to oppress women for the benefit of men.
Is it any surprise, then, that Muslim feminists accept and
espouse increasingly radical and deviant views and many
of them ultimately apostatize?
Certainly, it is depressing to see even otherwise religiously
devout Muslim women accepting the basic premises
of feminism, including the idea of universal oppressive
patriarchy extending throughout history.
In reality, all branches and varieties of feminism are
anathema to Islam. Muslim feminists might disagree with
this, but it does not change the fact. This is proven by a
simple argument:
1. One cannot be committed to feminism without accepting the Patriarchal Thesis, i.e., the thesis that there
exists a social structure perpetuated by men designed
to subjugate and oppress women that has existed since
the dawn of civilization.
2. The Patriarchal Thesis is anathema to Islam.
3. Therefore, Feminism is anathema to Islam.
Why is the Patriarchal Thesis (PT) so noxious as far as
Islam is concerned?
First of all, PT undermines the very notion of nubuwwa.
All anbiya who preached to humanity and stood in front of
their people to call to Islam were men. Were all these anbiya
part of the patriarchal structure used to dominate women?
PT also undermines the scholarly tradition. The vast
majority of ulama in our tradition were men, and the

10 4

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

most influential and prolific of them were men. And all of
them, literally all of them, espoused a plethora of views
that modern feminists consider toxic masculine misogynist
drivel of the worst kind. Were all these men part of the
patriarchal system used to oppress women?
PT undermines Islamic theology itself. If the patriarchy is
this entrenched, destructive force plaguing humanity and
inflicting so much pain and suffering, why doesn’t the Quran
address it? Why didn’t the Prophet ձ address it? Can the
Quran and Sunnah be considered complete guidance when
they do not call out this systematic oppression? Feminists
maintain that patriarchy is among the greatest forces
of evil in all human history, yet there is not even a word
for it in Arabic. Not a single verse or hadith dedicated to
sounding the alarm bells, warning humanity of this terrible
oppression. Why?
These are the logical entailments feminists make with
respect to Islam and that is why Muslim feminists go
through phases of disillusion with Islam and many end
up leaving. They start by throwing the scholars of our
tradition under the bus for having “evil” patriarchal views
of women. Then they graduate to attacking the prophets
(remember “Muslim reformist” Amina Wadud insulting
Prophet Ibrahim?). Then they graduate to criticizing the
Quran. Why did Allah use masculine pronouns to refer to
Himself? Why did Allah create Adam, a man, first? Why did
Allah reveal verse 4:34? etc.
This is the inherent theological tension created by the
Patriarchal Thesis. And it leads many Muslim feminists to
adopt increasingly deviant views and even apostatize.

FEMINISM

1 05

So those who want to claim that Feminism and Islam are
compatible, confront the 1-2-3 argument above. You have
limited options. I’ll make it easy and lay it out:
1. You can either argue that one can be a feminist and not
accept PT, i.e., the idea of ever-present patriarchy subjugating women since time immemorial.
2. Or you can argue that PT does not undermine Islam.
Which one is it?
Those who are fine with throwing the male-dominated
scholarly tradition under the bus (the “reform,” “progressive”
type as well as “Quranists,” et al.) will take Option 2. But
normal Muslims with correct aqida recognize that without
the male-dominated scholarly tradition, the Quran would
not have reached us, the Sunnah would not have reached
us, Islam would not have been preserved, etc. If you throw
the ulama out, you throw Islam out. The scholars are the
inheritors of the prophets. Anyone who wants to claim that
the scholars were systematically biased on a global scale
and unjust against women is undermining the morality of
the ulama and is therefore undermining Islam itself.
In any case, I maintain that this is a logical assessment.
Those who disagree are free to provide logical rebuttals.
Spare me the emotional appeals, ad hominem whining, and
white knight histrionics.
NB: Let me provide some disambiguation. Of course,
the patriarchy does exist. Islam is a patriarchal religion.
According to Islamic Law, lineage is patrilineal and social
and family structures have authority flowing through the
patriarch and other males figures. But patriarchy in the
feminist sense is different in that it ascribes maliciousness to
these structures. The feminist claim is that these patriarchal

10 6

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

institutions are designed by men with the evil intention to
frustrate the interests of women for the benefit of men. In
other words, an evil cabal of men are perpetually conspiring
to sabotage poor, innocent, naive women at every turn and
the brave feminists have discovered this dastardly plot only
in the past few decades and are fighting the good fight to
abolish it. Yeah, it sounds crazy because it is.
It has become absolutely critical for Muslim intellectuals
and imams to debunk this Patriarchy Thesis before another
generation of Muslims falls under the spell. There are many
ways to do this.
First of all, one should acknowledge that, yes, there are
men who abuse women and there are larger institutions,
including some religious institutions, that mistreat women
and usurp their rights. This cannot be ignored—domestic
abuse (physical and emotional), treating women like
garbage, preventing women from having any influence on
their household and their larger communities, overlooking
sexual abuse, etc. These are all problems that need to
be addressed in all societies of the world. But do these
problems stem from a large, inescapable system of men
working to keep women subjugated? Or are these problems
that arise due to certain abusive, selfish, ignorant, evil
people that happen to be men (or even women)?
ISLAMIC LAW MAKES IT EASY FOR HUSBANDS TO
OPPRESS WIVES
Q: Why does Islamic law make it easy for an evil husband
to oppress his wife?

FEMINISM

1 07

A: In today’s age and with today’s social structures and
some of the backwards cultural practices we find in some
Muslim countries, yes, it may be easy for a malevolent
husband to oppress his wife, to divorce her, to take
advantage of her, to abuse her, and so on. But for most of
Muslim history, this was not so easy. This is because the
familial and social structure in most places throughout
history were kinship based, i.e., based on the “extended”
family. While it is easy for a husband to oppress his wife in
today’s world, where families are very small and isolated
and people have no connection to their parents, extended
family, relatives, and so on, in the past, a wife could rely
on these networks to support her against an oppressive or
otherwise unreasonable husband. In fact, it was in the best
interest of the family to defend its female members from
such abuse, since dysfunctional families cannot produce
functional children who will contribute positively to the
tribe or extended family. It just made sense to watch for
your own and with that kind of backing, women were not
automatically in a position of de facto weakness in the face
of a potentially malevolent husband.
It is today in modern society that women do not have
much recourse against abusive husbands. Women today
have to rely on state institutions to provide them support,
and obviously state institutions are not always in a position
to help, and at the end of the day, women are forced to rely
on a cold bureaucratic system whereas family networks
of the past could prosecute and hold an abusive husband
accountable in a direct and immediate way. As the historical
record will attest, this is how things were done for thousands
of years, but modern society has dissolved the extended
family and forced people to rely on state (and corporate)

10 8

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

bureaucracy. The extended family is a crucial structure
of functional human living according to Islam’s vision of
human existence and this is emphasized in and assumed
by the Sharia itself. The fact that many of our societies in
the East and West are suffering such problems should tell
us something about the viability of certain modern social
structures and the dismantling of the extended family and
its authority in our time.
So the real question is, should we reform Islamic law to
conform to the diktats of modern society, which is suffering
from all these problems, or should we reform these social
structures and bring back those institutions that past
civilizations, Muslim and non-Muslim, took for granted for
thousands of years?
CRITICIZING FEMINISM THE RIGHT WAY
Yes, I have my (many) criticisms of feminism, but I have
to say that it is not right to silence or dismiss others by
branding them feminists. There are many instances of
abuse against women all around us and even in our families.
And when that abuse is called out, those cries for help and
justice shouldn’t be delegitimized by being called feminist.
If being concerned for the well-being of women is feminism,
then I would count myself as a feminist.
The reality, however, is that feminism is only superficially
concerned with the well-being of women. When you
look deeper and study the historical development and
conceptual genealogy of feminism, it is apparent how
much of it is contrary to women’s interests. So, no, I don’t
actually consider myself a feminist. But we need to be able

FEMINISM

1 09

to distinguish an academic critique of a philosophy from
this kind of despicable enablement of abuse of women.
And abuse is not limited to the physical, of course.
Emotional manipulation is equally if not more damaging.
WOMEN’S WELLBEING, NOT FEMINISM
I thought it was obvious, but I guess I was wrong, so here it
is spelled out. Being opposed to feminism does not mean
one is opposed to women’s rights. And being in favor of
women’s rights does not mean one is a feminist. Feminism
does not have a monopoly on representing the interests of
women. In fact, it often sabotages those interests.
THE POLITICAL AND SOCIAL POWER OF
MOTHERHOOD
Modern society has denigrated the importance of
motherhood to such a degree that even mothers develop
severe insecurities and depression at the thought of being
a “mere housewife” or “just a stay-at-home mom.” The
word “stay-at-home mom” itself is a dirty word, and bears
connotations of powerlessness, meekness, timidness,
abject dependence, and victim-hood. To be a stay-at-home
mother means that you have either been coerced into such
a destitute position or, even worse, you chose it for yourself.
And sure, as long as it was your choice, that is fine — society
will tolerate that purely for the sake of freedom of choice.
That’s the only value that that decision could have in the
eyes of modern people: that it was a decision freely made.
If you decided to dedicate your life to something trivial and

110

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

meaningless, that would be just as valuable as choosing to
be a stay-at-home mom.
Motherhood in itself, however, has no larger significance
in our day and age. Sure, people recognize the importance
of loving your mom in the personal sense of “I guess I should
not be a complete jerk to the person who brought me into
this world. Maybe I will send her a card on Mother’s Day.” But
beyond that, there is not much more of an understanding
of the significance and influence mothers really have and
ought to have.
Consider this quote from a Christian writer:
“Yes, my wife is JUST a mother. JUST. She JUST
brings forth life into the universe, and she JUST
shapes and molds and raises those lives. She JUST
manages, directs and maintains the workings of the
household, while caring for children who JUST rely
on her for everything. She JUST teaches our twins
how to be human beings, and, as they grow, she
will JUST train them in all things, from morals, to
manners, to the ABC’s, to hygiene, etc. She is JUST
my spiritual foundation and the rock on which our
family is built. She is JUST everything to everyone.
And society would JUST fall apart at the seams if
she, and her fellow moms, failed in any of the tasks
I outlined. Yes, she is just a mother. Which is sort
of like looking at the sky and saying, ‘Hey, it’s just
the sun.’”

This blogger is speaking in terms of appreciation, i.e., we
should appreciate mothers and not think that just because
some of them may not have 9 to 5 jobs, that doesn’t mean
they are not contributing to society, are lazy, etc.

FEMINISM

111

Appreciation is a good message, but the other aspect
of it is that we should understand the sheer influence of
mothers. Ultimately, they are the ones molding the next
generation of humanity as they see fit. Why do modernity
and feminism not recognize the power inherent to that?
Supposedly, all the power in society is found in the public
sphere, in business, in politics, etc., and these are arenas
dominated by men in patriarchal societies. But that view
completely disregards the exercise of power in the private
sphere (if we can even make such neat distinctions between
“public” and “private”).
From this perspective, by choosing to be stay-at-home
moms, women would be taking back a major source of
economic, social, and political power — the power to
deeply influence the upbringing of all members of society
and thus to shape the world itself. Rather than be insecure
or depressed at the thought of motherhood, today’s
women should seize the opportunity and be enterprising
in their approach. We associate qualities like intelligence,
dedication, vision, resourcefulness, and tenacity to
professional careers, e.g., working for a start-up or a
Fortune 500 company. But these qualities apply in spades
to motherhood, so why do people insist that women who go
to college or even get advanced degrees and then become
mothers are “wasting” their talent and “throwing away
professional opportunities”? People are miserably confused.
TRIPLE TALAQ
Many people don’t understand the issue of triple talaq.
Obviously, a husband who issues three talaqs altogether
against his wife has committed a stupid and offensive act.

112

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

And the fact that the divorce is binding and final according
to all the madhahib means the husband is the one getting
punished, not the wife! The husband loses his mahr and his
wife. The wife should feel fortunate to get out of a marriage
to a man who is so careless and unhinged that he loses
control and utters talaq three times like a petulant child.
So how is it helping Muslim women when the new Indian
law, passed by the racist criminal thugs of the Indian Hindu
BJP politcal party, bans triple talaq?
Banning triple talaq means that the husband doesn’t
get punished for his reckless behavior and the wife has to
continue living with such a person. And if she wants to get
out of the marriage through khul`, she has to give up her
mahr. So it is a lose-lose situation for her.
Muslim feminists celebrating this new law simply don’t
know what they’re talking about (as per usual).
Rather than focusing on banning triple talaq, the focus
should be on bad cultural attitudes toward divorce that
are not a part of Islam. Why should a woman be seen as
a persona non grata simply because she is a divorcee?
Why should her family or the community shun her or see
her in a bad light? This is not right. Divorce happens. It is
unfortunate, but that is life and that is why Allah has made
it permissible out of His wisdom. Do people think they know
better than Allah?
It is not the Islamic tradition and its fiqh that need to be
reformed. Yes, triple talaq is an abuse of the husband’s right
of talaq, but the fiqh has inbuilt deterrent against it, viz.,
making the divorce final. But any right given in the Sharia
can be abused. For example, a woman’s right to nafaqa
(maintenance) can be and is abused by some Muslim

FEMINISM

113

women, who basically gouge their husbands financially.
The right to mahr can be and is also abused by asking for
exorbitant mahr. Does this mean we dissolve a Muslim
woman’s right to nafaqa and mahr? Doing so would mean
dissolving Islamic marriage itself. Same with reforming or
banning the right of talaq for men.
In reality, what needs to be reformed and excised is
attitudes towards divorce that have been borrowed from
Hinduism and Christianity.
May Allah allow us to be true guardians and protectors of
our Muslim mothers, daughters, and sisters by following the
Quran, Sunnah, and its scholarly tradition, not by reforming
and ignoring those sources of guidance.
NB: I know that a small minority of scholars considered
triple talaq at one time as one talaq and I know some
contemporary scholars use this position for their fatawa.
The above is not trying to argue about the fiqh. Rather the
concern is with how traditional fiqh is misunderstood and
how that misunderstanding leads to mistaken calls for
reform of Islam.

CHAPTER

6

HIJAB
WHAT IS OPPRESSIVE ABOUT HIJAB REQUIREMENTS
IN SOME MUSLIM COUNTRIES?
Question

Answer

Question

Answer
Question
Answer
Question

Answer

What is oppressive about the mandatory
hijab requirements for women in some
Muslim countries?
It is oppressive because women can’t wear
whatever they want. They don’t have the
ability to choose.
But is there any country in the world that
allows people to wear whatever they want,
i.e., unlimited choice?
Yes, Western countries of course!
In these Western countries, can a person walk
around in public with his genitals exposed?
Well, no.
So would requiring her to cover himself be
oppressive according to your definition of
oppression? Wouldn’t this mean that, in these
countries, a person can’t always choose?
No, because exposing one’s genitals violates
principles of decency and civility. It’s very
different from exposing one’s hair.

116
Question

Answer
Question
Answer
Question

Answer
Question

Answer

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Who decided that exposing one particular
area of the body (genitalia) violates decency
and civility and exposing another part of the
body (hair) is perfectly acceptable?
Uh, that’s just what is normal.
Who decided that? What is that based on?
Where does such an idea even come from?
Uh…
Are you not aware of the hundreds of
cultures and societies past and present that
draw the lines differently, that have different
conceptions of nudity, that have different
standards of decency, etc.?
Uh…
Do you have any principled basis to appeal
to, to at least try to justify why Western
standards should be the default around the
world, and even in Muslim countries?
Uh…

You see, Islamic standards of public dress are based on
Divine commands. What should or should not be covered
comes from what Allah has commanded, and insofar as
we believe in Allah, we follow that guidance and strive to
understand the larger cosmic significance and wisdom of
those commands. Others might not believe in any of this,
but at least Muslims have some reasoning that follows
higher principles.
But the Western standards of dress imposed on all are
based on nothing more than cultural norms, and cultural
norms have no principled basis. They ultimately boil down

HIJAB

117

to, “This is just what we do,” or “This is what we found our
forefathers doing and we just follow them because that’s
what is comfortable.” There’s nothing more to it.
Yet, they are so confident and so militant when it comes
to their views on dress, views that are ultimately based on
nothing. But our views are based on the firmest foundation,
yet we easily cave in and throw it away for the sake of
meaningless cliches about “choice” and “freedom,” cliches
that fall apart with the slightest bit of scrutiny.
NB: The above does not constitute “the reason” a Muslim
woman should wear hijab. It is, rather, the response to a
very specific and very common argument made against
Islam and Muslim societies, namely that they are oppressive,
irrational, and do not respect the freedom of choice.
PRODUCTIVE WAYS TO DISCUSS THE HIJAB
Do we have a problem with countries that ban people from
wearing KKK garb or Nazi uniforms or Confederate flags in
public? Hopefully not. But what if the people of a country
— like France — feel about the hijab how we feel about KKK,
Nazi, and Confederate dress?
This is not speculation. This is more or less what
secularists in France, Germany, and elsewhere argue,
namely that the hijab represents to them the worst kind
of oppression and it doesn’t matter what Muslims say the
hijab means any more than what neo-Nazis say the swastika
means. All that matters is what the hijab symbolizes to them,
and to their society at large.
Muslims should contest that characterization. But that
would have to involve something more substantive than

118

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

“I should have the freedom to wear whatever I want.” That
argument is certainly not going to move anyone, much less
disabuse the secularists of their negative attitudes toward
the hijab.
Insisting that the “hijab is a choice” is equally ineffective
since the secularists don’t really disagree: they believe the
hijab is part of a larger system of patriarchal oppression and
that Muslim women are so steeped in that system that they
don’t even realize that they are being subjugated by means
of veil despite their conscious choice to wear it.
So how else could Muslims engage in a productive
dialogue with non-Muslims about the hijab? Using the
example of the Virgin Mary when speaking to Christians is
an obvious choice.
We should draw on other historical examples. Modern
bare-all dress, after all, is a recent aberration. We should
discuss the effects of nudity and the sexualization of public
spaces on people’s behavior and their psychologies (i.e.,
their hearts and minds).
What about the significance of covering up and adorning
oneself with fabric being uniquely human? Muslims of
course draw on our knowledge of Adam and Eve, but even
secularists have to admit that animals don’t cover in the
same way. Animals don’t use fabric to hide the body and
obfuscate its contours. Secularists certainly celebrate
human reason, which is another distinguishing factor that
sets humanity apart from the animal kingdom. Covering
the body ought to be understood similarly, as a mark of
humanity.
But even if secularists want to invoke naturalism and
claim that “nudity is more natural” as demonstrated by

HIJAB

119

the animals kingdom, we should consider how even that is
not exactly the case. Look at mating rituals and how males
and females will adorn themselves and will participate in
intricate dances and movements to attract the other. Even
for animals, mating is not some brute affair of two naked
bodies coming in contact and copulating. No, even animals
take each other’s “clothes” very seriously: coloration,
thickness of fur, intricacy of pigmentation pattern, etc.
Even animals are concerned with externalities and form
in a deliberate and even sophisticated way. And there are
more than a few species where the female in particular will
hide herself from males and make herself scarce so that
the males have to work extra hard to “prove themselves”
in order to win over their better half. But apparently, some
humans think that stripping down to their skin or baring
their bodies in other ways, taking pictures of said bodies,
and “matching” on a smart phone dating app is all that
is necessary and desirable before exposing themselves to
intimacy and all its vulnerabilities.
And what about futurism? If you look at the cusp of
experimental fashion, you will see much that is reminiscent
of the hijab. Certainly women covering the face and hair
is a part of some of these fashions. If Western culture and
society is continuously advancing, undoubtedly the styles
of today will be obsolete tomorrow. Such is the endless
march of “progress,” we are told. If women today are
inclined to skimpier outfits and brandishing their hair, it
serves to reason that preferences will shift and the trend
will reverse. In which case, Muslim dress is hardly out of
place in that wider context.
These are just brief examples, but each one has the
potential to lead to thought-provoking discussions about

120

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

the significance and meaning of dress, and as I keep saying,
that’s the level of discussion that needs to happen: on the
level of meaning and values. Invoking empty notions like
“freedom of choice” forestalls that discussion, sabotages it,
and puts Muslims in a losing position. Time to change our
strategy.
THE FRENCH AND THE HIJAB
You have to admire the French. They have strong views
about what parts of the body should and should not be
covered.
Muslims used to have strong views about what parts of
the body should and should not be covered.
The French base their views on some vague, baseless
metaphysical notions of human dignity and, of course, a
rejection of God. But their conviction is unmatched.
Muslims base their views on their commitment to God,
His laws, and the grounding of religious and spiritual ethics.
But apparently all that does not inspire real conviction in
some of them, at least not the conviction the French enjoy.
After all, the French are willing to stake a claim and say
boldly, “This is what is proper. This is what is right.”
The most some Muslims can say in response to this is,
“Yeah, you’re probably right. But maybe some women want
to wear a veil every now and then and their choice should
be respected if that’s OK with you. And if not, then shame
on you for not respecting their choice, boo hoo hoo.”
Why should the French or anyone else respect that?
They believe that the veil is fundamentally an affront to

HIJAB

121

civilization. They believe it is an abomination. There is no
respect for what one finds morally detestable.
Rather than address the issue on that moral level, rather
than find a backbone and make the deeper arguments that
cut to the core of the issue and doggedly interrogate the
assumptions and inconsistencies underlying French and
Western attitudes about the human body, nudity, sex, and
gender — rather than do this serious work, we are content
to sit and whine about ‘respecting choice” and “religious
freedom” and all this nonsense which is not even our
vocabulary, it’s not a part of our intellectual tradition, but
we use it anyway because we think others will accept it.
Newsflash. They won’t.
So a tip of the hat to the French. If only some of these
Muslims had an ounce of your conviction, it would be
Muslims setting standards of dress for you instead of the
other way around.
FALLACIES REGARDING HIJAB
Does Hijab Have Any Affect on Sexual Harassment?
This is a common argument I hear against the utility
of modest dress and the hijab, namely that “modestly
dressed women, even women in full hijab, are still victims
of catcalling and sexual assault. So clearly modest dress
and hijab have no impact in protecting women from sexual
harassment.”
But this is a flawed argument because no one claims
that dressing modestly will completely foreclose on the
possibility of receiving negative attention. The claim is

122

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

simply that, all else being equal, modest dress, e.g., hijab,
significantly reduces the likelihood of such harassment.
So, yes, while women in hijab are, unfortunately, frequent
victims of catcalling in Cairo’s busy streets, for example,
the undeniable fact remains that the harassment would
be much, much worse if these same women were dressed
in yoga pants, tank tops, and other common Western styles.
And it helps that the relevant ayah is clear on its own:
“O Prophet, tell your wives and your daughters and the
women of the believers to bring down over themselves
[part] of their outer garments. ȄþƷŎƪůŻƢĩƪƿŎƷþĚŦĩƷŉþƷ
ƷŉĩǢǜŎŦŦĚĩţűŻǜűþűĢűŻƷĚĩþĚƿƪĩĢ. And ever is Allah
Forgiving and Merciful.”
Al-Ahzab [Q33:59]

THERE IS NO PRACTICAL PURPOSE FOR THE HIJAB
Person A: I am done with seat-belts. They’re a
waste of time.
Person B: What? Are you crazy?!
Person A: Not at all. Wearing a seat-belt is just
symbolic, an empty ritual, some would
even say a “performance of piety” to
show the world how much you abide by
arbitrary laws sent down to us from on
high. And while some people choose
to undertake that performance — and I
respect their choice — I choose to forego
it.

HIJAB

123

Person B: Well, yeah, you can describe it like
that but that doesn’t mean seat-belts
are useless. They serve an important
practical purpose.
Person A: Ha! Like what?
Person B: For starters, they protect you from
getting hurt in a car accident.
Person A: That’s ridiculous. Did you know that
some people wear seat-belts and still
get injured when they get into a car
wreck? Some people even die despite
wearing a seat-belt. Clearly seat-belts
are useless and do absolutely nothing to
protect you.
Person B: …what? Just because a seat-belt doesn’t
magically save you from any and all
harm, doesn’t mean it’s useless.
Person A: Sorry, but you’re wrong. I know plenty
of people who were wearing a seatbelt and still got injured. Some of these
people were even driving in countries
where wearing seat-belts is very
common. Can you believe that?

124

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Person B: You’re making a logical error. Just
because a seat-belt does not and cannot
protect you 100% doesn’t mean that
it provides no protection at all. All else
being equal, wearing the seat-belt
significantly reduces the possibility of
injury and death.
Person A: Stop shaming non-seat-belt wearers!
If I am driving without a seat-belt and
I get hit by a drunk driver and I get
seriously injured or die, that’s the drunk
driver’s fault, not mine. Stop it with your
disgusting victim blaming!
Person B: …what? Obviously the drunk driver is at
fault, but that has nothing to do with
wearing a seat-belt. The fact that there
are crazy, irresponsible people in the
world doesn’t take anything away from
the practicality of wearing a seat-belt. In
fact, the existence of those irresponsible
people makes wearing a seat-belt all
the more essential from a practical
perspective.
Person A: GAH! I’m done with your seatbeltsplaining! You disgust me!
Person B: …uh…

HIJAB

125

Person A: Just another example of seat-belt
wearer’s privilege, smugly judging those
of us who want to exercise our free
choice about what we wear while driving.
This is EXACTLY what is wrong with the
world today.
Person B: I don’t mean to offend you. Actually,
if you look in your car’s owners
manual, even the car manufacturers
themselves say you need to wear a
seat-belt to prevent injury. Are the
car manufacturers being smug and
insensitive too?
Person A: That’s just YOUR biased, seat-belt
wearing interpretation of the owners
manual. We need a non-seat-belt
wearers interpretation of the owners
manual. Stop pretending like you have
EXCLUSIVE right to interpret the owners
manual because you DON’T.
Person B: I don’t think the owners manual is
ambiguous on thisPerson A: THAT’S ENOUGH! You have NO idea
what it is like to be me and what I have
been through while driving my car, so
you have a lot of NERVE telling me
whether or not I should wear a seat-belt.
And to make matters worse, you want to
shame me into silence with the owners
manual! Do you even own a car?

126

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Person B: No, but I don’t see how that changes…
Person A: WOW, you’re not even a car owner but
you want to lecture ME on seat-belts! Do
yourself a favor and SHUT UP!
Thus concludes yet another productive discussion on hijab
and sexual harassment.
By the way, here is the relevant passage from our “owners
manual”:
“O Prophet, tell your wives and your daughters and the
women of the believers to bring down over themselves
[part] of their outer garments. ȄþƷŎƪůŻƢĩƪƿŎƷþĚŦĩƷŉþƷ
ƷŉĩǢǜŎŦŦĚĩţűŻǜűþűĢűŻƷĚĩþĚƿƪĩĢ. And ever is Allah
Forgiving and Merciful.”
Al-Ahzab [Q33:59]

HIJAB AND EMPOWERMENT CLICHES
Is wearing the hijab empowering? When Muslim feminists
say this, they explain it by appealing to the notion of
choice. A Muslim woman is empowered because she can
choose to dress as she wants. The choice is what confers
the power. But if this is what is meant by empowerment,
then if a woman chooses to dress in a bikini or something
else, that would be equally empowering since it is based
on her choice.
Is it any wonder that young Muslim girls who have been
raised on this notion of empowerment choose to forego
the hijab entirely? Why bother with the hijab when what is

HIJAB

127

important is choice and feeling empowered? You can feel
really empowered wearing fashionable clothes, looking
sexy, getting guys to notice you. That feels a lot more
empowering to the average woman or teen girl in our
society than covering up, getting stared at by people, etc.
So let’s drop the “empowerment” cliches please because,
even if it did make sense to some people at some point, at
the end of the day, it has done a lot more harm than good.
What is amazingly ironic is that, if we really want to
talk about hijab in terms of empowerment, there is a
very obvious and compelling way to do so. As it turns out,
covering yourself, hiding in plain sight, shielding yourself
from public view is universally understood as empowering.
Think of the CIA, MI6, and other secret, covert agencies. A
large part of their power comes from being out of public
view and being hidden.
The most powerful people of the world stay out of public
view. They avoid the tabloids and the photo ops. The US
Supreme Court judges, for example, are notoriously private.
Many of the meetings between the world’s richest people
and politicians happen behind closed doors.
And this is not something new. Sultans and kings of the
past made an art out of avoiding the gaze of the commoner.
To be seen by regular people was seen as diminishing to
one’s status. If they had no choice but to travel through
common streets, some Ottoman sultans would even don
the veil to avoid being seen. This is not unlike modern
politicians and rulers riding in their black limos with tinted
windows.
But for some reason, people today think that baring it
all for all to see is what is empowering. How foolish. How

128

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

contrary to common sense. Not only do they uncover
their bodies, they even display the intimate details of
their private lives. Social media makes it increasingly easy
to let strangers into your home. This is the opposite of
empowering. This is enslaving yourself to the eyes of others.
Instead of controlling the information people have about
you, you give it away for free, handing them the key to your
soul.
All societies understand the value of privacy but this is
a concept that has been thoroughly eroded for us today
due to the influence of corrupt ideologies like feminism.
Seen in this light, we can reflect on a possible wisdom of
the hijab. Women, as opposed to men, certainly have more
that can be coveted, though men have much to hide as well.
But women ultimately have more information to hide, so
to speak. They are more vulnerable to the predatory gaze
of others, whether those of men or even women. This is
just due to the qualities Allah has given women. So given
these assets, should women just give away everything for
free? They could, but that would be contrary to reason
and common sense. Not only would it be a major lost
opportunity, it would also make them vulnerable to harm
in a thousand different ways.
Fact of the matter is, women in the past understood the
high value of not being available for public view and they
leveraged this power for their personal ends, whether social,
financial, familial, or even political. But modern academics
and researchers simplistically think, “Those poor powerless,
voiceless Muslim women and their veils. How degrading.
How oppressive. What a tragedy!” Little do they know that
they’re the ones living a tragedy.

HIJAB

129

And of course, we know that the ultimate reason one
wears hijab is to be obedient to Allah and follow His
Commands with devotion and sincerity. Allah knows best.
“HIJAB IS ABOUT CHOICE” AND OTHER
CONFUSIONS
It is baseless and empty for Muslim women to talk about
the hijab by endlessly invoking the concept of “choice.” In
what sense does anyone “choose” his clothes?
Western women naively believe their wardrobes to be a
function of free and independent choice, yet, despite that
belief, the vast majority of garb “coincidentally” falls within
the narrow bounds of current fashion and the diktats of
Versace, Chanel, and an interminable supply of “hot or not”
lists Western women follow with a fervent taqlid that would
make the most fastidious Sufi murids seem delinquent.
If the way women in society dress were purely a function
of independent choice, we would see widely varying styles,
widely varying parts of the body exposed and covered,
widely varying sources for those clothes, etc. But we don’t
see that in Western society. We see relative uniformity in
every way. Women (and men, too, obviously) in society tend
to dress alike, abiding by shared notions of nudity, shared
notions of what is appropriate, what is fashionable, etc. A
big part of the uniformity is that the majority of people get
their clothes from the same retail outlet chains.
Sure, colors might vary, cuts, and fabrics might vary,
but it’s the same basic themes shared by all, yet people
are under the impression that what they wear is “by
choice.” Really, it’s nothing but an overexaggerated sense

130

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

of individualism. Sure, you might have chosen the kind of
blouse to wear, but, in the larger sense, you didn’t choose
to cover your chest. You didn’t choose the retail stores in
your area. You didn’t choose the mass distributed designs
that were rolled out into those stores, etc., etc.
No matter how narrow a range of variation you give
people, they will come to think of themselves as practicing
agency within that narrow range. Given how obsessed
Western society is with choice and individuality, this is
inevitable.
You have an army of women with the same yoga
pants, ugly boots, black jackets, wearing the same cheap
accessories, wearing the same low-quality perfume from
the same mass distributors, coloring their faces with the
same chemicals, in the same patterns, and telling Muslim
women in hijab that they are oppressed, lack agency, lack
freedom of choice, etc.
And you have those same Muslim women writing op-eds,
speaking out in interviews, pleading that they do indeed
have a choice, just like their non-Muslim, non-veiled
counterparts. GAH!
STOP SAYING DUMB THINGS ABOUT HIJAB
Unfortunately, everything Muslims today say and write
about hijab is polluted with distortions and misconceptions
that occlude the meaning, purpose, and significance of the
veil.
The stark reality is the hijab cannot be defended by
feminism. The hijab has nothing to do with “women’s
liberation” or “women’s choice” or “women’s empowerment”

HIJAB

131

or “objectification,” or any of these modern philosophical
concepts that are not only external to the Islamic worldview
but were historically defined in opposition to the Islamic
worldview as a means to attack it.
See, when someone says we should reject orthodox Islam
because orthodox Islam is not compatible with feminism,
our response should not be some strained attempt to show
how Islam is indeed feminist and all Muslims are feminists
and the Quran is feminist, etc., etc., ad nauseam.
Our response ought to be to ask, why should anyone care
about feminism? It should then be followed a thorough
intellectual critique of feminism, showing what a base,
destructive, inconsistent, and incoherent philosophy it
really is, and how despite its claim to further the interests
of women, it actually undermines those interests and
has done immeasurable damage to the female condition
and the human condition in our times. That would be a
principled response, but it would be politically incorrect,
I guess, so never mind. Wouldn’t want to offend anyone,
right?
NON-MUSLIMS LOVE BURKINIS, BUT WHY?
Explaining Islam using the vocabulary of liberalism is, at
best, counterproductive. Saying that something is “freeing”
or “liberating” is an empty claim because anything and
everything can be conceived by someone as liberating.
Some people feel liberated by X and others feel liberated
by Y. It’s entirely subjective, so you’re not saying anything
meaningful by resorting to these empty terms (especially
when people’s understanding of liberty is so heavily
influenced by contemporary cultural sensibilities and

132

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

hence they aren’t inclined to believe Muslims when they
say the hijab or whatever else is liberating or empowering,
etc.). It is especially counterproductive for us as Muslims
to use this vocabulary because there is so much meaning
to convey in our deen and our tradition. Why don’t we tap
into that expansive, deep reservoir of meaning to talk to
our neighbors, our friends, our family? Why do we insist on
scraping the shallow puddle of liberalism instead?
HOW NOT TO ARGUE AGAINST THE BURKINI BAN
When Muslims argue against the “burkini ban” or “hijab
bans” on grounds of “freedom of choice,” they are being
inconsistent.
All societies regulate dress and impose standards of dress
in one way or another. They might not always do it through
explicit laws banning garment X or mandating garment Y.
Most often it is done through social pressure.
For example, the reason some Muslim women in the West
decide to take off the hijab is due to social pressure. By
wearing the hijab, they feel like fish out of water. They feel
the stares from strangers and it makes them uncomfortable.
Maybe they have secular relatives that bug them about it
and pressure them to not wear it. Little things like that
accumulate until they decide to take off the hijab or change
their dress in other ways to conform to social standards. In
this way, society controls how people dress and when it
comes to Muslim garb, this pressure is quite powerful and
relentless.
So this whole notion of “free choice” makes no sense in
context of these powerful social pressures. People might

HIJAB

133

experience their choices as self-generated even though the
truth of the matter is that people typically choose from the
limited options social circumstances allow.
But that is not the point I want to make here. The point
I want to make is that Muslims, too, should want to exert
social control. In the ideal society of a Muslim, dressing
according to Allah’s standards is the norm. And even if in
this ideal society there are no overt dress codes enforced
by the law akin to what you find in some Muslim countries,
there is still going to be social pressure of a religious bent. In
that ideal society, the women in the bikinis and tight skirts
are the fish out of water and they will feel the pressure to
dress like everyone else around them, even if there weren’t
any dress code laws to penalize them. In this way, Islamic
religious norms would be imposed in much the same way
Western standards of dress are imposed today.
So what is the ideal society Muslims envision? Is it not the
society of the Prophet ձ? Even if we suppose that the early
Muslims abided by a strict secularism and did not have overt
regulations policing the dress of Muslims and non-Muslims
in public like we find in some Muslims countries today, we
still know that the majority of people in that society dressed
conservatively according to Islamic norms. And wouldn’t
those norms put a lot of pressure on everyone, Muslims
and non-Muslims, to dress similarly? Wouldn’t that amount
to social control and religious imposition, i.e., exactly the
kind of imposition secularism and these freedom of choice
arguments eschew?
The only way to avoid that inconsistency is to either deny
the validity of the freedom of choice arguments and stop

134

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

using them when convenient, or to deny that the societies
ruled by the Prophet ձ and the Sahaba were ideal.
Put it another way. The kind of society that is implied by
a commitment to freedom of choice does not exist, cannot
exist even in theory. And if it could exist, it would not look
like the kind of society Muslims value and aspire to. For
these reasons, freedom of choice should not be invoked
whenever hijab or other aspects of Islamic garb come under
fire.
Consistency is important.
WEARING HIJAB AS DISOBEDIENCE
In a recent BBC documentary about Islam and women, a
young Muslim woman (who wears hijab) was asked whether
hijab is a form of oppression.34 Her response was absolutely
chilling:
“For someone to tell me I have to wear the hijab, if
someone tells me to do that, I’m taking my hijab
off. If you’re going to force me to wear the hijab,
I’m taking it off. I wear this out of love, this is my
identity, this is something that I love and I wouldn’t
even say that I do it because my God tells me to do
it. Everything that my God tells me to do, He gives
me a choice, I’m doing it because [I] want to do it
and I love it. It’s part of my religion and I own it.”

The scary thing is, many younger Muslims will not
understand why this is so objectionable. They will not
recognize the kufr implied in a statement like this.

62"#$%%&'())---"AA0"0+":=)%.'%9,)&<7+%')1B8$<@.A8.;/819

HIJAB

135

This is the subtle corrosive power of liberalism that
deeply affects people without them even realizing it. How
could you think, “If God tells me to do something, I won’t
do it”? Well, it makes sense if you have been indoctrinated.
If you are forced to do something, then that takes away
from your “autonomy.” It takes away from your ability to
“freely choose.” And anything that reduces your freedom
and liberty in this way is evil. To take away your ability to
choose is to take away from your identity, from who you are.
“And what could be worse than that?” asks the young Muslim
who is steeped in the social-justice-warrior infused identity
politics of the age, promoted by Muslims and non-Muslims
alike.
The sticking point is here:
But doesn’t God command us to do certain things and
prohibit us from other things? And aren’t there steep
consequences for not submitting and obeying to God? This
is precisely what force and coercion are!
It is through this line of reasoning that those Muslims
affected by liberalism face two options. Option 1: God is
evil (wa na`udhu billah) or, Option 2: God is not evil, but
God doesn’t command us or prohibit us in anything either.
Both options are kufr.
The way out of this dilemma is to critique liberalism and
to deconstruct concepts like freedom, autonomy, coercion,
etc.

136

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

FEMINISM AND HIJAB (OR THE DANGERS OF
UNCRITICALLY ADOPTING MODERNIST DISCOURSE)
The way we dress (or undress) can negatively impact others.
Both Islamic ethics and secular law acknowledge this.
Islamically, for example, we know that the gaze affects
the heart and mind. If society is saturated with images of
people in a state of undress and the streets are full of men
and women flaunting their bodies, this leads to corruption
and widespread fasad.
But even secular culture recognizes the negative
consequences of such nudity. This is proven by the fact that
schools and other institutions maintain strict dress codes.
Also, all countries have indecent exposure laws. And there
have even been numerous scientific studies expounded on
the psychological and neurological harms of pornography.
The point of all this is to show that: Yes, your clothes
matter and it is wrong and deeply destructive for feminists
to claim that “women can dress or undress however they
want and no one has the right to tell them otherwise.” Yes,
people do have that right to tell women how to dress. In fact
Western governments exercise that right to tell women (and
men) how to dress when it comes to what they define as
“indecent exposure.” So, if Western governments exercise
that right, why can’t Islamic law? It’s the same underlying
principle, except that what Western society considers
“indecent” is not exactly what Islamic law considers as
such. What Western society considers indecent is highly
influenced by changing culture. In contrast, Islamic
standards are based on the timeless wisdom of the Creator

HIJAB

137

of human beings, who knows our nature and knows what
is truly beneficial or harmful.
Consider the Quranic on the issue of women’s dress:
“O Prophet! Tell thy wives and daughters, and the
believing women, that they should cast their outer
garments over their persons (when abroad): that is
most convenient, that they should be known (as such)
þűĢűŻƷůŻŦĩƪƷĩĢ‫ܒ‬űĢŦŦþŉŎƪǼƷ‫ܮ‬FŻƢłŎǛŎűł‫܌‬rŻƪƷ
Merciful.”
Al-Ahzab [Q33:59]

One of the central purposes of covering is spelled out very
clearly in this verse: To avoid molestation and harassment.
Here we see the wisdom of hijab, how it is objectively
beneficial, how it is rational and most conducive to justice
on the personal and societal level. Contrary to what
modernist Muslims seem to believe, hijab is not an empty
ritual with only symbolic significance. It is secular thought
that wants to portray the hijab as a mere cultural fossil with
no moral relevance at best, and as an impractical tool of
oppression by men and nothing else at worst. It is a secular
mindset to equate the hijab and the bikini and say that they
are both equally expressions of women’s freedom because
they both represent a woman’s choice and therefore her
empowerment. No, hijab is practically, rationally, and
morally superior. Be proud of that instead of repeating stale
cliches about “the power of choice.”
Do you not believe that Allah has commanded the hijab
for a purpose, a wisdom, and the benefit of humanity?
If so, then you should reject the modernist claim that
it is a good thing for people to expose their bodies. You

138

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

should reject the idea that everyone has a right to expose
themselves to their own liking. You should believe that
there is a practical benefit for hijab in the same way that
there is a practical benefit that we readily recognize in
avoiding alcohol, gambling, pork, etc. Obviously, if you live
in a non-Muslim society, there’s hardly ever a possibility
of “imposing” these beliefs on others. But that doesn’t
mean you cannot believe that these injunctions are the
most correct, just, and beneficial for all of humanity and
that the way things are done all around us is detrimental
and the cause of corruption and suffering. Cherishing and
nurturing this belief is important if, among other things, we
want our children to observe proper hijab in the future. If
we don’t believe that hijab has this practical benefit, there is
little chance many in the next generation will feel the need
to adopt what they will see as empty symbolic gestures or
cultural relics of a prior, unenlightened generation. Indeed,
this is what we see today, not only among the youth but also
the previous few generations. If you look at our condition,
Muslim women today are leaving the hijab en masse. Why
is that? And this is not just to say that it is Muslim women
who are at fault or to blame anyone who does not wear
hijab. No, we are all responsible and we are all struggling.
But let’s struggle with clear-mindedness.
O Muslims, throw away the empty cliches and open your
eyes.

CHAPTER

7

SCIENCE &
SCIENTISM
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT SCIENTIFIC
MIRACLES IN THE QURAN
Do a Google search on “scientific miracles in the Quran”
and you will get millions of results, including web pages,
videos, and images. It is not surprising that, as Muslims,
we would be keen to have our holy book validated by the
dominant epistemic channel of the day, i.e., science. For
the vast majority of the world’s population, regardless of
race, ethnicity, or creed, science is synonymous with truth,
and, if a religious book is truly from God, then it ought to
be compatible with science.
By this reasoning, what clearer evidence could there
be of the divine origin of the Quran than the fact that it
miraculously contains foreknowledge of scientific matters
that could not have been known 1400 years ago? While this
sounds appealing and sensible, we should step back and
clear up some confusions.

14 0

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Misconception 1: “Science and the Quran never
conflict.”
Some Muslims claim that the Quran is 100% “scientifically
accurate.” Again, it is easy to understand why Muslims
would say this. Science is seen as a perfect representation of
reality and the Quran is the speech of the One who created
that reality. Therefore, logically, there should be perfect
accord between the two.
The problem with this, however, is that science is not
a perfect representation of reality. You do not have to
be a Kuhnian postmodernist to accept this. Even the
scientific community acknowledges that much of science
is provisional in nature, meaning that science is always
updating and evolving as new facts are discovered.
For example, the most scientifically robust theory we
have today is Quantum Field Theory (QFT). Yet, physicists
believe that QFT is either completely false or, at best,
an imperfect approximation of a more complete, more
accurate theory (one that can take into account the force
of gravity).
Few, if any, scientists today would claim that they know
the absolute truth in their field of research. (Scientists with
a Popperian bent might even say science can never know
the truth 100% but only disconfirm competing hypotheses.)
In short, science is incomplete, and often it is wrong. What
scientists hold as fact one day is often overturned the next.
As a concrete example, physicists in the early twentieth
century believed that the universe was in a steady state of
infinite size and age. Only in the 1930s did scientists begin
to seriously consider a Big Bang theory of the development

SCIENCE &SCIENTISM

141

of the cosmos. Of course, the idea of an eternal universe
contradicts the Quran, which describes a finite point of
Creation. Had Muslims in the early 1900s, for example,
decided to reinterpret the relevant verses of the Quran in
order to accommodate the eternal steady-state model of
the universe that was in vogue at the time, they would have
had to backtrack three or four decades later when the Big
Bang theory was popularized. In the same light, how can
we be sure that the contemporary science used by some
to reinterpret Quran and Islamic theology today will not
similarly be overturned in three or four decades’ time?
Given the tumultuous history of science, this is much more
likely than not.
In the end, contrary to what some may mistakenly
believe, science is not a perfect representation of reality,
at least not today and perhaps never. Given the perfection
of Allah’s speech, it would be inappropriate to make
broad pronouncements on the Quran’s compatibility with
something man-made, like science, which is inherently
imperfect, tenuous, and constantly in flux.
Does this mean that we should not reflect on the Quran
and ponder verses in light of different ideas found in science?
Of course we can. Some Muslims certainly experience a
boost in their iman by doing this and that should not be
undermined. But, ultimately, the concern is when that
personal reflection turns into a tafsir that one shares with
others or, worse, becomes a broader philosophy about “the
Quran and science.” This is problematic because, like any
reflection on the Quran, publicly interpreting the Quran
ought to follow the well-established norms of exegesis, i.e.,
tafsir, and adab with the Divine Address. We should heed
the profound words of Allah’s Messenger ձ:

14 2

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

“Whoever speaks of the Book of Allah from his
own opinion is in error, even if correct.”³5

Misconception 2: “The Quran is not a science
textbook.”
This is true, of course. The Quran is certainly not a science
textbook. But, when some Muslims make this claim, they
implicitly mean something else.
As we have seen, there are Muslims who overemphasize
the compatibility of science and the Quran, claiming that
science and the Quran never conflict. On the other hand, of
the Muslims who declare that “the Quran is not a science
textbook,” some of them mean to say that the Quran (and
religion, in general) have nothing to say about the world
at large. To borrow the term used by biologist Stephen Jay
Gould, these Muslims believe science and religion to occupy
“non-overlapping magisteria,” i.e., distinct and separate
domains of authority and applicability. In other words,
science’s authority lies in answering questions about the
world around us while religion’s authority lies in answering
questions about morality, spirituality, and the “meaning
of it all,” and neither should meddle in the business of the
other.
This, however, is a mischaracterization as far as the Quran
is concerned for the simple reason that the Quran speaks
about the world around us at length. It is true that the Quran
does not use modern scientific language. Nonetheless, it is
undeniable that the Quran is replete with statements about
the world and history. Some choice examples:
6E"#JA:#m.-:/U#O<,1</$<

SCIENCE &SCIENTISM

143

1. The createdness of the universe.
2. The existence of Angels and their activity in the world.
3. The existence of Jinn and their activity in the world.
4. The ability for consciousness to exist without a body or
brain (in other words, the existence of the immaterial
soul).
5. The resurrection of organisms after death and bodily
decomposition.
6. The existence of Heaven and Hell.
7. The Night Journey and Ascension.
8. The various prophetic miracles (e.g., splitting of the
moon, parting of the sea, raising the dead, etc.).
9. The extraordinarily long lives of certain persons (e.g.,
Nuh, the youth of the cave) [29:14, 18:11].
10. The Throne and Footstool of the Almighty.
11. The seven heavens (e.g., [65.12] and many others).
12. The rejection of the amana, or moral trust, by the heavens, earth, and mountains [33:72].
13. The creatures singing praises of their Lord and communicating with prophets.
14. The creation of Adam in Paradise.
15. The capabilities of Sulayman.
16. The existence of Magic and the “Evil Eye.”
17. The existence of life in the grave.
18. The annihilation of certain peoples by God due to their
unrepentant criminality.
19. The reality of barakah, or blessing/sanctity.

14 4

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

These examples were deliberately chosen to contrast with
modern science and history. It should be noted that many
verses in the Quran also mention everyday phenomena
like rainfall, the development of the human embryo, the
movement of celestial bodies, etc.
Reading these verses and many others like them, what
should Muslims living in this scientific age conclude? Are
all these verses — all of which, on a plain reading, conflict
with modern science — just colorful metaphors and fables
intended to be understood purely for their moral/spiritual
import? (Hopefully most Muslims do not believe this.) Or,
perhaps, all these verses refer to miracles and/or the Ghayb
(i.e., “Unseen”) and, therefore, remain outside the domain
of science and empirical knowledge? Or some combination
thereof?
Clearly, not all listed things fall under the heading of
“miraculous.” And, it is questionable whether everything
falls under the broad heading of the Ghayb. It is a common
assumption among modern Muslims that the boundaries
demarcating the Ghayb perfectly coincide with the limits
of empirical science, which is all too convenient given the
overarching belief in non-overlapping magisteria.
To put it another way, it would be an amazing coincidence
if the classical Islamic categories of ghayb (“the unseen”)
and hiss (roughly, “the perceptible”) for example, perfectly
aligned with modern Western notions of the “empirical”
and “scientific observation.” For example, would subatomic
particles like the Higgs boson be considered part of the
Ghayb in the same way that jinn are Unseen? Certainly,
the Higgs boson is invisible to all our senses, and only
recently has data from particle colliders provided hints of

SCIENCE &SCIENTISM

145

its existence. But, no eye has ever seen the Higgs boson,
and, as a matter of fact, no eye ever will.
The difficulty in categorizing such entities is revealing of
the underlying problem. We lack a consistent categorization
to apply across all entities, a principled categorization
that is consistent with classical understandings but also
accommodates modern science. I emphasize “principled”
because simply stipulating that “whatever is invisible to
modern science is de facto Ghayb” is toothless. This is
because science, again, is continuously changing. What
once was invisible to science may not be in the future. And,
we would think that categorizing an entity as Unseen has to
do with the inherent nature of the entity itself rather than
merely being contingent on what random scientists are
doing in their field at any given time!
Of course, I would not attempt to formulate such a
categorization scheme myself, nor do I have an interest in
doing so. We can leave that to qualified theologians.
That being said, what I see as important here is that,
when we read the Quran, we realize that we are learning a
great deal about the fundamental nature of the universe. In
fact, we learn much more significant and penetrating facts
than science could ever produce.
My observation is that, living in modern times, many
Muslims do not viscerally feel the reality of the things on
this list in the same way they feel the reality of entities
acknowledged by science, even when the latter are as
far removed from their daily experience as heaven, hell,
miracles, etc.
For example, you have Muslims who have no science
education, have never read a scientific paper in their

14 6

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

lives, have never been to a science lab, yet have utmost
conviction (yaqin) in, say, the theory of evolution or the
reality of atoms, while having less than yaqin when it
comes to angels, jinn, the barzakh, etc. The aim here is not
to impeach the value of science or question its legitimacy.
Nonetheless, such attitudes we increasingly find in the
Ummah are symptomatic of the fractured nature of modern
Muslim ontology and epistemology.
So, what is the takeaway message? Ultimately, we must
do away with the notion of non-overlapping magisteria.
As we have seen, the Quran contains vasts amount of
knowledge regarding the universe and how it works. As
soon as we say that only science has the epistemological
authority to describe the world in which we live, realities
detailed in the Quran wittingly or unwittingly take a back
seat in our minds, relegated to a lower level of veridicality
than entities sanctioned by science. It is not difficult to
imagine the deeply negative spiritual consequences that
can result from this.
Practically speaking, we should personally strive to
internalize the revelatory thrust of the Quran (and Sunnah),
to cultivate that visceral sense of “realness” and yaqin when
we read, for example, that there is a personage actively
trying to sabotage and conspire against us (Iblis) or that
the mountains, the heavens, the earth, and everything in
them (i.e., everything around us in day to day life, even if
inanimate and seemingly unconscious) sing the praises of
Allah (34:10, 17:44) or that everything that happens to us,
no matter how miniscule or quotidian, happens because
of Allah’s willing it so.

SCIENCE &SCIENTISM

147

DO ISLAM AND SCIENCE EVER CONFLICT? YES.
Many modern Muslims believe that “science and Islam can
never contradict.” In other words, nothing in revelation (i.e.,
the Quran and the teachings of the Prophet Muhammad
(s)) could ever contravene what we know of the world
through science. At first blush, this seems logical. We
can expect that man-made texts, especially those from
antiquity, will contradict natural facts, since people of the
past were ignorant of the scientific method. But the source
of revelation, in contrast, is the All-Knowing Creator Himself
who also created the universe. Therefore, no contradiction
is possible.
The flaw in this logic is that it ignores the fallible nature,
not of religious texts, but of… science. Scientific consensus is
an ever-evolving discourse. What scientists hold as fact one
day may be overturned the next. As an example, physicists
in the early twentieth century believed that the universe was
infinite in size and age. Only in the 1930s did scientists begin
to seriously consider a Big Bang theory of the development
of the cosmos. Of course, the idea of an eternal universe
contradicts the theologies of Judaism, Christianity, and
Islam, which all posit a finite point of Creation. Had Muslims
in the early 1900s, for example, decided to reinterpret their
theology in order to accommodate the eternal steady-state
model of the universe that was in vogue at the time, they
would have had to backtrack a mere three or four decades
later.
To reiterate, science is not always correct in its
representation of the universe. In fact, historically, it is often
wrong. Furthermore, scientists themselves acknowledge
the provisional nature of science in that their research is

14 8

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

perpetually a “work in progress” and subject to change.
Therefore, Islam’s incompatibility with some contemporary
scientific contentions, such as evolution, is not problematic
in the least. In fact, as far as we are concerned, it should
be entirely expected. The Quran provides us with timeless
truths describing, in many verses, the magnificence of
creation, truths relayed by the Creator Himself with His
perfect knowledge. It is expected that imperfect human
knowledge, as represented by scientific discourse, will fail
to match the Divine Address.
THERE IS NO “PLURALISM” IN SCIENCE
When it comes to certain fields, there is no such concept
as pluralism. In science, for example, it is assumed that
there is only one right answer. Sure, there can be multiple
competing theories, but ultimately one theory is assumed
to be the correct one and it is the job of scientists to
investigate, to debate, to analyze, to carefully consider, and
to work to come to that answer.
In contrast, today we are not taught to think of any
given religion as being right or wrong. Rather religion
is about personal identity, personal feelings, what you
subjectively feel to be the case. Religion is not about facts
and knowledge, therefore, the reasoning goes, how can any
given religion be considered “correct” or “true”? If you are
coming from this “subjectivist” view of religion, then you
might be prone to think that, in a sense, “all religions are
true” in one way or another.
But historically, people did not have this view of religion.
Religion was thought of in a similar way to how people today
think of science in the sense that understanding reality

SCIENCE &SCIENTISM

149

means understanding God and understanding God means
understanding what God has said. It was no coincidence,
then, that typically the most knowledgeable and educated
people in society in the past were also the most religiously
learned. It is also not a coincidence that inter-religious
debates in the past happened on the theological level, e.g.,
Christians and Muslims debating about the nature of God,
His attributes, etc., whereas today, most of the handful
of inter-religious debates that happen focus on moral
concerns like human rights, women’s rights, tolerance, etc.
It is important to note that having an “objectivist” view of
religion does not in itself contravene tolerance. For example,
our present secular society has an objectivist view when it
comes to science, but there is still tolerance for people who
are scientifically illiterate or who may even be downright
wrong about what they scientifically believe. However,
present society draws the line when it comes to people’s
incorrect scientific beliefs harming others, where harm itself
is defined according to what is considered to be the correct
scientific paradigm.
A simple example is the whole vaccination debate.
People can believe whatever they want about the impact
of vaccines on children, but at some point, the government
was given the mandate to intervene and say that children
must be vaccinated, etc. This is because there was a belief
that if people were allowed to pursue their incorrect
beliefs past a certain point, that would have wider negative
ramifications.
Perhaps we should understand Islamic tolerance in the
same light. In past Islamic societies, this kind of tolerance
also existed. Muslim and Islamic law’s tolerance for

15 0

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Christians, Jews, and their respective religious practices
are well known and documented. In other words, there was
room for people to be wrong from the perspective of the
dominant paradigm but there were limits to that tolerance.
This is something we see in present secular society as well,
though things are not conceived as such.
THE REALITY OF SCIENCE
Imagine a deaf, blind person who only has his sense of
touch available to learn about his surroundings. But it gets
worse than that. This person can only feel his surroundings
by using a needle. He holds the needle and rubs its tip over
the surfaces of objects around him. The tip of that needle is
his only window into the world. That tiny needle tip is his
only source of information about the entire universe.
So imagine our surprise when this man tries to tell us
about the nature of reality. Imagine our confusion as he
explains to us what “it all means.” Imagine our amusement
when he insists that the only things that exist in the world
are what he can feel through his needle.
Now imagine that instead of this needle, the man has to
use a small piece of thread to feel out his environment by
dragging the thread over surrounding objects. That will give
you an even more accurate understanding of the scope of
scientific inquiry.
Consider that human beings are only privy to a very
small sliver of the electromagnetic spectrum, i.e., visible
light, that we perceive with our eyes. Of course, due to
relatively modern technology, we can detect other kinds
of electromagnetic radiation that our ancestors had no idea

SCIENCE &SCIENTISM

1 51

about, e.g., infrared, ultraviolet, x-rays, gamma rays, etc.
What makes us think that there aren’t other “channels” of
information or “planes of existence” that we as of yet, due
to current technological limitations for example, have no
idea about?
Just considering our faculties of perception, there is
simply no way for us to know what we don’t know. If we get
lucky, we might stumble upon something. But considering
the vastness of the universe (the piece of it that we even
know about, at least) and the fact that even so much of our
own tiny planet has yet to be explored, there is plenty to
suggest that we are in the dark on a whole lot.
Now consider our mental capacity. Perception, after all,
is inexorably connected to the brain’s ability to “process”
sensory information. And that “processing” is a prerequisite
for our ability to consciously register that information. What
if our brains can’t “see” certain things that our sensory
organs nonetheless pick up? Again, there is no way to tell
for sure because we cannot, as it were, step “outside” of our
brains to see what we’re missing.
The ironic thing is that science itself implicitly
acknowledges these extreme limitations. According to
scientific consensus, after all, we are nothing but evolved
apes. Our perceptual and cognitive capacities, we are told,
are suited for finding edible fruit in trees and getting the
best warm body to mate with. Yet, somehow those functions
of day-to-day ape-hood are also amenable to probing the
depths of the universe, pondering what it all means, and
waxing poetic about everything from human nature to the
biological origins of morality.

15 2

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

We should all chuckle in the face of such blind, pathetic
hubris.
ISLAM AND SCIENCE IN CONFLICT: DESCRIBING
REALITY
What do we make of all the verses and ahadith that seem to
imply that the earth is flat or that the earth does not revolve
around the sun?
Consider the ayah in Surat al-Kahf:
ܹÃűƷŎŦ‫܌‬ǜŉĩű‫'ܡ‬ŉƿŦ‫ܮ‬¥þƢűþǢű‫ܢ‬ƢĩþěŉĩĢƷŉĩƪĩƷƷŎűłŻŁ
the sun, he found it setting in a spring of dark mud,
þűĢŉĩŁŻƿűĢűĩþƢŎƷþƟĩŻƟŦĩ‫ܒ‬ŦŦþŉƪþŎĢ‫'ܻ܌‬ŉƿŦ‫ܮ‬
¥þƢűþǢű‫܌‬ĩŎƷŉĩƢǢŻƿƟƿűŎƪŉ‫ܡ‬Ʒŉĩů‫ܢ‬ŻƢĩŦƪĩþĢŻƟƷ
among them [a way of] goodness.’”
Al-Kahf (Q18:86)

And the hadith:
The Prophet ձ said one day: ‘Do you know
where the Sun goes when it sets?’ They said:
‘Allah and His Messenger know best.’ He said:
‘It goes until it arrives at its place of settlement
beneath the Throne. Then it falls down in
prostration and remains like that until it is said
to it: ‘Arise! Go back from whence you came.’
Then it goes back and rises from its place of
rising. Then it goes until it arrives at its place
of settlement beneath the Throne. Then it falls
down in prostration and remains like that until
it is said to it: ‘Arise! Go back from whence you
came.’ Then it goes back and rises from its place
of rising. Then it goes without people finding

SCIENCE &SCIENTISM

1 53

anything wrong with it until it arrives at that
place of settlement it has beneath the Throne.
Then it will be told: ‘Arise! Enter upon the
morning rising from your setting place’.” Then
Allah’s Messenger ձ said: ‘Do you know when
that will be? It will be when ‘its faith will not
avail a soul which had not believed before or
earned some good from its faith.’³6
How do we understand all this? It is easy to say that these
are all ‘metaphorical.’ Perhaps they are in some sense, but
that’s too hasty. Is there any other ‘recourse’?
Imagine two people have equally correct knowledge
about the universe. Those two people can describe that
knowledge in different ways, i.e., they can describe the
universe in different ways. They can use different language,
different images, different concepts to explain the same
thing. Furthermore, they can use different terms even when
they are describing things literally from their individual
perspectives.
What do I mean by this? Well, a simple example is all the
different terms that Bedouin Arabs have for “lion.” Or all the
different terms that Eskimos have for “snow.” The way that
an Arab talks about a lion and the way that an Eskimo talks
about snow will be very different from how a zoologist or a
meteorologist speaks about these things. It is not that the
Arab or the Eskimo are speaking metaphorically while the
zoologist/meteorologist are speaking literally. No, in this
example, everyone is speaking literally but there are just
certain concepts that are in the language and at the disposal
of the Arab/Eskimo that are not found in the language and
63"#X.$r$#I:'7<1

15 4

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

conceptual architecture of the zoologist/meteorologist. And
vice versa.
The assumption that people nowadays tend to make
is that scientific language is the language that describes
things as they really are. But we don’t have to accept that.
In fact, we shouldn’t because scientific language is always
changing. I explain the significance of this below.
The second layer is this: Imagine two people where one
has correct knowledge about the universe and the other
doesn’t but thinks he does. This adds another wrinkle. In
the previous example, the Bedouin Arab relying on the
accumulated knowledge of centuries and generations of
Bedouins living in the environment of the lion arguably has
a better understanding of lions than the foreign zoologist
from outside that environment who travels to the location
for a couple of months at a time, does his fieldwork, and
goes back home.
And of course zoology itself is a new discipline. So
the language of the Bedouins will reflect their superior
knowledge. But the zoologist will not necessarily accept
this. In fact, the zoologist thinks that these Bedouins are
fairly ignorant and their understanding of lions pales in
comparison to his. And to prove that point, he will cite the
Bedouin’s descriptions of the lion and claim that those
descriptions are inaccurate. But on what basis can he
claim that the Bedouin’s description is inaccurate? He can
only do so on the basis of his own knowledge, which, in
this example, we have stipulated is incorrect and certainly
inferior to the knowledge of the Bedouins. Nonetheless, the
zoologist is confident that these Bedouins simply do not
know what they are talking about.

SCIENCE &SCIENTISM

1 55

This is the folly and pitiful arrogance of modern science.
First, scientific language is assumed to be the only accurate,
literal, acceptable way to describe the world. Second,
science assumes it knows what the universe is really like.
Both these assumptions we easily reject out of hand.
Now, to give you a taste of this, consider that most of what
they teach people in school about science, astronomy, and
the shapes and the motions of the earth and other celestial
bodies uses a Newtonian language. Since Isaac Newton’s
time, physicists by the end of the nineteenth century till
now have speculated that the universe is really more than 3
spatial dimensions. Einstein pioneered this way of thinking
about physics when he incorporated non-Euclidean
mathematics — such as Riemannian geometry — into his
treatment of gravitation.
At one point in the past decade, String Theorists were
even theorizing a 21-dimensional universe. Obviously, this
is all speculation on their part and only Allah knows the
reality. But even within the bounds of accepted theoretical
physics, we can see how describing the world as “flat” or
“rolling up the heavens” and so on are perfectly apt.
In 4 spatial dimensions, for example, a 3-dimensional
sphere can be rolled up, just like how in 3 spatial dimensions
a 2-dimensional circle can be rolled up. And so on. This goes
back to my point about scientific language always changing.
Part of this is because scientists’ knowledge about the
world, or what they purport to be knowledge at any rate, is
always changing. And then their language evolves on top of
that. So why should we take that language as a benchmark
for judging the Words of Allah? We decidedly should not.

15 6

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

On a spiritual level, I really cherish the passages in the
Quran and the ahadith that conflict with modern scientific
understandings. Those are gems for me and provide me
the most peace and boost in iman. Because those are
instances where revelation from Allah is teaching me
something or making me aware of something about the
world that modern people and the most advanced science
is not privy to (at least for the time being, perhaps). The ayat
about Dhul-Qarnayn in Surat al-Kahf about, e.g., the setting
place of the sun as well as the hadith cited above are really
beautiful and powerful to me and there is no reason to rush
to interpret them metaphorically or somehow anything less
than a pure, pristine, direct description of the reality given
to us by Allah, the Creator and Master of all reality.
May Allah strengthen our iman, illuminate our hearts and
minds with His ayat, and fortify us against the whispering
of Satan.

CHAPTER

8

LIBERALISM,
LIBERAL HYPOCRISY
LIBERALISM DOESN’T SEE ANYTHING WRONG
WITH INCEST
Incest is still illegal in the West. But whenever an incestuous
couple is arrested, the reactions on social media represent
a shift in attitudes on this descpicable act:
“These are two consenting adults! They love each other
and that’s all that matters! Just because it’s disgusting to
us doesn’t mean it should be considered immoral, much
less illegal! They are not harming anyone!”
But let’s stop and ask: Why is not harming anyone
required for something to be morally permissible? What’s so
bad about harming others? Sure, if we think about harming
others, that might make us feel bad or even disgusted. It
might cause us anger, but that doesn’t mean that it is
immoral.
In moral philosophy, there is a theory of morality called
emotivism. Emotivism says that our moral judgments
are nothing but expressions of emotion. When we say, “X
is wrong,” what that really amounts to and, hence, what
it really means is just, “X makes me feel bad!” Of course,

15 8

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

feelings are subjective — different people can and will feel
different things about X. As such, anyone who attempts to
make a factual claim like, “X is wrong as a matter of fact,” as
if that is universally or objectively the case is simply making
a category error. As an analogy, just because I don’t like the
taste of coconut, for example, that doesn’t mean that eating
coconut is wrong.
There are obviously many problems with emotivism. But it
is interesting how liberals use emotivism for their purposes
and use it selectively. For those moral proscriptions they
disagree with, liberals jump straight to emotivism, e.g.,
“Incest is not wrong just because it makes you feel icky.”
But for those moral proscriptions that they believe in,
emotivism goes out the window, e.g., “Harming others is
the very essence of immorality and something that we have
to use the force of law to prevent.”
The simple question is, why the selectivity? Why draw the
line at this notion of “harm” (which itself is loosely defined
and selectively applied)?
If you press liberals to explain why harming others is
immoral, this forces them to get into the meta-ethical and
metaphysical issues that they attack theists for. Either they
have to dig in their heels and say it’s immoral because “it
just is,” or they will just bite the bullet, reject the notion of
morality in its entirety, and embrace what amounts to some
form of nihilism. This can be responded to on its own terms
but even absent that, to simply get a liberal to admit he is
essentially a nihilist is itself a win that can be leveraged in
further arguing against him.

LIBERALISM, LIBERAL HYPOCRISY

1 59

This is how you play chess with these liberal humanists.
Call them out for their atrocious selectivity and the
checkmate will be close at hand.
LIBERAL MORAL “PROGRESS”: THE CONSENT
TABOO
Prominent atheists, like Lawrence Krauss and Richard
Dawkins, have expressed their support for incest. They
argue that as long as sex is between two consenting adults,
then it should be permitted, even if it’s between mother
and son, daughter and father, or siblings with each other.
This is a familiar pattern in atheistic/secular ethics: taboo
breaking. Fornication was always seen as immoral, but
then secular ethics tells us that that is just an irrational
taboo. Sodomy was always seen as vile, but then secular
ethics tells us that that is just an irrational taboo born out
of emotionality rather than reason and is therefore invalid.
And now the same thought process applies to sex with
immediate family members.
But why should this habitual boundary-stomping and
taboo-breaking from atheists stop there? What is stopping
us from seeing the idea of consent as an irrational taboo
driven by emotion? What makes consent so different from
these other discarded taboos?
An atheist/secularist could argue that just like backwards
people believed sodomy to be a disgusting and unnatural,
ungodly act, similarly backwards people irrationally believe
that sex without consent is a disgusting violation and, in
both cases, there is no rational, scientific reason to abide
by such outdated taboos.

16 0

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Now before anyone accuses me of promoting rape, I
am simply arguing on the basis of atheist morality, not my
own. Does atheistic/secular morality provide a rational or
scientific justification for the importance of consent? Not
at all.
The vast majority of atheists today are liberals and they
abide by liberal utilitarian ethics. According to utilitarianism,
whatever maximizes pleasure and minimizes harm, broadly
speaking, is morally good. And whatever maximizes harm
and minimizes pleasure is morally evil. As they often put
it, what doesn’t harm others should be legal and morally
permissible. This notion of harm and pleasure is implicit in
all liberal arguments regarding sexuality. A taboo, according
to utilitarianism, is meaningless because pleasure and harm
are the ultimate determinants of morality, not whether or
not people “feel icky” (as they put it).
Well, in that case, there are numerous examples of
non-consensual acts that increase total pleasure and
minimize harm. Consider voyeurism. A utilitarian could
install a secret camera in a women’s public bathroom
and broadcast a live feed to millions of voyeurs around
the world. Their aggregate pleasure would skyrocket, and
there would be minimal harm since the women wouldn’t
know that they are being recorded. Their faces could also
be blurred to protect their identities. Either way, the overall
pleasure far outweighs the harm. An atheist could say, look,
there is nothing wrong with this since no one is harmed and
the net pleasure is huge, and the insistence on consent is
just a backwards silly taboo that we all need to collectively
get over.

LIBERALISM, LIBERAL HYPOCRISY

161

If atheists and liberal secularists were consistent, they
would promote this kind of voyeurism just as much as they
promote incest, LGBT, etc.
This is among the many reasons atheism and secularism
more broadly are nihilistic and, when taken to their ultimate
conclusions, are clearly absurd and should be rejected by
all rational people.
THE FAKE TOLERANCE OF LIBERALISM
The Liberal Charge: “You are not tolerant.”
The Translation: “You do not tolerate the precise things
that I tolerate.”
One of the definitions of “tolerance” in the English
language is: “An allowable amount of variation of a specified
quantity, especially in the dimensions of a machine or part.”
Manufactured parts are never exactly the same. If a
factory produces, say, 100,000 pistons, no two pistons will
be exactly equal. There is always variation but that variation
has to be within a specific tolerance. If a specific piston is
beyond tolerance, it is deemed dysfunctional and has to
be trashed.
Liberals pretend to be infinitely tolerant and accuse
others of being intolerant when in reality their tolerance
has limits. Infinite tolerance, of course, is an oxymoron, a
contradiction in terms. The difference is liberal tolerance is
ultimately based on whims and haphazard cultural beliefs
whereas Islamic tolerance is based on hikma and guidance.
If we go back to the example of the manufactured
mechanical part, if the tolerance levels are not correctly

16 2

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

calibrated, the resulting parts will be dysfunctional and
useless. Similarly for human beings. The right kind of
variation is tolerable, but not all kinds of variation can lead
to a functioning, healthy human being. And who would
know better about human health, function, and well-being
— in the truest sense of those words — than the Creator and
Maintainer of humankind?
LIBERALISM IS NOT MERELY IRRATIONAL. IT IS SHEER
MADNESS
A Dubious Thesis:
Early liberal capitalist thinkers maintained the
belief that acting in a self-interested fashion is to
act rationally, and if everyone were to act rationally,
then that is all that is needed for society as a whole
to flourish.

A Really, Really Dubious Thesis:
Contemporary liberalism takes things a step further:
Who’s to say what rationality even consists of and
what “interests” are indeed “rational” to pursue? For
society to truly flourish, people should just pursue
whatever makes them feel good (so long as it’s all
“harmless” and “consensual,” of course!).

And then people wonder why the world is a mess.
LIBERAL SECULARISM’S BIGGEST DECEIT
What matters is not what you choose but the fact that you
have a choice.

LIBERALISM, LIBERAL HYPOCRISY

163

This is how liberal secularism attempts to nullify Divine
guidance. If all that matters is choice and what you actually
end up choosing is irrelevant, then what need do you have
for guidance? What need do you have for light pointing you
in the right direction, pointing you to the decisions that will
bring you happiness and success?
Is there any philosophical or ethical system as vacuous
as liberal secularism? Other man-made systems at least
make an attempt to guide humanity with practical advice
and principles that, in theory, should lead to individual and
collective felicity. But liberal secularism doesn’t bother with
that. All we need, according to it, is just to make a choice
without any hindrance in doing so. Any choice! Even if you
choose the most destructive, vile, nonsensical choice, as
long as you “freely” made that choice, it is infinitely better
than not having a choice or, worse, having God tell you what
is the right choice and making you feel bad for making the
wrong choice.
There never was a more incoherent way of thinking. But
it is this thinking that rules the hearts of modern men.
LIBERAL FAUX-THEOLOGY
The Liberal Theist’s Theology: There is no god except the
god that different cultures created for themselves. Then
each group attempts to impose their version of God on
everyone else because people are selfish and mean and
hateful. If only people realized that God doesn’t exist in
any objective (i.e., meaningful) sense and is at most an
impersonal deity, we could all worry about more important
things like celebrating the “right” of bourgeoisie men to
sodomize each other.

16 4

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

If you were to compare the theology of liberal secularists
to atheism, you would find them to be for all intents and
purposes identical philosophies. God is just something
people imagine for themselves. Religion is nothing more
than human expression. There is no independent God
or objective morality to worry about, other than liberal
morality of course, which just happens to coincide with the
prevailing cultural proclivities of Northwestern Europeans
and Americans.

CHAPTER

9

PROGRESSIVISM,
MORALITY
PROGRESSIVISM AND THE INHERITORS OF THE
PHARAOHS
The Quran does not assume a progressivist view of history.
When you read the accounts of the prophets, Musa, Esa,
Yusuf, Ibrahim, in the Quran, you should not think, “These
are stories of the past — we live in modern times. Our world
is different, our societies, our institutions, our governments
are more advanced and sophisticated.” No. Never think
that for one second because those are the thoughts of the
disbelievers as Allah mentions in the Quran itself, “Those
who disbelieve say, this is nothing but stories of the
ancients.”
There is a reason Allah gives us detailed historical
information about the struggles of the prophets and their
enemies. Because those are the struggles we face today.
Just like there are “inheritors of the prophets” alive today,
i.e., the righteous scholars, there are also inheritors of Iblis.
There are inheritors of Pharaoh. There are inheritors of Abu
Jahl and Abu Lahab. Let’s not be blind about this reality
lest we be caught off guard because we did not heed clear
warnings from our Lord.

16 6

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

THE INCOHERENCE OF MORAL PROGRESS
Liberal secular progressives (including humanists, atheists,
reformists, etc.) think there is nothing wrong with morality
changing over time and view it as a natural, inevitable
process that we should all embrace. Unfortunately for them,
they are deeply confused about the very nature of morality.
These individuals have no problem with religious
morality being discarded over time because they do not
view religious norms as morally compelling in the first place.
They say things like, “Well, in the past, due to religious
sentiment, sex outside of marriage, for example, was
considered wrong, but times have changed and we don’t
find it so bad anymore because we have progressed.”
It is very easy to show how muddled this thinking is.
Simply consider a value that these people do find morally
compelling, e.g., racial equality. Ask them, would they be OK
with white supremacy being considered morally acceptable
one day? Would it make sense to say that morality could
evolve such that, one day, white supremacy is the ethical
norm that all are expected to aspire to? Why not? What if
there really isn’t anything wrong with white supremacy but
we just don’t realize it yet and only future people will be
able to realize it, similar to how at one point, fornication
was considered wrong, but future people “discovered” that
it’s not so bad? What’s the difference? Why couldn’t morality
evolve in that way?
Now the response to this might be: “Morality does
not evolve haphazardly. It evolves in a specific direction.
Our morality becomes increasingly accurate as it sheds
superstitions and identifies harms. The only truly immoral

PROGRESSIVISM, MORALITY

167

act is to harm another person and this is called the ‘Harm
Principle.’”
Those indoctrinated by liberal secularism tend to have
this view: The only true moral principle is the Harm Principle.
Using this logic, they claim (despite plenty of countervailing
evidence) that we have discovered that fornication doesn’t
really harm people, so it should not be considered immoral.
Furthermore, we have discovered that white supremacy is
harmful, therefore it should be considered immoral.
But let’s step back for a moment. First of all, if the Harm
Principle is the keystone of all morality as liberal secularists
claim, then would they concede that it could also evolve?
If morality evolves and progresses, then could we one day
discover that it is morally permissible to harm people and
that the Harm Principle is an obsolete relic of the past? If
liberal secular progressives maintain that this is not possible
and the Harm Principle will always remain normatively
compelling, then they are not really progressive when
it comes to morality. They believe that there are moral
absolutes. So how could they fault devout Muslims for also
believing in moral absolutes that are invariant with time?
Now, refuting the Harm Principle is easy enough to do
(simply question what truly constitutes harm and who gets
to decide that; and additionally, point out that harm itself is
a value-laden concept that depends on your broader moral
and ontological commitments, etc.). But I want to focus on
the idea of evolving morality. Those who are dedicated to
the Harm Principle as a moral absolute explain changing
moral attitudes through time as a function of discovering
what is or is not truly harmful. But what is this discovery
process?

16 8

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Epistemologically speaking, is discovering harms akin to
discovering new planets or new chemicals? Is it an empirical
thing? Where can you see harm? And, more importantly,
how does our ability to see it progress as a function of time?
We can understand how discovering planets in the universe
has become easier with improved telescope technology.
But what is allowing us to discover new harms over time?
Clearly, the liberal secular progressive is not going to
have a non-ridiculous, non-grasping-at-straws answer
to this, so he will resort to this line: “Harms were always
known but powerful, evil, self-serving people prevented
moral sentiments from changing in order to address those
harms.”
A couple of notes on this. First, where is the proof that
certain harms were always known? If we survey world history,
much of what is considered seriously “harmful” by present
standards was unheard of historically. Homophobia is one
example. Transphobia is another. Cultural appropriation
is another. Microagression is another. Oppression through
pronoun usage is another. In fact, just attend a liberal
arts class, preferably in the Gender Studies department
at your nearest university, and virtually everything that
is taught as oppression, disenfranchisement, sexism, etc.,
was historically unheard of. The very concepts upon which
these “wrongs” are based were not coined prior to one or
two generations ago. So how plausible is this view that
many of the serious “harms” recognized by liberal secular
progressives today were known historically?
Secondly, again this response undermines the whole idea
of moral progress. If the Harm Principle is an un-evolving
absolute and what is or is not harmful is an un-evolving

PROGRESSIVISM, MORALITY

169

absolute and people’s knowledge of what is or is not
harmful is an un-evolving absolute, then where exactly is
all the moral progress we keep hearing so much about? Our
interlocutor could say that the progress happens when the
bad guys get beat and true justice triumphs. But that is a
very weak idea of moral progress. Everyone believes in this
kind of moral progress! The fight between good and evil is
perpetual and sometimes, the good guys win. Other times
they lose. Even non-liberal, non-secular theists believe this!
This is hardly the notion of continuous moral progress over
the course of human history that liberal secularists like to
appeal to.
Ultimately, when this idea of moral progress is critically
examined, it does not withstand the most minimal amount
of scrutiny. The notion suffers from serious epistemological
problems and this is partly due to the conceptual
deficiencies within the Harm Principle itself. When liberal
secular progressives invoke moral progress, Muslims who
maintain the universal, unchanging applicability of Islamic
moral principles from the time of revelation to present,
should push back. Muslims should point out these problems
and demand that their ideological opponents address the
gaping holes in their thought.

170

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

WE ARE THE LATEST AND GREATEST (FAMOUS LAST
WORDS)

Modernity and the Quran
One of the main drivers of moral progressivism is the
belief in scientific progress. If our knowledge of science
and technology has advanced so much in the modern era,
then it stands to reason that we as a civilization have also
advanced morally, that our moral knowledge also is superior
to that of peoples in the past. This line of reasoning is not
new. It is something all major civilizations have believed
of themselves, and it is a mindset that is directly opposed
in the Quran when Allah tells us to look at the remnants
and ruins of past civilizations who, despite their great
technical achievements, were destroyed for their arrogance
and rebellion against God and His messengers. In fact, the
Quran goes further than this by saying, not only are you
wrong for being arrogant in thinking that your strength and
technical achievement translates to rectitude and moral
superiority, but you are also wrong for thinking that you
are the strongest and most technically advanced civilization
of history. There were others greater in strength, numbers,
and impact on the land.
“Have they not traveled through the land and observed
how was the end of those before them? And they were
greater than them in power.”
Fatir (Q35:44)

“Have they not traveled through the land and observed
ŉŻǜǜþƪƷŉĩĩűĢŻŁƷŉŻƪĩǜŉŻǜĩƢĩĚĩŁŻƢĩƷŉĩů‫ܓ‬ȃĩǢ

PROGRESSIVISM, MORALITY

171

were greater than them in strength and in impression
on the land, but Allah seized them for their sins. And
they had not from Allah any protector.”
Ghafir (Q40:21)

“Have they not traveled through the land and observed
ŉŻǜǜþƪƷŉĩĩűĢŻŁƷŉŻƪĩĚĩŁŻƢĩƷŉĩů‫ܓ‬ȃĩǢǜĩƢĩ
more numerous than themselves and greater in
strength and in impression on the land, but they were
not availed by what they used to earn.”
Ghafir (Q40:82)

“Have they not traveled through the earth and observed
ŉŻǜǜþƪƷŉĩĩűĢŻŁƷŉŻƪĩĚĩŁŻƢĩƷŉĩů‫ܓ‬ȃĩǢǜĩƢĩ
greater than them in power, and they plowed the earth
and built it up more than they have built it up, and
their messengers came to them with clear evidences.
And Allah would not ever have wronged them, but they
were wronging themselves.”
Ar-Rum (Q30:9)

“We raise in degrees whom We will, but over every
possessor of knowledge is one [more] knowing.”
Yusuf (Q12:76)

We might wonder whether there were past civilizations
that were more technically advanced than ours today. Only
Allah knows. We shouldn’t automatically assume that there
weren’t. More importantly, we should not judge a people’s
values by how “modern” they are but by how completely
they accord with what the last Messenger ձ has brought.

172

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

MODERN VS. TRADITIONAL CONCEPTIONS OF
KNOWLEDGE
The modern concept of knowledge is an anomaly. The
notion that knowledge is something that can be found on
a sheet of paper, in a book, in a hard drive, in the digital
cloud, this is not the kind of knowledge that the Islamic
tradition is based on.
True knowledge cannot be abstracted away from living,
breathing people. For example, Allah sent revelation by
way of the angel Jibril to the Messenger ձ. The Prophet
ձ passed on his knowledge through companionship —
namely, by teaching his companions, who took instruction
not only from his words but also his actions, his behavior, his
blessed manners, etc. Human beings are thus the conduits
of knowledge and the Islamic tradition has operationalized
that through the concept of isnad, i.e., chain of transmission.
To claim to truly know something of `ilm, i.e., what Allah
has revealed, one has to know all the persons through
which that knowledge has passed over the centuries until
it arrived at you by way of your teacher. Reading from a
book or the internet is not a substitute for this. At most, one
is merely familiarizing oneself with texts, which, don’t get
me wrong, has its own benefits if done correctly. But to be
an `alim, to speak authoritatively about a religious issue
of contention often requires isnad. This is how Allah has
preserved the deen.
And this is why the Prophet ձ said,

“Verily, Allah does not take away knowledge by
snatching it from the people but rather he takes
away knowledge with the death of the scholars

PROGRESSIVISM, MORALITY

173

until he leaves no scholar behind and the people
turn to the ignorant as their leaders. They are
asked to give religious judgments without
knowledge, thus they are led astray and lead
others astray.”³7
We can contrast this with the modern conception of
knowledge, which usually has no moral component and can
be abstracted as separate from people. Go to a university
physics class and see if the professor mentions any history,
where those formulas have come from, who taught them to
whom, and so on. Perhaps that disconnect with history is
fine for the sciences, but not for one’s religion. The source
of all deeni knowledge is in the past, so to cut ourselves off
from the past is to cut ourselves off from that knowledge.
Muslims have to be careful not to conflate the modern,
scientific understanding of knowledge with true religious
knowledge.
MUSLIM SAVAGES CANNOT KEEP UP WITH SOCIAL
PROGRESS
Do Muslim reformers really believe they are the first to
notice that gender disparities exist in Islam? When it comes
to marriage, eye witness testimony, inheritance, etc., were
Muslims of the past just unaware of these disparities, or
were they too ignorant to understand — as the modern
reformers do — that gender disparity is tantamount to
injustice, oppression, and abuse? And were they too
incompetent to do anything about it? Only a couple of
options. Either past people really were that stupid and/or
6C"#X.$<$#.78^:=$.,<

174

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

unethical. Or modern reformers are projecting non-existent
injustices onto the past.
As a related example, the idea of transgender acceptance
is becoming ever more popular. As soon as this peculiar
social justice issue officially becomes status quo, that
will immediately render every past society as unjust and
intolerant for not recognizing what we modern enlightened
people have come to realize about transgenderism. Until
the next social justice issues comes along in another 5-10
years. And the next…
If people’s ethics are constantly in flux and at the mercy of
haphazard cultural shifts, those few who do have principles
and believe in timeless Truth will necessarily and perpetually
look like barbaric and backwards savages regardless. I, for
one, wholeheartedly embrace my “savagery.”
Many don’t understand how shallow and provincial so
many of the most cherished beliefs of modern times really
are. If you compare those “savage” parts of Islamic law
and ethics that people find most objectionable today to
what was on offer for the vast majority of human history
throughout the world, there are no significant differences.
But the modern tendency is to view the past as a black hole
of barbarity and oppression. Theologically, Muslims don’t
share that view—the earlier times were the best of times. So
this will create conflict and misunderstanding. We are not
willing to throw our past under the bus because we aren’t
deluded. Our reluctance makes a lot of our contemporaries
very, very angry. Violently so.

PROGRESSIVISM, MORALITY

175

IS ISLAM RELEVANT?
Is Islam relevant? How is Islam relevant to my life?
These are questions I was asked recently. I proceeded
to give an answer in terms of how Islam gives life purpose
where an atheistic, materialistic understanding of the world
does not and how the negative impact of lacking purpose
can be seen in the rates of depression and suicide affecting
the secular, post-religious world of today.
But this answer wasn’t really adequate for or convincing
to the questioner. After thinking about it for a moment, I
realized the problem. (You see, sometimes if you are asked
a wrong question, you are all but forced to give a wrong
answer.)
So, Islam doesn’t have to be relevant to you. The Truth
does not need to be validated by its utility to your personal,
individual life. The Truth by its very nature is relevant — in
fact, it is the only thing that is relevant.
Honestly, what is the standard of relevance we’re
operating under? Are professional sports relevant? Are
popular culture, music, and movies relevant? Are political
debates and world events relevant? Why? If that’s our
standard of relevance, then of course Islam will not seem
relevant because, unlike those other things, Islam actually
means something and is about something and has true,
lasting significance.
Thus, the problem for us is two-fold. We have a
mis-calibrated standard of relevance on the one hand. On
the other, we judge importance on the basis of personal
utility in the first place. We order the world according to

176

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

a subjective framework that assigns value according to:
“What looks good, feels good, sounds good to me?”
In other words, we have put our egos at the center. That’s
the only context in which the question “Is it relevant?”
makes any sense.
No one asks if biology is relevant, or nuclear physics,
or economics, or anything else related to the sciences or
academic investigation. In those domains, the question of
relevance has no sense. Of course, those are subjects we
assume to be concerned with truth and, as such, are not
attached to any individual’s personal feelings.
Well, your Maker is al-Haqq: the Highest Truth.
Submission to Him, i.e., Islam, should be at the center of
our paradigm. With respect to that core, we can judge the
(ir)relevance of everything else.
WHO IS THE REAL “FREE THINKER”?
Who is the real “free thinker”?

The atheist, who:
1. Lives in a secular world,
2. Goes to schools with secular curricula based on secular
philosophies that constantly question and critique faith
on the basis of “critical thinking,”
3. Is embedded in an elitist secular culture that neither
recognizes God nor religion,
4. Is every day exposed to media, movies, and music that
ignore or question the existence of God,

PROGRESSIVISM, MORALITY

177

5. Resides in an overall secular intellectual milieu where
being “religious” is tantamount to naivety and being
skeptical of religion is tantamount to enlightenment,
and then, after all that, arrogantly proclaims as if, against
all odds, he has made the discovery of the century, “Eureka!
There is no God!”?

Or the Muslim, who:
1. Lives in a secular world,
2. Goes to schools with secular curricula based on secular
philosophies that constantly question and critique faith
on the basis of “critical thinking,”
3. Is embedded in an elitist secular culture that considers
Islam retrograde and terroristic,
4. Is every day exposed to media, movies, and music that
ignore or question the existence of God and attack Islam
in particular,
5. Resides in an overall secular intellectual milieu where
being “religious” is tantamount to naivety, being skeptical of religion is tantamount to enlightenment, and
being Muslim is tantamount to simple-mindedness at
best, medieval barbarity, at worst.
And then, after all that, maintains conviction and
confidence in his Islamic beliefs and holds firm despite the
all consuming pressure, like clutching a burning ember?
Who has really gone against the tide and sought after the
truth in the face of overwhelming adversity?

178

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

THE LOGICAL DIRECTION OF MORALITY
We often hear that Islamic law needs to get with the times.
We often hear the argument that clearly our world differs
from the world of seventh-century Arabia at the advent of
Islam. So, if times have changed, then law and ethics must
change.
First of all, things have not changed as much as people
like to think they have. Human beings are still human beings.
Our fundamental nature has not drastically transformed
such as would require the kind of reforms some Muslim
progressives and reformers have been calling for.
Second of all, this entire attitude belies a fundamental
confusion about the logical nature and direction of law
and morality. Morality does not reflect how the world is
but how the world ought to be. To want to edit our moral
commitments on the basis of things that happen in the
world is logically unsound. Sure, we can learn new things
that may affect how we apply our moral standards. But
such new things are not going to modify the actual moral
principle at hand.
Example: As Muslims, we know the immorality of riba.
In the modern world, riba is everywhere. Some might say
that given this “new reality,” Muslims should reconsider
how strict they are about usury. They will argue that Islam
needs an “economic reformation” so to speak. In actuality,
there is no groundbreaking new reality that would require
such a reformation. The basics of buying, selling, and the
pursuit of profit has remained fundamentally the same for
all of human civilization. Granted that there are details in
every context that need to be accounted for, and historically
traditional Islamic scholarship has been very dynamic in

PROGRESSIVISM, MORALITY

179

how it has spoken to the vagaries of every age. But, the
basic moral principles are consistent. If the world is now
drowning in usury, Muslims should be all the more vigilantly
opposed to that new normal. That is the direction of
normativity: On the basis of our ethical commitments, we
desire to change the world for the better, not change our
ethical commitments to accommodate the demands of the
world around us.
Of course, sometimes the world seems unchangeable.
Sometimes we are overwhelmed by how drastically the
world diverges from what we know to be truth and justice.
But we should never lose hope or descend into a nihilistic
loathing for our brothers and sisters in humanity.
The most hopeful hadith in this regard is: “If the Hour [the
day of Resurrection] is about to be established and one of
you was holding a palm shoot, let him take advantage of
even one second before the Hour is established to plant it.”38
No matter how dire and hopeless the circumstances may
seem, it is our moral responsibility to do what we can.
GOOD WITHOUT GOD? DO WE NEED RELIGION TO
BE “GOOD PEOPLE”?

Do we need religion to be “good people”?
No.
In actuality, we specifically need Islam to be good people.
Yes, there are good people of other faiths, no doubt.
But I am using the term “good” in a technical sense to
65"#I:';./#J$1./

180

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

characterize a person who fulfills all basic moral obligations
or at least feels bad about not fulfilling them.
To suggest that only Muslims are even in a position to
fulfill all basic moral obligations and that adherents of
other religions are missing out on these obligations violates
principles of universalism that have become so widespread
among people today. It is almost a truism in the minds of
people that even those without religion can be morally
upright. But is this true?
Those who make this claim focus their argument on a
small set of moral truths.
“Of course I don’t need God to know that murder
is wrong!”
“Of course I don’t need God to know that rape is
wrong!”
“If you only refrain from murder and rape because
God told you so, then that shows how truly immoral
you are!”

In actuality, this shows how limited these people’s
understanding of morality is. Their morality only consists
of two line items: don’t kill and don’t rape.
There is usually also the platitude, “I don’t harm anyone.
That’s what my morality is based on and it doesn’t require
belief in God, much less Islam.”
This, of course, is a cop out because “harm” can be
very vaguely defined and context-dependent. What one
considers harmful can vary from time to time, culture to
culture, and even from person to person within a single
time and culture.

PROGRESSIVISM, MORALITY

1 81

So, even if we all agree that morality is simply about
preventing harm, different people will have widely divergent
views on harm. Furthermore, it is not easy to “calculate”
what causes harm in the first place or what causes the
most or least harm in any given situation. And when we
look at the way people behave in real life according to
their morality, it does not seem like they are acting on the
basis of a complex calculation of weighing harms. Mostly it
seems people act on the basis of larger societal and cultural
norms of acceptable behavior and then interpret whatever
is socially unacceptable as “harmful.”
These are objections raised against what’s known as the
Harm Principle in Western ethics.
But Islamic ethics is far richer, far more nuanced, and,
yes, far superior to the vague, speculative musings of liberal
deployments of the Harm Principle (which is, again, just a
cover for transient cultural sensibilities anyway).
Central to Islamic ethics are the concepts of adab and
khuluq, i.e., manners and character. As the Prophet ձ said,
“The best amongst you are those who have the best
manners and character.”39
Allah also praised the Prophet ձ as having khuluq adhim,
i.e., great superlative character.
When we look at the content of Islamic ethics, adab, and
khuluq, we find a great deal that is not intuitive as far as
Western liberal cultural sensibilities are concerned. Here
are some of the more prominent examples:
•

Great emphasis for respecting and taking care of
one’s parents.

64"#X.$<$#.78^:=$.,<

182

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

•

The moral imperative of helping one’s neighbors.

•

The moral significance of visiting the sick.

•

The premium placed on supporting orphans and
the poor.

•

The moral necessity of maintaining family ties.

Sure, you will find some impoverished semblance of
these values in other religions and non-Islamic cultures.
But in Islam, these are not niceties. They are duties. You
are not considered a morally exemplary person for doing
the above. Rather, you are merely doing your basic moral
duties and if you fail in this, then you are morally culpable.
It’s a big difference.
But there are further imperatives:
•

Can one be a moral person if one is racked with
jealousy?

•

Can one be of sound moral integrity if one habitually
backbites?

•

Can one be considered ethical in any sense if one
fails to have good assumptions of people?

•

Can one be of high moral character if one spreads
hearsay without verifying the truth of the matter?

•

Can one be characterized as morally upright if one
partakes in usurious business transactions?

The answer to all these questions is a hard no: If a person
has these qualities and does not feel guilt and shame and
attempts to rectify himself, then he cannot be considered
a moral person. So how could it be possible for someone
who doesn’t even know that these moral imperatives exist,
to abide by them? Obviously they couldn’t. You don’t see

PROGRESSIVISM, MORALITY

1 83

atheists, for example, emphasizing things like backbiting
or jealousy or respecting one’s parents. Ethics is only about
“Rape!” and “Murder!” for them.
In truth, the above 10 points are a very small sliver of
all the moral imperatives of Islam. For example, all these
points concern moral duties to other people. What about
moral duties towards one’s Creator? Certainly there are
moral imperatives there as well, which by themselves
would mean that those who reject God are ipso facto
morally deficient. But for the sake of argument, we can limit
ourselves to moral duties with respect to other people and,
still, the atheist and those who consign themselves to a
liberal secular morality are to be found grossly lacking in
their understanding of what morality even entails.
Some might argue that there really isn’t a moral
imperative to, for example, respect one’s parents, etc. The
response to this takes us deep into the subject of metaethics. How do we determine what is or is not moral in the
first place?
Well, we can start from a completely skeptical position
about all moral duties. This would make us nihilists. If
we can ask, why is it a moral imperative to respect one’s
parents, we can also ask why is it a moral imperative to
not harm others? The atheist and secularist do not have
a compelling or even consistent response to this. Simply
look at the state of moral philosophy in the halls of Western
academia. There is no consensus on even the most
basic questions. Everything is constantly in dispute. The
confusion is tangible.
As far as we’re concerned, atheists and secularists are
not even in the running.

184

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Theists, however, fair far better. Muslim, Christian, and
Jewish theologies each provide an overarching theory of
God, the universe, and humanity. It is in context of these
broader theories that moral imperatives are grounded and
find meaning. These theories can then be evaluated and
compared. Which one is most consistent? Which one is most
compelling?
When we look at Christian and Jewish ethics, they have
undergone significant changes especially in the last 100 or
even 50 years. For example, many Christian and Jewish
denominations now find no moral qualms with same sex
behavior. Their theological and ethical considerations
of family relations and the family institution have also
significantly shifted in order to mirror and accommodate
the dominant social forces of modern secularism, liberalism,
and capitalism. What justifies these shifts? Is it a belief in
progress, namely that ethics must progress as civilization
progresses?
Well what does civilizational progress even mean? And
what does it mean for ethics to “progress” such that what
was once considered a moral abomination 100 years ago
is morally permissible or even laudatory now? These are
questions that most Christian and Jewish denominations
do not have answers for. They too have fallen victim to the
pressures of modern cultural hegemony. Islam, in contrast,
has resisted these pressures. This is often why, for example,
Islam is considered morally “backwards” and retrograde,
but Islam is only “retrograde” if the last 10 or 20 years of
Western culture are considered the measuring stick by
which to grade religions. By that measure, all of humanity
prior to, say, the year 2000 or 2010 were in the dark abyss
of moral purgatory. This is a baldly arrogant perspective

PROGRESSIVISM, MORALITY

1 85

on world history and a thoroughly uncompelling narrative.
Islam safely avoids the entire dilemma, where most
Christians and Jews are embroiled in its plain implications.
We can also evaluate the overarching theories of
Christianity and Judaism. Providing full critiques is beyond
the scope of this short chapter, but areas of pressure can
be put on the Trinity, of course. As for Judaism, their
theology historically borrowed a great deal from Islamic
kalam discourse in the 12th century (Maimonides being the
most prominent example of a Jewish theologian actively
engaging in the debates and theological discourse of
Islamic Spain).
The only objections people these days raise about
Islam are that the Quran and Sunnah sanction practices
that people with Western liberal cultural sensibilities
find problematic. This is pretty weak. Many of the things
that people today find objectionable about Islamic law
and ethics were considered completely acceptable and
unproblematic simply 10, 20, or 100 years ago. But again,
the vague, inconsistent notion of “moral progress” is
incessantly invoked to handle this obvious critique. Without
substantiating what “moral progress” amounts to and
explaining how moral truths concerning human nature can
be conditional on time, these objections cannot be taken
seriously.
In the end, Muslims have the most compelling overarching
theory. And those of sound intellect can also investigate the
specifics of Islamic morality, including imperatives such
as the 10 listed above, to see how beautiful and profound
Islamic normativity actually is. Muslims, meanwhile,
enjoy the sweet fruits of abiding by the deen in this life

186

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

as well as the life to come bi idhnillah. Non-Muslims are
always welcome to accept Islam and experience all this for
themselves. And if they are not interested, we simply say,
lakum dinukum waliya din (“For you all is your religion, and
for me is my religion;” Quran 109:6).

CHAPTER

10

REFORMISTS,
MODERNISTS
“TRADITIONAL” MUSLIMS VS. THE MODERNISTS
Being a “traditionalist” Muslim is a reactionary term. The
term had to be coined in order to make the necessary
distinction against “modernist” and “reformist Muslim.”
The defining feature of a traditionalist is respect for the
intellect of past Muslims and a skepticism in the validity
of modern exceptionalism. The modernist, in contrast, is
skeptical of the intellect of past Muslims and a firm believer
in modern exceptionalism.
In other words, modernists believe we live in a unique
time and that that necessitates practicing Islam in a way
that it has never been practiced before. Modernists also
tend to believe that, in modern times, we have unique
knowledge that past Muslims were not privy to, and that
knowledge licenses us to practice Islam in a way that it has
never been practiced before.
The traditionalist, on the other hand, finds this reasoning
not only unconvincing but even irrational. What is so
unique about modern times that merits the adoption of
unprecedented beliefs and practices? Over the past 1400
years, we are still the same species with the same needs

188

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

and basic mental makeup, the same tendencies, the same
weaknesses. Which is not to say that the Sharia does not
accommodate certain kinds of changes and variation across
time and place. But our times are not exceptional and
unique enough to even begin to justify some of the things
modernists call for.
Traditionalists also respect the intellect and spiritual
insight of the collective body of Muslim scholarship over
the past 1400 years. If there are beliefs and practices that
the vast majority of, if not all, scholars upheld, that in itself
is evidence of the validity and soundness of those beliefs/
practices. The community does not agree on error. What
makes us so special, what unique intellectual capacity do
we have to go against the tide of historical unanimity?
COMMUNIST ISLAM – WHAT WE CAN LEARN FROM
THAT TRAVESTY
In the twentieth century, communism was very popular
with a group of academic Muslims. For these Muslims,
communism represented the peak of justice. It represented
the peak of worldly civilization, as the USSR at that time
was ascendant. So these Muslim academics wrote fervently
about how Muslims needed to adopt communism and how
true Islam was communist at its heart. They interpreted
the Quran and hadith in that light, pointing to verses
about zakat and sadaqa as divine directives against private
property.
Of course, there were many parts of Islamic law that
take certain property relations for granted, but since these
conflicted with communism, the Muslim communists

REFORMISTS, MODERNISTS

1 89

attacked the fiqh, called it backwards, unjust, and nothing
but a capitalistic distortion of God’s true religion. According
to them, the classical ulama were obviously just serving
their own interests as property owners, so they created
fiqh to advance their bourgeois agenda and oppress the
working class.
Other Muslims of the day pushed back against this,
poked holes in their arguments, and defended the ulama
from their smears. Having been rebuffed intellectually and
communally, these Muslims became more extreme little by
little until they decided to leave Islam entirely. Didn’t Marx
say that religion was the opiate of the people? Didn’t these
traditional Muslims reject the clear justice of communism
and the insights of historical materialism? It must be Islam
itself that is the problem.
So they became apostates and denounced Islam along
with the Muslim sheep who followed it blindly. Despite it
all, they had high hopes that in the near future the light of
communism would overcome the darkness of the Islamic
tradition and the entire Muslim world would follow them
into enlightenment.
Soon thereafter communism went out of vogue. The
USSR fell. By the end of the twentieth century, no one
remembered anything these people had written or
advocated for. Their movement was flushed down the toilet
of history.
Today’s social justice, liberal Muslims — openly, militantly
calling people to fahisha and disobedience, brazenly
slandering the ulama and sowing the seeds of confusion
in Muslims’ hearts — are on the exact same path. May Allah
expedite their fate!

190

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

IS ISLAM THE REASON THE MUSLIM WORLD IS
“BACKWARDS”? LATIN AMERICA BEGS TO DIFFER
The perennial question: Why does the Muslim world “lag
behind”?
The perennial answer: Because of Islam!
We expect this kind of analysis from the likes of
Orientalists, neoconservatives, and Barack Obama. But
unfortunately, some Muslims also share such sentiments.
From the beginning of the colonial period, self-hating
Muslims have agreed with their colonial masters that Islam
is the problem and the only way forward is to shed Islam.
Of course, the self-hating Muslims don’t come out and
say, “Islam is the problem,” literally. They will, instead,
say things like, “Islam needs to reform,” or, “We need to
revisit classical fiqh and apply new ijtihad as needed,” or,
“Classical scholarship had misogynistic elements.”
This is the not-so-subtle approach of Muslim modernists,
who oftentimes will be classically trained themselves and
will wear all the trappings of traditional scholars. Not all
modernists wear suits and ties.
Some wear more traditional garb.
Three arch-reformers: Jamal al-Din al-Afgani, Muhammad
Abduh, Syed Ahmad Khan.
Yes.
By wielding religious authority and using religious
language, these modernists are better able to influence
the average Muslim, who generally has a deep respect
for ulama and sacred knowledge. The colonial powers, of
course, recognized this and took advantage by deputizing

REFORMISTS, MODERNISTS

191

some of these scholars to advocate for European interests.
This dynamic is still used in full force to this day.
Now let’s think more deeply about this question of
“lagging behind.”
Who stands to benefit when Muslims view their bad
economic position in the world as a function of their own
religious tradition?
Hmm…
Well, if that question is too difficult, let’s look at other
regions of the world that are lagging behind.
In the news recently is Venezuela.
Why do countries like Venezuela lag behind? According
to Western liberal commentators, like the New York Times
and, recently, Donald Trump, the answer is simple:
“That Mr. Maduro [President of Venezuela] must
go has been obvious for some time. Since he
succeeded the leftist strongman Hugo Chávez
in 2013, his mismanagement, cronyism and
corruption, exacerbated by the drop in the price
of oil, Venezuela’s dominant source of revenue,
have brought the country to ruin. Hyperinflation
has rendered wages virtually worthless, people are
dying of starvation and lack of medical care, and
millions have fled to neighboring countries.”⁴⁰

See? Western powers only have the best interests of
Venezuela’s people at heart. These poor Venezuelans
are starving to death! They have no medicine! They’re
experiencing hyperinflation! WE HAVE TO DO SOMETHING!
2D"#$%%&'())---";B%<19'"0+1)>D!4)D!)>2)+&<;<+;)F9;9G:97.81./:8
,+8%,:1&"$%17

192

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

We have to support “regime change”! Perhaps, we need to
invade! That is the only humanitarian option at this point!
Of course, no mention of the fact that the starvation, the
lack of medicine, the hyperinflation, etc., are the direct result
of years of sanctions on Venezuela. Gee, isn’t it amazing
how when you put severe economic sanctions on a country,
that country will suffer economically? Then, conveniently,
you can blame whatever political faction you want to get rid
of for the economic hardship in order to justify supporting a
military coup or even a ground invasion. This is the circular
reasoning the New York Times and other Western media
outlets trot out without a shred of self-awareness.
Poor Venezuela is not the only victim of this tactic. Many
other Latin American countries have been brought to their
knees by way of American “humanitarianism.” America, the
savior of the world, has to save these backwards countries
from their own incompetence. It’s the only way.
TruthDig reports:
“A survey of The New York Times archives shows
the Times editorial board has supported 10 out of
12 American-backed coups in Latin America, with
two editorials—those involving the 1983 Grenada
invasion and the 2009 Honduras coup—ranging from
ambiguous to reluctant opposition.
“The reason the CIA and U.S. military and its
corporate partisans historically target governments
in Latin America is because those governments are
hostile to U.S. capital and strategic interests, not
because they are undemocratic. So while the points
the Times makes about illiberalism may sometimes

REFORMISTS, MODERNISTS

193

be true, they’re mostly a non sequitur when analyzing
the reality of what’s unfolding.”⁴¹

So, in short, this is how America does things. First priority
is American economic interests. Who is going to play ball?
Who is going to let America and American corporations
have their way and enjoy the world’s economic resources
for pennies on the dollar? Most countries will quickly open
their doors because who doesn’t love America?
“The West is so superior in every way. Freedom, democracy,
human rights. Please teach us your ways. Just don’t shoot!”
But of course, there will always be the troublemakers
who just can’t get with the program. So what does America
do? Impose crippling sanctions, brutal sanctions that end
up starving the population to death. Who can forget US
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright saying 500,000 Iraqi
children starving to death was “worth it”?
Then, the American media dutifully reports on the human
misery and says, “See! These poor people are dying! We
have to do something for those poor starving children!”
Of course, the human misery that is suffered due to the
tyranny of American-friendly dictators is not commented
upon or seen as a reason for action.
So, the Muslim world is not unique in its “backwardness.”
Not at all. Many regions outside of North America and
Western Europe are economically stunted in the same way.
So why does Islam get all the blame? Why does the Islamic
tradition and traditional Islamic scholarship get the blame?

2!"#$%%&'())---"%,:%$/<?"0+1).,%<079')B+:,80+1&79%98?:</98%+8%$98;8B8
%<19'8':&&+,%8+*8:8'8A.0=9/80+:&'8<;87.%<;8.19,<0.)

194

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Why does Muslim male authority get the blame? This makes
no sense.
We have to recognize what is really happening: A
hostage situation. All these countries have the gun to their
heads. After a while, Stockholm Syndrome sets in (i.e., a
psychological phenomenon where the hostage starts to
feel affection and affinity for the kidnapper).
Whenever someone starts running his mouth about the
Muslim world lagging behind and how that is a function
of Islam, just point him to all these other non-Muslim
countries. What explains their plight? Is it just that a handful
of countries in the West figured out the magic formula for
not starving to death and wallowing in squalor and the other
90% of the world’s population is utterly clueless? What
allowed Western Europe to discover the magic formula
and not the rest of the world? Is there some kind of racial
superiority that Europeans have that allowed them to do
this? Is the white aryan race special? Is that what the New
York Times and Donald Trump want us to believe?
THE HYPOCRISY OF “ISLAMIC REFORM”
Sometimes Muslim reformists or Muslims taking on certain
reformist positions will cite a rare, unusual classical
opinion to support their view. This is, of course, “cherry
picking” and it is intellectually dishonest. This is the same
critique we would make against terror groups like ISIS
and their approach to Islamic texts. What both ISIS and
these reformists are doing is post hoc justification. They
already have something they want to accomplish, whether
it is advancing political terror or advancing some liberal
ideology, whatever the case may be. And then they scan

REFORMISTS, MODERNISTS

195

the vast sea of Islamic scholarship for anything that might
lend support to their particular agenda.
Most of the time, by the way, even their reading of the
classical texts is wrong or ripped out of necessary context,
but let’s put that aside. We know that actions are by
intentions, so that should be the question when we are
confronted by these reform efforts. They will claim, “Suchand-such is a known opinion within the tradition.” And
that may be true. But our question should be: Why are we
citing these unusual opinions? What is the intention here?
To advance a certain point of liberal ideology, which itself
is intellectually and morally questionable?
Rather than bastardizing Islamic scholarship, why not
exercise a little bit of critical thinking and question that
liberal position? In other words, sincerity entails being
concerned with the majority position first and foremost
(even if one does not always accept or follow it), because
probabilistically speaking, the majority position is more
likely to represent the truth. But if one’s main concern is
justifying one’s own views, any opinion no matter how rare
or underrepresented is good enough.
PROGRESSIVE AND MODERNIST MUSLIM REFORM
When you compare the traditional schools of fiqh, you will
find some of them to be more difficult to follow in some
areas and easier to follow in other areas. For example, the
requirements and conditions of wudu in School A might be
more difficult to satisfy than School B but School B is easier
or more lenient in terms of travel, etc.

196

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

But when you look at the opinions of modern reformers
on matters of fiqh, they all trend in one direction. They
all take very predictable positions with the only apparent
common thread tying them together is that they accord with
and accommodate the sensibilities, biases, and aspirations
of modern Western bourgeois people. Any rational person
can see that this is not a coincidence. This is the glaring
red flag that signals to us that these reformers have no
consistent usul, i.e., principles, by which they are deriving
their opinions. Rather, they settle on their opinion, whatever
is most concordant with the dominant social conventions,
i.e., what they sometimes call “reason,” and then, after the
fact, try to cobble together a justification from a highly
selective reading of the Quran and hadith, and perhaps
other rare minority opinions they may find from legit ulama.
Despite all this, these reformers insist on being taken
seriously by the rest of us.
THE INSIGHT OF THE FAUX-TRADITIONALIST
Advocate a minority or even shadh opinion expressed
somewhere by someone in the corpus of Islamic scholarship
and so long as it conforms to modernist, liberal, feminist
sensibilities, you are a sage traditionalist brimming with
wisdom.
Advocate a majority or predominant position of the
schools of thought within the Islamic sciences that conflicts
with said modernist ideologies, and you are an out-of-touch,
inflexible extremist who doesn’t understand context and is
driving the Ummah to mass apostasy.

REFORMISTS, MODERNISTS

197

THE MODERNIST PLAYBOOK
Use this handy guide to easily dispute every normative claim
Islam makes that violates modern liberal secular values.
Using these rebuttals, you can justify virtually anything
and make it seem like the Islamic scholarly tradition is on
your side. With this guide you can undermine those pesky
traditional Muslims and champion your reformist Islam all
the while coming across as a nuanced and learned scholar
in your own right.
Traditionalist: “There is consensus on this topic.”
Modernist
Rebuttal:

“Actually, consensus is a highly
contested issue.”

Traditionalist: “These narrations are mutawatir (i.e.,
mass transmitted).”
Modernist
Rebuttal:

“Actually, tawatur is a highly
contested issue.”

Traditionalist: “This is the relied upon view of the
four Sunni schools.”
Modernist
Rebuttal:

“We don’t have to limit ourselves
to the schools because we live in a
different context today.”

Traditionalist: “This is an established position in
one school.”
Modernist
Rebuttal:

“Well, the majority of scholars say
otherwise, so we can trash the
minority position.”

198

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Traditionalist: “This is the majority position.”
Modernist
Rebuttal:

“Well, there is a minority position
that says otherwise, so we can
safely ignore the majority.”

Traditionalist: “This ayah is qat`i (i.e., clear cut).”
Modernist
Rebuttal:

“No it’s not.”

Traditionalist: “This hadith is unequivocal.”
Modernist
Rebuttal:

“But it is an ahad hadith, so we can
safely ignore it.”

Traditionalist: “This is the strongest position within
the school.”
Modernist
Rebuttal:

“But there is a solitary narration
relaying the statement of a Sahabi
that contradicts that position, so we
can safely ignore it.”

Traditionalist: “Most of the tafasir on these ayat
convey the same interpretation.”
Modernist
Rebuttal:

“Yeah, but there is one tafsir that
says something slightly different, so
that proves that the other tafasir are
the result of cultural bias.”

Traditionalist: “The fuqaha (i.e., Islamic jurists) are
agreed on this.”

REFORMISTS, MODERNISTS

Modernist
Rebuttal:

199

“The fuqaha are limited in their
knowledge of hadith. We have to
look at what the muhaddithun (i.e.,
hadith specialists) said.”

Traditionalist: “The muhaddithun are agreed on
this.”
Modernist
Rebuttal:

“The muhaddithun are limited in their
knowledge of fiqh. We have to look
at what the fuqaha said.”

Traditionalist: “The fuqaha and the muhaddithun
are agreed on this.”
Modernist
Rebuttal:

“But we live in a different context, so
our own ijtihad is necessary. Islam is
a living tradition, etc.”

See how easy it is to weasel your way out of anything
and everything? When you aren’t beholden to standards of
consistency and basic intellectual honesty, you can justify
pretty much anything and look good doing it! Enjoy!
HYPOCRISY ON GENDER SEPARATION
Muslim reformists, liberals, progressives who oppose
gender separation are often very aggressive, and their
aggressiveness matches the indignation they feel at the
notion that genders should be separated. But why is this
such a problem? Even the most secular societies impose
gender separation to some extent. Bathrooms are gendered.

200

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Locker rooms are gendered. Sports are gendered in
general. Secular societies recognize male and female and
operationalize those gender distinctions in countless ways.
Muslims simply operationalize gender somewhat
differently. But since Muslim practices and gender
separation differ from the dominant, Western model, that
is a problem. Rather than just acknowledge that Muslims
do it differently, these reformists and critics of Islam make
it seem like Islam is the only religion and worldview that
facilitates gender separation and is therefore backwards
and barbaric.
KNOWLEDGE VS. THE APPEARANCE OF
KNOWLEDGE
And when it is said to them, ‘Believe as the people have
believed,’ they say, ‘Should we believe as the fools have
believed?’ Unquestionably, it is they who are the fools,
but they do not know.
Al-Baqarah [Q2:13]

There are many people who call the believers fools in this
day and age. Allah tells us that unquestionably, undoubtedly
these people are the real fools and they themselves are
unaware of this and do not know the truth. Unfortunately,
many Muslims do not realize this either. Instead of seeing
the rejectors and deniers as fools, they are often seen as
respected experts, scholars, intelligentsia, etc., and their
work is even promoted among the Muslims to such an
extent that Muslims start modifying and editing their beliefs
to conform to the theories and ideologies of those who have

REFORMISTS, MODERNISTS

2 01

very explicitly and adamantly rejected iman. And many
Muslims don’t see any contradiction in this.
And where it gets really sad and really pitiful is when
Muslims look up to these people and because of their
admiration and respect for them, they start denouncing
their own scholars, calling the great ulama of the Ummah
as essentially fools, who had limited intellects, were just
speaking out of whim and desire, did not truly understand
the meaning of the Quran and Sunnah, etc.
What is the cause of this? One of the main factors is that
these Muslims have been enchanted with ideas that they
do not fully understand. When you do not fully understand
something, you have two options. You can just outright
reject it (even when you don’t know why you are rejecting
it). Or you can judge its value according to appearances.
Does this look like something legitimate? Does this sound
like it is coming from a learned place? Are reputable people
endorsing this? Do the masses accept this? Is it popular?
Basically, if something has all the appearances of
knowledge, then that is good enough to accept it. Much
of what Muslims today accept of these various modernist
ideologies are done on this basis. You do have a handful
who will just reject things regardless. That is the safer
path, but it does not help the wider Ummah. Therefore,
what is needed is to fully understand these ideologies. My
experience is and my claim is that when that happens, it
will be very obvious how foolish and contemptible they are.
And then we will know indubitably and unquestionably who
are the true fools.

202

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

“AMERICAN ISLAM”
If “American Islam” just means eating cheeseburgers after
Friday prayers instead of biryani, then no one has any issue
with that. The “American Islam” that people have a problem
with is when deen is compromised for no other reason than
to accommodate American sensibilities and culture.
Examples: In America, it is OK for Muslim women to marry
non-Muslim men because of x, y, z aspects of the culture.
In America, it is OK to have women and men pray side by
side because of x, y, z aspects of the culture. In America, it is
ok for non-mahrams to go on dates and use hook-up apps
because of x, y, z aspects of the culture. In America, it is ok
to smoke weed recreationally because of x, y, z aspects of
the culture. In America, it is ok for Muslims to attend and
participate in the religious rituals of Christians, Jews, etc.,
because of x, y, z aspects of the culture. In America, it is ok
for Muslim kids to go to prom because of x, y, z aspects of
the culture. In America, it is ok to consume riba (which is
technically not riba anyway!) because of x, y, z aspects of
the culture. In America, it is ok for Muslim women to get
abortions if they are not financially stable because of x,
y, z aspects of the culture. In America, it is ok to support
LGBT whatever because of x, y, z aspects of the culture. In
America, it is ok to ignore norms of gender separation in
the mosque or other religious gatherings because of x, y, z
aspects of the culture. And on and on.
If this is “American Islam,” count me out. But I will be
happy to sit down with you for a cheeseburger. Or biryani.

REFORMISTS, MODERNISTS

2 03

THE WESTERN STRATEGY FOR DOMINATING THE
MUSLIM WORLD
“A leaked memo shows that the Trump White House
was advised by the State Department to promote
an ‘Islamic Reformation’ and to use women and
young people in the Muslim majority world to
front it. [...] Focusing on female-empowerment as
the primary information messaging goal within the
Islamic-influenced world will allow the United States
to maintain a moral component for American power
and its liberation narrative.”⁴²

Focusing on women and youth to control the Muslim world
and distort Islam is not new. It has always been the central
strategy of colonizers, not only in the Muslim world, but also
Native America, aboriginal Australia, China, etc. for the past
few hundred years.
Colonizers like Lord Cromer and others specifically
focused on the claim that European values and European
men came to empower Muslim women while Islamic
values and Muslim men imprisoned women, abused them,
subjugated them. They argued that Islamic law needs
reform in order to accommodate women’s rights. First and
foremost, Muslim women must take off hijab and dress
like European women to be “free.” Second, women have
to refuse and resist any and all male authority, whether the
husband’s’, the father’s, or the male scholar’s. Furthermore,
the “barbaric” institution of polygyny must be abolished.
Muslim women must insist on leaving “domestic drudgery”
and joining the workforce, which conveniently meant
2>"#$%%&'())%$9<;%9,09&%"0+1)>D!5)D3)!5)<'7.1<08,9*+,1.%<+;8%,:1&8./8
1<;<'%,.%<+;)

204

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

becoming cheap, dispensable laborers for the colonizers.
And much more that has been meticulously documented
in many academic works.
The ultimate purpose of this multi-pronged attack was to
destroy the Muslim family. The colonizers aimed to destroy
that critical, central institution of Islam and the Ummah,
which is the strong, cohesive Muslim family, pitting wives
against husbands, daughters against fathers, sisters against
brothers, to slowly but surely gain complete control of and
authority over the Muslim masses. This has always been
the plan.
All this was done under the mantra of “female
empowerment.” That’s how it was marketed for the last
couple of centuries. This is why Muslim feminists with their
calls to upturn the tradition and reform the Sharia are
simply advancing the work of colonizers and imperialists.
This is why it is a contradiction in terms to be a feminist and
“decolonial” or “anti-imperialist” at the same time.
I am often accused by detractors of being “obsessed”
with feminism and its activism. Well, it’s not my fault
that the main path of attack on Islam is through women’s
issues, as good ol Trump’s State Department made clear
in the leaked memo. I, for one, am not going to sit back
and ignore this critical issue and let enemies feast on the
Ummah unimpeded.
I have often detailed the nefarious activities of Muslim
reformist group in the US and how they are receiving
hundreds of thousands of dollars from the US government
to advance “Muslim women’s empowerment.” Many
wonder why the US government would pump so much
money to help out small Muslim orginizations. Well, here

REFORMISTS, MODERNISTS

2 05

is your answer. It is all part of the overarching plan to
reform Islam according to the vision of imperialists. These
reformist and feminist orgs are simply their enthusiastic
agents aggressively trying to infiltrate our masjids, Islamic
schools, etc.
HADITH AND EPISTEMOLOGY: ADAM’S HEIGHT
Some Muslims react with extreme skepticism when they
read the hadith:
“Allah created Adam and he was sixty cubits tall.
Then He said, ‘Go and greet those angels and
listen to how they greet you, for that will be your
greeting and the greeting of your progeny.’ He
said, ‘Al-salamu ‘alaykum (Peace be upon you).’
They said, ‘Al-salamu ‘alaykum wa rahmat-Allah
(Peace be upon you and the mercy of Allah).’ So
they added the words ‘wa rahmat Allah.’ And
everyone who enters Paradise will be in the form
of Adam. People kept on growing smaller until
now.”4³
These Muslims want to know what is the evidence of
Adam and humans being this height? It is a funny question
because, if you are a Muslim, the evidence is the sahih hadith.
That is the evidence. The only reason you would think that
that is not evidence is if you are generally skeptical of all
hadith, in which case you are just a confused person and
have bigger things to worry about than the height of Adam,
or you take current scientific consensus as a sounder source
of knowledge about the height of Adam than sahih hadith,
26"#X.$<$#^:=$.,<

206

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

in which case, you think either the Prophet ձ misdescribed
his height or that the hadith transmitters made a mistake —
and given the text of the hadith and the fact that the height
of Adam is mentioned in multiple sahih hadith, it would
have to have been a pretty extensive mistake.
We can evaluate all this. First, we should note that we
don’t take current scientific consensus as relevant when it
comes to many things described in hadith. Think of Al-Isra
wal-mi`raj. Or any of the miracles of the prophets. Think
of any of the signs of the Day of Judgment, e.g., ya’juj and
ma’juj, etc. And if you have a problem with hadith, then
consider any of the events and things mentioned in the
Quran. So, if current scientific consensus is not germane to
any of these topics, why is it suddenly so all-determinative
when it comes to the height of Adam?
Also, I am afraid that people who take current scientific
consensus so seriously are often deeply ignorant about
the nature and the history of science. I have personal
experience with this as a physics student at Harvard as
well as a philosophy and history of science student there
and at Tufts. Some of my professors were either Nobel
Prize winners or on their way to winning it, and their
ignorance about some of the basics of science history was
astounding. They simply didn’t think it was important to
know the history of science. Not surprisingly, that lack of
interest and knowledge resulted in a very narrow, myopic
understanding of science itself, which is ironic considering
how accomplished they were in the sciences.
One piece of science history that is relevant to this
discussion is that past archaeologists believed in the
existence of giant human beings. They based their belief

REFORMISTS, MODERNISTS

2 07

on fossils and discovered bone fragments. Consider the
fossils of the species named Meganthropus. Is it surprising
that current scientists are unaware of this? No, they are
simply ignorant of the history of their own field. But that
does not erase the work and the historical record of their
predecessors.
As for myself, as a Muslim, I don’t privilege the speculative
over the definite. And I have no hesitation or qualms
taking that sahih hadith at face value and feeling perfectly
intellectually content and confident. In fact, ahadith like
that are gems that I treasure because they inform me about
the true nature of the world and history that I wouldn’t be
privy to otherwise since current scientific consensus says
something different.
(By the way, stop with the nonsense about bone strength
versus height. If bones are sufficiently dense, they can
support a creature of a given height. Arguing against this
hadith on the basis of bone structure is like arguing against
the possibility of Al-Isra on the basis that the Buraq couldn’t
have been aerodynamic enough to make the trip in such a
short period of time.)
NB: One of the foremost scholars in the world, Mufti
Taqi Usmani, relays an interpretation of this hadith from
Shaykh Anwar Shah al-Kashimiri, according to which Adam
was much taller in the Garden and then became smaller
when he was sent to Earth.44 He bases his opinion on an
analysis of the language of the hadith. Whether or not this
interpretation is correct, Allah knows best. But the point is,
22"#q'1.;<U# I:$.11./# O.c<U# :&07("&- ?&@;- &"#5A";(7U# f+7"3U# &"!EJ'#
0<%9/# AB# [.c.,# J=A.,# P$991.(# $%%&'())---"79%19%:,;%$9%.A79'"
0+1)>D!6)!D)$9<?$%8./.183D80:A<%'"$%17#

208

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

neither interpretation depends on contemporary scientific
“facts.”
THE PROGRESSIVES VS. THE FAUX-TRADITIONALISTS
Which person poses more of a danger to the Ummah?
The openly “progressive Muslim” calling for the reform of
Islam by, among other things, throwing away all hadith,
since there are so many “misogynistic” narrations in the
sahih collections, etc.? Or: The “learned shaykh” who has
studied at Al-Azhar or elsewhere who is no less under the
influence of modern ideologies like secularism, liberalism,
and feminism, but rather than openly calling for a complete
overhaul of the deen, instead resorts to misapplying obscure
“minority opinions,” bastardizing the concept of maqasid,
disqualifying otherwise sound hadith on dubious grounds,
employing highly creative Arabic etymological contortions,
bastardizing the concept of `urf, downplaying the scholarly
acumen of luminaries like Ghazali, Ibn Taymiyya, the four
imams, etc., may Allah have mercy on them, in order to
present a “nuanced” and “scholarly” opinion that is more
relevant for modern times?
THE MULTI-HEADED HYDRA OF MUSLIM REFORMISM
Is it necessary to provide a rebuttal to so-called reformist/
progressive Muslims? Not really. If you try to engage in
debate with them, it is a fruitless exercise because they have
no usul. They have no clear, explicit principles they use to
derive all the strange, divergent opinions they come up with.
So if you try to hold them to something, they quickly pivot

REFORMISTS, MODERNISTS

2 09

to something else and the conversation goes nowhere. I
speak from experience… A lot of face-palming experience…
But you don’t need to engage reformist/progressive
Muslims in order to completely debunk everything they
stand for. You do this by attacking the root of their ideology:
liberal, modernist thought. That is something worth
spending your time on. Consider this example.
Reformists make a big deal about hijab and gender
separation in general and how it is oppressive, patriarchal,
etc., etc. The more sophisticated reformists will cherry
pick from different historical texts and trot out a generous
helping of “maqasid-based reasoning” to make their case.
Some people might certainly want to get their hands dirty
and point out all the things they get wrong about the texts
and their bastardization of maqasid, maslaha, and other
fiqh principles. And this is an admirable endeavor in its
own right. But unfortunately the reformists will just shift
the argument and use another set of texts and another set
of arguments. Like fighting a mythological Hydra: You cut
off one head and two more grow in its place.
A more efficient route is to just stab the Hydra in the
heart by critiquing the modernist assumptions about dress,
oppression, patriarchy, gender roles, etc. By debunking
these notions, you take the wind out of the reformist’s
sails. And since the vast majority of these reformists are
such shallow thinkers, they usually haven’t even reflected
on the roots of their own ideology to see if they are sound
or hold up to the least amount of scrutiny. It is quite sad
actually that people destroy their iman and try to change
the religion on the basis of such flimsy philosophies that are
relevant only because they are trendy at this point in time,

210

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

but otherwise have no redeeming intellectual or moral
quality.
LIZARD HOLE COMETH
In the Quran, Allah gave us such a detailed description
of Bani Isra’il and their crimes and spiritual deficiencies
because the Muslims would mirror their evolution. The wellknown hadith of Muslims following the path of those before
them, step by step, testifies to this depressing eventuality.
“You would walk the same path as was taken by
those before you inch by inch and step by step
so much so that if they had entered into the hole
of the lizard, you would follow them in this also.
We said: ‘Allah’s Messenger, do you mean Jews
and Christians?’ He said: ‘Who else?’”
And when we look around us, we see as clear as day that
the Messenger ձ undoubtedly spoke the truth. Reflect
on the relevant ayat and you will see the same behaviors
and actions, not with a small minority of the Ummah, but
increasingly the majority and their leaders.
To those who are not satisfied with their religion and seek
to “reform” it to their liking:
“And if you turn away, He will replace you with another
people; then they will not be the likes of you.”
Muhammad [Q47:38]

CHAPTER

11

SEX & ZINA
SEX SELLS, THE SAME WAY DRUGS SELL
Why is the music and movie industry so sex-obsessed? We
are told that it is because “sex sells,” i.e., that the masses
want sex, they want to see that and consume that. So these
industries are simply meeting an already existing demand.
In reality, these industries are creating the demand. They
are forcing shamelessness down people’s throats until
they create a dependency. It works the same way with the
proliferation of drugs. No one naturally wants to inhale
smoke. No one wakes up wanting to inject deadly chemicals
into the veins. No one naturally desires to drink the rancid,
rotten fermentation of putrid fruits and vegetables. These
are all artificial desires that these industries spend billions
of dollars a year implanting into people’s hearts by way of
advertising and other forms of cultural engineering, until
people think that these desires are naturally arising and
therefore must be pursued and fulfilled.
This is why Western morality is so naturalistic. According
to it, the most moral thing is to act in accordance with
natural human rights and natural human interests. This is
what the liberal human rights regime is predicated on. But
no one cares to ask, well how natural are these rights and

212

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

interests? And even if they are natural, who decided we are
morally required to act in line with whatever is “natural”?
THE SEXUAL MISERY OF THE WESTERN WORLD
After Woodstock came campus surveys on sexual assault.
After bra-burning came date rape. The Sexual revolution
of the 1960s aroused enthusiasm at first, but passions
have since waned. Those movements have come to look
imperfect, even ugly: For one thing, they have failed to touch
meaning, purpose, or fulfillment, especially the fulfillment
relating to sex. Revolution doesn’t mean progress.
The recent finding that 1 in 4 Western women in college
are victims of sexual assault by Western men ominously
mirrors the fact that 1 in 4 Western women will be victims of
domestic violence at some point in their lives. These grim
stats have led people in the West to realize that one of the
great miseries plaguing much of the so-called Western
world, and the liberal secular world more generally, is its
sick relationship with women and girls. If they are not being
paraded around in sleazy beauty contests at the tender
age of five or being berated by sex-positive Feminists for
not embracing their “inner sex Goddess.” At a minimum,
Western females can look forward to a life of chronic clinical
depression and loneliness, if not outright domestic abuse
and sexual violence. To address the latter, both Western
universities and workplaces alike have taken to producing
extensive guides of good conduct for college boys and male
employees due to their preternatural propensity to date
rape and sexually harass their female counterparts.

SEX & ZINA

213

The Commodity of Sex
Sex is a complex commodity, commercialized — in places
like New York, London, Paris, or Amsterdam — by way
of liberalism’s hypersexualized culture, the voyeuristic
pressures of social media, and the pornographic images
of women (or their body parts) in the advertising-saturated
West. These together create a potent environment of
overexposure and desensitization, where people, like drug
addicts looking for a stronger high, must increasingly resort
to more extreme sexual acts and fetishes in order to generate
the same arousal. Not surprisingly, this escalation has led to
an epidemic of perversion and sexual abnormalities ranging
from zoo- to pedo-philia, each deviance with its own group
and its own social movement and dedicated Social Justice
Warriors advocating for acceptance and celebration.
Today sex is a great paradox in many countries of the
Western world: One acts as though it’s all that exists, and
yet it means absolutely nothing. Overindulged in a Tinderinduced stupor of casual copulation, it weighs on the
mind by its very vacuousness. Although Western females
are regularly accosted by the unsolicited genitalia of
sexting grade school football players as well as respected
Congressmen, they are encouraged to bare their own
“assets” on Instagram and Snapchat, in a social media
stream of simultaneously narcissistic and desperate cries
for validation.

214

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

The War on Women
Women are a recurrent theme in daily discourse, because
the stakes they personify — for myths of Western superiority,
progress, and exclusivism — are great. In some countries,
they are allowed access to the public sphere only if they
renounce their wombs: To be satisfied with women living as
mothers and “mere homemakers” would be to uncover the
paradox that feminists and progressives desperately need
to deny: Maybe Western women can’t have it all. Mothers
are seen as a source of destabilization — extended maternity
leaves trigger profit loss, some say — and are respected only
when defined by a corporate relationship, as the Senior VP
of X or Up-and-Coming Manager of Y.
These contradictions create unbearable tensions.
Womanhood has no outlet, no outcome; starting a family
is no longer a means for support, love, and fulfillment, but
a burden to be put off for as long as possible. The sexual
and psychological misery that results can descend into
absurdity and hysteria. Here, too, one hopes to experience
familial love, but the mechanisms for that love — marriage,
child-rearing, familial stability — are prevented: Half of
all children born in the West are born to single mothers,
which is disturbing given that there is a direct, undeniable
correlation between single-family homes and crime
rates — though this might partially explain why some
Western countries have the highest rates of homicide and
violent crime in the world. And for the few Westerners
that are married, the spectre of infidelity looms large, as
even adultery has been commercialized, where cheating
websites like AshleyMadison cater to tens of millions of
registered users.

SEX & ZINA

215

In some Western lands, the war on women has the air of
a theatrical farce. Western women spend over $20 billion
annually on cosmetics and perfumes and another $12 billion
on cosmetic surgery (while only $22 billion is needed to
feed, clothe, and provide basic health care for the entire
world’s poor) — all this expenditure to abide by artificial
standards of fashion and beauty dictated by the corporate
conglomerates profiting from the Western woman’s need to
be sexy. Of course, that very need only arises due to women
being deliberately socialized to obsess over every detail of
their bodies such that millions of females, some as young
as 11 years-old, suffer from eating disorders and other forms
of Body Dysmorphic maladies.
Unfortunately for these Western women, who are literally
starving themselves for attention, Western men, in the
thick of their own Crisis of Masculinity, don’t seem to be
too interested, as they’ve been thoroughly desensitized
by endless amounts of internet porn. And when the ADHDaddled gentlemen are not masturbating, they’re too busy
playing video games and killing themselves: Tragically,
suicide is the single biggest cause of death in men aged
20-49 in some Western countries.

Fantasy or Reality?
One result is that people fantasize about the trappings of
another world: either the world peddled by popular culture
and Disney films about romance and monogamous love
between “soul mates,” happily ever after, or the sexually
promiscuous, at times violent world of “hook ups,” no
consequence, no commitment sex, more at home on the
set of a pornographic film than in the realm of reality.

216

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

It’s a choice perfectly illustrated by the offerings
of the Western media. Miley Cyrus and other former
Mousketeers “gone bad” are all the rage on television as
is the sexualization of young girls and “tweens,” pushed
to empower themselves and “own their sexuality” by
dressing and acting like pornstars, peddling the promise
of their unattainable bodies and impossible sex well before
puberty. Clothing is also given to extremes: Western women
naively believe their wardrobes to be a function of free and
independent choice, yet, despite that belief, they all dress
more or less identically.
Sex therapists are legion in the Western world, and
their advice, no matter how contradictory or ludicrous, is
voraciously consumed. These self-anointed gurus have a
de facto monopoly on talk about the body, sex, and love.
With the internet, daytime TV, and gossip magazines galore,
some of their “tips” have taken monstrous forms, devolving
into a kind of porno Psychology. A simple perusal of the
women’s magazine covers at the typical Western grocery
store: “Help your lover shop for an escort,” and more.

Sex is Everywhere
Especially in schools.
Orgasms are required as soon as puberty is within
reach and a warm body is available. To be a virgin past an
arbitrary age is to be an outcast. These pressures combined
with the barrage of sexualized images and content in media
and environment make for a dangerous mix. Incidences of
prepubescent elementary school boys gang raping their
female classmates are a growing phenomena in many
Western cities. But young girls don’t just have their male

SEX & ZINA

217

classmates to worry about. Violent sex offenders in the
West, at least the ones who are caught and convicted, serve
shockingly short prison sentences before being considered
“rehabilitated” and let back into society. In some parts of the
West, offenders who commit sex crimes against children
on average serve less time in prison than offenders who
commit the same crimes against adults.
And it is not only about degenerates molesting children.
Producers, distributors, and consumers of child pornography
and child sex slavery include famous filmmakers, celebrated
sandwich spokesmen, and billionaire hedge fund bankers.
Even prominent Harvard Law School professors like Alan
Dershowitz are committing acts of pedophilia and sex
trafficking on the weekends, allegedly. Apparently the lure
of innocent, virginal children is too much for the West’s rich
and famous. These otherworldly delights are the unspoken
rewards for those who do well in the lands of sexual misery.
Dreaming about such prospects, pedophilic business
moguls surrender to a terrifying, surrealistic logic: The path
to orgasm is through predatory domination, not love.
The West has long found comfort in exoticism, which
exonerates differences. Satellite TV and the World Wide Web
has a way of normalizing cultural variations and of excusing
any abuses: Beyonce, Playboy, and “twerking” exempted
some Easterners from considering the plight of Western
women: Other than India and Zimbabwe, the rest of the top
10 countries with the highest incidence of rape in the world
are Western. Despite all this soul-rending misery, Western
imperialists have taken it upon themselves to export their
unique brand of “sexual liberation” to the rest of the world,
saving and rescuing women in “developing” nations by way
of military occupation and an unending stream of NGOs

218

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

ready to civilize societies who know nothing of the superior
sexual values of the morally “superior” West.
What long seemed like the foreign spectacles of faraway
places now feels like a clash of cultures playing out around
the globe. Differences once defused by distance and a sense
of isolation have become an imminent threat. People
around the globe — i.e., the long time subjects of Western
imperialistic pillaging and rape — are discovering, with
anxiety and fear, that sex in the Western world is sick, and
that its venereal disease has long infected the rest of the
world.
THERE IS ONLY ONE KIND OF “SAFE SEX”
It doesn’t matter if you are religious or not, or if you believe
in God or not. There is no such thing as “safe sex” if you
are not married. If there is no paper involved between you
and whoever you are sleeping with, you are at the mercy
of that person and there is very little anyone can do to help
you if something happens, be it accidental, deliberate, or
malicious. This is a matter of life and death in the most
literal sense, whether you are talking about the potential
to create life, i.e., a human being, or the contraction of
life threatening diseases, or any other kind of possible
emotional, physical, or sexual abuse, or all of the above.
This used to be common knowledge. This used to be
common sense. But now, just pointing this out means
you’re a religious fundamentalist who has turned off his
brain and doesn’t understand human rights and the value
of sexual autonomy, and blah blah blah. How blind can you
be? Is this really so hard for people to understand?

SEX & ZINA

219

As Muslims, yes, we abide by Islamic law when it comes to
pre-marital abstinence and marriage, etc., first and foremost
because we hear and obey our Creator. No doubt about it.
But when we recognize the clear benefit and wisdom in His
commands and make note of that in our crazy, topsy turvy
world, does that mean we are “rationalists,” trying to revive
mu`tazili philosophy, etc.? You don’t have to be a hardcore
theological rationalist to point out the stupidity at play here.
PREMARITAL SEX IS NOT A “VICTIM-LESS CRIME”
People sometimes jokingly ask, why is it that driving requires
a license, but you can have children without a license or any
kind of certification? It’s often a lighthearted remark, but,
when you think about it, it’s a legitimate question. If driving
or teaching at a school, practicing medicine or law, or even
being a plumber requires certification, then what about
something that is far more sensitive, far more significant like
having children and raising them? After all, children are our
future and the state of our society as a whole depends on
how children are brought up — their morals, their sense of
responsibility, their character, and so on. It’s no secret that
children who grow up without proper parental influence are
far more likely to become involved in drugs and crime, to
face unemployment, to fail to become productive members
of society and upright human beings. This, then, has a toll
on all of us, on all members of society.
Given these high stakes, one has to wonder how any
civilized nation could allow its people to have children
without having some kind of regulations to ensure that all
children have competent parents. Isn’t it a child’s right to
have a stable household and parents who are capable of

220

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

properly raising him? Isn’t it our right as members of society
to make sure incompetent, irresponsible people in our
midst aren’t having children that they will neglect, children
who will be more likely to become burdens on society?
Islam, of course, does require just such a license — a
nikah. Properly done, according to Prophetic guidance, a
nikah ensures that a couple is in the best position to raise
a family, with the full support of the extended family and
the community at large.
Yet, Islamic sexual ethics have been the target of
unrelenting criticism from modernists and liberals for
decades, who argue that Islamic law stifles the sexual
freedom and autonomy of individuals by prohibiting
premarital sex. To the contrary, this prohibition protects
people’s freedom and autonomy because it effectively
curbs the amount of children being born to single mothers
and couples who are not in a position to take adequate care
of them. This in turn benefits the interests of children and
hence, the interests of society at large. So, even if one is not
religious per se, the rational merits of prohibiting premarital
sex are more than clear. And all the sociological evidence
supports this.
Put differently, premarital sex is not a victim-less crime,
as some believe.45 It is a major crime that most modern
2E"#O$9#<;9F<%.A79#,91.,=#%+#%$<'#&+<;%#<'U#-$.%#.A+:%#0+;%,.09&%<+;k#L*#
<1&,9?;.%<+;# <'# <1&+''<A79U# %$9;# -$9,9# <'# %$9# F<0%<1k#O-+# 9.'B# ,98
&7<9'(#Y<,'%U#+;#.;.7+?B#-<%$#+%$9,#=<;/'#+*#09,%<H0.%<+;'#.;/#7<09;'9'U#
.<,&7.;9'# $.F9# $./# .:%+&<7+%# *+,# /90./9's%$.%# /+9';b%# 19.;# &<7+%'#
/+;b%# ;99/# %+# A9# 09,%<H9/# A9*+,9# tB<;?# 0+119,0<.7# @9%'"# X90+;/U# <*#
%$9# 9u<'%9;09# +*# 0+;%,.09&%<+;# 0+:&79/# -<%$# -</9'&,9./# '9u# 9/:0.8
%<+;# -9,9# 9;+:?$# %+# &,9F9;%# :;-.;%9/# &,9?;.;0<9'U# -$B# $.'# '<;8
?7981+%$9,$++/#0+;%<;:9/#%+#,<'9#/90./9#.v9,#/90./9#*+,#%$9#&.'%#ED#
B9.,'U#':0$#%$.%#%+/.BU#;9.,7B#$.7*#+*#.77#0$<7/,9;#.,9#<;#'<;?79#&.,9;%#
$+19'k# J77# %$9# '%.%<'%<0'# &,+F9# <;/:A<%.A7B# %$.%# %$9'9# 0$<7/,9;# .,9#
-+,'9#+i#%$.;#0$<7/,9;#-$+#?,+-#:&#-<%$#%$9<,#*.%$9,'#<;#%$9<,#7<F9'"

SEX & ZINA

221

nations have allowed to run rampant. This in turn affects
the crime rate, it affects the percentage of the population
that requires government assistance through welfare,
unemployment benefits, etc. — in effect, it makes people
far more dependent on the state, thus increasing state
power exponentially. It is no wonder that modern nation
states have shown no interest in upholding the sexual ethics
that human societies of all religions have depended on for
thousands of years.
In sum, we can make an unimpeachable case for why
Islamic sexual ethics are rationally and ethically superior
to the secular liberal alternative. So, if a religious argument
against things like dating, hooking up, etc., is not convincing,
then the rationalistic argument should suffice to make the
moral case. At the very least, even if someone does not
ultimately agree with this reasoning, he can admit that it
is reasonable. And that is enough to characterize Islam’s
sexual ethics concerning zina as rational and not simply
“prudish,” “close-minded,” “backwards,” “cruel,” and all the
other cheap adjectives used to denigrate Islamic law.
“SEX IS TABOO IN ISLAM”
Does the fact that Muslims don’t openly and explicitly
talk about sex mean that “sex is taboo in Islam”? Does the
fact that Muslims don’t have the same approach to sex
education and sexual expression as modern “sex-positive”
feminists and psychologists mean that Muslims have an
unhealthy attitude toward sex?
It is amusing how anything that does not fit in the
mold that the modern gurus of sexuality have defined for
themselves is characterized as “unhealthy.” Well, Muslims

222

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

think there is plenty that is unhealthy, backwards, and
destructive with the state of sexuality in modern society.
So, you’ll have to excuse us if we’re not overly eager to get
pointers from you on the subject.
THE PURPOSE OF “SEX EDUCATION”
Kids are getting sex education in school at younger and
younger ages. When I was in grade school, sex ed wasn’t
taught until 10th grade. Now middle schools and sometimes
elementary schools have these programs. What is the
impact of this on a child’s psyche and development and
what will be the impact collectively for society?
My dad was telling me that in the past, in Muslim cultures,
parents didn’t talk to their kids about this until puberty and
even then, they would not be explicit about it because they
understood the power of human curiosity. If you talk to a
child about this, they will be that much more likely to be
curious about it. They would want to investigate further
and try it, and that’s not a positive result, no matter what
modern psychologists tell us about being “sex positive,” etc.
The content of the material being taught is also changing
apparently. They are teaching elementary school children
about sexual fluidity, sex orientation, and that you have the
option of selecting your gender identity and whether you
like boys or girls or both or neither or beyond. You don’t
have to be a fortune teller to guess what kind of impact this
will have on our children and hence our future.
But you have to really be amazed by the liberal philosophy
underlying all this, namely, why shouldn’t small children
learn about sex? Sex is just a healthy, natural part of life,

SEX & ZINA

223

right? There is no shame in learning about what the human
body can do! Besides, what possible reason is there to not
teach kids this stuff? They probably know about it anyway
from TV! Etc.
Consider the parallels this has to the satanic discourse,
when Iblis deceived Adam and Hawwa to approach the tree
and their shame became apparent to them. In the same
vein, from the satanic perspective, there is nothing better
than children knowing about sex as soon as they can talk
and understand language. And of course this would be
portrayed as positive, progressive, and healthy. The reality
is, sex by default is something shameful in itself and it is
only transformed to something very positive, beneficial,
healthy, and elevated when it is in accord with Allah’s
commands, so much so that Allah rewards having sex when
it is done in this lawful way. But this is not the perspective
and logic our children are being taught. So it is no surprise
that they increasingly see traditional religion as out of touch
and irrelevant. If you learn in school that there is nothing
more healthy than sex by default, then only something
impractical, evil even, would hinder that in any way.
“CHILD MARRIAGE” IN BANGLADESH
Comparing “child marriage” in countries like Bangladesh
to marriage in the US or Western Europe — where the
average age of marriage is in the late 20s and early 30s — is
comparing apples and oranges. Western media is at pains
to portray 14, 15, and 16 year olds in Muslim countries as
innocent little children forced into an institution against
their will. The pertinent comparison to make is with Western
14, 15, and 16 years olds, who, due to circumstance, are

224

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

sexualized by peer pressure, the influence of pop culture,
fashion, sex education, and so on. Look at the pressure
“sexting” culture puts on children and how the internet and
cell phone technology have dramatically changed youth
sexuality in the West.
It is now very common for 12 and 13 years olds to be
sexually active, and that is not seen as a problem in the
West. Rather than teach abstinence, educators have
decided that elementary and middle school children need
to learn about “safe sex.” There is nothing objectionable for
two teens under 18 to have sex (with “protection”), to pass
around naked pictures of themselves through snapchat
(as long as it’s only other teens seeing the pictures), etc.
In fact, it’s healthy, empowering, and all but encouraged
by parents, schools, and society at large. But if a 15-year
old gets married in Bangladesh, that is a “heartbreaking,”
“infuriating” violation of a girl’s dignity.
So the problem can’t be that teen brides are “sexualized.”
If the problem is that getting married at a young age
hinders a teen’s education, that is also something that
can be said about sexually active teens here in the West.
How much time, mental energy, and resources are spent
by our children participating in all these cultural practices
revolving around dating, hooking up, sexting, prom, and
on and on? Again, no one thinks of any of that in terms of
opportunity cost vis-a-vis education.
Finally, if the problem is about coercion and consent and
that these teen brides really don’t want to get married, I
would simply argue that coercion is a context-dependent
concept. I am sure that nowadays there are many brides in
countries like Bangladesh that truly do feel miserable and

SEX & ZINA

225

coerced to have to get married at 15. But these feelings do
not arise in a vacuum. They arise in context of a society
that has, through the influence of satellite TV and internet,
adopted Western cultural norms, norms that portray being
a teenager as a time for casual dating, boyfriend/girlfriend
relations, and so on. If you grow up thinking that that is what
it means to be normal, free, and liberated, then of course
you will have to be coerced to follow a path that diverges
from that model. But if that context is absent, what is
inherently wrong with getting married young? What exactly
is it that makes contemporary Western norms superior?
Ironically, it is precisely that context of casual sex being
imported from Western sources that is scaring traditional
families into wanting their children, and especially their
daughters, married at a young age, whereas before, there
may have been more of an allowance for education.
Point being, this is a complex issue but Western media
prefers to push a highly ethnocentric, simplistic narrative
punctuated with manipulative pictures of “sad” brides.
Usually the media reporting does not include actual quotes
from the brides themselves. Everything we get is filtered
through the perspective and ideological bias of the Western
reporter.
Also, to be perfectly clear, I am not defending all the
cultural practices surrounding marriage in Bangladesh or
wherever else. My point is to highlight some of the double
standards and unfair caricaturing Western media engages
in in their portrayal of cultures they believe to be inferior.

226

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

IKHTILAT
It is very sad to see Muslims, including supposedly
knowledgeable Muslims, whine and pout about the very
basic Islamic principle which is avoidance of ikhtilat
(blameworthy gender mixing).
Gender mixing leads to flirting. Flirting leads to touching.
Touching leads to zina. Zina leads to the destruction
of marriage. The destruction of marriage leads to the
downfall of family. The downfall of family leads to the end
of humanity. Keep the partitions up.
Is this exaggeration? Not at all. Anyone who has eyes, has
knowledge, and is honest knows that blameworthy gender
mixing not only leads to all this, it can also lead to much
worse: The Fire.
I expect the usual liberal feminist reaction to such issues.
But liberal feminists in shaykh’s clothing also chime in with
pro-ikhtilat attitudes and truly asinine statements that do
nothing but show the pettiness and ignorance of the people
making them.
If you disagree with my characterization of the
consequences of ikhtilat, please answer these questions:
Does blameworthy gender mixing—as is common in
today’s society with Muslims and non-Muslims in social
settings involving casual friendly interactions—involve
plenty of flirting (not to mention other problems like sexual
harassment, unwanted attention, etc.)?
Does this interaction, in many cases, lead to things that
are clearly haram, e.g., gazing at non-mahrams, touching
them, smelling them, etc.?

SEX & ZINA

227

Does the prevalence of zina in society obstruct marriage
as well as destroy marriages and lead to all kinds of societal
harms with over 50% of children born in the West born into
single mother households (where children born into single
mother households are significantly more likely to get into
crime, drugs, drop out of school, be unemployed, fall into
depression, etc., etc.)?
Is the state of marriage in today’s society anything but
complete chaos, where over 50% end up in divorce and
around 25% of married men admit to cheating and 15% of
women admit to it, where adultery sites like AshleyMadison
have millions of registered users, etc., etc.?
It is difficult to understand how a Muslim can know
about all these things and not be alarmed. It is difficult to
understand how a Muslim can know that one of the signs
of the Last Day is the increase of zina and even zina being
committed in the street and not be alarmed by everything
around us. What do you think is the prime contributor of
such a state of affairs at the end of times? If you don’t think
it is ikhtilat, please enlighten us with your own explanation.
And save the “Muslims just need to have taqwa”
argument. It is surprising to see this new modernist line
being used to dissolve some of the clear boundaries set by
the Sharia and agreed upon by all scholars. It doesn’t matter
how much taqwa you have, if you are a man or a woman,
being alone with the opposite sex is prohibited (whereas
what constitutes khalwa itself has further details).
Casually hanging out with the opposite sex just for
the purpose of socializing, having fun, joking around is
prohibited. Yes, again there are many details and many
situations that fall into a gray area. But let’s not pretend

228

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

like Islamic law is OK with the kind of free for all that
characterizes Western liberal cultural standards.
As for partitions in the masjid, that requires lengthy
elaboration as well. But I find it shocking how inconsistent
the people opining on this are in arguing that partitions are
illegitimate. They know, of course, that they cannot argue
that partitions are haram or blameworthy innovation. So
they avoid that by making simplistic statements about
the Prophet’s mosque not having partitions between the
men and women’s prayer area. They conveniently don’t
comment, however, on all the ahadith that describe how the
Sahabiyyat were dressed, what times of day they attended
the masjid, how they were positioned in the masjid, in what
conditions they were prohibited by the Prophet ձ from
going to the masjid, etc., etc.
The prohibition of ikhtilat is not something Muslims
should be ashamed of. Not only is the lack of ikhtilat
required by piety and God-consciousness, it is the mark of
high civilization, culture, and class that unmarried men and
women do not freely mix, flirt, and roll around with each
other like animals. This is the Islamic ethos which has been
practiced for centuries throughout the Muslim world.
Muslims today who are embarrassed about this and hide
it behind cherrypicked narrations to justify a liberalized
view should just stop embarrassing themselves.
PS: Imam Ghazali (rahimahu Allah) wrote the following:
“If the first inward thought is not warded off, it will generate
a desire, then the desire will generate a wish, and the wish
will generate an intention, and the intention will generate
the action, and the action will result in ruin and Divine
wrath. So evil must be cut off at its root, which is when it is

SEX & ZINA

229

simply a thought that crosses the mind, from which all the
other things follow on.”46
Wow, is Imam Ghazali an extremist? He thinks that a
spontaneous thought in the inner depths of one’s heart
can lead to existential ruin and Divine wrath? Talk about a
slippery slope!
How much more slippery is it when the first step is not
a secret thought but actual physical activity and mixing?

23"#L$B.#wq7:1#.78m<;

CHAPTER

12

HOMOSEXUALITY
& LGBT
GAY EQUALITY
Does Islam deny equality by prohibiting same-sex sexual
behavior but allowing opposite-sex sexual behavior? Many
Western Muslims, young and old, seem to believe this. And
they argue that this is why Islamic law needs to be reformed
—so that this clear discrimination can be eliminated. But is
there really any discrimination going on? Is Islam oppressing
people? The short answer is no: Islam is not systematically
oppressing people by prohibiting certain sexual behaviors.
In actuality, LGBT normalization is oppressing people by
making them believe and feel that they need to engage in
self-destructive same-sex behaviors in order to be sexually
fulfilled.
IS ISLAM’S PROHIBITION OF SAME-SEX BEHAVIOR
DISCRIMINATORY?
Does Islam deny equality for “homosexuals”? Does it
provide an unfair benefit to “heterosexuals”?
Well, it depends on how you conceptualize that elusive,
ambiguous concept known as equality.

232

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Think of it like this. Islam certainly does not prohibit
sexual release. Everyone has a possible sexual outlet (with
the opposite sex) because, ultimately, sexual pleasure is
something “mechanical” to a greater or lesser extent. Now,
hear me out. If the right body parts are engaged in the right
ways, that more often than not leads to the desired result,
regardless of the gender of one’s partner. So, everyone is
equally able to marry the opposite sex and experience that.
Equality at its finest. No discrimination in sight.
Now, the modern LGBT objection to this is: No, gays and
lesbians simply cannot experience sexual fulfillment with
the opposite sex. They can only experience it with the same
sex.
Well, why? This is not the case in principle.
What if a man said he can only experience sexual
fulfillment with supermodels? Or a lady said she can only
experience sexual fulfillment with millionaires?
Would we think that that man and that woman were
being somehow fundamentally deprived sexually if they
lived their whole lives without finding their supermodel(s)
or millionaire(s) respectively? If not, why not? Is it because
we don’t take their claims for what they need for sexual
fulfillment seriously? Well, if we don’t, why should we take
the claims of self-labeled gays and lesbians seriously?
Now, you might say that my examples are preposterous.
But why? Is it because about 3% of the population considers
itself to be gay/lesbian but, relatively, there just aren’t
many people who claim they can only get sexual fulfillment
through supermodels and millionaires?
Well, that’s not a relevant difference. Conditioning and
social influence has a major effect on what people believe

HOMOSEXUALITY & LGBT

233

they need for sexual fulfillment. What is “sexual fulfillment”
really? Seems like a made-up concept. Who can really know
what he needs to be “sexually fulfilled”? Is it something
you can anticipate beforehand? What if what you need to
be “sexually fulfilled” is a very specific Australian office
worker exactly 5 years your senior who has a predilection
for hamburgers and long walks on the beach? What if this
and only this is what you need and your whole life, you
never knew it. Sorry! Guess you won’t ever experience
sexual fulfillment! You might mistakenly assume that you
are sexually fulfilled, you poor naive fellow. But nope! You
are missing out!
The idea of sexual fulfillment seems to be a wholly
modern concept coming from 20th century psychology. It
is as if one’s entire sense of self and well-being somehow
depends on whether the stars align and one reaches this
elusory point of fulfillment. In pop psychology, notions of
love also come into the mix. In reality, this is all a hodge
podge of contemporary metaphysical goop created to
justify popular cultural notions of acceptable sexual
behavior, which only very recently has come to include
same-sex behavior between adults.
Conditioning through these cultural structures is quite
powerful. It sets up people’s expectations for what they
need to be happy. With enough media control, you could
condition a good portion of the population to think that
they really do need supermodels to be sexually satisfied
and fulfilled. In fact, this is something that has already
occurred to some extent due to pornography. Studies
show that young men are less satisfied with “conventional”
sex because pornography has completely distorted their
expectations for what sexual fulfillment consists of. Their

234

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

brains have been rewired due to the influence of the online
stimulus.
But women are not off the hook. Women’s expectations
of an ideal husband have also been distorted by things like
Disney movies with Prince Charming, magazines, romance
novels, the tendency of social media to selectively highlight
happy couples doing happy things, etc. This all has an
influence. Studies show how this can increase marital
dissatisfaction on the part of women. The average man has
a hard time living up to unrealistic, over-inflated standards
of a romantic fantasy some women have built up in their
imaginations. Women, as a result, are left unfulfilled.
So, in reality, sexual fulfillment is elusive for an
increasingly large percentage of the population (far greater
than the percentage of those who believe that only the
same sex can provide them sexual satisfaction).
But do we think people are truly being deprived? Do
we believe that all these people are victims of oppression
or systematic inequality that allows some people to
experience sexual fulfillment but not others? Is there really
discrimination run amok?
Of course not. People’s expectations just need to be
adjusted.
This is how the Islamic prohibition of same-sex behavior
does not discriminate. In the Islamic conception, it is
understood that people can experience all kinds of desires
(shahawat). But in most cases, these desires cannot or
should not be pursued or fulfilled. This includes same-sex
desire, incestuous desire, beastiality, etc. In context of such
a panoply of diverse desires, it would be strange to fixate
on one particular desire or set of desires and claim that

HOMOSEXUALITY & LGBT

235

one can only be “sexually fulfilled” if that particular desire
is met. Who says?
Whether that desire is for supermodels or millionaires,
the expectation is that one must control that desire. If it can
be fulfilled and it is a permissible desire to fulfill, then fine.
If otherwise, then one must simply exercise self-control.
This requirement for self-control is only “oppressive” and
“discriminatory” if one has decided a priori that fulfilling said
desire is a “fundamental necessity” for “sexual fulfillment,”
etc., etc. Who gets to decide that? As we have seen, such a
claim is tenuous at best, for numerous reasons.
Can those with same-sex desires adjust their expectations
and mindset?
What I mean by this is, can those with same-sex desires
get rid of the expectation that they can only experience
“sexual fulfillment” by being intimate with someone of the
same sex? It might be difficult, but it is not impossible. The
same-sex attractions might not always be something that
can be eliminated — but that’s not my point. My point is,
it is probably more healthy in terms of one’s iman not to
think that Allah has created a world where a segment of
the population is categorically barred from attaining this
special, life-enriching, life-changing, euphoric state of
“sexual fulfillment.” If you do think in those terms, then it
becomes very difficult not to see God as unjust or Islam as
not discriminatory. It all goes back to how sexual fulfillment
is defined and delineated.
Ultimately, a lifetime of conditioning is a difficult thing to
counteract. But there are resources to help. At the end of the
day, however, Islam is not systematically oppressing people
by prohibiting certain sexual behaviors. LGBT normalization

236

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

is oppressing people by making them believe and feel that
they need to engage in self-destructive same-sex behaviors
in order to be fulfilled.
By the way, it is a real shame that the US Supreme Court
did not pursue this line of reasoning in their ruling on samesex marriage in 2016. Even the dissenters in the Obergefell
case did not seriously question the other side’s charge that
prohibiting same-sex marriage would be discrimination
and, hence, a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Technically it is discrimination, but so are laws that allow
16 year olds to drive but not 15 year olds. The question is,
is this the kind of discrimination that causes unnecessary
harm and disadvantages people in debilitating ways while
not serving an overall greater interest for the individual and
society overall? The answer to that obviously depends on
how we are conceiving harms and benefits. But, in light
of religious understandings of sexuality, it is fairly easy to
understand these things in a way that makes the answer to
the question a resounding, “No.”
IF WE DON’T SUPPORT LGBT RIGHTS, WE WILL LOSE
MUSLIM RIGHTS?
False analogy: LGBT groups advocate for Muslim rights
therefore Muslim groups should advocate for same-sex
marriage, transgender bathroom bills, pronoun preference,
etc. Why is it a false analogy? Because the particular Muslim
rights LGBT groups advocate for are not contrary to LGBT
ideology. Muslims being able to build mosques is not
contrary to LGBT ideology. Muslims not being banned from
travel to the US is not contrary to LGBT ideology, etc.

HOMOSEXUALITY & LGBT

237

But same-sex marriage, the dissolution of gender norms,
the promotion of “LGBT lifestyles” are contrary to Islam. So
it’s nowhere close to being a fair deal.
If we want to make this a fair situation, we would have
to see if LGBT groups are willing to support Muslim causes
and Islamic principles that do contradict LGBT ideology.
For example, are LGBT “allies” willing to support Muslim
events and causes that reinforce Islamic gender norms?
For example, would they be willing to co-sponsor events,
education, material that promote within the Muslim
community the traditional Islamic role of women as
mothers and men as breadwinners? Would they be willing
to sponsor policies in Muslim countries that contravene
liberal views on “gender equality,” e.g., laws that prohibit
Muslim women from marrying non-Muslim men, laws that
uphold the Sharia’s distribution of inheritance between the
genders, etc.? In fact, to make it perfectly analogous, LGBT
groups should support Muslims’ upholding of Islamic sexual
norms, including the prohibition of same-sex behavior.
That would make it a true “I scratch your back, you scratch
my back” situation. Muslims violate their sexual ethics by
advocating for LGBT normalization, LGBT groups violate
their sexual ethics by advocating for the normalization of
anti-same-sex behavior. Perfect parity.
If and only if LGBT groups were enthusiastically endorsing,
supporting, and sponsoring Muslims’ upholding of these
Islamic principles, would it be analogous to demand
Muslims to support same-sex marriage, etc.
But it’s never going to happen, so stop parroting asinine
arguments to justify your contribution to the spread of
fahisha.

238

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

EXTRASEXUAL RIGHTS NOW!
What is an extrasexual? Well, it’s a term I made up, but it is
very relevant to the LGBT confusion we are seeing today.
Recent scientific research claims that people’s inclinations
or disinclinations to commit infidelity are biologically
hardwired. Given this, we could say that the tendency to
be unfaithful constitutes a portion of people’s inherent,
immutable sexual orientation. Based on this, would there
be a need to categorize people into identity groups or
communities based on that? For example, would those with
a greater pull to cheat self-identify as “extrasexuals” with
everyone else identifying as “intrasexuals”? Would there
be “extrasexual pride parades” and an “extrasexual rights
movement” that would demand that Islamic and Catholic
schools make space for “alternative (read, ‘adulterous’)
lifestyles” and give voice to loud and proud cheaters?
Would refusal by these institutions then be stigmatized as
“extraphobia”?”
We can duplicate this maneuver for any given sexual
behavior or inclination and thereby dictate to and control
religious institutions accordingly, all on the basis of “antidiscrimination.” In fact, in recent times, groups like the
Virtuous Pedophiles have argued along these exact lines,
which goes to show how contingent and subjective the
appeals to recognize and accommodate LGBT identities
really are.
Right now, there isn’t an extrasexual rights movement,
but there could be one day. Why not? They would have as
much claim to acceptance as self-identifying LGBT persons.
This identity group could then claim that since pretty
much every religion and even most secular codes of ethics

HOMOSEXUALITY & LGBT

239

denounce adultery that they are all extraphobic and need
to do some serious soul-searching to expunge their hatred
and the government needs to intervene to make sure that
all institutions enable extrasexual voices and make sure to
accommodate extrasexual perspectives, etc. “How DARE
these Muslims and Christians tell ME how to live MY life?!
Don’t they know that this is just how I am and I have a RIGHT
to happiness? Don’t they know the kind of psychological
HARM they are causing by saying that infidelity is sinful?!
WHEN WILL THESE WOUNDS HEAL?”
So, yes, there are those who suffer from same-sex
attraction just like there are those who have a propensity to
want to commit infidelity. I am not denying that or denying
that those people have no choice in the desires that come
to them. BUT they do have a choice not to create an identity
out of that and define themselves according to it. We need
to support people in managing and combating desires, and
in all honesty, we all need support in managing desires
because it is something that affects everyone. That is how
we were created and that is one of the central tests in this
life.
ARE THERE “GAYS” IN ISLAM?
Does Islam have a concept for “being gay”?
In the Islamic tradition, there is no analogous term for
the concept of “homosexual,” i.e., the notion of a person
who experiences stable and exclusive erotic attraction to
the same sex while not feeling such attractions towards
the opposite sex. There is also no term for “heterosexual.”
Islamic scholars have employed terms to describe a person
who committed the action of Qawm Lut. However, this

24 0

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

is not what Westerners mean when they use the word
“homosexual.”
In the Western context, a “gay” person is one whose
identity is defined by his attraction to the same sex.
According to modern Western conceptions, an important
and immutable characteristic of a person is his “sexual
orientation.” Similar to popular notions of how a person
can be born with a certain color of skin and, thus, belong
to a certain race, a person can be born with a certain sexual
orientation and, thus, belong to a sexual identity group, e.g.,
“gay,” “straight,” “bi,” etc.
The Islamic tradition, in contrast, has no such conception
of a sexual identity. While it may be possible that a person be
born with more of an affinity and attraction to the same sex
(or even have the desire to be anally penetrated, as in the
case of the “ma’bun,” which the classical scholars discussed
at length), nonetheless, as far as Islamic categories are
concerned, this does not make that person a “homosexual”
or “gay” in terms of one’s essential identity, “who one is.”
This is because who a person ultimately is – internally and
externally – is not based on what that person desires or
what thoughts might occur to him. Islamic sexual categories
having to do with identity all revolve around action, not
mere desire, e.g., zani, etc. Once an act has been committed
and a person is convicted for that in a proper Islamic court,
then that is the only time it is appropriate to use such terms
in referring to specific persons. But this has nothing to do
with being a “homosexual,” which itself is only a modern
Western term coined in the 19th century CE (13th century
AH).

HOMOSEXUALITY & LGBT

241

THIS MOMENT IN HISTORY
There are defining moments in every culture’s history. As
far as American culture is concerned, we are in a transition
period from an era where same-sex behavior was universally
condemned to an era where it is universally accepted. In the
future, I want to be able to look back on my life and say, in
that important historical moment, I did what I could. I didn’t
let that moment slip by while remaining silent or indifferent
with regards to the truth. If I had been alive during the 1960s
during the “Sexual Revolution,” I would like to think that as
a Muslim, I would have been equally vocal in resisting those
sweeping cultural changes that were going to negatively
impact humanity on every level: materially, economically,
spiritually.
Today, Muslims have been so beaten down that they
are too afraid to let out even a peep of protest (i.e., those
Muslims who haven’t already joined in the LGBT jubilation).
Sure, people say that to oppose this cultural revolution is
to be “homophobic” and insensitive, but we don’t have to
accept that narrative or let it define us. We should forcefully
oppose it and assert that Muslims can be principled about
this issue.
For those who are constantly preaching the importance
of “American Islam” and how Islam needs to be relevant
and part of the wider American cultural conversation and
how Muslims needs to be a prophetic voice for all, now
is the perfect opportunity—a historical moment of great
significance. Yet they make every lame excuse to remain
inactive and silent. Chief among those excuses: Look we
are a minority. Most people here aren’t Muslims. We can’t
expect others to accept our moral values. If we speak out,
there will be backlash. This issue is not a priority, etc., etc.

24 2

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

As I have said over and over again, the only public issue
Muslims have proven to care about is “Islamophobia” and
racism because that’s the only social issue that directly
impacts Muslim comfort levels and it fits in with a very
popular national narrative. And I’m not saying that that isn’t
a worthwhile cause but there are other issues that are far
more negative in terms of sheer number of lives destroyed,
both Muslim and non-Muslim, that many Muslims don’t
speak out on, or advocate for, or even have on the radar.
When was the last time you heard American Muslims on
a national level, as Muslims, protest zina and rampant
atheism? Or the surveillance state and domestic spying?
How about Wall Street corruption? How about alcoholism
and drug use? How about single parenthood and abortion?
Usurious banking and financial structures? Militarization of
the police force? The dissolution of stable families and the
epidemic of institutionalization and assisted care? Rampant
consumerism? Are any of these issues “important” enough
for Muslims to come out and say, “We as Muslims do not
stand for this”? Or is the only time we find a collective voice
is when we are apologizing and offering condolences for
some mass shooting, and only then because we want to
avoid backlash?
So, it’s not really a surprise that some Muslims have
decided to sit back and watch things from the sidelines yet
again. But next time I get lectured at by a Muslim “leader”
on the importance of being principled and following in the
footsteps of Malcolm X or Muhammad Ali, I will know what
all the bluster really amounts to. You want to claim Malcolm
X and Muhammad Ali for yourself, but you don’t want to
face the unpopularity, the hardship, the backlash that they
faced? Ok.

CHAPTER

13

MALAISE
KEEPING YOU MISINFORMED IS THEIR JOB
Mainstream media aims to be as relevant as possible to as
many people as possible for the simple reason that more
viewers mean more money. The not-so-unintentional
consequence of this is a kind of nihilism about the truth.
The truth is not something CNN, Fox News, or the New
York Times editorial board are really interested in, frankly.
Outlets such as these have relegated themselves to merely
“fostering debate” and covering “all sides of an issue.” But
not all issues have multiple sides and not all matters require
endless debate. Some issues are easily resolved or can be
satisfactorily addressed through some quality research
and analysis. But outside a handful of topics of consensus,
the mainstream media tries its best to avoid resolution. It
does this by amplifying the most misinformed, biased, and
irrationally opinionated voices.
Consider the gun “debate” that crops up every 5 to 6 weeks
in the news cycle in the US. Despite all appearances, there
are clear answers to some of the fundamental questions
everyone should have about gun violence, homicide rates,
mass shootings, etc., and even if we don’t have answers
now, at least there are research methodologies that can
be pursued in a rational, scientific way to address those

24 4

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

questions. Anyone who is sincerely interested in the truth
of the matter would want to follow those methodologies
in seeking robust answers. With all its resources, the
mainstream media should be responsible for conducting
such research and/or enabling those who can do so, and
then disseminate the results far and wide. And if the results
are still ambiguous, then at least the pursuant conversation
would be an informed one.
But that is not what the media is interested in. Because
they are not interested in the truth. They are interested
in viewership/readership and that means catering to the
lowest common denominator. And given the abysmal state
of literacy and education in the US — especially when it
comes to logical analysis, science, etc. — that common
denominator is quite low indeed.
CONSUMING CONTENT AND ITS EFFECT ON THE
HEART
Most media content is determined on the basis of what
will have the highest consumption. Content producers
determine what people are most likely to consume and
then generate their content on that basis. This is an
inversion of knowledge, art, and creativity, which is why
it’s called “content” and not “speech,” “writing,” “discourse,”
“aesthetics,” “artistic expression,” and so on. Rather than be
driven by a pursuit for truth, beauty, and meaning, content
is literally nothing but the hollow pursuit of the dollar.
Western philosophers (e.g., Marxists) noted this
commodification of the arts earlier in the 20th century, but

MALAISE

245

even they could not imagine the depths to which present
media have sunk.
What is so subversive about media content today is
that it often presents itself as profound, as meaningful,
as sentimental, and heart-felt. The reality, though, is that
much of that content is carefully engineered to artificially
induce those emotions in the consumer because that
reaction correlates with more consumption, more money,
more profit. A cold, soulless machine that wraps itself
in a chemise of love, truth, even justice. This, of course,
is hypocrisy. And the danger for us living in an ethos of
hypocrisy is that we will unknowingly take on that modality
in our own expression, prioritizing form over substance,
aiming to elicit a response instead of aiming for haqq,
pursuing approval from creation instead of the Creator, our
hearts, in turn, hardening as we become accustomed to the
fake stuff instead of Reality, wallowing in an ersatz dunya
of pseudo-significance.
THE SINGLE EYE OF MODERN POLITICS
If you have ever wondered how the prophesied Dajjal,
i.e., the anti-Christ, could have such a large following
among people, including Muslims, despite his physical
disfigurement, his tyranny, and the word kafir literally
spelled out on his face, look no further than modern politics.
I always wondered about this. Why would anyone follow
such a clearly evil being? The answer is all around us. We
see shades of the same thing happening today, in the East
and West. You have politicians that openly commit all
manner of atrocity against the human race. They massacre,
drone strike, steal, corrupt, poison — all in full view of public

24 6

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

scrutiny. But no one seems to care. I mean, does a person
really care about the murder and oppression wrought by
the hands of someone like a President Obama if him making
a sappy, pandering speech is enough to elicit drooling
praise and slack-jawed devotion from that person?
So many crimes are whitewashed in the minds of people.
Bombing, invading, occupying — these are nothing more
than “geopolitics” or “hawkish foreign policy.” Killing
innocent people is nothing more than “collateral damage.”
Militarizing a police force that then terrorizes society and
is responsible for an endless stream of brutality and death
is nothing more than being “tough on crime” and “serious
about security.”
Is creative wording all it takes for you people to fall in
line? Just some carefully chosen terms and suddenly you
can’t see the butcher’s knife mutilating the corpse? Is wellspun terminology like a magic elixir that your mind cannot
resist?
If so, just try to hold on to one thing: God is not one-eyed.
HOW CAPITALISM DESTROYS CONTENTMENT
Contentment (qana`a) is a lost virtue in our times. Why?
We are constantly being conditioned by the modern
capitalistic world to see ourselves as masters of our own
destiny. All that separates us from success and riches is
our own effort and passion and drive, so we are told. The
concepts of Allah’s decree and apportionment are nowhere
in the picture. So people can never be content because
they rely on themselves despite the reality that we are all
impotent and it is Allah who decides.

MALAISE

247

These are matters of the heart. If you find yourself
unsatisfied in life and restless, reflect on contentment and
your conviction in the power and the control of your Creator.
THE CORPORATE VIRUS
If you’re not growing, you’re dying. This is the corporate
assumption that underlies the capitalist economy of our
times: The health of a business requires that revenue and
profit increase every year.
In other contexts, it is seen as most reasonable to achieve
equilibrium and “sustainability.” That’s certainly what so
much of environmentalism is supposed to be about. A
healthy planet is where people only consume what they
need and do so in a way that is sustainable long term and
doesn’t take away from the needs of others.
This is not possible if you believe that lack of growth
means death. The notion that continuous growth is possible
itself assumes infinite resources. For example, at some point,
every person in the world could have an Apple iPhone. After
that, there is no more conceivable growth, right?
Wrong! Every person on the planet could also own a
Macbook. And after that, they could all own iPads. And after
that, maybe Apple can expand into other verticals, like the
clothing industry, etc. In other words, as long as a brand is
not dominating every aspect of every person’s consumption,
there is always room for growth. Until the brand consumes
the consumer, there is room for improvement. Like a virus.
The Prophet ձ aptly describes this: “If the son of Adam
were to own a valley full of gold, he would desire to have
two. Nothing can fill his mouth except the earth [of the

24 8

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

grave]. Allah turns with mercy to him who turns to Him in
repentance.”47
POSITIVE PSYCHOLOGY, SELF HELP, THE SCIENCE OF
HAPPINESS
I recently watched a documentary called “Happy” about
what brings people happiness and joy. The documentary
interviewed many psychologists, neurologists, and other
“happiness experts” as well as surveyed many different
cultures around the world (but notably did not include
a single Muslim nation or culture). The 1.5 hour long
documentary had just 10 seconds on the fact that religion
brings “some” people happiness and it included 30 seconds
on how religion actually is a source of much pain and
suffering in the world.
Ultimately, the documentary concludes that happiness
is about being charitable, serving others, being grateful,
being content, pursuing meaning, connecting with family
and neighbors, not overvaluing money and material
possessions, meditating and spending time on quiet
reflection, and spending time in nature.
I thought to myself, all these things have analogs in Islam
and organized religion generally. Do people not make that
connection? If happiness is the goal and these are the
factors that are conducive to happiness, then organized
religion and especially Islam, which harmonizes these
factors and brings them to their perfect expression in the
Sunnah, is the clear answer for how people should lead
their lives.
2C"#X.$<$#^:=$.,<

MALAISE

249

The only cost for that happiness is believing in Allah, and
so even hedonistic modernity will sacrifice happiness to
avoid submitting to a higher authority, preferring instead
to define happiness in terms of an assortment of hollow
truisms that may capture the form but miss the essence
and source of true happiness.
THE REALITY OF BARAKA
Baraka is a reality.
Don’t let the materialistic assumptions of the modern
world infect your thinking and how you live your day to
day life. Don’t become cynical or complacent about this
important aspect of the Unseen.
The blessings that Allah bestows on humanity are real
and have tangible impact. And yes, sometimes that impact
is not explainable in terms of the materialistic parameters
of thought many of us have consigned ourselves to.
Don’t just acknowledge baraka in a theoretical sense.
Know it and see the world around you in light of it.
As a Muslim, baraka needs to be a part of how you see
the world. That will furnish you with spiritual benefits
because you will be seeking that baraka and you will gain
greater consciousness of your Lord. Your iman will also
experience periodic boosts as you start to recognize the
place of baraka (or the lack thereof) in your life. You will
notice that remembering Allah (dhikr) and good deeds
bring you baraka and the opposite take it away. This will
immensely improve your state of mind and heart.

25 0

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

This is because you will see and experience the
connections between the world and the will and power of
Allah. These are some of the many ayat all around us.
“We will show them Our signs in the horizons and
within themselves until it becomes clear to them that
ŎƷŎƪƷŉĩƷƢƿƷŉ‫ܒ‬ƿƷŎƪŎƷűŻƷƪƿǲȀěŎĩűƷěŻűěĩƢűŎűłǢŻƿƢ
Lord that He is, over all things, a Witness?”
Fussilat [Q41:53]

There will also be material benefits in terms of your
wealth, time, efficacy, efficiency, etc. Things will start
“working out,” so to speak.
You will also benefit intellectually because you will gain
more of an understanding of how the world really works.
Again, instead of theoretical knowledge, you will have
experiential knowledge because you will have experienced
these things and seen them for yourself.
So seek baraka in all the many things that Allah and His
Messenger ձ have specified. Make it a part of your daily
life and make it the lens by which you understand your life.
And may Allah bless us all.
RAMZAN VS. RAMADAN
Nationalism is a funny thing. It can be the source of bonding
and camaraderie as well as the cause of animosity, chestpuffing, and downright silliness.
Just consider all the online debate about the article “Why
are Indian Muslims using the Arabic word ‘Ramadan’ instead
of the traditional ‘Ramzan’?”, written by Shoaib Daniyal.

MALAISE

2 51

The article details how, historically, the Arabic word for
Islam’s sacred month “Ramadan” came to be pronounced
“Ramzan” in the sub-continent and how, recently, many
South Asian Muslims are reverting to the “Ramadan”
pronunciation due to, as the author puts it, the effect of a
“Saudi-influenced brand of Islam” and “cultural insecurity”
on the part of said South Asians.
Apparently, this is a debate that has been cropping up
annually in South Asian communities around Ramadan
time, and there are a lot of competing socio-political
tensions that underlie and color the conversation. As far
as I am concerned, however, much of it is little more than
nationalism and thinly-veiled anti-Arabism masquerading
as serious historical and linguistic analysis.

The Urge to Purge
Calls for abandoning “arabicized” language in preference for
a more “authentic,” “traditional,” or “pure” use of language
is hardly new and certainly not limited to South Asia.
Historically, many nationalist movements in the Middle
East have called for dropping vocabulary, pronunciation,
and script associated with Arabs and Arabic. In 20th
century Turkey, for example, part of Ataturk’s compulsory
modernization program was replacing the Perso-Arabic
script of Ottoman Turkish with a new Latin-based Turkish
alphabet that was meant to be truer to the modern secular
Turkish identity. In Iran also, government programs under
the rule of Muhammad Reza Shah attempted to “purify” the
Persian language by excising any and all Arabic vocabulary
and replacing it with Farsi equivalents, even if that meant
inventing a Farsi word from scratch. Historically, these calls

25 2

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

for purging Arabic almost always coincided with efforts to
secularize society and attenuate the influence of Islam in
people’s lives.
Beyond the Middle East and Arabic in particular,
attempting to reform the way people use language is often
little more than a way to bolster, entrench, or cultivate
nationalistic identities. Mundane linguistic details become
the battlefield for ideological tug of war. What often features
in these debates, however, is partisan historiography and
what Prof. Reza Zia-Ebrahimi of King’s College in London
calls “dislocative nationalism.” Prof. Zia-Ebrahimi’s research
is concerned with how Persian nationalists in the 19th and
20th centuries invented an Aryan national identity that they
then back-projected thousands of years to claim that Iran —
as a cohesive nation with its own distinct identity, religion,
and language — existed in ancient times and persisted
throughout history despite the “corrupting” influence
of invading forces and cross-cultural mixing. Nationalist
reformers in modern times then attempted to “purify”
what they anachronistically believed to be that essence
of Aryanness by “decontaminating” cultural markers of
anything believed to be foreign and non-Aryan, e.g., the
Arabic language and even Islam as a whole.
What these nationalists failed to appreciate, however,
is that the concept of a nation is a modern construction strictly speaking, just a figment of our collective imagination
- and that the history of any given geographic region is a rich
tapestry of interweaving cultures, languages, and traditions.
Only a highly selective (and, hence, inventive) reading
of history could ignore all that diversity in partitioning
off a specific nationalistic or racial essence. This kind of
nationalistic essentialism is, of course, not unlike what

MALAISE

2 53

renowned scholar Edward Said identified and bemoaned
as being operative in Orientalism and Western colonialism
generally.
Truth be told, this kind of caricaturing and mythologizing
of history in service of contemporary nationalistic identity
politics is ubiquitous, whether it is modern Egyptians feeling
a sense of connection to and national pride for the Ancient
Pyramids or modern Americans celebrating Thanksgiving
as a commemoration of a peaceful partnership between
the Pilgrims and Native Americans.

What does all this have to do with Ramzan?
We can see this selective and romanticized reading of
history in Daniyal’s Ramadan vs. Ramzan article. For
example, the author repeatedly uses the term “traditional”
to characterize the “Ramzan” pronunciation. The question
to ask is, what makes “Ramzan” so traditional? Given that
the sub-continent is home to hundreds of distinct languages
and dialects, each with its own storied history, why insist on
this one particular pronunciation? As Mahtab Alam noted
in his post on this issue last year, not all Indians, let alone
South Asians, claim Urdu/Hindi as their mother tongue.
Besides “Ramzan,” many South Asians have Ramojan,
Ramjan, Rumjan, Ramazan, and so on. As he succinctly
puts it, “Insistence on one [variation] is as hegemonic as
the other one.”
Further selectivity can be seen in how Daniyal describes
the historical influence of Persian/Farsi on the Indian native
language as opposed to the purported influence of Saudi
Arabia today. The author does not see anything problematic
or objectionable about the adoption of Persian language

25 4

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

and culture in the evolution of the sub-continent over the
course of centuries. But, when it comes to the contemporary
adoption of Arabicized speech patterns, that is somehow
indicative of Saudi meddling and “cultural insecurity” on
the part of Indian Muslims.
So why the inconsistency? If it is a legitimate, natural,
organic process for language to shift over time in the
sub-continent due to Persian influence historically, why
is it suddenly illegitimate, unnatural, objectionable when
that language continues to shift in present times due to an
Arab (or American, or English, etc.) influence today? In other
words, why does Daniyal take a laissez faire attitude when it
comes to language transformation historically, but when it
comes to modern transformations, suddenly “tradition” is
so important and we have to preserve the pronunciations of
old? What is so special, culturally iconic, and indispensable
about this one particular Persian variant, “Ramzan”?
All that Daniyal has to offer in response to this is that
“Ramzan” is traditional because that is how “most Muslim”
Indians have been pronouncing it for a few hundred years.
Of course, he does not cite any statistics or census results to
substantiate this. But, lack of verification aside, if we go back
in time, at one point that “Ramzan” pronunciation itself was
brand new and unprecedented in the sub-continent, just like
“Ramadan” is (supposedly) brand new and unprecedented
today. Maybe in a few hundred years, “Ramadan” too
will be considered the “traditional” and culturally correct
pronunciation. Only Khuda knows.

MALAISE

2 55

Persian Confidential
To step back and comment on this entire debate, I just
want to say that, ultimately, it does not matter how one
pronounces Ramadan or if a Muslim says “namaz” instead
of “salat.” From my own life experience and observing the
cross-cultural Muslim communities in the West and abroad,
I have found that these cultural debates are often nothing
more than tribalism (`asabiyya) rearing its ugly head.
In the interest of full disclosure, I am Persian American
and grew up saying “Ramezan,” “namaz,” “roozeh,” “sahari,”
“Khuda,” etc. I still use these words when speaking to my
Iranian family members and do feel a warm connection
to my Persian heritage. At the same time, I have no issue
using the Arabic equivalents when speaking to others,
e.g., my Egyptian wife, or my half-Persian, half-Egyptian
sons, who speak both Farsi and Arabic ma sha’ Allah.
And, coincidentally, in Persian, my first name, “Daniel,” is
pronounced “Daniyal.” Hopefully, my pronunciation of
my own name “Daniel” instead of “Daniyal” is not cultural
insecurity on my part.
As far as orthoepy is concerned, correct pronunciation is
religiously significant when it comes to obligatory prayers as
well as the study of the Islamic sciences, e.g., transmission
of hadith. Beyond this, as Muslims we should also not lose
sight of the fact that Arabic is a special language for a number
of reasons, chief among them that it is the language Allah
chose for the Quran, His final revelation to mankind. Also,
it is the mother tongue of the beloved Messenger of God ձ.
Given these two facts alone, how can any Muslim not feel a
deep abiding love for lisan al-`arab? As an American and a
Persian, I personally feel no contradiction in or threat to my

25 6

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

sense of identity by acknowledging this love. And when we
look at the history, literature, and scholarship of non-Arab
Muslims the world over, we also see a reverence for Arabic.
Of course, it should go without saying that one’s
appreciation of Arabic has no bearing on one’s opinion
of the Saudi government or any other state institution.
And, furthermore, this love of classical, formal Arabic,
i.e., fusha, does not give modern Arabs the right to look
down on non-Arab Muslims as somehow less authentically
Muslim for any reason, least of which the fact that non-Arab
Muslims use the words “Ramzan,” “sehri,” etc., in lieu of
the formal Arabic counterparts. Keep in mind that the first
and, arguably, most influential book of Arabic grammar
ever written was completed in the 2nd century of the Hijri
calendar by the Persian Muslim scholar Sibawayh, who was
a non-native speaker of the language to boot.
Whether we like it or not, if we go far enough back in
time, all of our personal family and cultural histories are
inevitably an amalgamation of a multitude of cross-cultural
influences, regardless of the modern national identities
we may currently associate with. In that wider sense,
vociferously insisting on a nationality and imbuing so much
significance on a singular national identity and language
just seems historically illiterate, chauvinistic, and, well, silly.

CHAPTER

14

MUSLIM SKEPTIC
THE VALUE OF DESTRUCTION TO MODERN ISLAMIC
SCHOLARSHIP
My dad has always been a very handy person and loves to
take on home projects mashaAllah. When I was young, he
would try to get me to help him and I never really enjoyed
it, but I still ended up learning a lot.
One of the things he taught me early on is that when you
start a project, you have to make sure you are working on
a clean, solid site. For example, if you want to re-paint the
side of your house, you first have to clean off any old paint,
take off any rotting wood, etc. Only after all that prep work
is done can you actually start painting. You can always just
forget the prep work and put new paint on top of the old
stuff, but within a short period of time, the new paint will
start to crack and peel and things will be even worse than
before.
The same principle applies to pouring concrete or
installing a new deck. The first step is very crucial. You have
to disassemble, deconstruct, and, if needed, destroy the
old structure and remove the debris. Only once the site is
clear and level, can you build something that is solid and
will last in the long run. It would be counterproductive and

25 8

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

quite silly to try to build something on the shaky remains of
the previous structure because the final product, no matter
how well-built it otherwise is, will likely be just as shaky and
prone to collapse and dilapidation as the original.
Also if you are trying to build on the remains of the
original structure, you will have to make adjustments and
compensations to accommodate what you are building
on. Rather than build something according to your own
preferences and needs, you now have to build something
which suits and takes into account the extant structure
upon which you are building.
All this is just a metaphor for a situation our contemporary
ulama have to deal with in the course of their scholarly
work in light of modern issues. In this metaphor, the old
paint or the old dilapidated structure is modernism and
its concomitant -isms: liberalism, scientism, feminism,
secularism, etc. This is the stuff that needs to be dismantled
and thoroughly cleaned out because if a scholar builds on
this, even if what he builds is of the highest quality and
the most sound erudition, the end result is still going to
be lopsided, shaky, and liable to collapse. But if the rot is
scraped off and discarded, leaving a pristine, level work
site, that is when the alim can build a true and lasting
masterpiece bi idhnillah.
This is why we see so much tawfiq from our scholarly
predecessors. They were building on solid ground. They
were building on top of the solid scholarship of those before
them, all of which was built on the unshakable foundation
of revelation and the Prophet’s Sunnah ձ. And that is
how they were able to create this unmatched monument

MUSLIM SKEPTIC

2 59

of intellectual and spiritual achievement that is the Islamic
sciences.
But at the dawn of the modern period, as the Muslims
lost political power and European modernist philosophy
increasingly became the dominant mode of thought around
the world and in Muslim societies as well, that’s when some
of the discourse and some of the scholarship became
reactive. All of a sudden, scholars are having to respond
to these -isms and/or write their opinions in light of them,
whether due to social pressure or political pressure or even
outright coercion by colonizers and other agents of Western
hegemony. And of course this — knowingly or unknowingly
— affected the content of that scholarship. In effect, some
of that scholarship ended up being built on rot.
We need to clean out the rot. We need to deconstruct
and dismantle it and discard the rubbish. Then we can
resume building with confidence and on our own terms,
once again showing the world that nothing can match the
magnificence and awe-inspiring splendor of this deen.
PURIFYING THE MIND
Just as one can suffer from diseases of the heart, so too
can one suffer from diseases of the intellect. But in Islamic
thought the heart and the intellect are intimately linked and
inseparable such that they have a direct impact on each
other.
Arrogance, for example, is typically understood as a
disease of the heart, but arrogance also affects one’s
intellect, i.e., one’s ability to understand and grasp truth.
Arrogance can even affect the eyes such that one is blinded

26 0

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

from truths that are right before one’s eyes. And this is an
everyday thing that we can observe with people around
us, where we wonder why some cannot see something so
obvious. Same goes for maladies such as jealousy, malicious
hate, and greed. Such diseases are so severe that they not
only lay waste to the soul but also infect the entire body, up
to the point of clouding one’s ability to think clearly. When
you analyze the work of some Muslim reformers, you can
see the telltale signs of these diseases in the arguments
they make and the conclusions they draw. May Allah spare
us from such a condition.
Purifying the heart of its diseases allows the heart to be
more receptive to guidance and light. But the mind and
one’s ability to think can also be diseased. By addressing
these intellectual diseases and purifying the mind of them,
the intellect is more receptive to guidance and light.
WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO BE A “MUSLIM SKEPTIC”?
Ibn `Abbas narrated a hadith from the Prophet ձ.
A man heard the hadith and became disturbed by it and
objected to it. Upon hearing this, Ibn `Abbas commented,
“What is it that they have to fear?! They easily accept what
is clear, however when it comes to what is unclear, they are
destroyed.”
The modus operandi of the Western skeptic is to question
and then object to anything that does not accord with his
understanding. This is because he erroneously believes that
his own mind can serve as the absolute criterion of Truth.
The Muslim Skeptic, however, questions himself and
objects to anything within himself that does not accord

MUSLIM SKEPTIC

261

with Islam. This is because he correctly understands that
his own mind is finite and that only Islam can serve as the
absolute criterion of Truth.
The true weapons of mass destruction are immoral,
irrational, destructive, fallacious ideas that appear
convincing to people such that they accept those ideas as
the truth, cherish them, and fight for them. In this case, it
is far better to be a skeptic in the face of such “truth” than
to be counted as a “believer.”
WHAT IS THE MISSION OF THE MUSLIM SKEPTIC?
Simply put, the Muslim Skeptic wants traditional Islam —as
an intellectual tradition, as a spiritual tradition—to be taken
more seriously in the world today, by Muslims and kuffar
alike. Why? Because many Muslims have major obstacles
crippling their faith, e.g., liberalism, secularism, scientism,
etc. Many kuffar, too, have these obstacles preventing
them from accepting Islam or, short of that, respecting
the Prophet ձ and the Quran and the Islamic way. So let’s
take down these obstacles. As Muslims, we understand the
Prophet ձ, the Quran, and Islam as clearly beyond anything
commonplace or within the realm of purely human, natural
possibility. Imagine something of such beauty, power, and
awe-inspiring splendor that to merely look upon it, one
knows this is from beyond…this is from the Creator. This is
the level of enchantment, amazement, and love we have or
should have for our deen. The question then becomes, why
isn’t everyone else seeing what we see? Why is everyone
seeing barbarism and incivility, etc.? And there are a variety
of reasons, but a major reason is these obstacles. So let’s
address that problem in the best way.

26 2

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

WHY BE A MUSLIM SKEPTIC?
Allah says,
“And if you obey most of those in the earth, they will
ŦĩþĢǢŻƿþƪƷƢþǢŁƢŻůŦŦþŉܼƪǜþǢ‫ܒ‬ȃĩǢŁŻŦŦŻǜűŻƷŉŎűł
but conjecture and they only lie.”
Al-An’am [Q6:116]

Conjecture, translated from dhann, is baseless opinion,
assumptions, basically empty thought that is not grounded
in truth, reality, and understanding. Allah tells us very
clearly that most people live and breathe on the basis of
dhann. But they incorrectly claim that they are on solid
ground, so much so that they try to lead people. In other
words, they put on a show of confidence and speak with
authority, acting like they know what they are talking about.
In this way, they try to get people to follow them in their
error.
But the Muslim has to be skeptical of these false leaders.
Even if a person speaks with authority or has credentials or
uses charming, persuasive language, be careful. Judge on
the basis of the manifest, undoubted truths of Islam. More
likely than not, such people are only speaking from dhann.
As an example, every few years a new scientific study
comes out on the “health benefits” of drinking alcohol.
Secular, colonized Desis, Arabs, Persians, etc., point to the
studies as proof of how backwards Islam is. But inevitably,
all these studies turn out to be flawed and overturned
or the results turn out to be ambiguous and ultimately
un-repeatable and baseless.

MUSLIM SKEPTIC

263

A FOUNDATIONAL PRINCIPLE FOR
UNDERSTANDING ISLAM IN LIGHT OF MODERNITY
Let me share a foundational principle with you that can
greatly help address doubts in Islam in this day and age.
This is a principle that unfortunately very few understand,
even despite having an extensive background in studying
the secular sciences and even the Islamic sciences
traditionally.
The principle is this: Not everything that people speak of
as being real is, in fact, real.
Think about this for a second. How could large numbers
of people speak about and presume that something is
real when, in fact, that something is just a figment of their
imagination?
Well, there are many ways for this to be the case and
history has borne this out in countless examples. The most
obvious example is religion. Obviously, entire societies and
civilizations have been devoted to gods that don’t exist.
Entire religions have been established on the premise that
these gods exist, yet those gods are based on nothing but
supposition and misguided whims.
Another instructive example is found outside the domain
of religion. This is in the empirical sciences.
Consider the scientific and empirical theories that were
held as absolute and unquestionable fact one day but
disregarded the next. There are so many examples from
very recent history in the “hard sciences” like physics,
chemistry, and biology.

26 4

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Have you heard of the ether? Or phlogiston? Or
corpuscles? These were empirical entities which were
assumed to exist and were theorized about and seemingly
verified experimentally by the scientific community but
were later rejected as nonexistent.
How can that be? How could the scientific community
have agreed that something is real based on empirical
evidence and rational analysis yet that something turn
out to have been nothing but a figment of its collective
imagination?
We don’t need to delve into the details of how this can
happen for the purposes of this chapter. We just need
to be aware that it can and does happen with surprising
frequency in history, even in the scientific, “rational,”
“empirical” world.
Now let’s apply that insight. In discussing politics and
ethics and justice, there are presumed “moral realities.”
These are values that large groups of people believe to
be true and real. Now think about it—if a large group of
people can be wrong about something as seemingly solid
as empirical reality, how more liable are they to be wrong
about something like morality?
In our situation today, Islam is being attacked left
and right on the basis of it not conforming to certain
alleged moral realities. Islam does not respect freedom
of conscience! Islam does not acknowledge democracy!
Islam does not recognize religious liberty! Islam does not
respect sexual autonomy! Islam does not acknowledge
gender nonconformity! And on and on.
But what if these concepts have no basis in reality,
i.e., have no moral weight? What if they’re figments

MUSLIM SKEPTIC

265

of the collective imagination of modern people under
the overwhelming influence of Western academic and
intellectual hegemony?
If you can ask yourself this question and start from this
skeptical posture, then this is the first step to resolving
so many tensions and doubts that plague the minds of
contemporary Muslims.
But unfortunately, many Muslim intellectuals and
scholars completely bypass this skepticism. They just
accept the moral reality of these concepts and values. This
is an unmitigated disaster.

Why?
Because the obvious question is: If something like, for
example, “freedom of conscience” is real, why is it not found
in revelation?
“But it is found in revelation!” these intellectuals exclaim.
And to prove this, they scan the Quran, hadith, and classical
scholarly tradition to find anything and everything that
can conceivably be construed as expressing the concept or
value they adamantly insist to be real.
But their methodology is fundamentally flawed because
for everything they cite as an example of that value in the
texts, there are 10 examples that contradict it. But of course,
those 10 examples don’t see the light of day in their research.
This is not always because the scholar or intellectual is
trying to conceal anything or is being dishonest. Sometimes
they honestly do not see the counterexamples because they
have been conditioned to read and understand the texts
with a lens that is inexorably colored by the same concepts

26 6

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

and values they are trying to discover in the texts. This
creates a vicious, self-reinforcing cycle that often proves
to be impossibly difficult to break out of.
The final point to make is to address the obvious
counterargument: Well, why can’t this skepticism be
applied to Islam and Islamic values (whatever you may
believe those to be)? Why should we believe those concepts
and values have a basis in reality?
The simple answer is: We don’t just assume this. We
investigate. We analyze. We reflect. We ground ourselves
in valid intellectual sources—i.e., Quran, Sunnah, and the
classical scholarly tradition—cautious not to smuggle in
any illegitimate biases. Of course, that is only the beginning.
You also have to experience, feel, and taste. This comes
through everything that Islam prescribes in terms of ibadah,
dhikr, tilawa, etc. This is a comprehensive life program
that allows one to arrive at reality and haqq empirically,
rationally, and spiritually (since all these epistemic sources
are interconnected).
But there is another important step. Clearly those who
are entrenched in the modern worldview also claim that
they “taste” the truth of their concepts and values. This
is apparent from the passion and, at times, violence and
animosity with which they advocate for those values. So
what grounds do we have to deny the truth of those views?

Easy.
You simply deconstruct those theories of value. You point
out their inconsistencies. You systematically pick them
apart until it is clear to all involved that those ideas are
vacuous and not worthy of respect or acceptance. Obviously

MUSLIM SKEPTIC

267

one might be less or more skilled in doing this. And the
exemplar of this method is none other than our beloved
prophet Ibrahim, peace be upon him (Quran 6:74-83).
In any case, if you understand this method, you will
immediately recognize what’s contrary to it, i.e., apologetics,
i.e., work that takes for granted modernist concepts and
values and tries to justify them by appeal to selective
citations from the Quran, Sunnah, and classical scholarly
tradition. And then you will inshaAllah recognize how
uncompelling and generally unappealing apologetics are
until you can’t stand them.
May Allah make us sincere seekers of truth.
CONFESSIONS OF A MUSLIM SKEPTIC
The other day, a Muslim teen asked me the purpose of
prayer. Why should we believe in God? Why do bad things
happen to good people? As it turns out, this barrage of
questions only represented the tip of a big, ominous iceberg.
There are a whole host of questions like this that are
festering in our community and causing many crises of faith.
The unfortunate reality is that some Muslims are leaving
Islam due to these unanswered questions, a trend that
is exacerbated by the decreasing popularity of organized
religion in society at large.

So Many Questions, So Few Answers
How do we address this challenge?
As someone who grew up as an American teenager in
the 90s, the questions I had then were mere child’s play

26 8

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

compared to the soul-swallowing issues that Muslim youth
are struggling with today. Topics like gay rights, the war on
terrorism, scientific proof for the existence of God, women’s
rights, the value of modesty, the merits of sexual abstinence,
human evolution, the importance of family, etc. — anything
and everything is up for debate, analysis, and, ultimately,
disavowal.
In sum, religion is seen as lacking any intellectual
credibility. The only way to restore that credibility in the
minds of the doubting masses is to address these questions
head on.

Skepticism Defined
Whether in the academic or professional sphere, the
most effective way to address complicated, controversial
questions is to take a step back and pinpoint the hidden
assumptions that underlie those questions. This way, one
can problematize (or undermine) the question itself and,
thus, proactively address it on one’s own terms.
Traditionally, this tendency to problematize and
undermine common beliefs has been associated with
skepticism. In the sense I am using the term, a skeptic is
someone who will pause to deconstruct and critique a
thought system in order to judge its intellectual merit (not
to be confused with philosophical skeptics, who question
the possibility of knowledge entirely).
Oftentimes, it is religious beliefs that are the target of
skeptical questioning: Why should we believe God exists?
Why should we believe the Quran to be the word of God?
Why should we believe Muhammad ձ was the messenger
of God? Skeptical questioning of this nature originated

MUSLIM SKEPTIC

269

with atheists and opponents of religion but, over time, has
spread to all corners of the globe. Nowadays, even the
faithful ask themselves these questions, and, when they
cannot find answers, they either abandon the religion or
ignore the questions entirely.
But there is another way.

Muslim Skepticism Against Liberal Secular Double
Standards
From my experience, skeptics of religion often are hypocrites
in that they do not attack all thought systems equally. They
save their most rabid lines of critique for religion, especially
Islam, but give certain non-religious beliefs a free pass.
For example, someone like Bill Maher, a self-proclaimed
liberal, has no shortage of animosity in critiquing Islam. But
does he take that same critical, skeptical mindset to his
evaluation of, say, liberalism? Has he spent any time on
TV delving into the many different critiques and questions
plaguing liberal thought? Has he dedicated any of his
programming to contemplating the amount of violence
and death modern liberalism has wrought?
Maher portrays himself as an objective, neutral analyst
using the power of rational thought to discover the truth,
but, in actuality, he is a propagandist, as detached from
objectivity and rationality as the fervent Bible-thumpers he
lampoons. The only difference is he proselytizes liberalism
instead of Christianity.
The Muslim Skeptic, then, is someone who gives such
hypocrites a taste of their own medicine.

270

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

Why can’t Muslims turn the tables by expressing
skepticism about liberalism, the nation-state paradigm,
scientism, humanism, progressivism, and the rest of the
unquestioned modernist dogmas of our times?

Turning the Tables
Consider this small sample of “controversial” or “tough”
questions:
•

What is the scientific proof for the existence of Allah,
angels, the afterlife, the soul, etc.?

•

Why does Islamic Law require women to wear the
hijab but not men?

•

Why would an all-merciful God allow evil to exist?

•

Do we have free will to make our own choices?

•

Why does Islamic Law prohibit homosexual acts?

•

Why do many Muslims not accept the evolutionary
theory of man’s origins?

What we often fail to realize is that these questions do
not arise in a vacuum. Most of these are not questions that
troubled or even arose in the minds of Muslims 30, 40, or
500 years ago.
These are questions that are characteristic of our time and
intellectual culture in the 15th/21st century. As such, there
are complex, deeply ingrained assumptions that underlie
each of them. The only reason they may seem “tough” to
address is that we are blind to those assumptions and take
them for granted.
The Muslim Skeptic must dig out these assumptions in
order to scrutinize and interrogate them. In this way, rather

MUSLIM SKEPTIC

271

than resolving such “tough” questions, the Muslim Skeptic
aims to dissolve them.
Given the number of such questions threatening the faith
some Muslims, there is a pressing need for such a skeptical
approach.

Skepticism in Action
As a brief example, consider the question of God’s existence.
Some modern Muslim commentators concede that there
is no objective evidence for the existence of God, and it
all boils down to a “leap of faith.” The Muslim Skeptic’s
approach, in contrast, would be to first investigate the word
“objective.” The concept of objectivity itself has a convoluted
and interesting history that we cannot take for granted.
Then, the Muslim Skeptic would reflect on widely accepted
standards of evidence used to undermine belief in God, e.g.,
scientific evidence, and evaluate them for consistency. For
example, if we are supposed to reject the existence of God
due to an alleged lack of scientific evidence, should we
also reject the existence of things like the passage of time,
human consciousness, abstract mathematical entities,
etc., that similarly lack scientific or physical modalities?
Clearly, most people are not extreme enough to deny such
things that clearly have a reality, despite a lack of scientific
evidence. And so on.
In this way, the Muslim Skeptic is not afraid to question
widely held, cherished beliefs, such as the authority of
science, in order to unpack hidden assumptions that cloud
the issue and confuse people.

272

THE MODERNIST MENACE TO ISLAM

The best example of this strategy is found with Prophet
Ibrahim, who literally and metaphorically deconstructed
the idols of his time, showing their fundamental irrationality.

Conclusion
To be sure, skepticism is a negative, deconstructive exercise.
Its purpose is to use rational argumentation to topple false
idols so that the light of Truth has a chance to shine through.
One of the greatest Muslim Skeptics then, in these terms,
was Prophet Ibrahim who cleverly undermined the idolatry
of his people, as related in the following verses:
And thus did We show Ibrahim the realm of the
heavens and the earth that he would be among the
certain [in faith]. So when the night covered him
‫ܡ‬ǜŎƷŉĢþƢţűĩƪƪ‫܌ܢ‬ŉĩƪþǜþƪƷþƢ‫ܒ‬NĩƪþŎĢ‫ܹ܌‬ȃŎƪŎƪůǢ
lord.” But when it set, he said, “I like not those that set
[i.e., disappear].” And when he saw the moon rising,
ŉĩƪþŎĢ‫ܹ܌‬ȃŎƪŎƪůǢŦŻƢĢ‫ܺܒ‬ƿƷǜŉĩűŎƷƪĩƷ‫܌‬ŉĩƪþŎĢ‫܌‬
“Unless my Lord guides me, I will surely be among the
people gone astray.” And when he saw the sun rising,
ŉĩƪþŎĢ‫ܹ܌‬ȃŎƪŎƪůǢŦŻƢĢ‫ܗ‬ƷŉŎƪŎƪłƢĩþƷĩƢ‫ܺܒ‬ƿƷǜŉĩű
it set, he said, “O my people, indeed I am free from
what you associate with Allah. Indeed, I have turned
my face [i.e., self] toward He who created the heavens
and the earth, inclining toward truth, and I am not
of those who associate others with Allah.” And his
people argued with him. He said, “Do you argue with
me concerning Allah while He has guided me? And I
fear not what you associate with Him [and will not be
harmed] unless my Lord should will something. My

MUSLIM SKEPTIC

273

Lord encompasses all things in knowledge; then will
you not remember?
Al-An’am (Q6:75-80)

By pointing to a star, the moon, and the sun, saying, “This
is my lord,” Ibrahim mirrored the discourse of his detractors
in order to reveal the internal inconsistency of their beliefs.
Muslim intellectual history is full of Muslim Skeptics who
employed all manner of rational stratagem to evaluate,
undermine, critique, and overturn philosophies they
deemed dangerous or subversive. This is a lost art Muslims
today should be keen to revive, especially given that we find
ourselves in an intellectual climate that has proved time
and again to be hostile to our deen.
As Sayyidina `Umar once asked, rhetorically, “Are we not
on the Truth?” (Alasna `ala al-haqq?)
It is time for us to start acting like it.

THE

MODERNIST

MENACE
TO ISLAM

A Muslim Critique of Modern -Isms

DANIEL HAQIQATJOU
Physics and Philosophy Graduate of

HARVARD UNIVERSITY

