y*'

}' p ■

/

•

/pt,

r*

-/ f

. •w

/

-7:^&^SPq

yA

t; § V/ /■■

hiLdW

imam Aby Hartied Ai-GHAZA?
? -£

A

\

i$

,^Mil
naIS
-? I

Imam Abu Homed AL-GHAZALI
(450-505 H. = 1058-1111 A.D.)

©F REUNION’S SCIENCES
(IHYA' ULUM AD-DIM)

mm,
Translated by
Mohammad Mahdi al-Sharif

Volume III
The quarter of the destructives

Dar Al'Xolob iHimiyah
1971
^
Est. by Mohammad Ali Baydoun 1971 Beirut- Lebanon
ftablie par Mohamad Ali Baydoun 1971 Beyrouth - Liban

'
f
t

h ttp^/wv\w.af-ilmiyah.cDm info@al-ilmiyah.com

:

sales@al-ilmiyah.com

baydoun@al-ilrT%ah.com

5

»
»

:
>
:

Title

fi

REVIVAL

p

OF RELIGION’S SCIENCES
(IHYA' ULUM AD-DIN)

Classification: Jurisprudence and sufism
Author

: Imam Abu Homed AL-GHAZALI

Translator

: Mohammad Mahdi al-Sharif

Publisher

: Dar Al-Kotob Al-llmiyah

Pages

: 2784 (4 volumes)

Size

: 17*24

Year

: 2011

Printed in

:Lebanon

Edition

: 1*

1

i

Dar Al-Kotob
fll-ilmiyati

Est. by Mohamad Ali Baydoun
1171 Beirut - Lebanon

Aramoun,

Exclusive rights by © Dar Al-Kotob Al-llmiyah
Beirut-Lebanon No part of this publication may be
translated,reproduced,distributed in any form or by any
means,or stored in a data base or retrieval system,without
the prior written permission of the publisher.

al-Quebbah.

Dat Al-Kotob Al-ilmiyah Bldg.
Tel : +961 5 804 810/11/12
Fax:
+961 5 804813
P.O.Box: 11-9424 Beirut-lcbanon,
Riyad al-Soloh Beirut 1 107 2290

•■o*>

\

s
?
5
£
00

4j<lill<7vJI jlj ^u4>4jI]Ljyi^c

+M1 0A-IA1-/U/U
+VU 0 A- LAW

I

•o

Tous droits exdusivement reserves a © Dar Al-Kotob Al-llmiyah
Beyrouth-liban Toute representation,edition,traduction ou reproduction
meme partie)le,par tous procedes, en tous pays,faite sans autorisation
prealable signee par I’editeur est illidte et exposerait le contrevenant a
des poursuites judidaires.

2
C—ltlS)l JjiAU

jl

jl »"■»

1V-VYYV

jl

ji

■»

4J0Jjil Cjir.41j ■»

. lilov jjiilUl 4jxa1j_*j Vi

1

jl

jl

i

cjUI<**•»-«jl

I

I

I
i

•: I
!: iI

I

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, MOST GRACIOUS, MOST MERCIFUL
REVIVAL OF RELIGIOUS SCIENCES
Quarter of destructives
The third quarter of REVIVAL OF RELIGIOUS SCIENCES

It is the first book of the quarter of destructives

INTRODUCTION
In the name of AUah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Praise be to Allah whose majesty does perplex the hearts and thoughts of
those who seek in vain to comprehend him; whose shining light at its
beginning bewilders eye and sight; who is acquainted with all hidden secrets;
who knows all that conscience does conceal; who has no need of counselor or
helper in ruling of His kingdom; the Overturner of hearts and the Forgiver of
sins; the Concealer of faults; the Deliverer from anxieties. In addition, Allah’s
blessing and peace rest in abundance upon the chief of the messengers, the
uniter of religion, the exterminator of heredcs, and upon his descendants..
To go further: The honor and excellence of man in which he surpasses all
other sorts of creatures are his apdtude for knowing Allah, whose is the
praise. This knowledge provides for man's beauty and perfection and glory in
the present world, and his provision and store for the hereafter. He is
prepared for this knowledge only through his heart, and not by means of any
of his body organs. For it is the heart which knows Allah, draws near to Him,
works for Allah, strives toward Allah, and discloses that which is in the
presence of Allah. The organs of body, on the other hand, are no more than
followers, servants, and instruments which the heart uses and employs as the
king uses his servants, as the shepherd makes use of his flock, or as the
craftsman uses his instrument.
That is because it is the heart which is accepted with Allah when it is free
from all barring Him, even though veiled from Allah when it becomes
wholeheartedly engaged in anything other than Him. It is the heart which is
required (to do good), is communicated with, is admonished (for violation), and
is punished (for doing evil). It rejoices in nearness to Allah and prospers if
justified, and becomes undone and miserable if debased and corrupted. It is that
which in reality is obedient to Allah, and the acts of worship manifested in the
organs of the body are but (the signs of) its light. It is it also which is disobedient
and rebellious against Allah, and the acts of violation that run through the organs
are but its effects. By its darkening and its enlightening, there appear the good
3

c
5

:
5

:
:
:
:

;
5

'
:
:

S

*:
■

The quarter of the destructives
4
and evil qualities of its external appearance, since "every vessel drips of what it
contains."
The heart is that, which, if a man knows, he knows himself, and if he
knows himself, he knows his Lord Almighty; and vice versa, it is that which, if
a man ignores, he ignores himself, and if he ignores himself, he indeed ig nores
his Lord Almighty. He who ignores his own heart is still more ignorant of
everything else, since the majority of mankind ignore their own hearts and
their own selves, for intervention has been made between them and their own
selves as confirmed by Allah’s saying: "Allah comes in between a man and his
own heart." (Al-Anfal 24)

His intervention consists in preventing man from observing it (his heart),
watching over it, and becoming acquainted with its qualities, and perceiving
how it is turned between two of the fingers of (Allah) Most Merciful; and how
at one time it lusts for the lowest of the low and is brought down to the plane
of the demons; and at another time, it mounts up to the highest of the high,
and advances to the world of the angels who are drawn near to Allah. He who
ignores his heart to watch over it and be mindful of it, and to observe such of
treasures of the unseen as shines on and in it from the Dominion of the
unseen, he is one of those in whom Allah Almighty says: "they forget Allah,
so He has Therefore, caused them to forget themselves. They are indeed the
wicked." (Al-Hashr 19)

Thus, the knowledge of the heart and its qualities is the root of religion and
the foundation of the way followed by the novices. Since we have completed the
first half of this book which deals with the acts of worship and customs carried
on by the external body organs, and this is the exoteric knowledge, and since we
have promised to explain in the second half the destructives and saviors which
come upon the heart, and this is the esoteric knowledge, we must preface this
part with two books: The first will deal with the explanation of the wonders of
heart qualities and characteristics, and the other with the manner of disciplining
the heart and improving its characteristics. After that, we will launch forth into a
detailed discussion of destructives and saviors. Let us now mention that which
can be most readily understood of the exposition of the wonders of heart by
means of examples. Most minds are too dull to make a clear statement of its
wonders and secrets which pertain to the realm of the dominion of the unseen.

CHAPTER ONE
EXPOSmON OF MEANING OF NAFS (SOUL), RUH (SPIRIT), QALB
(HEART), AND AQL (MIND); AND THEIR RELATED SIGNIFICANCE

I

i

l

i

i

It should be known that these are four names used in these chapters.
However, few of the leading scholars have a comprehensive knowledge of these
i

5
Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart
names and their different meanings, and of the definitions of the things named.
Most mistakes regarding them originate in ignorance of the meaning of these
names, and of the way in which they are applied to different objects. We will
explain the meaning of these names as much as pertains to our purpose.
The first of these is the term Qalb (heart), and it is used with two meanings:
One of them is the cone-shaped organ of flesh which is located inside the left
side of the chest. It is flesh of a particular sort within which there is a cavity, and
in this cavity, there is black blood which is the source and seat of the spirit. We
do not now intend to explain its shape nor its mode of operation since religious
ends have no connection therewith, but this is the field of physicians. Animals
and even the dead have this heart of flesh. Whenever we use the term heart in
this book, we do not mean this sort of heart, for it is but an impotent bit of flesh,
belonging to the visible material world, and is perceived by the sense of sight, by
animals as well as by mankind.
The other meaning of the heart is a subtle tenuous substance of an ethereal
spiritual sort (Latifah Rabbaniyyah Ruhaniyyah), which is connected with the
physical heart. This subtle tenuous substance is the real essence of man. The
heart is the part of man which perceives and knows and experiences; it is
addressed and held responsible and rebuked, and it has some connection with the
physical heart. The majority of men have been mentally bewildered when they
tried to perceive the nature of this connection. Its connection therewith
resembles the connection of accidents with substances, of qualities with the
things they qualify, of the user of a tool with the tool, or of that which occupies a
place with the place.
We will guard against trying to explain this for two reasons: first, because
it deals with mystical sciences (Ulum Al-Mukashafah) and our aim in this
book is limited only to the science of practical religion (Ilm Al-Mu'amalah).
Second, to verify it summons disclosure of the secret of spirit, concerning
which the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” did
not speak, and Therefore, no one else should speak. Our aim then is that
whenever we use the term Qalb (heart') in this book we mean by it this subtle
tenuous substance. Our intention is to mention its characteristics and states,
not its real nature in itself, for the science of practical religion necessitates to
know about its characteristics and states and does not require to make a
mention of its real nature.
The second term is Ruh (spirit), and it is also used with two meanings
relevant to our purpose:
One of these is a subtle body whose source is the cavity of the physical heart,
and which spreads by means of the pulsative arteries to all the other parts of the
body. Its circulation in the body and the overflowing from it of the light of life,
sense perception, sight, hearing, and smelling to the members of the body
resemble the flood of light from a lamp which is moved about throughout a
house, whenever the lamp is brought to any part of the house it is lighted by it.
Life is like the light that falls upon the walls; the spirit is like the lamp; the

The quarter of the destructives
6
circulation of the spirit and its movement within (the body) correspond to the
movement of the lamp throughout the house by the moving of him who moves
it. Whenever physicians use the term spirit, they have in mind this meaning,
which is a subtle vapor produced by the heat of the heart. It is not our purpose to
explain this meaning of the term since it lies in the scope of physicians who treat
the body. The purpose of physicians of religion who treat the heart that it may be
led near to the Lord of the worlds, has no connection at all with the explanation
of this 'spirit
The second meaning is that subtle tenuous substance in man which knows
and perceives, as we have already explained in the second meaning of the heart. It
is the meaning intended by Allah in His statement: "And they ask you (O
Muhammad) concerning the Ruh (the Spirit); Say: "The Ruh (the Spirit): it is one
of the things, the knowledge of which is only with my Lord. Moreover, of
knowledge, you (mankind) have been given only a little."” (Al-Isra’ 85)

It is a marvelous and Divine thing, and it is beyond the limit of most minds
and understandings to perceive its real and ultimate nature.
The third term is Nafs (soul) and it includes many meanings, two of which
pertain to our purpose:
One is intended to refer to the faculties of anger and appetence in man, which
we will explain later. This meaning prevails among Sufis, for they mean by the
soul that principal in man which includes his blameworthy qualities. So they say:
"The soul must be mortified and broken." It is that which is referred to by the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” in his statement:
"Your worst enemy is your soul that lies between your sides." (This narration is
reported by Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
The other meaning is that subtle tenuous substance which we have
mentioned, i.e. man in reality. It is the soul and essence of man. Nevertheless, its
description differs according to its different states. When it is at rest under His
command, and agitation has left it on account of its opposition to the fleshly
appetites, it is called “soul at rest” (An-Nafs Al-Mutma'innah), of which Allah
says: "(It will be said to the pious - believers of Islamic Monotheism): "O soul in
(complete) rest and satisfaction! Come back to your Lord well pleased (yourself)
and well pleasing (unto Him)! Enter you then among My (honored) slaves, And
enter you My Paradise!" (Al-Fajr 27:30).

a

<© vsv

4jj *wT © aSf&Ui

>

The soul according to the first concept cannot be conceived of as returning to
Allah for it is far removed from Allah and belongs to the party of Satan.
However, when the soul is restless, but is striving to drive off and oppose the
appetent soul, it is called “upbraiding soul” (An-Nafs Al-Lawwamah), for it
upbraids its possessor whenever he falls short in the worship of his Master, of

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart -------------------------------------which Allah Almighty says: "I swear by the upbraiding soul." (Al-Qiyamah 2).

7

^O^Vj ^
Nevertheless, if the soul leaves opposition and becomes submissive and
obedient to the demands of the fleshly appetites and the invitations of Satan, it is
called 'the soul that commands to evil (An-Nafs Al-Ammarah Bis-Su*), of which
Allah said relating about the wife of Al-Aziz (Egyptian prime minister): "And I
free not myself (from the blame). Verily, the (human) self is inclined to evil,
except when my Lord bestows His Mercy (upon whom He wills). Verily, my
Lord is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."(Yusuf 53)
4

jy* <jj oj 03

^

5®3lS/

o!

^

Yet it may be said: "By the soul that commands to evil' is meant the soul with
the first concept", for that, 'soul' is most blameworthy. Nevertheless, the soul
with the other concept is praiseworthy, for it is man's very self, or his essence and
real nature, which knows Allah and all other knowable things.
The fourth term is Aql (mind). It also includes various meanings which we
have mentioned in the Book of Knowledge, of which two pertain to our purpose:
First, Aql (mind) refers to the force of knowledge of the real nature of things,
and is Thus, an expression for the quality of knowledge whose seat is the heart.
Second, it refers to that which perceives knowledge, and Thus, it points out
the heart in the sense of the subtle tenuous substance. We know that every
knower has within himself an entity (Wujud) which is a self-existing principle,
and knowledge is a quality residing in it, and the quality is something other than
the thing qualified. So mind may be used to refer to the quality of the knower,
and also to mean the seat of perception, the mind which perceives. It is the
latter meaning that is referred to in the statement of the Messenger of Allah
“Allah's blessing and peace be upon him”: "The first thing Allah created was
mind." (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu
Umamah; and Abu Na'im on the authority of A'ishah). Knowledge is an
accident which cannot be conceived as the first created thing, and its seat
should have been created before or along with it, and because one cannot
converse with it (knowledge). It is reported in a particular tradition that He
(Allah) said to mind: "Draw near" and it drew near. Then He said: "Retreat"
and it retreated.
Therefore, it has now been made clear to you the following meanings of
these names: the corporeal heart, the corporeal spirit, the appetent soul, and
mind. These are four meanings which are denoted by four terms. There is also a
fifth meaning which is that subtle tenuous substance in man which knows and
perceives, and all these four names are successively applied to it. There are then
five meanings and four terms, and each term is used with two meanings. Most
scholars are confused in distinguishing between these terms, and concerning
their successive usage. So you find them talking about thoughts, saying: "This is
the thought of mind, this is the thought of spirit, this is the thought of heart,

I
The quarter of the destructives
8
and this is the thought of soul", and the observer does not understand the
distinction in the meanings of these names. So for the sake of uncovering this
matter we have put here at the beginning an explanation of these names.
Wherever the word heart occurs in the Qur'an and in the Sunnah, it refers to
that in man which discerns and comes to know the real nature of things. This
may be alluded to by metonymy as the heart which is in the breast, because there
is a special connection between that subde tenuous substance and the physical
heart. For although this subde tenuous substance is connected with and used by
the rest of the body as well, yet this connection is by means of the heart, so
Therefore, its primary connection is with the heart. It is as though the heart
where its seat, its kingdom, its world, and its mount. For this reason, Sahl AtTastari has likened the heart to the throne and the breast to the seat. He said:
"The heart is the throne and the breast is the seat." Nevertheless, it must not be
supposed that he meant the throne and seat of Allah, for that is impossible. But
he meant that the heart is the subde tenuous substance's kingdom and the
primary channel for its planning and activity. These then (the physical heart and
the breast) stand in the same relationship to the heart (subde tenuous substance)
as do the throne and seat to Allah Almighty. This simile is appropriate only in
certain respects. The explanation of this is not fitting for our purpose and so let
us pass it by.

CHAPTER TWO: EXPOSITION OF ARMIES OF HEART
Allah says: "And none knows the armies of your Lord save Himself." (AlMuddaththir 31).
4 CjS ^0 sy-zr
^
In hearts and spirits and in other worlds Allah has levied armies, whose
nature and the details of whose number none knows save He. We will now refer
to some of the armies of heart pertaining to our purpose.
Heart has two armies: one visible seen with the eyes, and the other invisible
seen only by insight. The heart is as king, and the soldiers are as servants and
helpers, and this is the meaning of army. Now its visible army seen by the eye
includes the hand, the foot, the eye, the ear, the tongue, and the rest of the
outward and inward body organs. These all serve the heart and are in subjection
thereto, and it has the disposition of them, and repels for them. They were
created with an inherent disposition to obey it, and cannot disobey it nor rebel
against it. For if it orders the eye to be opened, it is opened; if it orders the foot
to move, it moves; if it orders the tongue to speak and is decisive about the
matter, it speaks; and so also for the rest of the organs.
The subjection of organs and senses to the heart resembles, from one point
of view, the subjection of the angels to Allah; for they were created with an
inherent disposition to obedience, and they cannot disobey Him. "They disobey
not Allah in what He commands them, but they do what they are commanded (to
do)." (At-Tahrim 6).

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart -------------------

9

^ 0 Oyy-y, ^ 0^ ^ 0^ ^
But even, there is one difference, that is, the angels know their own obedience
and conformity, whereas the eyelids obey the heart in opening and dosing
because they are in subjecdon to it, and have no knowledge of themselves nor of
their obedience to the heart. The heart is in need of these armies in the same way
as it is in need of a vehicle, and provision for that journey for which it was
created, the journey to Allah, thereby it is able to come upon its different stations
until He is met face to face. It is for this reason that hearts were created as Allah
says: ”1 have not created jinn and men but to worship Me." (Adh-Dhariyat 56)

i©

^'5

}

The vehicle of the heart is the body alone; its provision is knowledge alone;
and the means of attaining the provision for the journey and supplying one’s self
therewith lie only in righteous acts. It is impossible for the creature to reach Allah
except by dwelling in the body and passing through this present world, for the
nearest stage must be passed through in order that the most distant stage may be
attained. This present world is the seedbed of the hereafter, and it is one of the
stages of right guidance. It is called nearer only because it is the nearer of the two
abodes. The heart must Therefore, get its supply of provision from this world.
The body is its vehicle by which it comes into contact with this world. Thus, the
body needs to be cared for and preserved, and it is preserved only by procuring
for it such food and other things as are suitable for it, and by warding off from it
the causes of destruction which are repugnant to it and destroy it. The heart
Thus, needs two armies in order to procure food: an internal army which is the
appetite, and an external which is the hand and organs that procure food. So the
needed appetites are created in the heart, and the members of the body are
created which are the instruments of the appetites.
Likewise, the heart needs two armies to drive off the things which destroy: an
internal army of anger, by which it drives off things that destroy and takes
revenge upon its enemies, and an external which is the hand and the foot by
which it carries out the dictates of anger. This is completed by means of things
outside the body. The organs then are like weapons, etc. Then, too, the appetite
for food and the means of securing it are of no profit to him who needs food as
long as he has no knowledge of food. So in order to gain such knowledge the
heart needs two armies: an internal army, which is the perception of sight, taste,
smelling, hearing, and touch; and an external, which is the eye, ear, nose, etc. A
detailed account of the need for these and the wisdom in them would be very
long, and many volumes would not be sufficient to contain it. We have referred
to a small portion of it in the Book of Thanksgiving, and this will suffice.
All the armies of the heart are limited to three classes. One class incites and
instigates either to the obtaining of that which is profitable and suitable, as, for
example, appetence; or to the removing of that which is harmful and destructive,
as, for example, anger. This impulse may be called will. The second class is that

c
The quarter of the destructives
10
which moves the members to the attainment of these desired ends, and it is called
power. These are armies which are diffused diroughout the rest of the members,
especially the muscles and sinews. The third class is that which perceives and
gathers information as spies. These include the power of sight, hearing, smell,
taste, etc, which are divided among particular members. This is called knowledge
and perception. Corresponding to each of these internal armies there are external
armies which are the physical members. These are made up of flesh, fat, nerve,
blood, and bone, which are prepared as the instruments of these armies. Thus,
the power to seLze lies only in the fingers, the power to see only in the eye, and so
on for the other powers. We are not now speaking of the external armies, I mean
the physical members, for they belong to the visible material world, but rather of
those unseen armies by which the heart is helped.
This third class, which alone of this group perceives, is divided into that
which is lodged in the outer abodes, i.e. the five senses, hearing, sight, smell,
taste, and touch; and that which is lodged in inner abodes, or the ventricles of
the brain which are also five. Thus, a man after seeing an object closes his eye
and perceives its image within himself. This is the retentive imagination. This
image then remains with him by means of something which preserves it that is
the army of memory. He then thinks about what he has remembered and
combines pert with pert, after which he recalls what he had forgotten and it
comes back to him again. Then he gathers together in his retentive
imagination all the meanings of his sense impressions by means of the
common sense. For there are within man common sense (Hiss Mushtarak),
imagination (Takhayyul), reflection (Tafakkur), recollection (Tadhakkur), and
memory (Hifdh).
Had Allah not created the powers of memory, thought, recollection, and
imagination, the brain would be devoid of them even as is the hand and the foot.
Thus, these powers are internal armies and their seats are internal. Such then they
are the armies of the heart. It would take a long time to explain this by setting
forth examples so that the understanding of the week could comprehend it, while
our purpose in such a book as this is that the strong and superior from among
the learned shall be profited thereby. Yet we will strive to make the weak
understand by setting forth examples so that this may be brought within the
range of their understanding.

CHAPTER THREE: EXPOSITION OF SIMILITUDES
OF HEART WITH ITS INTERNAL ARMIES
It should be known that the two armies of anger and appetence are
sometimes perfectly obedient to the heart, and help it go on the path it follows,
and be good companions in the journey which lies before it. But these two also
sometimes might disobey the heart, in trespass and revolt, until they gain the
mastery over it and bring it into subjection. This results in destroying it and
cutting it off from its journey by which it might reach eternal happiness. The
heart has another army which is knowledge, wisdom, and reflection, the

r\
P=

■

;

11
Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart
explanation of which will follow, it should seek the aid of this army, for it is the
party of Allah, against the other two armies, for they may Join themselves to the
party of Satan. If it neglects this help and gives the army of anger and appetence
dominion over itself, it will surely perish and suffer a manifest loss.
This is the state of the majority of people, for their intellects have been forced
by their appetence to labor at devising stratagems to sadsfy the appetence,
whereas appetence should have been forced by their intellects to labor to satisfy
the need of mind. We will make this clearer to your understanding by means of
three examples.
Example One
We may say that the soul (I mean by the soul the aforementioned subtle
tenuous substance) is like a ruler in his city and his kingdom, for the body is the
kingdom, world, abode and city of soul. The powers and organs occupy the place
of craftsmen and laborers. The intelligent reflective power is like the sincere
advisor and intelligent minister. Appetence is like an evil slave who brings food
and provisions to the city. Anger and passion are like the chief of police. The
slave who brings the provisions is a liar, a deceiver, an impostor, and a malicious
person who plays the part of a sincere advisor, while there lies beneath his advice
dreadful evil and deadly poison. It is his wont and custom to contend against
every plan which the wise minister makes, so that not even, for an hour does he
cease his contention and opposition to his opinions.
When the ruler in his kingdom seeks the advice of his minister and shuns the
counsel of this vile slave, inferring indeed from his counsel that the right course is
that which is contradictory to his opinion; and the chief of police disciplines him
and brings him under the authority of the minister and causes him to be under
his orders, empowering him on his part over this vile slave and his followers and
devotees, so that the slave becomes under authority and not the possessor of it,
and subject to orders and directions and not one who gives orders and directs;
then the rule of his state becomes upright and justice prevails because of him.
Thus, when the soul seeks the aid of the intellect and is disciplined by the passion
of anger which it empowers over appetence, seeking the aid of one of the two
against the other; sometimes through diminishing degree and excess of anger by
making an ally of appetence and gradually modifying it; sometimes through
subduing and overcoming the appetence by giving anger and ardor power over it
and by disapproving of its demands; then its powers are made harmonious and its
character comely. Whoever turns aside from this path is like unto him of whom
Allah says: "Have you seen he who has taken as his god his [own] desire, and
Allah has sent him astray due to knowledge and has set a seal upon his hearing
and his heart and put over his vision a veil? So who will guide him after Allah?
Then will you not be reminded?" (Al-Jathiyah 23).
C.QyvOJ Jx-

4A)T

i 0 Ojjhii

*S>T oL; ^

Ij

QA C-Jtjsl

The quarter of the destructives

12

He also says: "And if We had willed, we could have elevated him thereby,
but he adhered [instead] to the earth and followed his own desire. So his
example is like that of the dog: if you chase him, he pants, or if you leave him,
he [still] pants. That is the example of the people who denied Our signs.” (AlA’raf 176)
vi*jlp

o!

i£li

iji jj aD-i

i

^
vllJi

ji

Again, He says about him who restrains his soul from lust: "But as for he who
feared the position of his Lord and prevented the soul from [unlawful]
inclination, Then indeed, Paradise will be [his] refuge.” (An-Nazi’at 40-41)

i @5

<>

Op 0 cu&J h3j

3>

The way in which these armies strive, and the way in which some of them are
given power over others will be discussed, if Allah so wills, in the Book of
Discipline of Soul.
Example Two
It should be known that the body is like a city and the mind, I mean the
perceptive power in man, is like a king who rules over it. Its perceptive external
and internal powers of the senses are like its armies and helpers. Its organs are
like the people of the city. The soul which commands to evil, i.e. appetence and
anger, is like the enemy who opposes him in his kingdom and strives to destroy
his people. His body Thus, becomes as it were a frontier outpost, and his soul is
stationed on guard therein. So if he is one who strives against the enemy and
routs him and conquers him as it should be, then will his deeds be praised on the
day when he returns to the Presence (of Allah), Who says: “Not equal are those
believers remaining [at home] - other than the disabled - and these who strive and
fight in the cause of Allah with their wealth and their lives. Allah has preferred
these who strive with their wealth and their lives to those who remain [behind],
by degrees. And to both Allah has promised the best [reward]. But Allah has
preferred those who strive over those who remain [behind] with a great reward.”
(An-Nisa* 95)
^ Jv"*" e?

jyv^ Jjl

4XA

J*
4©

Iyr I

o*5 ^
'5

J-vLi

5 H Js>

But if he loses the frontier and neglects his people, his deeds will be blamed
and vengeance will be exacted from him when he meets Allah. According to a
certain Tradition: "It will be said to him on the day of Judgement: 'O evil
shepherd, you ate meat and drank milk and did not bring back the lost nor
restore the broken; today I will revenge on you.,n It is also due to this struggle
that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” refers in

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

13

his statement: "We have returned from the minor fight in the Cause of Allah
(jihad) to the major fight." (This narration is reported by Al-Baihaqi on the
authority of Jabir).
Example Three
The mind is like a horseman who has gone hunting. His appetence is his
horse and his anger is his dog. When the horseman is skilled and his horse
well broken and his dog trained and taught, then he is able to succeed. But
when he is himself clumsy, his horse ungovernable, and his dog vicious, then
his horse neither is guided under him, nor does his dog go forth in obedience
to his signs. So he himself deserves to perish rather than to gain that which he
seeks. The clumsiness of the horseman is like the ignorance, lack of wisdom,
and dim insight of a man. The agitation of the horse is like the victory of
appetence, especially the appetite for food and sexual intercourse. The rabidity
of the dog is like the victory of anger and its domination. We ask Allah to
grant us success with His grace.

CHAPTER FOUR
EXPOSITION OF SPECIAL PROPERTIES OF HEART OF MAN
It should be known that Allah has bestowed on all animals other than man all
of the things we have mentioned. For animals, have appetence and anger, and
external and internal senses. Thus, the sheep sees the wolf with her eye and
knows in her heart its enmity, and so flees from it. That is an inner perception.
We will now mention that which peculiarly characterizes the heart of man,
because of which he has been given great honor and is qualified to draw near
Allah. This special characteristic has its basis in knowledge and will. By
'knowledge' is meant to have knowledge of the things of this world and the
hereafter, and of intellectual realities. These things are beyond the objects of
sense perception, and animals do not share man in them. Nay rather, knowledge
of axioms and universal is a peculiar property of the reason. Thus, a man judges
that a single person cannot be imagined to be in two places at one time. This is
his judgment for every person, although it is well known that he has observed
some persons by his sense perception. So his judgment he passed on all persons
goes beyond that which sense has perceived. If you understand this concerning
this obvious axiomatic knowledge, it is even more obvious in the rest of
theoretical sciences.
Regarding the will, when a man perceives by his intellect the consequences of
an act and the good way to deal with it, there is aroused within his essential self a
desire for the interest, a desire to exert himself in the means to attain it, and also
the will to this end. This differs from the will stirred up by appetence and the
willpower that animals have: indeed, it is quite the opposite of appetence. For
appetence shuns bleeding and cupping, while the intelligent man wants them,
seeks them, and freely spends money for them. The appetite inclines to savory
foods in time of sickness, while the intelligent man finds within himself a

The quarter of the destructives
14
deterrent from them. This abstinence does not come from appetence. Had Allah
created the intellect which gives information regarding the consequences of
things, and not created this motive which moves the organs to carry out the
mandates of the intellect, then the Judgment of the intellect would in reality have
been lost.
Thus, the heart of man has the special properties of knowledge and will,
which are lacking in the other animals, if not lacking in the child in his original
constitution, for this comes to him with maturity. Now appetence, anger, and the
external and internal senses exist potentially in die child, but in attaining them the
child must pass through two stages: the first is that his heart must comprehend
the knowledge of axioms and universal principles, such as the knowledge of the
impossibility of impossible things, and the possibility of things manifesdy
possible. But in this stage, he has not yet attained the speculative sciences, save
that they have become possible and within easy reach of attainment. His status in
relation to knowledge is like that of the writer whose knowledge of writing does
not go beyond inkstand, pen, and the letters as they are written separately but not
in their combined forms, for such a person is on the way to writing but has not
yet achieved it The second is that he shall acquire that knowledge by experiment
and reflection, so that it is stored up in him in a way that enables him to return to
it whenever he wills. His status is like that of a man skilled in writing who, on
account of his ability therein, is called a writer, even though he is not actually
engaged in writing.
This is the highest stage of humanity, but in this stage, there are
innumerable degrees of disparity among men in the abundance or paucity of
knowledge, in the majesty or sordidness of knowledge, and in the way of
attaining it. Sometimes, knowledge comes to some hearts through divine
inspiration by way of immediate revelation and disclosure, and for some it is a
thing to be learned and acquired. Sometimes it is gained quickly and
sometimes slowly. In this stage the varying degrees of learned, wise, saints,
and prophets are seen.
The degrees of advancement in knowledge are unlimited in as much as Allah's
knowledge is infinite. The highest rank is that of the prophet to whom is revealed
all or most of realities, not by a process of acquisition nor after difficulty, but by a
divine inspiration within the shortest possible time. In this happiness, man draws
close to Allah in thought, reality, and quality, regardless of place and distance.
The stepping-stones up to these various degrees are the stations reached by those
seeking after Allah, and they are limitless. Each traveller knows his own station
which he has attained on his journey. He knows it and he knows also those
stations which are behind him. He does not know the real nature of that which is
just ahead of him, but he may believe in it as he believes in the unseen.
Even as we believe in Prophethood and the prophet and accept his
existence as true, while no one but a prophet knows the real nature of
Prophethood; and even as the embryo knows not the state of the baby, nor
does the baby know the state of the discerning child and what has been opened

15

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

up to him of axiomatic knowledge; nor does the discerning child know the state
of the intelligent man and what he has acquired of speculative knowledge; so
also the intelligent man knows not what attainments of the grace and mercy of
Allah have been revealed to His saints and prophets: "Whatever Allah grants to
people of mercy - none can withhold it; and whatever He withholds - none can
release it thereafter. And He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise.” (Fatir 2)
e-t> JiXJ

ja]

Ctj LgJ

^lliJ 4jjl £cJLAj L« ^

iO
Although this mercy is generously bestowed by virtue of the goodness and
generosity of Allah who never withhold it from anyone, it appears in those hearts
which are exposed to the gifts of Allah. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” said: "Verily your Lord has, in many of your days, gifts
(of mercy), so, behold! Expose yourselves to those gifts!” (This narration is
reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah and Abu Sa’id). One exposes himself
to them through cleansing and purifying the heart from evil and from the
wickedness which comes from blameworthy character, as will be discussed later.
This liberality is that which is referred to in the statement of the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "Allah descends every night to
the lowest heaven and says, 'Is there anyone who asks, that I may respond to
him?"' Again, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said reladng from his Lord: "Great indeed is the longing of the righteous to meet
me, and I long even more to meet them." Consider also the statement of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” in his narradon
about his Lord Almighty: "Whoever draws a span nearer to me, I come a cubit
nearer to him."
All of this is an indication that the light of knowledge is not veiled from
men's hearts by any stinginess or prohibition on the part of the Giver, who is
far removed from such acts, but rather it is veiled by wickedness, uncleanness
and anxiety within the heart. For hearts are like vessels; as long as they are filled
with water air cannot enter them. So the knowledge of the majesty of Allah
cannot enter into hearts which are occupied by anything else apart from Him. It
is that to which the following statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” refers: "Had it not been for the fact that
Satans hover over the hearts of mankind, They would have been able to see the
dominion of Heaven." (This narration is reported by Ahmad on the authority of
Abu Hurairah).
It is obviously clear that the special characteristic of man is knowledge and
wisdom, and that the noblest kind of knowledge is the knowledge of Allah, His
attributes and deeds. By this, man achieves perfection, and in his perfection lie his
happiness and worthiness to live near the divine majesty and perfection. The
body then is a vehicle for the soul, and the soul is the seat of knowledge.
Knowledge is the end destined for man and his special characteristic for which he

The quarter of the destructives
16
was created. As well as the horse shares with the donkey the power to carry
burdens and is distinguished from it by its own special characteristics of
advancing and fleeing properly, and beauty of form, for which the horse was
created in a way that the removal of which from it would bring it down to the
low rank of die donkey; likewise man shares some things with the donkey and
horse, and differs from them in others which are his own special characteristics.
These distinguishing characteristics are among the qualities of the angels who are
drawn near Allah.
Man lies in a rank between brutes and angels. Man, in nourishment and
reproduction, is a plant; in having sense perceptions and movement by his own
free will, he is an animal; and as regards his figure and stature, he is like the figure
engraved on die wall; but his distinguishing characteristic is his experiential
knowledge of the real nature of things. Whoever makes use of all of his organs
and powers in such a way as to seek their aid in attaining knowledge and work,
becomes like the angels and is worthy to be joined to them, and deserves to be
called an angel and a lord-adherent (Rabbani), or an honourable angel as stated by
Allah on the tongue of the women who described the Prophet Yusuf: "This is no
mortal; this can be no other than an honorable angel." (Yusuf 31).

i 0<l\lli Oj

iid* & ^

But whoever spends his energy in lagging behind bodily pleasures and lusts as
do the animals is brought down to the low depth of the brutes. So he becomes
ignorant as an ox, glutinous as a pig, greedy as a dog or a tomcat, malevolent as a
camel, arrogant as a tiger, or sly as a fox; or he may unite all of these and become
a rebellious devil.
There is not a single organ nor a single sense perception but that it may be
helpful along the path that leads to Allah, as will be discussed in part in the Book
of Thanksgiving. Whoever uses them therein achieves felicity, but whoever turns
aside therefrom loses and fails. The totality of man's happiness therein lies in
making the meeting with Allah his aim, the abode of hereafter his dwelling place,
this present world his temporary stopping place, the body his vehicle, and its
members his servants.
So the perceptive part of man dwells in the heart, as a king in the midst of his
kingdom. The imaginative faculty whose seat is in the front of the brain acts as
the master of his couriers, for the reports of sense perceptions are gathered
therein. The faculty of retentive memory, whose seat is the back of the brain, acts
as his storekeeper. The tongue is his interpreter and the active members of his
body his scribes. The five senses act as his spies, and he makes each one of them
responsible in a carte in domain. Thus, he sets the eye over the world of colors,
hearing over the world of sounds, smell over the world of odors, and so on for
the others. These are the bearers of news which they collect from their different
worlds and transmit to the imaginative faculty which is like the master of the
couriers. The latter in turn delivers them to the storekeeper, which is memory.
The storekeeper sets them forth before the king who selects therefrom what he

17

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

needs in managing his kingdom, in completing the journey ahead of him, in
overpowering his enemy by whom he is afflicted, and in warding off from
himself those who cut off his path.
If the king does that, he is successful, happy, and thankful for the blessings of
Allah. But if he neglects all of these things, or uses them for the welfare of his
enemies which are appetence and anger, and other swiftly passing pleasures, and
in the building of his path instead of his abode, given that this present world is
his path through which he must pass, while his own homeland and permanent
abode is the hereafter, then he is forsaken, wretched, ungrateful for the blessings
of Allah, being one who misuses the armies of Allah and forsakes Mis path. So he
deserves hatred and exile in the day of overturn and return. We seek refuge with
Allah from such.
Ka'b Al-Ahbar “Allah be pleased with him” referred to this example which
we have set forth when he said: "I visited A’ishah “Allah be pleased with her”
and said to her: “Man's eyes are a guide, his ears a funnel, his tongue an
interpreter, his hands wings, his feet couriers, and the heart is his king.
If the king enjoys good health, so also will his armies." She said: "Thus, have I
heard the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” saying."
In his illustration of man's heart, Ali “Allah be pleased with him”, said: "Verily
Allah has vessels on His earth, and they are the hearts of men. Those most
beloved to Him are the smoothest, the purest, and the most robust.” Then he
explained: "The most robust in religion, the purest in certainty (of faith), and the
smoothest to the brethren." This is a reference to the statement of Allah
Almighty: "and those with him (the Prophet) are forceful against the disbelievers,
merciful among themselves.” (Al-Fath 29)

i^

$<-)L4j

}

And: "Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The example of His
light is like a niche within which is a lamp, the lamp is within glass, the glass as if
it were a pearly [white] star lit from [the oil of] a blessed olive tree, neither of the
east nor of the west, whose oil would almost glow even if untouched by fire.
(An-Nur 35)
19-J

^-Lya,*jt ^-Lva-4 tpi

<-0Jy (j4 \j°JJ

jy

^

4©
Ubai Ibn Ka’b “Allah be pleased with him” said: "This refers to the light of
a faithful believer and his heart.” He Almighty further says: “Or [they are] like
darknesses within an unfathomable sea which is covered by waves, upon which
are waves, over which are clouds - darknesses, some of them upon others. (AnNur 40)
fi>!

cLUC ^43j3 QA

(J*

The quarter of the destructives

18

It is an illustration of the heart of the hypocrite. Zaid Ibn Aslam “Allah be
pleased with him” said in comment on the statement of Allah: "in a preserved
tablet" (Al-Buruj 22)

i (JfS

^

"It is the heart of the faithful believer." Sahl said: "The heart and the breast
are like the throne and the seat." These then are the examples of the heart.

CHAPTER FIVE
EXPOSITION OF QUALITIES AND SIMILITUDES OF HEART
It should be known that there are four mingled factors which dwell together
in man's nature and makeup, and Therefore, four kinds of qualides are
combined against him. These are the qualities of the beasts of prey, brutish
qualities, devilish qualities, and lordly qualities. In so far as anger rules over him,
he is addicted to the deeds of a beast of prey, such as enmity, hatred, and
attacking people by beating and cursing them. In so far as appetence rules over
him, he is addicted to brutish acts of gluttony, greed, carnal desire, and so on.
In so far as there is within his soul something lordly, as Allah says: "The Ruh
(the Spirit): it is one of the things, the knowledge of which is only with my
Lord, and of knowledge, you (mankind) have been given only a little" (Al-Isra’
85)

4©^

£jjli

$

He claims lordship for himself and loves mastery, superiority, exclusiveness,
and despotism in all things, and to be the sole ruler, and to slip away from the
rope of servitude and humility. He longs to study all the sciences, and even he
claims for himself science and knowledge and the comprehension of the real
nature of things. He rejoices when knowledge is attributed to him, and grieves
when accused of ignorance. The comprehension of all realities, and seeking to
rule by force over all creatures are among the lordly qualities, for which man is
greedy. In so far as he differs from the brutes in having the faculty of
discernment, although sharing with them in anger and appetence, he attains to
devilish qualities. Thus, he becomes wicked and uses his discernment in the
discovery of ways of evil. He seeks to attain his ends by guile, deceit, and
cunning, and sets forth evil as though it were good. These are the characteristics
of devil.
Every man has within him a mixture of these four qualities, i.e., lordly,
devilish, beastly, and brutish; and all of these are gathered together in the heart.
So there are gathered inside of a man's, skin, as it were, a pig, a dog, a devil, and a
pig. The pig is appetence, for the pig is not dispraised for his color, his shape or
appearance, but for his covetousness, his voracity, and his greed. The dog is
anger, for the wild beast and the rabid dog are not dog and beast for their
appearance or color or shape, but because the spirit and meaning of this bestial

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

19

quality is rabidity and enmity. Now within man there is the rabidity and anger of
the beast, and the greed and voluptuousness of the pig. Thus, the pig through
gluttony invites man to excess and abomination, and the wild beast by means of
anger calls him to oppression and harmful acts.
The devil continues to stir up the appetite of the pig and the wrath of the wild
beast, and to incite the one by means of the other, and makes their inborn
dispositions alluring to them. The sage, who represents the intellect, is in duty
bound to ward off the plotting and guile of the devil by disclosing his
dissembling, by way of penetrating insight and evident clear illumination; and to
destroy the gluttony of this pig by setting the dog over him, for by means of
anger he breaks down the assault of appetence. He wards off the rabidity of the
dog by setting the pig over him and bringing the dog in subjection under his rule.
If he does this successfully, his affairs are set right, equity is manifest in the
kingdom of the body, and all goes in the straight path. But if he is unable to
overcome them, they overpower him and bring him into servitude, and so he
continues to search out crafty tricks and careful plans to satisfy his pig and please
his dog. Thus, he is constantly in servitude to a dog or a pig.
This is the condition of the majority of mankind whenever their primary
concern is for the belly, sexual indulgence, and vying with the enemy. The strange
thing is that he disapproves of idolaters worshipping stones, whereas if the veil
were removed and his true state were disclosed and his true condition were
disclosed to him as it is disclosed to mystics, either in sleep or when awake, he
would see himself standing before a pig, now prostrating himself before him and
again kneeling, awaiting his signal and his command: whenever the pig is roused
up to seek the satisfying of any of his appetites, the man is sent forth at once to
serve him and to bring that for which he lusts. Or else the man would see himself
standing before a rabid dog. worshipping him, obeying his demands and requests,
and carefully planning schemes to render obedience to him. Thus, he endeavors
to please his devil, for it is he who stirs up the pig and arouses the dog and sends
them forth to bring the man into subjection. In this way, he worships the devil in
his worship of these two.
So every man should first of all watch over times of his activity and
inactivity, his silence and his speech, his rising up and his sitting down, and let
him meditate them with careful insight, and he will find, if he is just to himself,
nothing but an effort all day long to serve these base impulses. This is the peak
of oppression for it makes the possessor to be possessed, the lord to be lorded
over, the master a slave, and the conqueror to be conquered, for that man
forces the mind which is worthy of lordship, conquest and rule to serve these
low impulses.
Undoubtedly from obedience to these three, there spring forth unto the heart
qualities which are heaped up thereupon so that they become a dirty stain and a
rust which is destructive and deadly to the heart. From obedience to the pig of
appetence, there result the following characteristics: shamelessness, wickedness,
wastefulness, avarice, hypocrisy, defamation, wantonness, nonsense, greed,

The quarter of the destructives
20
covetousness, flattery, envy, rejoicing at another's misfortune, etc. As for
obedience to the dog of anger there issue to die heart the qualities of rashness,
squandering, haughtiness, boasting, hot temper, pride, conceit, sneering,
disregard, despising of creatures, the will to evil, the lust of oppression, etc. In
regard to obedience to devil through obedience to appetence and anger, there
result from it the qualities of guile, deceit, craftiness, cunning, deception,
dissembling, violence, fraud, mischief, obscenity, and such like.
But if the matter is reversed and man overcomes all these, bringing them
under the rule of the lordly element within him, then his heart becomes the
abode of such lordly qualities as knowledge, wisdom, comprehension of real
nature of things, knowledge of things as they really are, subjugation of all by the
power of knowledge and insight, and worthiness to excel all creatures because of
the completeness and majesty of his knowledge. Then, too, he dispenses with the
worship of appetence and anger, and, through holding in check the pig of
appetence and placing him back again within his proper limits, he acquires such
honorable qualities as chastity, contentment, quietness, abstemiousness,
godliness, piety, happiness, goodly aspect, modesty, sagacity, helpfulness, and
such like. By holding in check the power of anger and conquering it, and putting
it back within its proper limits, man attains the qualities of courage, generosity,
gallantry, self-control., patience, gentleness, endurance, pardoning, steadfastness,
nobility, valor, majesty, and others.
The heart is as a mirror which is surrounded by these factors which exert
their influence upon it. These influences reach the heart in an uninterrupted
succession. The praiseworthy influences which we have mentioned increase the
clearness, shining, illumination, and brightness of the mirror so that the clear
statement of Reality shines therein and there is revealed in it the real nature of
thing sought in religion. To such a heart the Messenger of Allah “Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him” referred in his statement: "Whenever Allah
intends good for a man He causes his heart to exhort him." He further said:
"The man whose heart is his exhorter has a protector from Allah over him."
This is the heart in which there abides the celebration (of the Praises of Allah
Almighty). Allah says: "Unquestionably, by the remembrance of Allah hearts are
assured." (Ar-Ra’d 28)
% ii

., x ^ ^

•»

The blameworthy influences are like a darkening smoke which rises up over
the mirror of the heart and is heaped up upon it time after time until it becomes
black and gloomy and entirely veiled from Allah. This is corrosion and rust. Allah
said: "No! Rather, the stain has covered their hearts of that which they were
earning.” (Al-Mutaffifin 14)

He also said: "if We willed, We could afflict them for their sins? But We seal
over their hearts so they do not hear.” (Al-A’raf 100)

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

4.CP^}-r-^

21

<4^

^

Here He connected their lack of hearing with sealing over their hearts by sins,
even as He connected hearing with godly fear in His statement: "Fear Allah and
listen" (Al-Ma’idah 108)

(And: Fear Allah, for Allah teaches you." (Al-Baqarah 282
Whenever sins are heaped up the heart is sealed, thereupon it is blinded to the
perception of reality and the goodness of religion. It scorns the hereafter and
magnifies this present world, feeling concern for it alone. So if anything
concerning the hereafter and the dangers therein knocks at its ear gate, it goes
into one ear and out the other. It does not find an abiding-place in the heart nor
stir it to repentance and making amends. These are they who despair of the
hereafter just as the infidels despair of those who are in their graves. This is the
meaning of the blackening of the heart by sins according to the statement of the
Qur'an and the Sunnah.
Maimun Ibn Muhran said: "Whenever a man commits a sin he makes a black
spot upon his heart, and whenever he turns away from it and repents, the spot is
polished away, and if he returns to sin it increases until it covers the heart." This
is rust. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"The heart of the believer is stripped clean therein a lamp shines, but the heart of
the disbeliever is black and upside down." (This narration is reported by Ahmad
and At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu Sa’id). Obedience to Allah by striving
against the appetites polishes the heart, but disobedience to Him blackens it. So
whoever engages, in acts of disobedience blackens his heart; and whoever does a
good deed after he has done an evil one, thereby removes its effect, does not
have his heart blackened, but its light decreases. It is like a mirror which is
breathed upon and then wiped off, and then breathed upon again and wiped off,
causing it to be without cloudiness.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"There are four kinds of hearts: a heart which is stripped clean in which a lamp
shines and this is the believer's heart; a heart which is black and upside down, and
it is the unbeliever’s heart; a hardened heart bound in its sheath of evil, and it is
the heart of the hypocrite; and a broad heart in which there is both belief and
hypocrisy. Its belief is like green herbage which pure water causes to abound, and
its hypocrisy is like an ulcer which purulent matter and pus cause to spread. This
heart is judged to belong to whichever of the two prevails over the other." (This
narration is reported by At-Tabarani and Ahmad on the authority of Abu Sa’id).
Allah said: "And if an evil suggestion comes to you from Satan, then seek refuge
in Allah. Indeed, He is Hearing and Knowing.” (Al-A’raf 200)

22

The quarter of the destructives

4
ylXJZsi UJJ }
Thus, He stated that the clearness of the heart and its perspicacity are attained
by the practice of celebration of Allah, and none achieves this except those who
fear Him. For the fear of Allah is the door to celebrating Him; celebration is the
door to disclosure; and disclosure is the door to the greatest felicity which is die
success of meeting AJlah.

CHAPTER SG: EXPOSITION OF SIMILITUDES OF HEART REGARDING
SPECIAL SCIENCES
It should be known that the seat of knowledge is the heart, by which I mean
the subtle tenuous substance which rules all the parts of the body and is obeyed
and served by all its members. In its relationship to the real nature of intelligibles,
it is like a mirror in its relationship to the forms of changing appearances. For
even as that which changes has a form, and the image of that form is reflected in
die mirror and represented therein, so also every intelligible has its specific
nature, and this specific nature has a form which is reflected and made manifest
in the mirror of the heart. Even as the mirror is one thing, the forms of
individuals another, and the representation of their image in the mirror a third,
being Thus, three things in all, so here too there are three things: the heart, the
specific nature of things, and the representation and presence of these in the
heart. The intellect stands for the heart in which there exists the image of the
specific nature of things. The intelligible stands for the specific nature of things.
Comprehension stands for the representation of the image in the mirror.
As well as the act of grasping, for example, requires that which grasps, such
as the hand, that which is grasped, such as the sword, and an act bringing
together the sword and the hand by placing the sword in the hand which is
called the act of grasping, so also the presence of the image of the intelligible
into the heart is called comprehension. The reality was in existence and so also
was the heart, but there was no comprehension present, for comprehension
stands for the presence of the reality into the heart. Similarly the sword was in
existence and so also was the hand, but there was nothing named 'the act of
grasping and taking' hold because the sword has not actually come into the
hand. It is true that grasping stands for the presence of the sword itself in the
hand, while the Intelligible itself does not actually come into the heart. For fire,
itself does not actually come into the heart of one who knows fire, but that
which is actually present is its definition and real nature which corresponds to
its form. So the comparison of the heart with the mirror is more fitting, for
man himself is not really present in the mirror, but there is present merely an
image which corresponds to him, and Thus, the presence of an image in the
heart corresponding to the real nature of the intelligible is called
comprehension.
The mirror may not reflect the forms for five reasons: first, because of a
defect in its formation, as, for example, a piece of crude iron before it is turned
and shaped and polished; second, because of its dirt and rust and dullness, even

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

23

though it is perfect in formation; third, because it is turned away from the
direction of the object toward something else, as, for example, if the object
were behind the mirror; fourth, because of a veil placed between the mirror and
the object; and fifth, because of ignorance of the direction of the object desired,
so that it is impossible to place it in front of the position and direcdon of the
object.
Likewise, the heart is a mirror ready to have reflected in it the true nature of
reality in all things. Hearts are short of knowledge which they lack only because
of the following five reasons:
The first reason is an imperfection in its own nature, such as the heart of a
child which does not reflect intelligibles because of its imperfection.
The second reason is because of the dullness due to acts of disobedience,
and the filth heaped up upon the face of the heart because of many lusts, for
these prevent the purity and cleanness of heart. Reality ceases to be manifest
therein in proportion to its darkness and the filth heaped up upon it. To this, the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” referred in his
statement: "When a man commits a sin something of his mind forsakes him and
does not return to him again." That is to say, there comes over his heart a
dullness whose influence abides forever, even when his purpose is to remove it
with a good deed. But if he had done the good deed without the preceding evil
deed, then the heart would unquestionably shine more. However, when the evil
deed preceded, the value of the good deed was lost, although the heart was
restored by it to its state previous to the evil deed, but its light was not increased
thereby. This is an evident loss and an inescapable defect. The mirror which has
been stained and then wiped off with a polishing cloth is not like that which has
been wiped with the polisher to increase its clearness without any previous stain.
So undertaking obedience to Allah and opposing the demands of the appetites
brighten the heart and purify it. Therefore, Allah Almighty says: "But those who
strive in Our Cause We will surely guide them into our ways.” (Al-Ankabut 69)

4 Cjj

^Oji

Yt&\P ^ W'HL=r Cr^l3

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Allah causes him who acts upon the best he knows to become the heir of
knowledge which he knows not." (This narration is reported by Abu Na’im on
the authority of Anas).
The third reason is that the heart may be turned away from the direction of
reality which is sought. The heart of the righteous and obedient man, although
being bright, might not have the clear statement of reality, for he does not seek
reality nor does he have his mirror opposite to the direction of the thing
sought. Perhaps all of his attention is taken up by the details of bodily
submission or arranging the means of his livelihood, and his thought is not free
to contemplate the Lordly Presence and the hidden divine realities. So there is
revealed to him only that which he thinks about, whether it is the minute
defects of his religious works or the hidden faults of the soul if it is these which

The quarter of the destructives
24
occupy his mind, or the interests of gaining a livelihood if he thinks of them. If
limiting one's attention to works and details of acts of obedience prevents the
revelation of reality with clarity, what is your estimation of one who spends his
energy in the lusts and pleasures of this present world and the things connected
therewith? How should true revelation not be veiled from such a man?
The fourth reason is the veil. The obedient man who has overcome his
appetites and devoted himself exclusively to a certain specific reality may not
have this revealed to him because it is veiled from him by some belief which
he had from his early childhood, and he has blindly followed and accepted in
good faith. This belief walls him off from the true nature of reality and
prevents anything being revealed to his heart in opposition to the strict
interpretation of the doctrines which he has blindly accepted. This too is a
great veil which overshadows most Muslim scholastic theologians and those
who are fanatical followers of juristic schools, if not most righteous men who
think upon the dominion of the heavens and the earth; for they are veiled by
their blindly followed dogmas which are hardened in their souls and firmly
fixed in their hearts, and have become a veil between them and the perception
of realities.
The fifth reason is ignorance of the direction from which the knowledge of
the thing sought must be obtained. For the novice cannot obtain knowledge of
that which is unknown except by recalling the sciences which are related to what
he desires. Once he recalls them and arranges them within himself in a special
order to which the learned name process of deduction, he will then have found
the direction of the thing sought, and its true nature will be clearly revealed to his
heart. For the things which are not instinctive that one desires to know cannot be
caught save in the net of acquired knowledge; indeed no item of knowledge is
acquired except from two preceding items of knowledge which are related and
combined in a special way, and from their combination a third item of knowledge
is gained. This is like the product of the copulation between a male stallion and a
mare. Here even as well as one who wishes to produce a mare cannot do so from
donkey, camel, or man, but from a special source, from male and female horses,
through a particular way of union, so also every item of knowledge has two
special sources and a particular way for their combination, and from this
combination there is gained the derived item of knowledge which is sought.
Ignorance of these sources and of the manner of combining them is what hinders
understanding. An example of this already mentioned is the ignorance of the
direction in which the object is.
Another example is that of a man who desires to see his nape in a mirror. If
he holds up the mirror in front of his face, he does not have it placed opposite to
the position of his nape, which Thus, does not appear in it. If he holds it behind
his nape and facing it, he has turned the mirror away from his eyes and so cannot
see either the mirror or the reflection of his nape in it, So he needs another
mirror to place behind his nape, with the first mirror facing it in such a way that
he can see it and he must observe the proper relationship between the placing of

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

25

the two mirrors so that the image of his nape is reflected in the mirror opposite
to it, and the image of this mirror is reflected in the other mirror which faces the
eye. Then the eye perceives the image of his nape. So in the pursuit of knowledge
there are strange ways in which there are devious turnings and oblique ways,
stranger than those we have mentioned concerning the mirror; and rare indeed
upon the face of the earth is he who is guided to the way of clearly seeing
through those devious ways.
These are the reasons which prevent the heart from coming to know the real
nature of things. Otherwise every heart is constitutionally fitted to come to know
realities, for it is a lordly and noble thing, distinctive from other substances in the
world by this special property and noble quality, To which it is referred by the
statement of Allah Almighty: "Verily we offered the trust to the heavens and the
earth and the mountains, and they refused to bear it, and feared it; but man
(undertook to) bear it." (Al-Ahzab 72)

£i±\$

Jv^'34^11 Jp iSiiVf
4

bj >

V^jik otf j\

This refers to the special characteristic which distinguishes him from the
heavens, the earth, and the mountains, by which he is enabled to bear the trust of
Allah; This trust is experiential knowledge and monotheism.
The heart of every human being is, in its original constitution, fitted for and
capable of bearing this trust, but the reasons which we have mentioned prevent
it from carrying this burden and realization of the trust. In this connection, the
Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Every child
is born with a natural conformity to the true religion (of Islam), and it is only
his parents who make him a Jew, a Christian or a Magian." (This narration is
reported by Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah
“Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "Had it not been for the
fact that devils hover over the hearts of the children of Adam they would have
been able to see the dominion of Heaven." This is a reference to many of these
hindrances which are the veil between the heart and the dominion.
To this also is the reference in the narration on the authority of Ibn Umar
“Allah be pleased with him” in which he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him” was asked: “O Messenger of Allah! Where is
Allah: on earth or in the heaven?” He replied: “In the hearts of His believing
creatures." According to a particular narration, Allah said: "Neither My earth nor
my heaven could contain me, but the tender and calm heart of my servant.” It is
further narrated that the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him” was asked: "Who are the best of men?" He replied: "Every believer whose
heart is cleansed." They asked: "What is the cleansed heart?" He answered: "It is
the god-fearing pure heart in which there is no fraud, nor inequity, nor treachery,
nor rancour, nor envy."
In this context, Umar Ibn Al-Khattab “Allah be pleased with him” said: "My

The quarter of the destructives
26
heart saw my Lord when, because of piety, He removed the veil." For if the veil is
lifted between oneself and his heart, the visible material world and the dominion
of invisible unseen become clearly manifest in his heart, and he sees a Garden the
breadth of a part of which is that of the heavens and the earth. Its total expanse is
greater than the heavens and the earth, for the heavens and the earth stand for
the visible material world, which, although broad in extent and far-reaching in
compass, is yet but finite in relation to the whole, But the dominion of invisible
unseen is boundless, consisting of those mysteries that are beyond the sight of
the eyes and perceived only by insight. It is true that only a part of it appears to
the heart, but in itself and in its relation to the knowledge of Allah, it is infinite.
The material world and the unseen dominion taken together under one
classification are called the Lordly Presence, for the Lordly presence encompasses
all existing things. For there exists nothing except Allah, His Acts and Dominion;
and His servants are a part of His Acts. What appears of this to the heart is,
according to some, the Garden itself; but according to the people of truth, it is
the means of meriting the Garden, and the extent of his possession in the Garden
is in proportion to the extent of his knowledge, and the extent to which Allah
and His attributes and Acts have been revealed to him. The intent of all of these
acts of worship and actions of organs is the purification, improvement and
enlightenment of the heart. "Prosperous is he who purifies it." (Ash-Shams 9).
The purpose of purification is to achieve the Illumination of faith in it; I
mean the shining of the light of knowledge (of Allah). That is the point in the
statement of Allah Almighty: "Whomsoever Allah wishes to guide, He expands
his breast to Islam" (Al-An’am 125)
4 (Jp)
V-l
01 4^1 (j*3 ^
And: "Is he whose breast Allah has expanded for Islam, and who is in light
from his Lord "(Az-Zumar 22).
4©
Cr? Jy
H3
^
This illumination and this faith have three degrees: The first degree is the
faith of the laymen which is purely blind imitation. The second is the faith of
scholastic theologians which is mingled with a sort of logical reasoning. The third
degree is the faith of the Gnostics, which is seeing clearly with the light of
certainty (of faith).
We will make this clear to you by an example: your admitting that Zaid, for
instance, is in the house has three degrees. The first is that someone has told you,
someone whom you have experienced to be truthful and never known to lie and
never doubted his word. Your heart by the mere hearing calmly receives his
report and is satisfied with it. This is the belief by mere blind acceptance, and of
such nature is the faith of the laymen. For when they reached the age of
discrimination they heard from their fathers and mothers of the existence of
Allah, of His knowledge, will, and power, and the rest of His attributes; also of

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

27

the sending of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”,
his veracity, and his message. They received even as they heard and became
established therein and satisfied therewith, and it never occurred to their minds to
disagree with what their fathers and mothers and teachers told them because of
the high esteem in which they held them. This faith is the efficient cause of
salvation in the hereafter, and those who embrace it are in the first (i.e. lowest)
ranks of the people of the right hand, but not among those who are drawn near
Allah. For this faith has in it no mystical unveiling, nor insight, nor expansion of
the breast by the light of certainty, since it is possible for errors to lie in what is
heard from individuals, nay indeed from groups, in that which pertains to
doctrine. The hearts of Jews and Christians are also satisfied with what they hear
from their fathers, only their belief is a mistaken one because an error has been
passed on to them. Muslims believe the truth, not because they have studied it,
but because the word of truth has been passed on to them.
The second degree of belief is that you hear the words and voice of Zaid
from within the house, but from behind, a wall and you deduce from this the fact
of his being in the house. Then your belief, your admittance, and your certainty
that he is in the house are stronger than your belief through hearsay alone. For if
you are told that "He is in the house” and then hear his voice, you become more
certain of it, for the voice indicates shape and form to him who hears it on
condition of seeing the form. So his heart judges this to be the voice of that
person. This is belief mingled with proof. It is also possible for error to follow
because one voice might resemble another. Also, pretense is possible by means of
imitating the voice. This does not occur to the mind of the hearer, for he had no
thought of any such accusation, or that anyone had a purpose in such
dissembling and imitation.
The third degree of belief is to enter the house and look at him with your
own eyes and see him. This is the real experiential knowledge and sure
observation. It is like the knowledge of those who are drawn near Allah and of
the sincere lovers of truth, for their belief is based on eyewitness. This belief
includes that of laymen and that of scholastic theologians; and they have this very
evident additional advantage that leaves no place for the possibility of error. It is
true that believers of this class differ in rank according to their attainments in
knowledge, and the degrees of unveiling.
An example of the difference in degrees of knowledge is that one man sees
Zaid in the house when he is near at hand in the courtyard and while the sun is
rising, and so he sees him perfectly; while another sees him in a room, or at a
distance, or in the evening, so that his form is sufficiently plain that he can be
sure that it is he, but the minute details and hidden features of his form are not
made clear to him. The variance in degree in seeing divine things is of this sort.
Regarding the difference in the attainment of knowledge, it is as though one sees
Zaid, Amr, Bakr, and others in the house, while another sees Zaid only. The
knowledge of the former is unquestionably greater than that of the latter because
of the abundance of things known.

28

The quarter of the destructives

This is the state of die heart in relation to the sciences; and Allah knows best
diat which is right.

CHAPTER SEVEN:
EXPOSmON OF CONDITIONS OF HEART REGARDING DIVISIONS OF
SCIENCES: INTELLECTUAL AND RELIGIOUS, AND PERTAINING TO THIS
WORLD AND THE HEREAFTER
It should be known that the heart is innately predisposed to apprehend the
real nature of ideas as has been stated previously. But the knowledge which exist
in it is of different kinds: intellectual and Sharia-based. Intellectual knowledge is
divided into axiomatic and acquired, Acquired knowledge is divided into that
which deals with this present world, and that which deals with the hereafter. By
intellectual knowledge, we mean that by which the innate mind makes its
judgments and which does not come into existence through blind imitation and
instruction. It is divided into axiomatic and acquired. No one knows whence or
how the axiomatic is attained, Such is a man's knowledge that one person cannot
be in two places at the same time, and that one thing cannot be both created and
eternal, existent and non-existent at the same time. For man finds this knowledge
to be a natural endowment of his soul from his early childhood, and does not
know when or whence he attained it, I mean that he does not know any
proximate cause for it. Otherwise, it would not be hidden from him that it is
Allah who has created and guided him.
Acquired knowledge is that which is gained by learning and deduction. Both
of these are sometimes called intellectual. Ali “Allah be pleased with him” said: "I
beheld the intellect as though it were two-fold: innately endowed, and developed
through instruction. That which is developed through instruction is of no avail
apart from the innately endowed, even as the sun is of no avail apart from a
seeing eye." The first of these is referred to in the statement of the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "Allah certainly has created
nothing more honorable to Him than the intellect." The second is referred to in
his statement to Ali “Allah be pleased with him”: "When men draw near Allah by
different kinds of good deeds, you draw near by your intellect." For it is
impossible to draw near by innate constitutional endowment, nor by axiomatic
knowledge, but by that which is acquired. In All's case, he was able to draw near
by using his intellect to acquire the knowledge by which close proximity to the
Lord of the worlds is bestowed.
The heart is like the eye, and the innate intellect in it is like the potentiality of
sight in the eye. The potentiality of sight is a subtlety which is lost in blindness,
but present in sight, even though a man may have closed his eyes, or the darkness
of night may have enfolded him. The knowledge attained thereby in the heart is
like the potentiality of perception of sight in the eye, and seeing of the essence of
things. The fact that knowledge is deferred from the eye of the intellect during
childhood until the age of discretion and maturity is like the deferment of vision

29
Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart
from the sight until the time when the sun shines with its flood of light upon the
objects of sight.
The pen with which Allah has written knowledge upon the pages of the heart
is like the disk of the sun. Knowledge is not achieved within the heart of the child
before the age of discretion only because the tablet of his heart is not yet
prepared to receive the engraving of knowledge. The pen is one of the creations
of Allah which He has made a cause for achieving the engraving of knowledge
upon the hearts of men. Allah said: "Who taught with the pen, taught man what
he did not know." (Al-Qalam 4-5)

i 0 pH jj £

jfe uri'»

The pen of Allah does not resemble the pen of His creatures, even as His
attributes do not resemble the characteristics of His creation. Thus, His pen is
not made from a reed nor from a piece of wood, even as He Himself is not made
up of substance nor of accident.
So the comparison between the inner insight and the outer vision is valid
from these points of view, save that there is no comparison between them in
honor. For the inner insight is the very soul itself which is the perceiving subdety.
This is like the horseman, and the horse like his mount; and blindness of the
horseman is more dangerous to him than blindness of his mount. Indeed, there is
no relation between the one affliction and the other, nor comparison between the
inner insight and the outer vision. Allah has called it by its name for He said:
"The heart belies not what he saw" (An-Najm 11)

40tiffin
Thus, calling the perception of mind “vision”. Likewise is the statement of
Allah Almighty: "Thus, did we show Abraham the dominion of the heavens and
the earth" (Al-An’am 75)

In this, He did not mean the outer vision of the eye, for that was not granted
exclusively to Abraham that it should be set forth as having been a special favor.
Therefore, the non-perception is called blindness. Allah Almighty says: "For it is
not their eyes which are blind but blind are the hearts which are within their
breasts." (Al-Hajj 46)

He further says: "But he who in this life is blind shall be blind in the hereafter
too, and err farther from the way." (Al-Isra’ 72)
<4

>

This is the exposition of intellectual science.
Now as regards the religious sciences, they are taken by way of acceptance on
the authority of the prophets “Peace be upon them”. This is acquired by learning
the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing

The quarter of the destructives
30
and peace be upon him”, and understanding their meaning after having heard
them. In this is the heart made perfect in quality and safe from illness and disease.
For die intellectual sciences, although needed by the heart, are not sufficient for
its safety; just as the intellect is not sufficient to maintain the causes of physical
health, but needs also to gain the experiential knowledge of the properties of
medicines and drugs by learning them from the physicians, since the intellect
alone cannot find the knowledge. But after it is heard, it cannot be understood
except by means of the intellect. Thus, the intellect cannot dispense with
instruction nor can instruction dispense with the intellect.
So he who is a proponent of mere blind imitation and of setting the intellect
entirely aside is ignorant; and he, who is satisfied with the intellect alone,
without the light of the Qur'an and the Sunnah, is deceived. Take care of not
becoming in either of these two groups, but be one who combines both
sources. For the intellectual sciences are like foods, and the religious sciences
are as medicines. The sick person is harmed by food whenever he neglects the
medicine. Thus, the diseases of the heart can be treated by the medicines
derived from Sharia, which are the duties of the acts of worship and the works
which the prophets set in order for the reformation of hearts. So he who does
not treat his sick heart by the use of ritual worship, but is content to use the
intellectual sciences alone, is harmed thereby, even as the sick man is harmed by
food.
The assumption of those who think that the intellectual sciences are
contradictory to the sciences of Sharia and that it is impossible to combine them
arises from blindness in the eye of insight. We take refuge with Allah from it. But
often such a man finds some of the sciences of Sharia contradictory to others and
is unable to combine them; so he supposes that there is a contradiction in our
religion and is perplexed thereby, and he withdraws from religion as a hair is
withdrawn from dough. This is only because his own impotence has caused him
to imagine an inconsistency in our religion. How far that is from the truth. He is
indeed like a blind man who entered a house and there stumbled over some of
the vessels of the house and said: "What are these vessels doing in the path; why
are they not put in their place?" They answered him: "Those vessels are in their
place, but you did not find the way because of your blindness. How strange it is
of you not to hold the blame of your stumbling on your blindness, but rather to
hold blame of it upon the negligence of someone else." This is the relationship
between religious and intellectual sciences.
The intellectual sciences are divided into those of the present world and those
of the hereafter. Those of this present world are such sciences as medicine,
arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and the other professions and trades. Those of
the hereafter are such as the knowledge of the states of the heart, of defects in
religious works, and of the knowledge of Allah and His attributes and acts as we
have explained in the Book of Knowledge. These are two incompatible kinds of

31

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

sciences, by which I mean that whoever devotes himself to one of them and goes
deeply into it has his insight into the other fallen short for the most part.
Ali “Allah be pleased with him” has given three parables of this present world
and the hereafter. He said: "They are like both scales of balance; and like the East
and the West; and like two fellow-wives, for when he makes one content he
displeases the other." So you see those, who are wise in the affairs of the present
world, in medicine, arithmetic, geometry, and philosophy, are ignorant in the
matters of the hereafter. Similarly, those who are wise in the minute details of the
sciences of the hereafter are ignorant, for the most part, of the sciences of this
present world; for the power of the intellect cannot accomplish the two things
together, as a general thing. Thus, one of them prevents the perfection of the
other.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Most of the inhabitants of the Garden are simpletons." That is, they are
simpletons in the things of this present world. Al-Hassan said: "We saw a group,
which if you saw them, you would say that they are mad; and if they saw you,
they would say that you are demons." So whenever you hear about a strange
thing in the field of religion which people well-versed in the sciences deny, do not
let their denial delude you so that you do not accept it; for it is impossible for him
who walks the Eastern path to get possession of that which exists in the West. So
also is the case with this present world and the hereafter. Allah Almighty says:
"Verily those who hope not for our meeting, and are content with the life of this
world, and are comforted thereby and feel secure therein and those who are
heedless of Our signs, " (Yunus 7)
tp \y Lft-b\j UU J-ll Oy>xJlj

JJ btliJ

^Oi ^

He further says: "They know the outward appearance of the life of this
present world, but of the hereafter they are heedless." (Ar-Rum 7)

He also says: "But turn aside from him who turns his back upon our warning
and desires naught but the life of this present world. This is their sum of
knowledge." (An-Najm 29-30)
c- *

iQrU'b*; ^ £U;S ®

•$! i;_ JJ3 b/i ^ jy

»

So to combine a complete attentive observance of the affairs of this present
world and of religion could hardly be available, save to those whom Allah has
firmly established for the direction of His servants in their livelihood and their
return (to Allah). Such are the prophets who are helped by the Holy Spirit, and
receive divine power sufficient for all things, that does not fall short at all. But
when the hearts of creatures are given over completely to that which pertains to
this present world, they turn aside from the hereafter and fall short of coming to
perfection therein.

32

The quarter of the destructives

CHAPTER EIGHT
EXPOSITION OF DIFFERENCE BETWEEN GENERAL INSPIRATION AND
LEARNING; AND DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SUFI WAY OF SEEKING THE
UNVEILING OF REALITY AND THE WAY OF SPECULATIVE
PHILOSOPHERS
It should be known that the sciences which are not axiomatic but which come
into the heart at certain times differ in their manner of attainment. Sometimes
they come upon the heart as though something were flung into it from a source it
knows not. At other times, they are gained through deduction and study. That
which is not attained by way of acquisition nor through the cunning of proof is
called general inspiration and that which is attained through inference is called
reflection and mental perception. Furthermore, that which exists in the heart
apart from some expedient or cunning or effort on the part of man is divided
into two classes. In the first, the man is not aware how he achieved it, and
whence it came; in the other he is acquainted with the cause from which he has
derived that knowledge, which is the vision of the angel who casts it into his
heart. The former is called general inspiration, and breathing into the heart. The
latter is called Divine revelation, and it is an exclusive characteristic of the
prophets, whereas the former is given only to saints and pure. The preceding kind
of science which is gained through deduction is that given to the learned.
The true doctrine is that the heart is predisposed by nature to have the true
nature of reality in all things revealed in it. But this is prevented by the
intervention of the five aforementioned causes. These are as a veil which hangs
down between the mirror of the heart and the Preserved Tablet, which is
engraved with all that Allah, has decreed until the day of Judgement. The
reflection of the real nature of knowledge from the mirror of the Tablet upon the
mirror of the heart is like the reflection of an image from one mirror to another
mirror opposite it. The veil between the two mirrors is sometimes removed by
the hand and at other times by a gust of wind which moves it. Thus, the winds of
divine favor sometimes blow and the veils are drawn aside from the eyes of
hearts so that there is reflected in them something of that which is written upon
the Preserved Tablet
Sometimes this takes place during sleep, thereby there is revealed that which
will come into being in the future. The veil is completely lifted by death when the
covering is withdrawn. At other times, revelation is made during wakefulness and
the veil is lifted by a secret favor from Allah, and some of the marvels of
knowledge glisten in the heart from behind the curtain of the unseen. This may
be like a dazzling flash of lightning, or it may be continuous up to a certain point,
but its continuance is most rare. Revelation then does not differ from acquiring
as regards the knowledge itself, its seat, and its cause, but it differs only in the
removal of the veil, for this is beyond man's will. General inspiration does not
differ from Divine revelation in any of these respects, but only in the matter of
seeing angel who imparts the knowledge; for our hearts attain knowledge only by

I

33

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

means of angels. To this Allah Almighty refers in His statement: "It is not fitting
for any mortal that Allah should speak to him, except by inspiration, or from
behind a veil, or by sending a messenger who reveals, by His permission, what
He pleases." (Ash-Shura 51).

4 iQo U

'iyMj j--£* J*

If you have come to know this, know also that the inclination of the Sufis is
toward the knowledge gained through inspiration, and not to that gained through
instruction. Therefore, they do not covet the study of knowledge, nor the
acquiring of that which authors have composed, nor discussion about the
statement of doctrines and proofs which have been mentioned. But they say:
"The way of knowledge is to put foremost self-mortification, to abolish
blameworthy traits, to cut all ties, and to advance toward Allah with utmost
concern." Whenever this takes place, Allah becomes the ruler over the heart of
His creature and the surety for its illumination with the light of knowledge. When
Allah becomes the ruler of the heart He floods it with mercy and sheds His light
upon it, and the breast is opened and there is revealed to it the mysteries of the
unseen, and by a gift of mercy there is cleared away from the surface of the heart
the veil of deceit which blinds its eye, and there shines in it the real nature of
divine things.
The novice has only to make himself ready by a thorough purifying, by
summoning intention along with a sincere desire, by utter longing, and by
watching with constant expectation for the mercy which Allah may grant him.
Prophets and saints had divine things revealed to them, and the light flooded
their breasts, not by learning and study of books, but by their approach of
asceticism in this present world, by cutting their own selves off from all of its ties,
by disengaging the heart of all of its affairs, and by advancing with the utmost
concern toward Allah; for, whoever belongs to Allah, Allah belongs to him. The
Sufis assert that the way to this is, first of all, by cutting off all ties with this
present world and by disengaging the heart of them, by taking away concern for
family, possessions, children, native land, knowledge, rule, and rank.
Nay, rather, he must bring his heart into that state in which the existence and
non-existence of all these are the same. Then he must withdraw alone and remain
in privacy in a special place apart and limit himself to the prescribed religious
duties and supererogatory prayers. He must sit with empty heart and
concentrated purpose. He must not divide his thought by reciting the Qur'an, nor
the contemplation of its exegesis, nor by books of tradition, nor anything else.
But he must strive that nothing save Allah shall come into his mind.
Then after he has seated himself in a place apart, he shall keep saying
continuously with his tongue, "Allah, Allah," and his heart shall be fixed on it too,
until he comes finally to a state in which the motion of the tongue will end and it
will seem as though the word is flowing over his tongue. He must continue

The quarter of the destructives
34
patdendy in that until every trace of the word is effaced from the tongue and he
finds his heart persevering in that devotional exercise. Still he shall persevere until
the form and letters of the expression and the very appearance of the word is
effaced from the heart and there remains present in it naught save the ideal
meaning which is, as it were, adhering to and inseparable from (he heart.
It is up to him to choose to attain this point or to prolong this condition by
warding off the suggestions of Satan. But it is beyond his choice to procure
Allah's gift of mercy. By what he has done Thus, far he has exposed himself to
the breezes of Allah's mercy, and it only remains for him to wait for such mercy
which Allah may grant to him, even as He gave His mercy to the prophets and
saints. Upon doing this, if his desire is sincere, his intention pure, and his
perseverance good, and if his lusts do not draw him aside nor the suggestions of
the self engross him with the ties of this present world, there will shine forth the
gleams of reality into his heart. In its beginning, this will be like a swift flash of
lightning. It is not continuous but it returns, although it may delay. If it returns it
may continue, and it may be but a flash. If it continues, it may be for a longer or
shorter time. These different types may appear, one succeeding the other, or they
may be limited to one sort only. The stages of the saints of Allah in this are
unlimited, even as the superiority of their nature and moral characteristics is
beyond limitation. So this way goes back to an absolute purifying and clarifying
and brightening of the heart on your part, and then only to make ready and wait
in expectation.
The speculative theologians and those whose opinions deserve consideration
have not denied the existence of this way, that it is a possibility, and that it does,
in rare instances, lead to the desired end. Indeed this way has been that of most
prophets and saints. But they consider it a difficult way, and think it slow in
bringing results, and feel that the fulfilling of all of its conditions is very
improbable. They claim that to blot out all ties to this extent is practically
impossible. If it does happen for a moment, its continuation is even more
difficult, since the slightest evil prompting or involuntary suggestion disturbs the
heart. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"The heart of the believer is more unsteady than a cooking vessel as it boils."
(This narration is reported by both Al-Hakim and Ahmad on the authority of AlMiqdad Ibn Al-Aswad). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” further said: "The heart of the believer is between two of the fingers
of (Allah) Most Merciful." (This narration is reported by Muslim on the authority
of Ibn Umar)
During such strenuous effort, the physical constitution may be disordered,
the intellect confused, and the body diseased. If progress in the discipline and
improvement of the soul is not made by means of the realities of the sciences,
then the heart is ensnared with corrupt images which the soul trusts for a long
time before they come to an end; and one may live out his appointed time
without success. Many Sufis has traveled this way and still has continued to hold
a certain fancy for twenty years, whereas if he had studied science thoroughly

35
Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart
beforehand, the point of confusion in his fancy would have been opened up to
him at once. So to engage one's self in the path of learning is a surer and easier
means of attaining the aim.
They claim that it is as though a man left off the study of jurisprudence,
asserting that “the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
did not study it, but even he became one who understood the divine law by
means of Divine inspiration without any repetition or application, and perhaps
discipline of the soul will bring me finally to that goal." Whoever thinks this
wrongs himself and wastes his life. Nay rather, he is like one who gives up the
way of gain through farming, hoping to chance upon some treasure. The latter is
indeed possible, but extremely unlikely. So too in the matter of gaining
knowledge.
They say: "It is first of all necessary to attain that which the learned have
achieved and to understand what they said. Then after that there is no harm in
expectantly waiting for that which has not been disclosed to the other learned
men, and it may be that this will be disclosed afterwards through strenuous
effort."

CHAPTER NINE: EXPOSITION OF DIFFERENCE IN RANK BETWEEN
BOTH POSITIONS BY A TANGIBLE EXAMPLE
It should be known that the wonders of the heart are beyond the realm of
perceptibles of senses, for the heart is also beyond sense perception. The
understandings are too weak to grasp, except by means of a tangible example, to
put to sense that which is not perceived through the senses. So we shall explain
this to people of weak understanding by means of two examples.
For the first illustration let us suppose a reservoir dug in the earth, into which
the water can be conducted from the surface above through streams which empty
into it. The bed of the reservoir may also be dug up and the dirt removed from it
until the fountain of pure water is reached, and then the water bursts forth from
the bottom of the reservoir. This water is purer and more constant, and perhaps
more copious and abundant. The heart than is like the reservoir and knowledge
like the water. The five external senses are like the streams. Knowledge may
possibly be conducted to the heart by means of the streams of the senses and the
consideration of things observed until it is Thus, filled with knowledge. It is also
possible to stop up these streams from it by solitude and retirement and averting
the eyes from seeing, and then to resolve in the depth of the heart upon purifying
it and taking away from it the layers of coverings until the fountain of knowledge
bursts forth from within it. But you might say: "How can knowledge burst forth
from the heart itself while it is destitute of it?" Know that this is one of the
wonders of the heart's mysteries. It is not permissible to deal with it in the science
of practical religion.
What can be mentioned is that the real natures of things are written down in
the Preserved Tablet, and indeed in the hearts of the angels who are brought near
(Allah). For just as an architect draws plans for buildings on blank paper and then

The quarter of the destructives
36
brings diem into actuality in accordance with that archetype; Thus, the Creator of
the heavens and die earth wrote an archetype of the world from beginning to end
upon die Preserved Tablet, and then brought it into actuality in accordance with
that archetype. From die world which has been brought into actuality in the
image of the archetype there is transmitted to the external senses and retendve
imagination still another image. For whoever looks at the sky and the earth and
then closes his eyes, sees in his imagination the image of the sky and the earth, so
that it is as though he were looking at them; and were the sky and the earth
annihilated and he himself survived, he would find within himself the image of
the sky and the earth as though he were beholding them and looking at them,
Then from his imagination an effect is transmitted to the heart, so that there is
represented in it the real natures of things which have entered into sensation and
imagination.
The representation in the heart corresponds to the world which is represented
in the imagination, which in its turn corresponds to the world as it exists in itself
external to the imagination and heart of man. This existing world corresponds to
die archetype existing in the Preserved Tablet. Thus, the world has four degrees
of existence. There is existence in the Preserved Tablet which is prior to its
corporeal existence. Sequel to it is its real existence, which is followed in turn by
its imaginative existence; I mean the existence of its image in the imagination. Its
imaginative existence is followed by its intellectual existence; I mean the existence
of its image within the heart. Some of these orders of being are of spiritual and
some of corporeal character. Of the spiritual, some are more spiritualistic in their
order of being than others. This is a kindness coming from the divine wisdom;
for Allah has made your eyeball in such a way that, in spite of its smallness, there
is pictured within it the image of the world, the heavens and the earth, with all
their widely spreading extent. Then it goes on from existence in the realm of
sensation to existence in the imagination; and from it to existence in the heart.
For you can never apprehend anything save that which has reached you; and Had
He not placed an image of the whole world within your very being you would
have no knowledge of that which is apart from yourself. Glory be to Him who
has arranged these wonders in heart and eye, and then blinded heart and eye to
the perception of them so that the hearts of the majority of creatures have
become ignorant of themselves and their wonders
Let us now go back to the purpose in view and say: It is conceivable that the
real nature of the world might be represented in the heart, once from the senses
and once from the Preserved Tablet; even as it is conceivable that the image of
the sun should be represented in the eye once from looking directly at it and once
from looking at the water on which the sun shines which reproduces its image.
So whenever the veils are lifted between the heart and the Preserved Tablet, the
heart sees the things which are therein, and knowledge bursts forth into it
therefrom, so that it does not have to acquire its knowledge through the avenues
of the senses. This is like the bursting forth of water from the depth of the earth.
Whenever the heart becomes occupied with things in the imagination derived

37
Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart
from sensibles, this veils it from examining the Preserved Tablet, just as when
water is preserved in streams thereby it is prevented from bursting forth from the
earth; or just as he who looks into the water which reproduces the image of the
sun is not looking at the sun itself.
Thus, the heart has two doors. One door opens toward the dominion of the
unseen which is the Preserved Tablet and the world of the angels. The other door
opens toward the five external senses which lay hold on the visible material
world; This visible world also resembles the dominion of the unseen to a certain
extent. Now the fact that the door of the heart is opened to the acquisidon of
knowledge through the senses is a thing you understand. But regarding its door
which opens to the dominion of the unseen and the examining of the Preserved
Tablet, you have certain knowledge through meditadng upon the wonders of
visions and the heart's observation in sleep of what will be in the future or what
was in the past, without any acquisition on the part of the senses.
That door However is opened only to him who devotes himself exclusively to
the remembrance of Allah. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” said: "Men of a single thought have taken the lead." He was asked:
"Who are they?" He answered: "Those who are infatuated with the remembrance
of Allah, for this devotional exercise of theirs has put away from them their load
of sin and they come to the resurrection unburdened." Then he described them
by relating the statement of Allah: "Then I shall draw near with my face toward
them. Do you think about what anyone knows what thing I desire to bestow
upon him toward whom I turn my face?" Then He said: “The first thing I give
them is that I cast something of my light into their hearts and they give tidings of
me even as I give tidings of them." (This narration is reported by Muslim, AlHakim, Al-Baihaqi and At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
The entrance for these tidings is the inner door. So then therein lies the
difference between the knowledge of the prophets and saints and that of the
learned and the philosophers: the knowledge of the former comes from within
the heart through the door which is opened toward the dominion of the
unseen, whereas the knowledge of the philosophers comes through the doors
of the senses which open to the material world. The wonders of the world of
the heart and its wavering between the visible and invisible worlds cannot be
fully dealt with in the science of practical religion. But this is an example which
will teach you the difference in the place of entrance of the two kinds of
knowledge.
The second example will let you know the difference between the two types
of work; I mean the work of the learned and that of the saints. The learned work
to acquire knowledge itself and gather it into the heart, but the saints among the
Sufis labor only to the end of polishing, cleansing, clarifying, and furbishing the
heart. It is related that once the Chinese and the Byzantine Greeks vied with one
another before a certain king as to the beauty of their workmanship in decorating
and painting. So the king decided to give over to them a portico so that the
Chinese might decorate one side of it and the Byzantine Greeks the other side

The quarter of the destructives
38
and to let a curtain hang down between them so as to prevent each group from
looking at the other. And he did so. The Byzantines brought with them
numerous strange colors, but the Chinese entered without any color at all and
began to polish their side and to furbish it. When the Byzantines had finished
the Chinese claimed that they had finished also. The king was astonished at
their statement and the way in which they had finished the decorating without
any color at all. So they were asked: "How have you finished the work without
any color?" They replied: "You have nothing to do with us; just lift the veil." So
they lifted it, and behold on their side there shone forth the wonders of the
Byzantine skill with added illumination and dazzling brilliance, since that side
had become like unto a polished mirror by virtue of much furbishing. Thus, the
beauty of their side was increased by its added clearness. The care of the saints
about cleansing, polishing, purifying, and clarifying the heart until the true
nature of reality shines forth clearly therein with utmost illumination is like the
work of the Chinese. The care of the learned and the philosophers about
acquiring and adorning knowledge, and the representation of this adornment in
the heart is like the work of the Byzantines.
But, whatever it might be, the heart of the believer never dies, nor is its
knowledge erased at death nor its clearness beclouded. To this Al-Hassan
referred in his saying: "Dust will not consume the seat of faith." This knowledge
is a means of access that draws one near to Allah, But what the heart has attained
of knowledge itself, or what it has attained of purity and capacity to receive what
knowledge writes upon the heart, does not enable it to dispense with more
knowledge. There is no happiness for anyone apart from learning mystical
knowledge, and some degrees of happiness are more noble than others, just as
there is no wealth without money. For he who has a dirham is wealthy and he
who has storehouses crammed full is wealthy. The difference between degrees of
the happy is in accordance with their difference in mystical knowledge and faith,
just as the difference between degrees of men of wealth is in accordance with the
scarcity or abundance of their money.
The varieties of mystical knowledge are lights, and believers do not run to
meet Allah save by their lights. Allah Almighty says: "On the Day you see the
believing men and believing women, their light proceeding before them and on
their right, [it will be said],"Your good tidings today are [of] gardens beneath
which rivers flow, wherein you will abide eternally." That is what the great
attainment is.” (Al-Hadid 12)
,

<p

<* *

* Z*

**

- -»f

^> * .

» ».

jy (JC-O

i0^
It is narrated that "Some of them are given light as much as a mountain and
some smaller...and so on until the last of them will be a man who is given a light
on his big toe, which sometimes shines and sometimes goes out Whenever it
shines, he puts his foot forward and walks, and when it goes out, he stands still.

39
Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart
Their crossing the bridge (that is over the Hell) is in accordance with their light.
Some of them cross within the twinkling of an eye, some as quick as a flash of
lightning, some as the passing of a cloud, some as a falling star, and some as a
charging horse. He who is given a light on his big toe crawls prone on his face,
hands and feet. When one hand slips off, he holds on with the other, and when
one foot slips off, he holds on with the other. The fire reaches his sides, but he
keeps on In this way, until he is saved." (This is reported by At-Tabarani and AlHakim on the authority of Ibn Mas’ud).
Thus, the distinction in the faith of men seems evident, and if the faith of
Abu Bakr “Allah be pleased with him” is to be placed on one scale of the
balance, and on the other scale that of all men except prophets and messengers, it
shall overweigh. This resembles the statement of him who said:" Were the light
of the sun to be placed in the one scale of balance against that of all lamps it
would preponderate." For the light of the faith of individuals among the laymen
is like the light of a lamp, and with some it is as the light of a candle. But the light
of the faith of the righteous is like that of the moon and stars, and the faith of the
prophets is as the light of the sun.
Just as the form of the entire horizon with all its broad expanse is revealed in
the light of the sun, while only a narrow corner of the house is revealed in the
light of a lamp, Thus, also is there a distinction in the expansion of the breast by
mystical knowledge, and in the disclosure of the breadth of the dominion of the
unseen to the mystics. It is narrated that "On the day of resurrection the
command will be given: 'Bring out from the fire whoever has as little faith as a
weight, half a weight, a quarter of a weight, or even a grain of parley, or an
atom.i M (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Abu
Sa’id). All of this goes to show the distinction in the degrees of faith, and that
these quantities of faith do not prevent entering the fire. It is also understood
from this that whoever has more than a weight of faith will not enter the fire. For
were he to enter orders would be given for bringing him out first of all. Again,
whoever has an atom's weight of faith in his heart does not deserve to abide
forever in the fire even though he would enter it.
Similarly, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: "There is nothing better than a thousand like it except a believing man”,
(this narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Salman) referring to
the superiority of the heart of a believing mystic, for it is better than a thousand
hearts of the common folk. Allah Almighty says: "You shall be the highest if you
but be believers." (A1 Imran 139)
4 @1 CJ&y*
Oj
^
He Thus, gives preference to believers over Muslims. The one referred to is
the believing mystic and not the blind imitator. Allah Almighty says: "Allah will
raise all you who believe, as well as those who are given knowledge, many
degrees.” (Al-Mujadilah 11).

40

The quarter of the destructives

By 'those who believe' here He means those who give trust apart from
learning, Thus, distinguishing them from 'those who are given knowledge. This
indicates that the word 'believer' is applied to the blind imitator even though his
giving trust does not result from insight nor mystical revelation. In his comment
on the statement of Allah: "Allah will raise all you who believe, as well as those
who are given knowledge, many degrees” (Ad-Mujadilah 11)
4

4AJI £-3^)

Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with both” said: "The learned man is exalted
above the believer by seven hundred degrees, between each two of which there is
a distance equal to that between heaven and earth." The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Most of the people of the
Garden are simpletons, but the seventh Heaven is for men of understanding."
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said:
"The learned man is as far superior to the layman as I am superior to the least
man of my Companions" or, according to another version “as the full moon is
superior to the rest of the stars." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on
the authority of Abu Umamah). These evidences make it clear that the distinction
in rank among the people of the Garden is in accordance with the distinction in
their hearts and their mystical knowledge. For this reason, the day of resurrection
will be a day of mutual gain and loss, since he who is deprived of the mercy of
Allah will be a great loser and suffer a severe failure. For he who is Thus,
deprived will see high ranks above his own station, and he will look forward to
them in the same way that a rich man who owns ten Dirhams looks forward to
die rich man who owns the earth from East to West. Each of them is rich, but
how great is the difference between both. So how great loser has he been who
has lost his fortune (of the favor of Allah):” In the hereafter are greater degrees
and greater preference." (Al-Isra’ 21)

CHAPTER TEN:
EXPOSITION OF TESTIMONY OF DIVINE LAW TO VALIDITY OF METHOD
OF MYSTICS IN GAINING EXPERIENTIAL KNOWLEDGE, NOT THROUGH
INSTRUCTION NOR BY THE ORDINARY WAY
It should be known that whosoever
_ has had even a small thing revealed to
through inspiration, and brought into his heart from whence he knows not,
as learnt by experience the validity of this way. He who has never apprehended
s must nevertheless believe in it, for the rank of mystical knowledge therein is
storieste^7 atta^lec^ ^ls attested by proof texts from Divine law, experiences, and
In regard to the proof texts of Divine law, a mention may be made of His

41
Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart
statement: "And those who strive for Us - We will surely guide them to Our
ways. And indeed, Allah is with the doers of good.” (Al-Ankabut 69)

4

o!3 tiL—

^

All wisdom that appears in the heart through regular steadfastness in worship
apart from instruction comes by way of mystical disclosure and inspiration. The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Allah causes
him who acts upon what he knows to inherit the knowledge of that which he
knows not, and aids him in what he does so that he comes to deserve the
Garden. But he who does not act upon what he knows goes astray in that which
he knows, and is not aided in what he does so that he comes to deserve the fire."
Allah Almighty says: "And whoever fears Allah, to him will He grant a way out
(from all difficulties and doubts), and will provide for him from whence he
reckons not" (At-Talaq 2)
I.e. 'He will cause Him to know without instruction and to be sagacious
without experiment.' Allah further says: "O you who believe! If you fear, Allah
He will make for you a criterion "(Al-Anfal 29)

4

o!

I.e. light thereby to distinguish reality from falsehood, and one finds a way
out of uncertainties.
Therefore, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
used to invoke much for light. He said (by way of supplication): "O Allah! Give
me light and increase light unto me; grant me light in my heart, light in my grave,
and light in my hearing, light in my sight..until He said: "(and light) in my hair,
my skin, my blood, my flesh, and my bones." (This narration is reported by both
sheikhs on the authority of Ibn Abbas). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” was asked about the significance of the statement of
Allah: "Is he whose breast Allah has expanded for Islam, and who is in light from
his Lord "(Az-Zumar 22)
4 ’0i

jy

^

o-*-31 ^

Thereupon He replied: "Expanding (of the breast) is enlarging, for, when
the light is cast into the heart, the chest is enlarged and expanded for it." (This
narration is reported on the authority of Ibn Mas’ud). The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said to Ibn Abbas “Allah be
pleased with both”: "O Allah! give him religious understanding and teach him
interpretation." Ali “Allah be pleased with him” said: "We have nothing which
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” divulged to
us save that Allah gives a servant understanding in His book." This was not by
instruction.
In his comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: "He brings
wisdom unto whom He wills" (Al-Baqarah 272)

The quarter of the destructives

42

4 {(gj i&kj*
Jy}
It is said that 'wisdom is understanding in the Book of Allah. Allah says: "And
this we gave Solomon to understand" (Al-Anbiya 79)
Referring especially to what was revealed to him under the name of
standing. Abu Ad-Darda' “Allah be pleased with him” used to say: "The
believer sees with the light of Allah from behind a thin veil." And by Allah, that
is the truth; Allah casts it into their hearts and makes it to move upon their
tongues. One of the righteous predecessors said: "The estimation of the
believer is divination." The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said: "Beware of the natural insight of the believer, for he sees with
the light of Allah." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority
of Abu Sa’id). It is to this that the following statements of Allah Almighty
refers: "Verily, in that there are signs for those who read them aright" (Al-Hijr
75)
And: "We have made manifest the signs unto a people that are sure." (AlBaqarah 118)
Al-Hassan related a tradition from the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him”, in which he said: "Knowledge is of two kinds: one of
them is the esoteric knowledge within the heart and it is the profitable
knowledge." One of the learned was asked about that esoteric knowledge, and he
replied: "It is one of the secrets of Allah which He casts into the hearts of His
beloved, and with which He has acquainted no angel nor human being." The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Verily there
are from among my nation those communicated with, instructors and (Divinely)
inspired, and Umar is one of them." (This narration is reported by Al-Bukhari on
the authority of Abu Hurairah; and Muslim on the authority of A’ishah). Ibn
Abbas “Allah be pleased with both” recited: "We have not sent any Messenger
before you" (Al-Anbiya 25)
4 Jy~j

^-43*

blljl Uj ^

Nor any prophet, nor anyone to be communicated with, i.e. trustworthy. The
(Divinely) inspired is he in whose heart an unveiling has been made from within,
and not from the direction of external sensibles.
The Qur'an states that god-fearingness is a key to tight guidance and mystical
revelation, and it is knowledge without instruction. Allah says: "And in what
Allah has created in the heavens and the earth are signs unto a people who do
fear." (Yunus 6)
4O

<3^13j ^

43
Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart
He Thus, makes it particular to them. He further says: "This is an explanation
unto men, and a guidance and a warning to those who fear." (Al Imran 138)

Abu Yazid and others used to say: "The learned man is not he who learns
something by heart out of a book, for if he forgets what he has memorized he
becomes ignorant, but the learned man is he who takes his knowledge direcdy
from his Lord whenever he wishes without any memorizing or study." Such a
man is a Divine learned, and to him it is referred in the statement of Allah
Almighty: "We taught him knowledge from our presence." (Al-Kahf 65)
Although all knowledge is from His presence, yet some of it come through
the means used in teaching mankind, and this is not called Divine knowledge.
This latter however, is the knowledge which is opened in the secret of the heart
without any usual means from without. These are the traditional evidences, and
were all of the existing evidences of this sort to be gathered together including
verses, traditions, and recorded sayings, it would be boundless.
The witness of experience to this is also boundless. This appears from the
Companions, the Followers, and those who came after them. Abu Bakr As-Siddiq
“Allah be pleased with him” said to A’ishah “Allah be pleased with her” just
before his death: "They are but your two brothers and two sisters." At that time,
his wife was pregnant and later she bore a daughter, and he knew before her birth
that she was a girl. Umar “Allah be pleased with him” said during his sermon on
Friday: "O Sariyah! (Take shelter to) the mountain"; since it had been disclosed to
him that the enemy was upon them. Learnt about that, he warned them. The fact
that his voice reached them was one of the many miraculous gifts of the saints.
Anas Ibn Malik “Allah be pleased with him” said: "I entered upon Uthman
“Allah be pleased with him” and on my way there I had come across a woman
and looked at her out of the corner of my eye and reflected on her charms. As I
entered, Uthman “Allah be pleased with him” said: “One of you comes upon me
with the traces of adultery visible in his eyes. Do you not know that the adultery
of the eye is the look? So repent or I shall punish you.” I said: “Is there Divine
revelation after the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him”?” He replied: “No, but mental perception, inference, and true natural
insight.”"
Abu Sa'id Al-Kharraz said: "I entered the sacred mosque and saw a poor man
wearing two tattered cloaks and said to myself: 'This man and his like are a
burden upon mankind.' He called me to him and said: “Allah knows what is in
your hearts, so beware of Him.” (Al-Baqarah 235)
li

L jJLu 4i)l

*1

^

Then I asked for forgiveness of Allah secretly, at which he again called me
and said: “He it is who accepts repentance from His servants.” (At-Tawbah
106)

44

The quarter of the destructives

Ji>
Then he disappeared from me and I did not see him again."
Zakariyya Ibn Da\vud said that Abu Al-Abbas Ibn Masruq went to see
Abu Al-Fadl Al-Hashimi when he was sick; and at that time, he had children
but was without known means of livelihood. Abu Al-Abbas said: "When I got
up I said to myself: “How does this man get earnings to eat from?” But he
shouted at me: ‘O Abu Al-Abbas put away this sordid anxiety, for Allah has
hidden kindnesses.’”
Ahmad An-Naqib said: "I went to Ash-Shibli who said: 'Tried be you O
Ahmad.’ I said: 'What do you mean?' He said: 'As I was sitting there came over
me the thought that you are niggard.’ I said: 'I an not niggard.’ But my thought
continued to reproach me saying: 'but you are niggard.' So I said: 'Whatever the
day brings to me, I shall give to the first poor man who meets me.' No sooner
had I finished the thought than there came to me a courier of Mu'nis Al-Khadim
who brought fifty Dinars and said: 'Use this for your own expenses.' When he
said so, I rose up and took it and went out, and behold, a poor blind man was
sitting in front of a barber who was shaving his head. So I approached him and
gave him the Dinars. He said: 'Give them to the barber.' I said: 'But their sum is
such and such.’ He replied: 'Have we not told you that you are niggard?' When he
said this I gave them to the barber, who said: 'When this poor man sat down
before me I agreed that I should take no fee from him,' So I threw them into the
Tigris and said: 'No one magnifies you but Allah Almighty humbles him.'"
Hamzah Ibn Abdullah Al-Alawi said: "I went to Abu Al-Khair An-Ninani,
with the intention in my heart to greet him but not eat food in his house. After I
left his house, he soon caught up with me, carrying a plate of food. He said: £Eat,
O young man, for you have now passed out from the limits of your former
resolution.’" This man Abu Al-Khair An-Ninani was famous for his miraculous
gifts. Ibrahim Ar-Raqqi said: “I went to see him to greet him, but I arrived at the
time of Maghrib prayer, and he had not recited Al-Fatihah correctly. So I said to
myself that my journey was in vain. When he finished I went outside to perform
ablution and a lion attacked me, so I went back to Abu Al-Khair and told him
that a lion had attacked me. Then he went and shouted at it: 'Had I not told you
not to attack my guests?' Thereupon the lion turned aside and I performed
ablution. When I returned he said to me: 'You have labored to make right the
external act and were afraid of the lion, while we have labored to make right the
internal act and the lion was afraid of us.'"
The stories of the natural insights of Sheikhs and of the way they were able to
tell the thoughts and intents of men are beyond calculation. Indeed, the stories
told of their seeing Al-Khadir “Peace be upon him” and asking him questions, of
hearing the voice of an unseen speaker, and of various kinds of miraculous gifts
are numerous. A story is of no value to him who denies as long as he does not
see it with his own eyes, and he who denies the basic idea denies also the details.
The absolute proof which no one can deny consists of two things. One of

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

45

them is in the wonders of true vision, for by it the unknown is unveiled. If this is
permissible in sleep, it is also not impossible during wakefulness; for sleep does
not differ from wakefulness save in the fact that the senses become stili and
disengaged from the things perceived by them. How many a waking man is there
so deep in thought that he neither hears nor sees because of his preoccupation
with himself.
The second is that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” was able to speak accurately about the unknown and things in the
future, as is set forth in the Qur'an. If that is permissible in the case of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” it is also
permissible for others. For the prophet is merely a person to whom the true
nature of things has been disclosed, and who worked for the reformation of
mankind. So it is not impossible that there should exist a person to whom the
true nature of things might be disclosed, but who does not work for the
reformation of mankind. Such a man is not called a prophet, but a saint.
So whoever believes in the prophets and considers true vision as trustworthy
must unquestionably assert that the heart has two doors: a door to the outer
world which is the external senses; and a door to the dominion of the unseen
within the heart, which is the door of both general and prophetic inspiration and
breathing into the heart. If he asserts his belief in both of these, he cannot limit
knowledge to what is gained by learning and the ordinary direct methods, but
striving is also another way for him. This illustrates the fact which we have
mentioned of the strange swaying of the heart between the material world and
the dominion of the unseen.
As for the cause that lies behind the unveiling of a thing in sleep by means of
an example which needs interpretation, and likewise the appearance of angels to
prophets and saints in different forms, these are among the secrets of the
wonders of the heart, the knowledge of which befits not but the science of
disclosure. So let us limit ourselves to what we have mentioned, for it is sufficient
to stir up to striving and to seeking unveiling therein.
One of those to whom secrets are unveiled said: “There appeared unto me an
angel who asked me to dictate to him something of my hidden celebration of the
Oneness of Allah. He said: <cWhat deed shall we write down to your account? We
wish to take up (to Allah) for you a deed by which you shall draw near to Allah.”
I said: “Do you not write down the practice of the obligatory duties?” They
answered: “Surely.” I said: “That will suffice you." This is an indication that the
noble recording angels are not acquainted with the secrets of the heart, but only
with deeds which are manifest.
One of the mystics said: “I asked one of the Substitutes (Abdal) concerning
the perception of certitude, and He turned to his left and said: “What do you say,
Allah's mercy be upon you?” Then he turned to his right and said: “What do you
say?” Then he smote upon his breast and said: “What do you say?” Thereupon he
answered me with the strangest reply I have ever heard. So I asked him about his
turning and he replied: “I did not have any ready answer in that matter; so I asked

The quarter of the destructives
46
the angel on the left and he said: ‘I do not know'; then I asked the angel on the
right who is more learned than he, and he also said: ‘I do not know’; then I
looked into my heart and asked it, and it told me the answer which I gave you, so
Therefore, it is more learned than both of them." This is the meaning of
statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”:
"Verily there are in my nation such as inspired, and Umar is one of them."
According to a certain tradition, Allah says: "Whenever I examine the heart of
a man and find persistent remembrance of me preponderant therein, I assume
control over him and become his companion; I converse with him and become
his familiar friend." Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani said: “The heart is like a pavilion
pitched, around which are closed doors, and whatever door is opened into it
influences on it." So it appears that one of the doors of the heart is opened
toward the dominion of the unseen and the highest assembly (of angels). This
door is opened by means of striving, scrupulous abstinence, and shunning the
lusts of this present world.
For this reason, Umar “Allah be pleased with him” wrote to the
commanders of the troops: "Memorize what you hear from those who are
obedient (to Allah) for they have revelations which are true." One of the
learned said: “The Hand of Allah is on the mouth of sages, and they only
speak of that reality which Allah has prepared for them." Another said: “You
can say, if you will, that Allah acquaints the submissive humble with some of
His mysteries."

CHAPTER ELEVEN
EXPOSmON OF DOMINATION OF SATAN OVER HEART THROUGH
PROMPTING EVIL SUGGESTIONS; MEANING OF SUCH EVIL
SUGGESTIONS; AND MEANS OF OVERCOMING THEM
It should be known that the heart, as we have mentioned, is like a pavilion
pitched, to which there are doors and their influences and resultant effects pour
into it from each door. It is also like a target into which arrows are shot from
every direction. Or it is like a mirror which is set up, across which there pass
various different images; so there appears in it one image after another, one (the
current) image being always present. Or it is like a basin into which different
streams of water empty from channels opening into it.
The entrances of these influences which are constantly being renewed in the
heart are either from without i.e. the five external senses; or from within i.e.
imagination, appetence, anger, and characteristics which are made up of the
temperament of man. For if, he apprehends a thing by means of senses it has an
effect upon the heart. Likewise when lust is aroused, caused, for example, by
vigorous eating and a strong constitution, it leaves its trace on the heart. Even if
the effect upon senses ceases, there remain the imaginative images which have
been formed in the soul. The imagination shifts from one thing to another, and
in accordance with the shifting of the imagination, the heart shifts from one state
to another. We mean that the heart is constantly in a state of change and of being

47

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

influenced by these causes. The most important of these influences which come
into the heart are involuntary thoughts. By involuntary thoughts, I mean the ideas
and recollections which take place therein. By these, 1 mean its perceptions of
knowledge, either by way of renewal or recollection; for these are called
involuntary thoughts since they occur to the mind while the heart has been
unmindful of them.
These involuntary thoughts are motives of wills. Intention, resolution, and
will are all unquestionably subsequent to the thought of the thing intended to the
mind. Thus, the basis of action is involuntary thoughts. Then the thought stirs up
desire; desire sdrs up resolution; resolution stirs up intention; and intention stirs
up the members of the body. The involuntary thoughts which stir up desire are
of two kinds: that which leads to evil, I mean that which has a harmful result; and
that which leads to good, I mean that which is profitable in the hereafter. These
are two different kinds of thought and need two different names. The
praiseworthy thought is called inspiration, and the blameworthy thought, I mean
that which leads to evil, is called evil suggestions.
Moreover, it should be known to you that these thoughts is a created
occurrence, and every created occurrence must have a creator. Whenever the
created occurrences differ, this refers to a difference in their causes. This is what
is known from the Sunnah of Allah regarding the relationship between effects
and causes. Whenever the walls of a house are lighted by the light of the fire and
its ceiling is blackened by the smoke, you know that the cause of the blackening
differs from that of the lighting. Similarly, the light of the heart and its darkness
have two distinct causes. The cause of the thought which leads to good is called
an angel, and the cause of the thought which leads to evil is called Satan. The
divine favor by which the heart is prepared to receive the inspiration of the angel
is called divine succor; while that by which it is prepared to receive evil
suggestion of Satan is called deception and disappointment. For these different
meanings, need different names.
Angel' stands for a creature whom Allah has created whose business is to
bestow benefit, to serve knowledge, to reveal the truth and right, to promise
good, and to enjoin good; and Allah has created him and constrained him to do
these things.
Satan* stands for a creature whose business is the opposite of all this, to
promise evil, to enjoin shameful deeds, to threaten with poverty whenever one
intends to do good. Thus, evil suggestion vis-a-vis inspiration; Satan vis-a-vis
angel; and divine succor vis-a-vis disappointment. To this is referred in the
statement of Allah Almighty: "And of everything have we created pairs." (AdhDhariyat 49)
- *
i Cp (ffryj

Crfi ^

All existing things have opposites, being in pairs, save only Allah who is
unique and has none vis-a-vis Him, Indeed He is the One and Only, the Real, the
Creator of all these pairs. The heart is strained between Satan and angel. The

The quarter of the destructives
48
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “The heart
has two visitations. The one is from the angel and it is a promise of good and
belief in the Divine Reality; and whoever finds this let him know that it is from
Allah, and let him give praise to Allah. The other visitation is from the enemy and
it is a promise of evil, a denial of the Divine Reality, and forbidding of good; and
whoever finds it let him take refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned." Then he
recited the statement of Allah Almighty: "Satan threatens you with poverty and
orders you to immorality, while Allah promises you forgiveness from Him and
bounty. And Allah is all-Encompassing and Knowing.” (Al-Baqarah 268)

Al-Hassan said: “These are but two anxieties which revolve in the heart: an
anxiety from Allah, and another from the enemy. Allah has mercy on the creature
who pays attention to his own concern, executing that whose source is from
Allah and striving against that whose source is from His enemy." In regard to the
attraction of the heart toward these two ruling forces, the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “The heart of the believer is
between two of the fingers of (Allah) Most Merciful." Allah is too highly exalted
to have a finger made up of flesh, bone, and blood, and divided by joints. But the
significance of a finger here refers to swiftness in turning and ability to move and
change objects; for you do not want your finger for its own sake, but for what it
will do in turning and replacing things, even as you ordinarily do your work with
your fingers.
Allah does what He does by subjugating the angel and Satan by His power to
turn hearts, even as, for example, your fingers are forced by you to turn objects.
The heart in its original innate condition is fitted for receiving the influences of
angel and Satan alike, with no preponderance of the one over the other. The
preponderance of the one side over the other is, however, brought about either
by following whims and giving one's self over to the appetites, or by turning from
and opposing them.
When a man follows the dictates of anger and appetence the domination of
Satan through desire appears, and the heart becomes the nest and seat of Satan.
Desire is the pasture and abundant provision of Satan. But when a man strives
against the appetites and does not give them the rule over him, and imitates the
moral character of the angels, then his heart becomes the habitation and resting
place of angels. Since no heart is devoid of Appetence, anger, miserliness,
covetousness, hope of long life, and other similar human qualities which
originate in desire, there is no heart in which Satan does not roan about
prompting to evil. In connection with this, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "There is not one of you but that he has
a devil." They asked: "And you, O Messenger of Allah?" He answered: "And I
also, save that Allah helped me to gain the victory over him and he became a
Muslim and commands only good." (This narration is reported by Muslim on
the authority of Ibn Mas’ud). This is because Satan works only through

49
Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart
appetence. So when Allah has given anyone the victory over appetence so that
it extends only in proper directions and within proper limits, then appetence
does not invite to evil and Satan which is armored thereby commands naught
but good. Whenever the thought of this present world predominates in the
heart by virtue of the demands of desire, then Satan finds an opportunity and
prompts to evil. But when the heart is devoted exclusively to the thought of
Allah, Satan leaves it and his field is constrained, and the angel draws near and
inspires.
In the battle of the heart, there are constant attacks and counter-attacks
between the forces of the angels and Satan until it is conquered by one of
them which takes up its residence and abode therein. When the other enters,
he takes it by a trick. Most hearts have been conquered and occupied by the
forces of Satans, and so filled with evil suggestions which call for the
preference of the swiftly passing world and the casdng aside of the hereafter.
The starting point for their taking possession is the following of the appedtes
and desire. After this takes place, the heart cannot be reconquered except by
emptying it of the Satan’s sustenance which is desire and appedtes, and
building it up by means of remembrance of Allah which is the place of angelic
influence.
Jabir Ibn Ubaidah Al-Adawi said: “I complained to Al-'Ala' Ibn Ziyad about
the evil suggesdons I find in my breast. He said: “This is like a house which
thieves pass by; if there is anything in it they take it. otherwise they pass on and
leave it." That is to say, Satan does not enter the heart which is devoid of desire.
Regarding this Allah Almighty says: “Verily you have no authority over My
servants." (Al-Isra’ 67)

40

^o\}

But whosoever follows his desire becomes the servant of desire, not a servant
of Allah; Therefore, Allah gives Satan power over him. Allah says: “Do you see
him who takes his desire as his god?"
That is, his desire is his god and the object of his worship, and so he is a
servant of Satan, not a servant of Allah.
Therefore, Amr Ibn Al-As “Allah be pleased with him” said to the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: “O Messenger of
Allah, a devil has kept me from my prayer and reciting (the. Qur'an)." He
replied: “That demon is called Khinzib, so whenever you are conscious of his
presence seek refuge from him with Allah, and spit thrice to your left." He said:
“I did so, and Allah sent him away from me." (This narration is reported by
Muslim). According to another tradition there is a devil for ablution called AlWalhan, so seek refuge from him with Allah. (This narration is reported by
both Ibn Majah and At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Ubai Ibn Ka’b). The evil
suggestion of Satan is not removed from the heart save by the remembrance of
anything other than what he suggests. For if there is suggested to the heart the

The quarter of the destructives
50
thought of anything, what has been in it previously is annihilated. Everything
other than Allah and what is connected with Him may possibly become a field
for Satan's activity.
The remembrance of Allah is the safe side, for it is known that there is no
room for Satan there. A thing is treated only by its opposite, and the opposite of
all the evil suggestions of Satan is the remembrance of Allah by seeking refuge
with Him and disclaiming strength and power. This is what you mean when you
say: "I seek refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned", and: "There is no strength
nor power save in Allah Most High, Almighty." This can be done only by the
pious in whom the remembrance of Allah predominates, and Satan only
approaches them as a sly trick at the times of their blunders. Allah says: “Indeed,
those who fear Allah - when an impulse touches them from Satan, they
remember [Him] and at once they have insight.” (Al-A'raf 201)

i CjJ)

l^ o'kc-ri Jr?

*\! 'j^1

In his comment on Allah's statement: "...from the whisperer who slinks off'
(114:4)
Mujahid said: “He (i.e., Satan) stretches out his authority over the heart; if
Allah is remembered he slinks away and crouches down, but if this is carelessly
overlooked he stretches out his authority over the heart." The mutual hostility
existing between the remembrance of Allah and the evil suggestion of Satan is
like the mutual hostility between light and darkness and night and day. Of their
mutual opposition, Allah says: “Satan has overcome them and made them forget
the remembrance of Allah." (Al-Mujadilah 19)

Anas “Allah be pleased with him” told that the Messenger of Allah “Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him” said: “Satan places his snout on the heart of the
son of Adam, If he remembers Allah, Satan slinks away, but if he forgets Allah,
Satan gobbles up his heart." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya,
Abu Ya'li and Ibn Adi). Ibn Waddah in one of his traditions said: “When a man
becomes forty years old without repenting, Satan rubs his hand over the man's
face and says: 'By my father it is the face of one who will not succeed."' Just as
the appetites are mingled with the flesh and blood of the son of Adam, so the
authority of Satan runs through this flesh and blood and surrounds the heart on
all sides. The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said:
“Verily Satan runs through the son of Adam just like the circulation of his blood,
so make difficult his circulation by means of hunger." For hunger breaks down
appetence, and Satan's course is in the appetites. Because the appetites surround
the heart on all sides, Allah has revealed the words of Iblis: "I will lie in wait for
them in Your straight path; then I will surely come to them from before and
behind, on their right hand and on their left." (Al-A'raf 16-17)

51

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart ------------------------------

o*5

o*5

o?5 }r^ ow o?

P (fj

’

c

" *•vj V

<£>1^
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
“Verily Satan lies in wait for the son of Adam in all his ways. He lay in wait in the
way of Islam and said: "Will you become a Muslim and leave your religion and the
religion of your fathers?' But he disobeyed him and became a Muslim. Then he
lay in wait for him in the path of emigration and said: 'Will you emigrate; will you
leave your land and your sky?' But he disobeyed him and emigrated. Then he lay
in wait for him in the path of Jihad saying: 'Will you engage in war which is the
destruction of self and property, and kill and be killed, and your wives be
remarried and your property divided?' But he disobeyed him and took part in
Jihad." The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
“Whoever does this and dies, it is incumbent upon Allah to admit him to the
Garden." (This narration is reported by An-Nasa'i on the authority of Sabrah Ibn
Abu Fakih). Thus, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” mentioned the meaning of evil suggestion, i.e. the thoughts that occur to
the mind of the Mujahid that he will be killed and his wives remarried, and similar
thoughts which would keep him from Jihad.
These thoughts are known, and so the evil suggestion is known by
observation. Every involuntary suggestion has a cause which requires a name to
define it, and the name of this cause is Satan. It is not to be imagined that any
human being will be released from him. People differ only in the degree of their
disobedience or obedience to him. Therefore, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: “There is no one but that he has a
(companion from) Satans."
From this sort of investigation there is made clear the meaning of evil
suggestion, inspiration, angel, Satan, divine succor, and disappointment. In
addition to this, some have speculated out the essence of Satan: whether he is a
refined body, or incorporeal; and how, if he is a body, that which is a body can
enter into the body of a man. But this is not now needed in the science of
practical religion. He who seeks after this is like the man into whose clothing a
female-snake has crawled. What he meeds is to remove it and get rid of its harm,
but he occupies himself with investigating its color, form, length, and breadth,
which is absolute ignorance. The way in which these involuntary evil suggestions
strike the soul is known. This indicates undoubtedly that a cause lies behind it. It
is known that he who invites to the evil against which warning has been given for
the future is an enemy. Undoubtedly, also, man knows through experience who
the enemy is, so he ought to busy himself in struggling against him. Allah has
made known his enemy in many passages of His Book that men might believe in
his existence and guard against him. Allah Almighty said: “Satan is a foe to you,
so take him as a foe. But he only calls his party that they may become the
companions of the blaze." (Fatir 6)

:

The quarter of the destructives

52
4 GfS’ Cr?

j40?“ l**^

He further says: "Did I not enjoin on you, O children of Adam, that you
should not serve Satan? Verily he is an open enemy to you. (Ya Sin 60)

4 (JfS Cfrr*

j4=>l

^

f

^

So man must work to ward off the enemy from himself, not by asking about
his origin, his relationships, and his dwelling place. It is true that he must ask
about his weapons so that he may ward them off from himself. The weapons of
Satan are desire and the appetites. This is sufficient for the intelligent. But in
regard to the knowledge of the quality of his essence, his real nature, and the
real nature of the angels, this is the field of the mystics who have penetrated
deeply into the science of mystical revelations, and it is not required in the
science of practical religion that one should know it. One must indeed know
that involuntary suggestions are divided into the following: what is known
certainly to invite to evil, which is manifestly evil suggestion; what is known to
invite to good, which is undoubtedly inspiration; and what one is uncertain
about, for he does not know whether it is from the visitation of the angel or
Satan.
Indeed, it is one of the tricks of Satan to set forth evil in the form of good.
To make correct distinctions in this matter is a subtle problem and the majority
of men perish therein. Satan cannot invite them to open evil, but he portrays evil
in the form of good. Thus, he says to the learned in the art of preaching: "Will
you not look at mankind dead through ignorance, lost through heedlessness, and
about to enter the fire? Do you not have mercy on the creatures of Allah to
rescue them from the dangerous places by your counsel and preaching? Allah has
blessed you with a perspicacious heart, an eloquent tongue, and an acceptable
manner of speaking; so how can you deny the grace of Allah and expose yourself
to His wrath by refraining from spreading knowledge abroad and calling mankind
unto the straight path?" He continues to confirm this idea within the man's soul
and to draw him on by agreeable tricks until he engages in preaching to the
people for a time. After that Satan invites him to adorn himself for them, and to
affect a more beautiful style of utterance and a show of good, saying to him: "If
you do not do this your discourse will make no impression upon their hearts, and
they will not be guided to the Truth." Satan keeps on confirming this to him, and
at the same time fastening on him unmistakably the stains of hypocrisy,
popularity with the crowd, delight in high rank, pride in the power given by many
followers and much learning, and a contemptuous attitude toward mankind,
Thus, with his advice he leads the poor man gradually to destruction, for he
speaks, supposing that his purpose is good, whereas it is actually to attain high
rank and popularity. By reason of this he perishes, supposing his position is good
in the Sight of Allah, even though he is among those of whom the Messenger of
Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “Verily, Allah aids this
religion by a group for which there is no share of happiness." (This narration is

53

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

reported by An-Nasa’i on the authority of Anas). He further said: "Verily, Allah
establishes this religion by means of the impious man." (This narration is
reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
It is narrated that Iblis appeared to Jesus ancj s^ to him: "Say, "There is no
god save Allah." He answered: "That is a true word, but I do not say it because of
your saying." So, underneath the good, Satan has dissemblings, and his
dissemblings of this sort are endless. By them are destroyed learned men, godly
worshippers, ascetics, the poor and the rich, and all types of men who hate
evident evil, and will not allow themselves to enter into open acts of
disobedience. We shall give a summary of the tricks of Satan in the Book of
Things that Deceive in the end of this Quarter.
It is our purpose, if time allows to write a special composition on the subject
which we shall call 'The Dissembling of Iblis. His dissembling is now spread
abroad among lands and peoples, especially among the sects and creeds, so that
of good things only a trace remains. All of this is in submission to the
dissemblings of Satan and his tricks. So it is the duty of man to pause at every
intent which is suggested to him so that he may know whether it is from the
visitation of the angel or of Satan, and to ponder over it as he looks into it with
true insight, not with the desire of nature. He should not consider it save in the
light of piety, insight, and abundant knowledge, as Allah Almighty says: “Indeed,
those who fear Allah - when an impulse touches them from Satan, they
remember [Him] (i.e. return to the light of knowledge) and at once they have
insight (have the ambiguity revealed to them).” (Al-A’raf 201)

4O

(*"*

l$>

>i»

But he who has not disciplined his soul through godly fear, and whose
nature is inclined to submit to the dissembling of Satan through following
after desire, makes many mistakes thereby, and his destruction is, though
unknown to him, hastened through it. Allah Almighty says about him: "...But
there shall appear to them from Allah that which they had not reckoned on."
(Az-Zumar 47)
^

Li 4A51

It is said that this refers to deeds which they supposed to be good deeds, and
behold they are evil deeds.
The most obscure type of the sciences of practical religion to understand is
the deceit of the soul and the will of Satan. This is the individual obligation of
every creature, but men have neglected it and busied themselves with sciences
which bring evil suggestions to them and give Satan authority over them, and
cause them to forget his enmity, and the way to guard against him. Nothing can
deliver from an abundance of evil suggestions save closing the doors of the
involuntary thoughts. These doors are the five external senses, and the inner
doors are the appetites and the affections of this present world. Solitude in a dark
house will close the door of the senses, and disentangling one's self from kin and

The quarter of the destructives
54
money lessens the entrances for evil suggestions from within. There remain,
however, inner entrances in the imaginings which course in the heart, and these
cannot be warded off save by exercising the heart in the remembrance of Allah.
But still Satan continues to contend and struggle with the heart, and to divert it
from meditating on Allah. So there is no escape from struggling against him, and
this struggle has no end but death, since no one, as long as he lives, is safe from
Satan.
It is true that one may become strong so that he is not led astray by him,
and he may ward off his evil from himself by means of struggle, but he can
never dispense with struggle and defense as long as the blood runs through
his body. For as long as he is alive, the gates of evil are open to his heart and
cannot be closed. They are appetence, anger, envy, covetousness, greed, and
others which will be explained later. So whenever the gate is open and the
enemy not careless, he cannot be warded off except by watchfulness and
struggle.
A man said to Al-Hassan: "O Abu Safid! Does Satan sleep?" He smiled and
answered: “Were he to sleep we should rest" Therefore, the believer has no
escape from him. It is true that he has a way of warding him off and weakening
his power. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: <£The believer can trouble his Satan just as anyone of you troubles his
camel on his journey." (This narration is reported by Ahmad on the authority of
Abu Hurairah). Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him” said: "The Satan of the
believer is emaciated.” Qais Ibn Al-Hajjaj said: "My Satan said to ne: ’When I
entered into you I was like a camel fit to be slaughtered, and now I am like a
sparrow.11 asked him: Why is that?' He answered: *You cause me to melt away
by your remembrance of Allah.'" Thus, it is not impossible for pious people to
stop up the doors of Satan and to keep them by being on guard; I mean the
obvious doors and the clear paths which lead to overt acts of disobedience. But
they stumble in his obscure paths, for they are not clearly guided to them so as
to guard them, as we mentioned in "The Deceiving of Learned and Preachers”.
The difficulty lies in the fact that the doors to the heart which are opened to
Satan are many, while there is but a single door for the angels, and that one door
is likely to be confused with all the others, Man before them is like a traveler in a
desert of many paths and obscure roads on a dark night, where he can hardly
know the way except by the eye of insight or the rising of a shining sun. The eye
of insight here is the heart which has been purified by piety; and the shining sun
is that abundant knowledge derived from the Book of Allah and the Sunnah of
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”. By these two,
he is righdy guided regarding Satan's obscure ways; otherwise, his paths are many
and obscure.
Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him” said: “the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” one day drew a line for us and
said: This is the way of Allah.' Then he drew other lines to the right and left of
that line and said: These are ways on every one of which, there is a Satan inviting

55

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

(men) to him.' Then he recited the statement of Allah: "And, [moreover], this is
My path, which is straight, so follow it; and do not follow [other] ways, for you
will be separated from His way. This has He instructed you that you may become
righteous.” (Al-An’am 153)
,

^

^ C

,

A*

i (0) by^
He Thus, referred to those other lines. Thus, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” showed the abundance of Satan's ways.
We have mentioned an example of one of his obscure ways by which he
deceives the learned and worshipers who have control over their appetites and
abstain from overt acts of disobedience. Let us now mention an example of his
plain ways by which it is evident that the son of Adam must pass. This is
contained in the following narration attributed to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”.
There was once a monk of the children of Israel. Satan entered into a maid
and caused her to have a fit, and put it into the hearts of her folk that she could
be cured by the monk. So they brought her to him, but he refused to receive her.
They continued asking him until he finally took her in. When she was with him
for treatment, Satan came to him and made approaching her seem alluring to
him, and he kept on tempting him until he had sexual relation with her and she
became pregnant. Then he whispered to him saying: "Now you will be disgraced.
Her folk will come to you: so kill her, and if they ask you, tell them that she died."
So he killed her and buried her. But Satan went to her folk and whispered to
them, and put in their hearts that he had sexual relation with her and made her
pregnant, and then killed and buried her. Her folk then came to him and asked
him about her and he told them that she had died. They took him to kill him in
revenge for her. Then Satan came to him and said: “I am he who caused her to
have the fit, and I put the thought in the hearts of her folk. Now obey me and
you will be rescued. Prostrate yourself before me twice," So he prostrated himself
twice. He (Satan) said to him: “Now, I am disassociated from you.” It is of him
that Allah said: “Like unto Satan when he said to man, 'Disbelieve.1 But when he
disbelieved, he said: *Verily I am disassociated from you.' (Al-Hashr 16)

ih: Visy. jj

US 3^1
i (Jp

40

^

>

jjj

So look at his tricks and the way in which he compelled the monk to commit
these great sins, and all of this because he obeyed him in taking in the maid for
treatment
This in itself was an insignificant matter, and perhaps he who did it
considered it a good and charitable act, and he approved of it in his heart
because of a hidden desire. So he went ahead with it as one desirous of doing
good, and thereafter the matter went beyond the sphere of his choice, one

The quarter of the destructives
56
thing leading him on to another, until he found no escape. We seek refuge
with Allah from the loss of the beginnings of things. To this, the Messenger
of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" referred in his statement:
"He who hovers about a forbidden thing is in danger of falling into it." (This
narration is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of An-Nu’man Ibn
Bashir).

CHAPTER TWELVE
EXPOSITION IN DETAIL OF WAYS BY WHICH SATAN ENTERS HEART
It should be known that the heart is like a fortress, and Satan is an enemy
who wishes to enter the fortress, to take possession of it, and to rule over it. The
fortress cannot be kept secure from the enemy except by guarding its doors and
entrances, and the breaches in its walls. He who does not know its doors cannot
guard them. The protection of the heart from the evil suggestions of Satan is an
prescribed duty and an individual obligation upon every legally competent. That
which is indispensably connected with fulfilling duty is itself also obligatory. The
warding off of Satan cannot be achieved save by the knowledge of his ways of
entering, and so the knowledge of his entrances becomes an obligation. The
entrances and doors of Satan are the characteristics of the creature, and they are
many. But we shall refer to the great doors which are like the large street gates,
which are not too narrow for the many forces of Satan.
One of his great gates is anger and appetence. Anger is the ogre of the
intellect. If the forces of the intellect grow weak the forces of Satan attack, and
whenever man becomes angry Satan plays with him just as a lad plays with a
bell. It is narrated that Iblis met Moses “Peace be upon him” and said: “O
Moses! You are he whom Allah chose to give His message and spoke to
direcdy, and I am one of the creatures of Allah. I have sinned and desire to
repent. So intercede with my Lord on my behalf that He may forgive me."
Moses said: "Well." So Moses climbed the Mount and talked to his Lord, and
then intended to descend, his Lord said to him: “Fulfill the trust (you have been
required to fulfill).” Moses “Peace be upon him” said to him: “O Lord! Your
servant Iblis likes that you should accept his repentance.” Allah revealed to
Moses: "O Moses, you have fulfilled your duty; order him to prostrate himself
before the grave of Adam in order that he may be forgiven." Then Moses met
Iblis and said to him: "You are commanded to prostrate yourself before the
grave of Adam in order to be forgiven." But he became angry and proud and
said: “I rejected to prostrate myself to him when he was alive, should I do it
now that he is dead?" Then he said: “O Moses, you have made me indebted to
you in that you have interceded with your Lord on my behalf. So remember me
on these three occasions and I shall not destroy you: Remember me when you
are angry, for then my spirit is in your heart and my eye in yours, and I run
through you even as the circulation of your blood. Remember me when you are
angry, for when a man is angry I 'breathe into his nose and he does not know
what he is doing. Remember me when you encounter the army of the enemy,

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

57

for I come to a man who meets the army of the enemy and remind him of his
wife, his children and people, so that he will turn back. Do not sit by a woman
who is unlawful for you, for I am her aposde to you and yours to her." By this,
he referred to appetence, anger and greed. Fleeing from the army is greed for
this present world. His refusal to prostrate himself to Adam after he was dead
was envy, which is the greatest of his entrances.
It is narrated that one of the saints said to Iblis: "Show me how you
overcome a son of Adam." He replied: “I take him while in anger or desire." It is
further related that Iblis appeared to a monk who asked him: "Which
characteristics of mankind are more helpful to you?" He answered: "Hastiness of
temper; for if a man is sharp-tempered we can turn him upside down even as lads
toss a ball." It is narrated that Satan says: "How can the son of Adam overcome
me, for if he is content I come so that I may be in his heart, and if he gets angry I
fly so that I may be in his head."
Among the great doors for his entrance are envy and greed. For whenever a
man is greedy for anything his greed makes him blind and deaf, as the Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “Your love for the thing
blinds and deafens." (This narration is reported by Abu Dawud on the authority
of Abu Ad-Darda’). The light of insight is that which makes known the entrances
of Satan, but if envy and greed cover it up man cannot see and then Satan finds
his opportunity. He makes everything which will help to the attainment of his
desire seem alluring to the greedy one, even though it be disapproved and
immoral.
It is narrated that when Noah “Peace be upon him” entered the ark, he took
into it a pair of every sort as Allah commanded him. He saw in the ark an old
man whom he did not recognize. So he asked him: "What brought you here?" He
said: "I came to seize the hearts of your friends, so that their hearts would be
with me and their bodies with you." So Noah “Peace be upon him” said to him:
"Go out from here, O Enemy of Allah, for you are accursed." Iblis said to him:
"By means of five things I destroy mankind, and I shall tell you about three of
them, but I shall not tell you about the other two." Allah then revealed to Noah:
"You have no need of the three; let him tell you of the two." Noah said to Iblis:
"What are the two?" He replied: "They are the two which never play me false nor
disobey me, and by them I destroy man: they are greed and envy. Through envy I
was cursed and became stoned Satan; and as for greed, the whole garden was
permitted to Adam, save only the tree, but I obtained my desire over him through
greed."
One of his great doors is satiety of food, even though it be lawful and pure.
Satiety strengthens lusts, and lusts are weapons of Satan. It is narrated that Iblis
appeared to Yahya Ibn Zakariyya “Peace be upon both” who saw on him hooks
of every sort. So he said to him: "O Iblis, what are these hooks?" He replied:
“These are the lusts by which I overcome the son of Adam." He asked: "Do I
have any of these?" He answered: "Perhaps you become satiated with food and
Thus, we make ritual prayer and devotional exercises a burden to you." He asked:

The quarter of the destructives
58
"Is there anything else?" He answered: "No." So he said: ' By Allah I shall never
eat my fill." Iblis replied: “And, by Allah, I shall never give advice to a Muslim
again."
It is said that in eating abundandy there are six blameworthy qualities:
First, it drives the fear of Allah from his heart. Second, it drives from his heart
compassion toward mankind; for he supposes that, they are all satiated. Third,
it makes the acts of worship a burden upon him. Fourth, if he hears wise
speech he is not impressed by it. Fifth, if he speaks in admonition and wisdom
it makes no impression on the hearts of men. Sixth, it stirs up disease within
him.
Another one of his great doors is the love of adornment in furnishings,
apparel and house. When Satan sees this quality dominant in the heart of man
he lays eggs in that heart and hatches them, and keeps on bidding him to
make the house heritable, to adorn its ceiling and walls, and to enlarge its
buildings. He invites him also to adorn his apparel and his riding animals, and
seeks to enslave him therein along his lifetime. If he overcomes him in this, he
has no need to return to him again, for one phase of this leads on to another
and continues to take him on from one thing to another until his fixed term
comes, and he dies while he is in the way of Satan and following desire. Evil
consequences are to be feared therefrom in infidelity; we seek refuge with
Allah from it
Another one of his great doors is covetousness of men. Satan constandy
makes it seem alluring to him to use craftiness and flattery towards him whenever
his desire prevails over his heart, using all sorts of hypocrisy and deception so
that he becomes the object of his desire or the object of his worship. So the man
keeps on thinking of a trick for attracting his love and affection, and tries every
means possible to attain this end. The very least he does is to praise him for
something he does not possess, and to treat him with adulation by not
commending him to do good nor forbidding him to do evil.
Safwan Ibn Salim told that once Satan appeared to Abdullah Ibn Han2alah
and said to him: "O Ibn Hanzalah! Learn from me a thing which I shall teach
you." He answered: "I have no need of it" He said: "Look, and if it is good, take
it, otherwise, leave it O Ibn Hanzalah do not ask for anything for which you
desire any save Allah; and look how you will be if you get angry for I take
possession of you when you become angry."
Among his great doors is haste, and giving up steadfastness in affairs. The
Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said: “Haste is
from Satan whereas deliberateness is from Allah Almighty.” (This narration is
reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Sahl Ibn Sa’d). on that, Allah
Almighty says: “Man was created of haste." (Al-Anbiya 37)

And: "And man was ever hasty" (Al-Isra* 11)

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

--------

59

Fie said to Flis Prophet “Peace be upon him”: "Plasten not (on reciting) the
Qur'an until its inspiration is completed for you.” (Ta Ha 114)

4 (©)

^Uj

o*

& o^

This is because actions should follow clear understanding and experiential
knowledge. Clear understanding requires reflection and leisurely action, but haste
prevents this. For when man seeks to make haste Satan readily dispenses to him
his own evil from whence he knows not
It is narrated that when Jesus “Peace be upon him” was bom devils came to
Iblis and said: “All of the idols have bowed their heads this morning." He
answered: "This is some new event that has taken place; remain in your places."
So he flew over the earth until he came from its East to West, but he found
nothing. Then he found Jesus who had been bom, and beheld the angels
surrounding him. So Satan returned to them and said: “A prophet was born last
night. No female ever conceived or brought forth save when 1 was present except
this one. So despair of idols being worshipped after this night, but approach the
sons of Adam through haste and agility."
Another one of his great doors lies in Dirhams and dinars, and all types of
possessions, such as goods, beasts and estates; for whatsoever exceeds the
bounds of daily sustenance and need is the abiding-place of Satan. For he who
has his daily provision has an empty heart. But if he found a hundred dinars, for
example, on the road, ten desires would be stirred up in his heart, each of which
would require another hundred dinars. So what he found would not satisfy him,
but he would need nine hundred more. Before he found this hundred, he had
been self-sufficient, and now when he has found the hundred he thinks that
through them he has become rich. But he has come to be in need of nine
hundred in order to buy a house in which to dwell, to buy a servant girl, furniture,
and graceful clothing. Each one of these things calls for something else to go
with it, and that for something else ad infinitum, until he falls into a pit the
bottom of which is Hell, for it has no other end.
Thabit Al-Bunani narrated that when the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” was sent forth on his mission, Iblis said to his soldiers:
"Something has happened, so go and see what it is." They dispersed in their
search until they were weary, and then they came back and said: “We do not
know." He said: "I shall bring you the news." So he went, and returned saying:
"Allah has sent forth Muhammad." Thabit went on to say: "So He began sending
his soldiers to the Companions of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him”, but they returned frustrated, saying: We have never
encountered such folk as these. We no sooner smite anyone of them than they
rise up for their prayers and it is all cancelled.’ Iblis said to them: ‘Take your tine
with them; perhaps Allah will give them some of this present world's goods, and
then we shall seize those of whom we have need.’" (This narration is reported by
Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).

The quarter of the destructives
It is related that one day Jesus “Peace be upon him” took a stone for a
cushion and Iblis passed by him and said: "O Jesus! You have desired
something in this present world." On that Jesus “Peace be upon him” took it
and threw it away from beneath his head and said: “You may have this along
with this present world." In reality, he who owns a stone to use for a cushion
during sleep, possesses a thing of this world which may be a tool of Satan
against him. Take for example a man who rises by night for prayer, whenever
there is near him a stone which he can use for a cushion, it keeps on calling
him to sleep, and to use it as a pillow, and but for it he would not think of
doing such a thing, nor would his desire for sleep be aroused. This being true
for a stone, what is the state of who possesses downy pillows and a soft bed
and goodly recreadon pieces? Then will such a man rouse himself to the
worship of Allah?
Aunong his great doors is sdnginess and fear of poverty. This is what prevents
from spending and giving alms, and summons to storing up roods, to laying up
treasures, and to that, painful punishment which is promised to those who vie
with one another in possessions, as the Qur'an says. Khaithamah Ibn Abd-ArRahman quotes Satan as saying: "No son of Adam has overcome me, nor will
anyone overcome me in three things when I command him: to take money
wrongfully, to spend it wrongfully, and to withhold it from its proper use."
Sufyan said: “Satan has no weapon like the fear of poverty, and if man accepts
this from him he begins doing deeds of vanity, withholding the right, talking with
falsehood, and supposing evil of his Lord.” One of the evils of stinginess is a
greedy frequenting of markets to gather money, for marketplaces are nestingplaces of Satans.
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Umamah “Allah be pleased with him”
that the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"When Iblis descended to the earth he said: ‘O Lord! You have cast me down to
the earth and caused me to become a stoned one, so appoint for me a house.
'The Lord answered: 'The bath.' Then he said: 'Appoint for me a sitting place.' He
answered: 'The marketplaces and the intersections of the streets.' He said:
‘Appoint food for me.' He answered: "That on which the name of Allah has not
been mentioned.' He said: ‘Appoint drink for me.' He answered: 'Everything
intoxicating.' He said: ‘Appoint for me an announcer, 1 He answered: 'Musical
instruments,' He said: ‘Appoint a Qur'an for me.' He answered: 'Poetry.' He said:
‘Appoint for me a kind of writing.' He answered: 'Tattooing.' He said: ‘Appoint a
tradition for me.' He answered: 'Falsehood.' He said: 'Appoint snares for me.' He
answered: 'Women.'" (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani).
Among his greed doors is sectarianism and partisanship, prejudice and secret
hatred of opponents and looking upon them contemptuously and disdainfully.
This is one of the things which destroy both pious and profligate together. For
one of the savage characteristics in nature is an inborn disposition to slander, and
to busy oneself with men's shortcomings. So when Satan makes this appear to a
man as the truth and it becomes agreeable to his nature, its sweetness overcomes
60

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart
61
his heart, and he goes to work at it with all enthusiasm. He is glad and happy in it,
and thinks that he is striving in the field of religion when he is really endeavoring
to follow Satan. Thus, you will see one who is a devoted partisan of Abu Bakr
As-Siddiq “Allah be pleased with him” and at the same time a partaker of that
which is unlawful, giving free rein to his tongue as a busybody and in falsehood
addicted to all manner of corruption, and were Abu Bakr “Allah be pleased with
him” to see him he would be his foremost enemy; for the follower of Abu Bakr is
he who chooses his way and walks in his mode of life, and guards his mouth. It
was the habit of Abu Bakr “Allah be pleased with him” to put pebbles in his
mouth so that his tongue would be silent about what did not concern him. So
how can such a busy body pretend loyalty to and love for him?
Then you will see another busy body who goes beyond all bounds in his
partiality for All “Allah be pleased with him” who was so much ascetic in his
manner of life that he wore, while he was Caliph, a garment which he bought for
three Dirhams, and cut off the end of the sleeve up to the back of the hand. But
you see the wicked wearing silk garments and adorned with wealth gained
unlawfully, while he quarrels over love to Ali “Allah be pleased with him” and
pretends such love, when in fact Ali “Allah be pleased with him” will be his
foremost opponent on the day of Judgement. What would you say of a person
who took a man's son, dear to him, his consolation and his heart's life, and began
to beet him and tear him, to pluck out his hair and cut it off with sheers, and at
the same time he pretended to love the boy's father and be loyal to him? What
would the father think of such a man?
Now it is a well-known fact that religion and religious law were more loved by
Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and Ali and the rest of the Companions “Allah be
pleased with them” than their families or children, if not more than their own
selves. Those who rush blindly into disobedience to the law are they, who rend
the law and cut it off with the shears of lusts, thereby show their love for Iblis,
the enemy of Allah and of His saints. What then do you suppose will be their
condition on the day of resurrection in the presence of the Companions of the
Prophet and the saints of Allah? May rather, if the lid were removed so that these
might know what the companions desire in the people of the Messenger of Allah
“Allah's blessing and peace be upon him”, they would be ashamed to mention
them with their tongues because of the turpitude of their acts. Satan also makes
them imagine that if anyone dies as a devotee of Abu Bakr and Umar “Allah be
pleased with them” the fire will not come near to him. He makes another imagine
that if he dies as a devotee of Ali “Allah be pleased with him” there will be no
fear for him. This is what the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him” said to Fatimah “Allah be pleased with her” who was a part of his
own self: "Do righteously, for I cannot avail you against Allah in the least." (This
narration is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Al-Miswar Ibn
Makhramah).
We have cited that as a representative example of all the partisan loyalties.
Such also is the predicament of the partisans of Ash-Shafi'i, Abu Hanifah, Malik

The quarter of the destructives
62
and Ahmad. For if anyone pretends to belong to the sect of an imam and does
not walk according to his manner of life, that imam will be his opponent on the
day of resurrection when he will say to him: "My doctrine is to do, and not
merely to talk with the tongue; and talking with the tongue is to the end of doing,
not raving. So why have you disobeyed me in the practise and manner of life
which are my belief, and my walk by which I advanced, and in which I departed
to Allah, and then afterward you pretended falsely to belong to my sect?" This is
one of the greed entrances of Satan by which he destroyed most of the world.
The juristic schools have been given over to a group in which there is but
little fear of Allah, whose insight into religion has grown week, whose desire for
this present world has become intense, and whose greed to gain followers has
grown strong, and they have not been able to gain a following and attain
influence save through their partisanship. So they have veiled this within their
own breasts, and have not reminded their followers of the wiles of Satan therein,
but indeed, they have acted as agents of Satan in carrying out his wiles against
them. So men have continued in partisanship and have forgotten the principal
truth of their religion. Thus, they have perished and caused others to perish. May
Allah forgive us and them.
Al-Hassan narrates that Iblis said: “I enticed the people of Muhammad
“Peace be upon him” to disobedience, but they overcame me by seeking
forgiveness. Then I enticed them to sins for which they would not seek
forgiveness: these are partisan prejudices." In this, the Accursed One told the
truth, for they do not know that these are the causes which lead to acts of
disobedience, so how should they seek forgiveness for them?
One of the great devices of Satan is to turn man's attention away from
himself by busying them with the disputes and contentions which arise between
people in the matter of sects. Abdullah Ibn Mas’ud “Allah be pleased with him”
said: "A group of people were sitting in the state of celebration (of Allah) when
Satan came to cause them to abandon their assembly and to cause divisions
among them, but he could not. So he came to another company who were
conversing on worldly affairs, and stirred up dispute among them so that they
began to fight with one another. But it was not they on whom he had set his
purpose. Then they who were engaged in the celebration (of Allah) rose up and
busied themselves in deciding between those who were fighting, and so were
scattered from their assembly; and this was what Satan was aiming to accomplish
with them."
Another one of his great doors is to induce the laymen, who are not
experienced in the science of theology and have not gone deeply into it, to set
themselves to thinking about the essential nature and attributes of Allah, and
about subjects which their limited intelligence cannot attain, until he causes them
to doubt the basis of their religion or to indulge in vain imaginings unworthy of
Allah, thereby a man becomes a disbeliever or an innovator, while at the same
time he is happy, joyful, and rejoicing at that which has come into his heart. He
supposes it to be mystical knowledge and insight, and that this has been revealed

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

63

to him because of his own perspicacity and greater intelligence. The most foolish
of men are those who believe most strongly in their own intelligence; and the
men of most stable intelligence are those most suspicious of themselves and most
ready to ask the learned.
A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her” narrated that the Messenger of Allah
“Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said: “Verily Satan comes to one of
you and says: 'Who has created you?' He replies: 'Allah who is blessed and
exalted.' Then Satan says: 'But who has created Allah?' Therefore, if one of you
has this experience let him say: 'I believe in Allah and His Apostle’, and Satan will
go away from him." (This narration is reported by Ahmad, Abu Ya'li and AlBazzar; and both sheikhs on the authority of Abu Hurairah). The Messenger of
Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” did not order any investigation of
a way of treating this evil suggestion because it effects the laymen rather than the
learned. The laymen should content themselves with believing, submission, and
occupying themselves with their worship and their means of gaining living, and
leave learning to the learned. It is better for a layman to commit adultery and
theft than to talk about the science of theology, for he who speaks about Allah
and His religion without sure learning falls into disbelief in a way which he knows
not, and is like one who rides the fathomless sea without knowing how to swim.
Satan's devices that have to do with creeds and sects are numerous, and we only
mentioned these by way of example.
Another one of the doors by which Satan enters the heart is thinking evil of
Muslims. Allah says: “O you who believe, shun much assumption, for verily sin
lies in much assumption." (Al-Hujurat 12)

!

For if, anyone passes an evil judgment on another through conjecture, he
is sent by Satan to slander him by means of backbiting, and he shall perish.
Satan may induce him to give the other less than his just rights, or to be
remiss in honoring him, or to look at him with the eye of disdain, considering
himself much better than the other. These all are among the things that
destroy. Divine law has Therefore, forbidden man to give himself to
accusations. The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "Ward off the places of accusations." He himself guarded against
exposing himself to accusation.
In this issue, it is narrated on the authority of Ali Ibn Al-Hussain that he said:
Safiyyah, the wife of The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” told
me that she went to The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him” to visit him in the mosque while he was in I'tikaf in the last ten days of
Ramadan. She had a talk with him for a while, then she got up in order to return
home. The Prophet “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” accompanied her.
When they reached the gate of the mosque, opposite the door of Umm Salamah,
two Ansari men were passing by and they greeted The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”. He told them: “Do not run away! And

The quarter of the destructives
64
said: “She is (my wife) Safiyyah Bint Huyai." Both of them said: “Glory to Allah,
(How dare we think of any evil) O Allah's Aposde!" And they felt it. The Prophet
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said (to them): "Satan reaches
everywhere in the human body as blood reaches in it, (everywhere in one's body).
I was afraid lest Satan might insert an evil thought in your minds." (This narration
is reported by both sheikhs).
Observe how the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” was anxious about their religion and guarded them, and how he felt anxiety
for his nation and taught them how to guard themselves against accusation. Thus,
the godly learned who is known for his religion should not think lighdy about his
affairs and say in self-admiradon: "No one would assume aught but good of me.”
For ell men do not look at even the most godly and pious and benevolent people
in the same way. Some look upon them with the eye of approval, and others with
the eye of displeasure. A poet said: “The eye of consent is dulled to every fault,
but the eye of disapproval reveals the defects." So one must guard against
supposing evil of another, and against accusation of evil men. Wicked men think
naught but evil of all men; so whenever you see a person thinking evil of men
and looking for faults, know that he is a corrupt person in his own heart. His
wickedness is his thinking evil of others, and this fairly oozes out of him. He
thinks of others only from his own standpoint. The believer looks for excuses;
the hypocrite for faults. The believer is sound-hearted in his attitude toward all
creatures.
These are some of the entrances of Satan into the heart. If I desired to
compass all of them, I should be unable to do so. But that number will point to
others. There is no blameworthy characteristic in man that is not an instrument
of Satan, and one of his entrances into the heart.
Now you may ask: "What then is the remedy and the way to ward off Satan?
Is it not enough to remember Allah and for a man to say: 'There is no might nor
power save with Allah'?" It should be known that the remedy for the heart in this
matter is to obstruct these entrances by purifying the heart of these blameworthy
characteristics. This is something that would take a long tine to mention. Our aim
in this quarter of the book is to set forth the remedy for the destructive
characteristics, and every characteristic needs a separate book, as will be explained
later. It is true that if you are to cut out of the heart the roots of these
characteristics, Satan would still be able to pass through it and make suggestions
to it, but it would not be an abiding-place for him, and the celebration of Allah
prevents him from passing through it. The true nature of celebration does not
dominate the heart until after it has been built up in piety and cleansed of all
blameworthy qualities. Otherwise remembrance is merely a suggestion of the self
which has no power over the heart and does not ward off the power of Satan.
Therefore, Allah says: “Indeed, those who fear Allah - when an impulse touches
them from Satan, they remember [Him] and at once they have insight.” (Al-A’raf
201)

65

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart ----------------------------------

i ©>

(*-* 1

j^r^*1 \! '3^' ^ y--il'

]»

He thereby makes this a special characteristic of the god-fearing men.
Satan is like a hungry dog which comes to you. If you have neither bread
nor meat in your hands it is driven back by your saying 'go away', the voice
alone sufficing to ward it off. But if you have some meat in your hands and the
dog is hungry, it will rush at the meet and will not be driven away by mere talk.
Thus, Satan can be driven away from the heart which is devoid of his food by
merely remembering Allah. But if appetence overcomes the heart it drives the
true nature of remembrance of Allah to the marginal regions of the heart so
that it does not gain the mastery over its core. This core becomes the abidingplace of Satan. But Satan tempts the hearts of those who fear Allah, which are
devoid of whims and blameworthy characteristics, not to lusts, but to empdness
through neglect of remembrance. When one begins the exercise of celebradon
again Satan crawls back. The proof of this is the statement of Allah Almighty:
"So seek refuge with Allah from Satan the expelled [from His mercy].” (AnNahl 98)
There are also other tradidons and Holy Verses on the subject of
remembrance.
Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” said that the devil of a disbeliever
met the devil of a believer, the devil of the unbeliever was sleek, fat, and well
clothed, while the devil of the believer was emaciated, dishevelled, dust-colored,
and naked. The unbeliever's devil asked that of the believer: "What is the matter
with you that you are so emaciated?" He replied: “I am with a man who mentions
the name of Allah when he eats, and so I remain hungry. He mentions the name
of Allah when he drinks, so I stay thirsty. He mentions the name of Allah when
he gets dressed, and I continue naked, and when he anoints himself he mentions
the name of Allah and I remain disheveled." The other said: “I dwell with a man
who does nothing of all of this, so I share with him his food, his drink and his
clothing.”
Muhammad Ibn Wasi' used to say every day after the morning prayer: "O
Allah, You have invested with power over us an enemy who has insight into our
faults, and who with his cohorts sees us as we cannot see them. O Allah, cause
him to despair of us ever, as You have caused him to despair of Your mercy.
Make him abandon hope of us as You have made him abandon hope of Your
pardon. Remove him far from us as You have removed him far from your mercy,
for You have power over all things." One day he was on his way to the mosque
when Iblis appeared to him and said: “O Ibn Wasi', do you recognize me?" He
replied: “Who are you?" He said: “I am Iblis." He asked: “What do you want?"
He said: "I desire that you will not teach anyone this supplication of seeking
refuge perchance I would not touch you with harm.” He answered: "By Allah, I
shall not keep it from anyone who desires it, and you may do what you will.

The quarter of the destructives
Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Abu Laila said: "There was a devil who used to come to
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” with a
firebrand in his hand and stand before him as he prayed. Whenever the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” recited and sought
refuge with Allah, the demon would not go away. Then Gabriel “Peace be upon
him” came to him and said to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him”: "Say, 'I seek refuge with the perfect words of Allah, which neither
pious nor impious crosses, from the evil which persists in the earth and from
what goes forth from it; from what comes down from heaven and what ascends
up into it; from the temptations of night and day and the misfortunes of night
and day, except that which brings good, O (Allah) Most Merciful.'" When he said
this the devil firebrand was extinguished and he fell on his face. fThis narration is
reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and others).
Al-Hassan said: “I was informed that Gabriel “Peace be upon him” came to
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and said:
Werily a demon of the jinn is plotting against you, so when you retire to your bed
recite the Holy Verse of TTirone (of Majesty, i.e. Al-Baqarah 255).'" (This
narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: “A demon came to me and contended
with me and contended with me again, so I seized him by the throat, and by Him
Who sent me forth as a messenger of truth, I did not release the demon until I
found the cold saliva from his tongue on my hand; and had it not been for the
summons of my brother Solomon “Peace be upon him”, he (the demon) would
have been left lying in the mosque.” (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu AdDunya on the authority of Ash-Sha’bi; Al-Bukhari on the authority of Abu
Hurairah; and An-Nasa’i on the authority of A’ishah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "Never did Umar follow a path but that Satan took a course different from
his." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Sa’d Ibn Abu
Waqqas). This is because the hearts of these had been cleansed of that on which
Satan pastures and feeds, namely the appetites. So if you desire that Satan be
warded off from you only by mere celebration of Allah, as he was warded off
from Umar “Allah be pleased with him”, you will find it impossible, and you will
be like a man who takes medicine before he abstains from food, whose stomach
is burdened with heavy foods, and yet he hopes that the medicine will benefit
him as it benefits one who has taken it after abstaining and emptying his
stomach. The celebration of Allah acts as medicine, piety as abstinence which
frees the heart from the appetites. When celebration comes into a heart that is
empty of anything else save the thought of Allah, Satan is warded off, even as
illness is repelled when the medicine enters a stomach that is empty of all foods.
Allah said: ‘Indeed in that is a reminder for whoever has a heart or who
listens while he is present [m mind]." (Qaf 37)

66

(s'j£=>pity's ^ o! ^

67
Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart
He also said: “It has been decreed for every devil that whoever turns to him
- he will misguide him and will lead him to the punishment of the Blaze.” (AlHajj 4)
(c|j)I

^Jj

jAbi?u jAjli 0 Yjj

jAjl aIIp

^

Whoever helps Satan by his work is his devotee, even though he celebrates
Allah with his tongue. If you say that the tradition is absolute that celebration of
Allah drives out Satan, and do not understand that most general statements of the
divine law are limited in their particular application by conditions transmitted by
those learned in religion, then consider your own self, for hearing is not like
seeing with the eye. Consider prayer, the highest point of your celebration of
Allah and of your worship. Watch your heart when you are at prayer and see how
Satan attracts it to the markets, to the reckoning of dealers, and to answering
those obstinate. Observe how he causes you to pass through the valleys of this
present world and its places of destruction, so that you do not recall the
unnecessary tilings of this world which you had forgotten, except during your
prayer. Satan does not press upon your heart save while you prey. Thus, prayer is
the touchstone of hearts by which its good and vile qualities both appear. Prayer
which comes from hearts laden with lusts is not accepted.
It is no wonder then that Satan is not driven away from you; nay rather, his
evil suggestions to you may increase, just as the medicine taken before refraining
from food may increase disease. So, if you seek deliverance, do abstinence
through piety, and then follow it with medicine of remembrance and Satan will
flee from you as he fled from Umar “Allah be pleased with him”. It is narrated
on the authority of Wahib Ibn Munabbih that he said: “Fear Allah, and do not
insult Satan openly while in secret you are his friend", i.e., while you are obedient
to him. Another said: "How strange it is that a man, knowing the benefactor's
goodness, will disobey Him; and knowing likewise the Accursed One's rebellion,
will obey him." As Allah said: “Call upon me, I will answer you ", (Ghafir 60)
And you claim He does not answer, so also you celebrate Allah, and Satan
does not flee from you because of your failure to observe the conditions of
celebration and supplication.
Ibrahim Ibn Adham was asked: "Why is it that we invoke and our invocations
receive no answer, although Allah Almighty says: ‘Call upon me, I will answer
you'?" He answered: "Because your hearts are dead." He was asked: "What has
caused them to die?" He answered: "Eight habits: You have known Allah's right
(over you) but have not done your duty towards Him. You have read the Qur'an,
but have not acted according to the limitations it has imposed. You have said ‘We
love the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him’” but you
have not followed his law. You have said 'We fear death' but you have not
prepared for it. Allah said: ‘Verily Satan is to you a foe, so take him as a foe' (Fatir
6)

68

The quarter of the destructives

i0
CrWiJl o! >
But you have agreed with him upon acts of disobedience. You said 'We
fear the fire', and constrained your bodies to enter it. You said ‘We love the
Garden', but have not labored to gain it. Whenever you get up from your beds
you cast your faults behind your backs and spread the faults of other men
before your faces. You have angered your Lord, so how can He answer your
prayers?"
If you ask whether he who invites to the different acts of disobedience is a
single devil or different devils, you should know that in practice you have no
need to know about this matter. Busy yourself in warding off the enemy, and do
not ask about his characteristics. Eat the vegetable wherever it comes from, and
do not ask where the garden is. However, in the light of investigation and the
testimony of tradition it appears evident that the devils are armies set in array,
and that every type of disobedient act has its own devil, appointed to it and
inviting to it. But the path of investigation is a long one, and what we have
mentioned will suffice you, namely, that different effects indicate different causes.
This is what we have mentioned regarding the light of the fire and the blackness
of smoke.
As for tradition, Mujahid said: "Iblis has five sons and has appointed to each
one of them the charge over a certain matter. They are Thabr, Al-A'war, Mabsut,
Dasin, and Zalanbur. Thabr is the master of afflictions who enjoins destruction,
splitting of pockets, smiting of cheeks, and the claim of the pre-Islamic days of
ignorance. Al-A'war is the master of adultery who commands thereto and makes
it appear beautiful. Mabsut is the master of lies. Dasin enters into the relations
between a man and his wife, bringing about faults to him and making him angry
at them. Zalanbur is the master of the market-place, and by virtue of him those in
the market continue to be unjust to one another." The devil of prayer is called
Khinzib, and the devil of ablution is called Walhan. There are many narration on
this subject.
As well as devils are a host so also angels are a host. In the Book of
Thanksgiving we mentioned the secret of the multitude of angels, and that
each one of them is appointed for a special work unique to him. It is narrated
on the authority of Abu Umamah Al-Bahili “Allah be pleased with him” that
he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: "One hundred and sixty angels have been given charge over the believer
to drive away from him that which he cannot ward off. Of these seven are for
sight and they drive away (evil) from it just as flies are driven away from a
plate of honey on a summer day. They drive away also those who, were they
to appear to you, you would see them on ever}' plain and mountain, each one
with outstretched hand and open mouth; and that which if the believer were
given charge of himself therein for a single instant, the demons would snatch
him away." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and AtTabarani).

69
Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart ------------------------------- -----Ayyub Ibn Yunus Ibn Yazid said: “We have been reported that there are
born children to the jinn along with the children of mankind, and these grow up
together.” It is narrated on the authority of Jabir Ibn Abdullah “Allah be
pleased with him” that when Adam was cast down to the earth he said: “O
Lord, You have placed enmity between this creature and myself, so should You
not give me help against him I would not be able to overcome him." Allah
answered: "There shall not be a child born to you but he will be given to the
keeping of an angel." He said: ”0 my Lord, give me more." He answered: "I
shall recompense an evil deed with an evil deed and a good deed with ten and
more." He said: “O Lord, give me more." He answered: "The door of
repentance is open as long as the spirit is in the body." Then Iblis said: “O
Lord, would You not give me help against this creature whom You have
honored above ne, so that I may be able to overcome him?" He answered: "No
son shall be born to him but there shall be one born to you also." He said: “O
Lord, give me more." He answered: "You shall course through them as the
circulation of their blood, and you shall take their breasts as dwelling- places."
He said: ”0 Lord, give me more." He answered: "incite [to senselessness]
whoever you can among them with your voice and assault them with your
horses and foot soldiers and become a partner in their wealth and their children
and promise them." But Satan does not promise them except delusion.” (AlIsra’ 64)

It is narrated on the authority of Abu Ad-Darda’ “Allah be pleased with
him” that the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him”
said: “Allah has created the jinn of three sorts. One sort is snakes, scorpions
and creeping insects of the earth. Another is like the wind blowing through the
air. The third sort is subject to reward and punishment. Allah has also created
three kinds of men. One kind is like the brutes, as Allah Almighty says: “They
have hearts they discern not therewith; they have eyes they see not therewith;
they have ears they hear not therewith; they are like cattle, nay, they go more
astray" (Al-A'raf 178)

i
I jU* Ll-S
^ylljl
Another kind have bodies of human beings and spirits of devils. A third sort
are those who will be in the shadow of Allah on the day when there is no other
shadow save his alone." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and
Ibn Hibban).
Wuhaib Ibn Al-Ward told that once Iblis appeared to Yahva Ibn Zakarivya
“Peace be upon both” and said: “I want to give you an advice.” He said: “I do
not need your advice, but tell me a^out the sons of Adam.” He said: “They are of
three sorts. The first sort which is the strongest of them upon us, is such that,
when we come to one of them to tempt him and gain control over him, he in fear

The quarter of the destructives
70
betakes himself to protection to seeking forgiveness and repentance. Thus, he
destroys every advantage we may have gained over him. we return to him again
and he repeats the same thing. Thus, we neither despair of him, nor do we
achieve our purpose in him, so we are in distress regarding him. Another kind
consists of those who are in our hands just like a ball in the hands of your
children, and we catch them as we will, for we can cope with their souls. The
third kind are those who, like yourself, are infallible (from committing sin), and
we can do nothing with them."
You may say: "But how can Satan appear to some men and not to others? If
one sees his form, is it his real form, or is it an image in which Satan appears to
him? If it is his real form, how is it that he is seen in different forms? How can he
be seen in two places and in two forms at the same time in such a way that two
people see him in two different forms?" It should be known that the angels and
devils each have two forms which are their real forms. These are not perceived by
natural sight, save only by the illumination of the prophetic office. The Prophet
only saw Gabriel in his true form on two occasions. Once the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” asked him to appear to him in his real
form, and Gabriel made his appointment with him at Baqi’, and he appeared to
him and filled the whole horizon from East to West. He saw him again in his true
form on the night of the Heavenly Journey at the Lote tree. But for the most part
he saw him in the form of a man. He used to see him in the form of Dihyah AlKalbi who was a good-looking man.
For the most part he (angel or devil) unveils an image of his form to mystics
and masters of hearts, and Thus, he appears to one of them while he is awake,
and this man will see him with his eye and hear him with his ear. This will take
the place of his real form, likewise he is revealed to a majority of good men
during sleep. Revelation during wakefulness is made only to one who has
attained such a high rank that the occupation of his senses with the things of
this world does not prevent the revelation which comes in sleep, so he sees
while awake what one sees during sleep. It is narrated on the authority of Umar
Ibn Abdul-Aziz that a man asked his Lord to show him the place Satan
occupies in relation to the heart of a man. He saw in his sleep the body of a
man like crystal, and the inside of it was visible from without. He saw Satan in
the form of a frog sitting on the left shoulder, between the shoulder and the
ear, and he had a long and thin proboscis which he had put in through the left
shoulder into the heart in order to make evil suggestions to it. Whenever the
man made mention of Allah, Satan withdrew. This very same thing is
sometimes seen during wakefulness, for some of the mystics have seen Satan in
the form of a dog reclining on a carcass and inviting men to it. The carcass
represents this world.
This is like observing his real form. That’s because reality must appear in the
heart from that side of it which is turned toward the dominion of the unseen.
Then its influence shines upon the side which is turned toward the visible
materiel world, for the two sides are connected with each other. We have already

71
Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart
explained that the heart has two sides. One of them is turned toward the
dominion of the unseen which is the place of entrance of inspiration and Divine
revelation, and the other side is turned toward the world of sense; and that which
appears of this world in the side turned toward the world of sense is only an
imaged form, for the world of sense is entirely subject to imaginative
reproduction. But that image comes from looking by means of sense (of sight) at
the exterior of the visible world. It is possible that the form may not correspond
to the ideal reality. You may see a person with a beautiful external appearance,
while he is abominable in his heart and hideous in his inner life, because the
world of sense abounds in deception.
But the form produced in the imagination by the illuminating effect of the
dominion of the unseen upon the inner secret hearts cannot but reflect
accurately their qualities and correspond to them. For the form in the
dominion of the unseen follows the true characteristic and corresponds to it.
So it is not strange that the hideous reality is not seen save in a hideous form.
Thus, Satan is seen in the form of a dog, a frog, a pig, etc, whereas angel in a
pretty beautiful form, form is an indication of the ideal realities and a true
reflection of them. Therefore, the monkey or pig seen in sleep indicates some
hideous likeness, while a sheep indicates a man of integrity, Thus, it is with all
the categories of dreams and their interpretation. These are strange mysteries,
and they belong to the wonders of the heart. It is not fitting to mention them
in the science of practical religion. But the intent is that you shall believe that
Satan and angels are revealed to masters of hearts, sometimes by means of
representation and reflection during sleep, and sometimes in reality. For the
most part revelation is representation by a form that reflects the ideal reality,
not the ideal reality itself. The latter is However, seen by the eye in very truth.
Only the mystic has this direct sight, not others around him, as for instance a
man asleep.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN: EXPOSITION OF THAT FOR WHICH MAN IS HELD
ACCOUNTABLE AND THAT FOR WHICH HE IS PARDONED IN FIELD OF
EVIL SUGGESTIONS TO HEARTS, THEIR DECISIONS, INVOLUNTARY
THOUGHTS AND PURPOSES
It should be known that this is an obscure matter and that there have
appeared Holy Verses and traditions regarding it which contradict each other. It
is confusing for all save discriminating scholars of the law to find a way of
combining these statements.
Regarding pardon, it is narrated that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” said: <cMy people are pardoned their self talk as long as
they do not translate it in words or deeds.” (This narration is reported by both
sheikhs on the authority of Abu Hurairah). It is further narrated by both AIBukhari and Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah Allah be pleased with
him” that the Messenger of Allah “Adah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Verily Allah says to the recording afigels: 'If a servant of mine intends to do an

;
i

;

i

The quarter of the destructives
72
evil deed, do not write it down; but if he does it then write it down as an evil
deed. If he intends to do a good deed record it as a good deed, and if he does it
write it as ten.'" This points to pardon for the act of heart and its intention to do
an evil deed. According to another version: "He who intends to do a good deed
but does not do it has it reckoned to him as a good deed, and he who intends a
good deed and does it has it reckoned to him up to seven hundred folds. He who
intends an evil deed but does not do it does not have it reckoned against him, but
if he does it, then, it is written down." According to a third version: "If one
thinks about doing an evil deed, I will forgive him this, as long as he does not do
it." All of this points to pardon.
In relation to punishment, Allah Almighty says: "Whether you show what is
within yourselves or conceal it, Allah will bring you to account for it. Then He
will forgive whom He wills and punish whom He wills, and Allah is over all
things competent.” (Al-Baqarah 284)
^

^

A

4jjf 4j pSw-UeJ
^

jl

^ U ij-Lp Ojj ^

9*

He further says: "And do not pursue that of which you have no knowledge.
Indeed, the hearing, the sight and the heart - about all those [one] will be
questioned.” (Al-Isra’ 36)

This indicates that the deed of the heart is like that of the hearing or sight and
is not pardoned. He also said: "And conceal not testimony, for he who conceals
it, verily, sinful is his heart." (Al-Baqarah 283)
^

b ^-3Ip jAjji l.g a:

5 J1

I^

He also says: "Allah will not hold you accountable for a casual word in your
oaths, but He will hold you accountable for what your hearts have earned." (AlBaqarah 225)

ipr t

iji

^

at fa. ^ >

One cannot become well acquainted with the true nature of this matter, as it
seems to us, unless he comprehends the details of the heart’s acts from the time
they begin to appear until the act is committed by the members of the body. Let’s
say that the first thing that comes to the heart is the involuntary thought, For
example, of the form of a woman, and that she is behind him in the road so that
if he were to turn around he would see her. The second is the stirring up of his
desire to look, which is the moving of appetence in human nature. This is
generated by the First involuntary thought and we call it natural inclination, while
the first is called the self-talk, the third is the judgment of the heart that the thing
must be done, i.e., that he must look at her. For when there exists a natural
inclination there is still no decision nor intention until the inhibitions are put
away. Thus, modesty or fear may prevent him from looking. The nullification of

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

73

those inhibitions may come through reflection, but in any case it is a judgment of
the reason and is called a conviction. This is subsequent to the involuntary
thought and natural inclination.
the fourth stage is to fix his determination upon looking, and to make it his
definite intent. This is call a decision to act and intent and purpose. This decision
may have a weak beginning, but if the heart gives heed to the first involuntary
thought until its attraction to the heart is prolonged, this decision becomes
inevitable, and it becomes a determination of the will. Then when the will is
determined one may repent after determination and give up the action. Perhaps
he may neglect it because of some happening and neither do it nor give heed to
it, or again, perhaps some hindrance may come along to prevent him from the
action. There then are four states of the heart before the bodily member acts:
involuntary thought, which the talk of the self is; then inclination; then
conviction, then decision.
Now regarding the involuntary thought we say that one is not held
accountable for it because it is not included in voluntary choices. Such also is the
case with inclination and the sdrring up of appetence, for they too are
involuntary. These are what the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” intended in his statement: "My people are pardoned the talk of the
self." The talk of the self stands for the involuntary thought which suddenly
occurs to the mind, but is not followed by any determination to carry it out.
Determination and decision are not called talk of the self. This is confirmed by a
narration on the authority of Uthman Ibn Maz'un “Allah be pleased with him” in
which he said to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him”: “O Apostle of Allah! My self talks to me to divorce Khawlah." The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” answered: "Be
deliberate; my usage includes marriage." He said: "My self talks to me to get
castrated." The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: “Be deliberate; castration of my nation is persistent fasting." He said: "My
self talks to me to become a religious ascetic.” The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Be deliberate; the asceticism of my
people is to take part in Jihad and pilgrimage." He said: “My self talks to me to
give up meat." The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” answered: "Be deliberate, for I like it. If I should find it I would eat it; and
if I were to ask Allah for it He would feed me therewith." (This narration is
reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Sa’id Ibn Al-Musayyab; and AdDarimi on the authority of Sa’d Ibn Abu Waqqas; and At-Tabarani and AlBaghawi on the authority of Uthman Ibn Maz’un). These are involuntary
thoughts, unaccompanied by a determination to carry them out, and they are
the talk of the self. Therefore, he consulted the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” since he had no determination nor decision to
act.
The third stage is conviction, and the judgment of the heart that the thing
must be done. There is an extent of uncertainty in this, in that it may be

Ed

The quarter of the destructives
74
compulsory or voluntary, and the states differ accordingly. One is held
accountable for that which is voluntary, But not for that which is compulsory.
The fourth is a decision to act, and one is held accountable for it. But if it is
not carried out, in this case: if one has given it up through fear of Allah and
contrition for his decision, then this is reckoned to him as a good deed. His
decision was evil, but his abstaining from it and struggle with himself against it
were good. A decision in accord with nature does not indicate a complete
heedlessness of Allah, but abstinence through struggle against the nature requires
great power. One’s effort in going contrary to nature, which is a work done for
Allah, is stronger than his effort to agree with Satan through agreeing with his
own nature. Thus, it is reckoned to him as a good deed, because his effort in
abstaining and his decision thereto outweighed his decision to do the deed. But if
the act is stopped by a hindrance, or if he gives it up for any reason other than
the fear of Allah, it is reckoned to him as an evil deed, for his decision is a
voluntary act of the heart. The proof of this detailed statement is attested from
the authentic narration in which the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: “The angels say: ‘O Lord, that servant of You desires to
do an evil deed', although He perceives (that) better (than they). He says: 'Keep
watch of him, and if he does it, write it as an evil deed like it. But if he gives it up
write it down as a good deed for him, for he has given it up only for my sake’."
Then He said: Tf he does not do it', He meant the forsaking of it for Allah's sake.
But if one has determined on an act of lewdness which is made impossible for
him by some cause or neglect, how can this be reckoned to him as a good deed?
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "People
will be mustered (on the Day of Judgement) according to their intentions solely."
(This narration is reported by Ibn Majah on the authority of Jabir and Abu
Hurairah; and Muslim on the authority of A’ishah and Umm Salamah). We know
that he who determines at night to get up the next morning and kill a Muslim or
commit adultery with a woman, and then he dies that night, he will have died
with his deed made up and will be mustered (on the Day of judgement)
according to his intention, having decided upon an evil deed which he has not
carried out. The decisive proof of this is confirmed by the statement of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "If two Muslims
meet in a sword fight, both the killer and the killed will be in the fire." Someone
said to him: "This one was a murderer, but what about the slain?" He replied:
<fBecause he desired to slay his fellow." (This narration is reported by both
sheikhs on the authority of Abu Bakrah).
This is an authoritative statement which shows that by mere desire a man
became one of the people of the Fire even though he himself was unjustly
slain. How can anyone suppose that Allah will not punish for intention and
decision, when man is punished for everything that comes within the scope of
voluntary action, save as he atones for it by a good deed? Destroying the
determination by contrition is a good deed, and it is Therefore, reckoned to
him as a good deed. But to miss the thing desired because of hindrance is not

75
Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart -------------------------------------a good deed.
But involuntary thought, the talk of the self and the stirring up of desire are
all outside the realm of voluntary acts. So to consider them as worthy of
punishment would be to make man responsible for what is beyond his power. In
this connection, It is narrated by the grand imam Ahmad and Muslim on the
authority of Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him”: When Allah Almighty
revealed: “To Allah belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth. Whether you
show what is in your minds or conceal it, Allah calls you to account for it He
forgives whom he pleases, and punishes whom he pleases. For Allah has power
over all things”, (Al-Baqarah 284)
Cr*4 j^jl

4 ^5

4=q..,a’tl ^ L Ij-Lp oi3

^

^ C. 4JJ ^

Ijp

The companions of The Messenger of Allah felt it hard. They went to the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and knelt down.
They said to him: “O Messenger of Allah! We have been order to do the deeds,
which are within our capacity, such as performing the prayer, observing fasts,
practicing Jihad and giving in charity. Then, this Verse has been revealed to you,
which we cannot bear.” The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said (to them): “Do you want to say the same as those of the two
Scriptures (i.e. Jews and Christians) said: “We hear and disobey”? no! you should
say: "We hear, and we obey: (we seek) Your forgiveness, our Lord, and to You is
the end of all journeys.” Accordingly, they said: “We hear, and we obey: (we seek)
Your forgiveness, our Lord, and to You is the end of all journeys." they recited it,
and it flowed smoothly on their tongues, and when they did so, Allah Almighty
annulled it by the following Holy Verse: “On no soul does Allah place a burden
greater than it can bear. It gets every good that it earns, and it suffers every ill that
it earns.” (Al-Baqarah 286)
(c^p}

L*

L LgJ

n/1 \JLJu 4i)lc_iJ5C

^

From this it appears that man is not held accountable for the deeds of the
heart which are not within his power.
Here then is an uncovering of this ambiguity, who ever supposes that every
act of the heart is called self-talk and does not differentiate between these three
classes must inevitably err. For how could it be that man would go unpunished
for such acts of his heart as pride, conceit, hypocrisy, dissimulation, envy, and all
the malicious acts of the heart? Allah Almighty says: "And do not pursue that of
which you have no knowledge. Indeed, the hearing, the sight and the heart about all those [one] will be questioned.” (Al-Isra’ 36)
4.

^^

JT iljjilij Jvajlj

oj

^ J-d U

^

I.e., as much as is included in voluntary action. If one’s eye were to fall
involuntarily upon a woman unlawful for him, he would not be blameworthy
for it; but if he followed it with a second look he would be punished, for it

I

The quarter of the destructives
76
would be voluntarily, likewise the involuntary thoughts of the heart follow the
same course, Indeed the heart is more deserving of blame since it is
fundamental.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
“Piety is here”, pointing to his heart. (This narration is reported by Muslim on the
authority of Abu Hurairah). Allah says: "Their flesh will never reach Allah, nor
wall their blood; but piety on your part wall reach Him." (Al-Hajj 37)
4 SjS

dLajLo

iajT Jlii ^ ^

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “Sin
is the allurement of heart." He further said: "Righteousness is that in which the
heart quietly trusts, even though men may give you advice after advice." (This
narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu Tha’labah; and
Ahmad on the authority of Wabisah). So we can say that if the heart of a mufti
gives an advice making anything obligatory, even though it errs therein, this
becomes a meritorious act. Indeed, if a man thinks that he has performed
ablution and must pray, and then prays, but afterwards remembers that he had
not performed ablution, he still has the reward for doing it. But if he
remembers and then neglects it he is punished. If a man finds a woman in his
bed and supposes her to be his wife, he commits no act of disobedience by
sleeping wath her, even though she is stranger. But if he thinks that she is a
stranger and then sleeps with her, he becomes disobedient even though she is
his wife. All of this is so because it is the heart and not the organs that is
considered.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
EXPOSITION OF WHETHER OR NOT EVIL SUGGESTION COULD BE
IMAGINED TO BE ENTIRELY CUT OFF DURING DEVOTIONAL EXERCISES
It should be known that the learned, who observe the heart of man and
investigate its characteristics and its wonders, disagree on this question, holding
five different opinions. One group says that evil suggestion is cut off by
remembrance of Allah. They quote the statement of the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” in which he said: "Whenever Allah is
remembered, he (Satan) hides himself." To hide one's self is to keep still, so it is
as though he keeps silent.
Another group says that the source of evil suggestion does not entirely cease
to exist, but continues to move in the heart, even though with no effect, however,
for the heart, since it is entirely immersed in remembrance, is veiled from the
effect of evil suggestion. The heart is like a man so engrossed in his chief concern
in a way that, if he were spoken to, he would not understand, even though the
voice reaches his hearing.
A third group says that neither the evil suggestion nor its effects are out off
entirely, but its domination over the heart is cut off. It is as though Satan weakly
whispers at a distance.

77
Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart
A fourth group says that evil suggestion ceases to exist for a moment at the
remembrance of Allah, and that remembrance also stops for a moment. These
two states follow each other in succession at such close intervals that they seem,
because of their closeness, to be pressing against each other. They are like a ball
which has many separate dots on it, for if you roll it rapidly you will see the dots
as though they were circled, because of the speed with which the modon brings
them together. This group says that (Satan's) hiding is mentioned (by the
Prophet), while we observe evil suggestion along with remembrance, and there is
no other explanation for it than this.
A fifth group says that evil suggestion and remembrance crowd upon each
other constantly within the heart endlessly. Just as a man may see two things at
the same time, so also the heart may be the channel for two things. The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “Every man
has four eyes. Two are in his head and through them he sees what pertains to his
relationships to this present world. The other two are in his heart, and through
them he sees what pertains to his religion." (This narration is reported by Abu
Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of Mu’adh). Al-Muhasibi held this view.
But in fact, in our sight, all of these groups are correct. Each one fails to
include all the species of evil suggestions, and looks only at one species of evil
suggestion and tells of it.
Evil suggestions are of different sorts. The first is clothed with truth to a
certain degree, for Satan may be garbed with truth. Thus, he will say to a man:
"Do not give up the enjoyment of pleasures; life is long and resisting your desires
throughout your whole life causes great suffering." But if the man remembers at
this time the greatness of Allah's right (over him) and His great rewards and
punishments, he will say to himself: "Resisting the desires is hard, but it is still
more difficult to endure the Fire, and one of the two is inevitable." So if the man
remembers the promise and threat of Allah and renews his faith and certainty,
then Satan hides himself and flees away, For he cannot say that the Fire is easier
to bear than resisting acts of disobedience, nor can he say that disobedience does
not lead to the Fire, because his faith in the Book of Allah prevents him from
that, and Thus, his evil whisperings are cut off.
So also he will suggest that one should be proud of his own deeds, saying:
"What creature knows Allah as you know Him, or serves Him as you serve Him?
How great then is your place with Allah." But then the man remembers that his
knowledge, his heart, and his members with which he works, and his work itself
are all of these created by Allah, so how can he be proud of them? Then Satan
hides himself, for he cannot say: "This is not from Allah", because his knowledge
and faith compel him. This is a sort of evil suggestion that can be cut off entirely
from those who have mystical knowledge and are enlightened by the light of faith
and knowledge.
The second species of evil suggestion is that which moves and stirs up
appetence. This is divided into that which man knows assuredly to be an act of
disobedience, and that of which he is almost certain. If he knows it assuredly

The quarter of the destructives
78
Satan withdraws from die stirring up which results in moving appetence, but
does not withdraw from stirring up per se. But if it is of the suspected sort it
may continue to exert its influence in such a way as to call for a struggle in
warding it off. Thus, the evil suggestion exists, but is warded off and does not
gain the victory.
The third type of evil suggestion is that which comes only from involuntary
thoughts and recollecting pest states; like, for example, thinking about something
other dian prayer while praying. So when the man begins the practice of
remembrance, conceivably it is warded off and returns again and again.
Remembrance and evil suggestion Thus, keep alternating. It is conceivable that
they press so closely upon one another that the understanding will include an
understanding of the meaning of the thing recited, and also of those involuntary
suggestions, as though the two were in two different places in the heart. That this
sort of evil suggestion should be entirely warded off so as not to recur is very
unlikely, but it is not impossible since the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” said: “Whoever prays a two-cycle prayer without
experiencing any suggestions of the self about this present world during the
prayer will have all his former sins forgiven." If this were not conceivable he
would not have mentioned it. This cannot be conceived, however, save of a
heart over which love has so gained the mastery that it has become as one
infatuated. Thus, we sometimes see a man whose heart is so wholly occupied
with an enemy who has injured him that he may think about contending with
his enemy as long as is equal to offering a two-rak’ah prayer and more, and no
other idea save that of his enemy will cross his mind. So too one deeply in love
may think in his heart about conversing with his beloved and be so deeply
submerged in this thought that nothing else save conversing with his beloved
ever occurs to him. If someone else were to speak to him he would not hear,
and if one should pass in front of him he would be as were unseeing. If this is
conceivable in the case of fearing an enemy and coveting reputation and money,
why should it be inconceivable in the case of fearing the Fire and coveting the
Garden? But this is rare because of the weakness of faith in Allah and the last
day.
If you consider all of these classifications and types of evil suggestions you
will understand that each one of these groups has its own point which applies
under particular circumstances. To summarize: Salvation from Satan for a
moment or for an hour is not unlikely, but salvation from him for a long lifetime
is indeed very out-of-the-way and impossible of attainment. If anyone could have
escaped from the evil suggestions which Satan makes by means of involuntary
thoughts and rousing of desire, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” surely would have escaped it. It is narrated about him that he
looked at the marks of his garment during prayer, and when he finished the
prayer he threw the garment away, saying, "It distracted me from prayer." He
said: “Take it to Abu Jahm and bring me his coarse garment." (This narration is
reported by Al-Bukhari). It is further narrated that the Messenger of Allah

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

79

“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” had a gold ring on his finger, and he
looked at it while he was in the pulpit. Then he flung it away, saying: "One look
at it and one at you." (This narration is reported by An-Nasa’i on the authority of
Ibn Abbas). This was due to the evil suggestion of Satan by arousing the pleasure
of looking at the gold ring and the marks of the garment. This took place before
gold was forbidden, and Therefore, he wore it and then threw it away.
The evil suggestions of this world of show and its money are cut off only by
casting them away, and separating one's self from them. For as long as a man
owns anything beyond his actual need, be it but a single dinar, Satan will not
cease during prayer to cause him to think about his dinar. How will he keep it?
For what will he spend it? How can he hide it so that no one will know about it?
How shall he show it so as to boast of it, etc.? Whoever fixes his clutches on this
present world and then desires to get rid of Satan is like a man dipped in honey
who thinks that the flies will not light on him. This is impossible, for this present
world is a great entrance for the evil suggestions of Satan, Indeed there is not one
entrance only, but many.
One of the wise men said: “Satan approaches the son of Adam from the
direction of his acts of disobedience. If he abstains from these, Satan comes to
him by way of giving advice, in order to cause him to fall into some religious
innovation. If he refuses this he commands him to lead a life of narrowness and
abstinence so that he considers as unlawful that which is lawful. If he refuses this,
Satan makes him doubt regarding his ablution and prayer so that he may not have
certain knowledge (about the performance of them). If he abstains from this
Satan makes righteous acts easy for his so that men may see him as patient and
pure, and their hearts be turned to him. Then he becomes proud of himself, and
by this he (Satan) destroys him. At this point man is in great need, for this is the
extreme degree of temptation, and Satan knows that if man passes by it he has
escaped from him into the Garden.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
EXPOSITION OF HOW SWIFT HEARTS TURN, AND ARE CLASSIFIED IN
RESPECT TO CHANGE AND STABILITY
It should be known that the heart, as we have mentioned, is surrounded by
the qualities which we have spoken of, and that various effects and states are
poured into it from the entrances which we have described. So it is, as it were, a
target which is being hit constantly from every direction. Whenever a thing hits
the heart by which it is influenced, it is also hit from another direction by an
opposing influence so that its character is changed. If a demon comes to the
heart and calls it to desire, there comes also an angel to drive it away. If a demon
entices it to one evil, another demon entices it to another. If an angel attracts it to
one sort of good, another angel attracts it to some other good. So at one time it is
torn between two angels, at another between two demons, and at another
between an angel and a demon. It is never left alone at all.

The quarter of the destructives

80

To this refers the statement of Allah Almighty: "We will overturn their hearts
and their sights "(Al-An’am 110)

i0
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”, because
of his wide observation of the strange doings of Allah in the wonders of the
heart and its constant changes, used to swear by it and say: "No, by Him Who
overturns hearts." (This narration is reported by Al-Bukhari on the authority of
Ibn Umar). He often used to say: “O You Who overturn hearts, establish my
heart firmly upon Your religion." They said: “Do you fear, O Apostle of
Allah?" He answered: "What is there to make me sure since the heart is between
two of the fingers of (Allah) Most Merciful, Who turns them about even as He
wills?" Or according to another version, "..if He wills to establish it He causes it
to stand, and if He wills to cause it to go astray He does so." (This narration is
reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Anas; and Al-Hakim on the
authority of Jabir; and Muslim on the authority of An-Nawwas Ibn Sam’an).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” set forth
three parables for the heart saying: "The heart is like a sparrow, turning about
every hour." (This narration is reported by Al-Hakim, Al-Baghawi and Al-Baihaqi
on the authority of Abu Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarrah). "The heart in its constant
changes is like a pot boiling up together." (This narration is reported by Ahmad
and Al-Hakim on the authority of Al-Miqdad Ibn Al-Aswad). "The heart is like a
feather in a desert which the winds blow along over and over." (This narration is
reported by At-Tabarani and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Abu Musa AlAsh’ari; and Al-Bazzar on the authority of Anas).
These changes and the wonders of the dealings of Allah in causing them,
which cannot be sought out, are known only by those who watch and ponder
over their own condition in relation to Allah. Hearts are divided into three
classes from the standpoint of being fixed on good, on evil, or wavering
between both:
There is a heart which is inhabited by piety, purified by discipline, and cleared
of all evil characteristics. Into it are poured involuntary suggestions of good from
the storehouses of the unseen and the entrances to the heavenly dominion. The
intellect is then wholly occupied with thinking about that which has been
suggested to it so as to know the minute details of good therein and understand
the secrets of its benefits. Thus, its purpose is revealed to the intellect by the light
of insight, and so it decides that this thing must be done. It then urges the heart
and calls it to do the act. The angel looks to this heart and finds it good in
substance, pure because of its piety, enlightened by the light of reason, furnished
with the light of experiential knowledge, and he sees that it is worthy to be his
place of abode and alighting. Thereupon he supplies it with an unseen host, and
guides it into other blessings, so that good is Thus, led on to greater good
unceasingly. His help in causing it to desire good and making it easy of
attainment does not cease. To such a heart is referred in the statement of Allah

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

81
Almighty. But as for him who gives alms and fears Allah and believes in the
best, we will make easy his path to happiness." (Al-Lail 5-7)
^®
((y)
{^5 'ju\j
£\±y
In such a heart there shines the light of the lamp from the niche of lordship,
so that therein lies no hidden polytheism, for such is more hidden than the
creeping of a black ant on a dark night. No hidden thing is concealed from this
light, nor does any of the wiles of Satan get the start of a heart like this. Indeed
Satan stands and speaks flowery words striving to deceive, but the heart will not
turn to him. This heart, after being purified from the destructives, soon becomes
filled with the saviors we are going to mention: thanksgiving, patience, fear, hope,
poverty, asceticism, love, satisfaction, longing, trust, meditation, examination of
conscience, etc. This is the heart to which Allah turns His Face. It is the heart
referred to in His statement: "Do hearts not find rest in remembrance of Allah?"
(Ar-Ra’d 28)
4 G3 V*jyilaJ ailSI

*1

^

And : “O You soul which are at rest." (Al-Fajr 27)

The second heart is disappointed, laden by passion, corrupted by foul actions,
stained by blameworthy characteristics, Its doors for demons are open, and its
doors for angels closed, The starting point of evil in it is an involuntary
suggestion of passion which is cast into it and speaks therein. Then the heart
turns to the intellect as judge to get its decision and learn the right course therein.
But the intellect has become accustomed to serve passion, and familiar with it,
and continues to invent tricks to agree with passion and assist it until they entice
the soul and help on the passion. Thus, the breast rejoices in passion whose
darkness covers it because of the withdrawal of the forces of the intellect from
the defense of the heart. Accordingly the power of Satan grows because of the
breadth of his area due to the spread of passion. Satan then approaches the heart
with allurement and seduction and anticipations, speaking flowery words to
deceive. The power of faith in (Allah's) promise and threat grows weak and the
light of certainty regarding fear of the hereafter is extinguished. For there rises up
from passion a dark smoke over the heart which fills it entirely so that its lights
are extinguished. Then the intellect becomes like an eye whose lids are full of
smoke so that it is not able to see.
This is what the victory of appetence does to the heart, so that there is no
possibility left for the heart to stop and look. If a warner should try to make it see
and hear what the truth is, it would blind itself to understanding and close its ears
against hearing. Appetence is roused up in it and Satan overpowers it. The bodily
members move in accordance with the desires of passion, and the act of
disobedience appears in the physical material world from the dominion of the
unseen in accordance with Divine decree and fate of Allah. To such a heart is
referred in the statement of Allah Almighty: "Do you consider him who takes his

The quarter of the destructives
82
lusts for his god? Will you then be in charge over him? Or do you reckon that
most of them will hear or understand? They are only like the catde, if not more
straying from the way." (Al-Furqan 43-44)
jl

J

^Jky^ds=»\ jl

i

f l (C.J))

^

C-olil

'4^!

o*

^

p-* bj

And: "Already the word has come into effect upon most of them, so they do
not believe." (Ya Sin 7)

And: "It is all the same to them if you do warn them or do warn them not;
they will not believe." (Ya Sin 10)
i (i|S Oy^yi Y
^
Many a heart in this condition is regards all desires, and many a heart is in this
state as regards certain desires, like a man who abstains from some things, but if
he sees a pretty face he cannot control his eye and heart. Or it may be like a man
who cannot control himself in anything having to do with high rank, leadership,
and pride. He has no grip to hold himself firm when the occasion appears. It may
be like one who cannot control himself in anger, no matter how much he may
despise it and recall its faults. Or it may be like a man who cannot control himself
when he is able to get a dirham or a dinar, but he covets it as one bereft and
disordered, forgetting therein-manly virtue and piety. All of this is because of the
rising of the smoke of passion over the heart so that the light of modesty, manly
virtue, and faith is extinguished, and he strives to secure what Satan desires.
The third heart is that in which there appears suggestions of passion which
summon it to evil. But there follows then a suggestion of faith which summons it
to good, the soul with its lusts hastens to the aid of the evil suggestion, the lust
grows stronger, and enjoyment and delight seem good. But the intellect hastens
to the aid of the good suggestion, repels the idea of the lust, and makes the doing
of it appear abominable, attributing it to ignorance and likening it to a brute or a
lion in rushing blindly into evil and showing little concern for consequences. The
soul then inclines toward the advice of the intellect. Satan in turn attacks the
intellect and makes the call of passion louder, saying: "What is this cold narrow
aloofness? Why do you abstain from your passions and torment yourself? Do you
see any of your contemporaries going contrary to his passions, or giving up his
aim? Will you Thus, leave the pleasures of this present world for them to enjoy,
and deprive yourself of them until you are avoided, miserable, and worn out, and
become the laughing-talk of modern folk? Do you want to attain a higher rank
than so-and-so and so-and-so? They have done what you have longed to do and
have not abstained. Don't you see the learned man so-and-so? He does not guard
against doing this, and if it were evil he would abstain from it." Thus, the soul
inclines to Satan and is turned to him. Then the angel attacks Satan and says:
"Has Anyone ever perished save he who followed the pleasure of the moment,

Book one: Exposition of wonders of heart

83

forgetting the consequences? will you be contented with a trifling pleasure and
forsake the pleasure of the Garden and its blessedness forever? Or do you think
that the pain of resisting your lust is too great a burden, but do not think the pain
of the Fire grievous? Will you be deceived by men's neglect of themselves, their
following their own passions, and their taking sides with Satan, in spite of the fact
that the torment of the Fire will not be made easier for you to bear because of
the disobedience of another? Now if it were summer and all the people were
standing in the sun, but you had a cool house, would you stay with the people, or
would you seek shelter for yourself? How could you disagree with men through
the fear of the sun's heat and not disagree with them through fear of the Fire?"
Thereupon the soul inclines to the saying of the angel.
The heart continues to sway between the two forces, being attracted by
each of the two parties, until there overcomes It that which is dominant
therein. For if the Satanic qualities are predominandy in the heart which we
have mentioned, then Satan is victorious and the heart inclines to its own sort
among the parties of devils, turning away from the party of Allah and His
saints, and taking sides with the party of Satan and its own soldiers. Because
of predestination its members have done what causes them to be remote from
Allah.
If the angelic characteristics are predominant in the heart it will not give heed
to the allurement of Satan, nor his urging the claim of the swifdy passing world,
nor his making light of the hereafter. But it inclines to the party of Allah, and its
obedience appears in its members in accordance with what has previously been
decreed.
“The heart of the believer is between two of the fingers of (Allah) Most
Merciful", i.e., between the attraction of these two parties. This is the case with
most men; I mean the turning and shifting from one party to another, for
perpetual constancy in the party of the angels or that of the devils is rare in both
cases. These acts of obedience and of disobedience appear, coming from the
storehouses of the unseen into the physical material world, by means of the
storehouse of the heart; for it is one of the storehouses of the dominion of the
unseen. When these appear they are signs which teach masters of hearts the fact
of the predetermined decree. For him who is created for the Garden the means
of obedience are made easy, and for him who is created for the fire the means of
disobedience are made easy. Evil companions have been empowered over him,
and the sayings of Satan have been cast into his heart. For by varieties of sayings
he (Satan) deceives the foolish. Examples of these sayings are: "Truly Allah is
merciful, so do not worry. Men do not all fear Allah, so do not disagree with
them. Life is long, so wait and repent tomorrow." "He makes them promises, and
stirs up desires within them, but Satan promises only dilution." (An-Nisa’ 120)

He promises them repentance and stirs up within them a desire for
forgiveness, but he destroys them, by the permission of Allah, through these

The quarter of the destructives
84
tricks and the like. He opens a man's heart to receive deception, but contracts it
against the reception of truth. All of this is because of the Divine decrees of
Allah. "Whomsoever Allah wishes to guide, He expands his breast to Islam; but
whomsoever He wishes to lead astray, He makes his breast tight and constricted,
as though he would mount up into the sky." (Al-An’am 125)
LLjL£=3 ^rj>- lily©

,j-*5

j0jJ^ £~S^i

O'

^

"If Allah helps you there is none can overcome you; but if He leaves you in
the lurch, who is he that can help you after Him?" (A1 Imran 160)
4 CSS

Cr? ^<S $ ' ^

'x^~' ^]5

o! ^

He is the One who guides aright and leads astray. He does as He wills and
judges as He desires. There is none to avert His judgment, nor is there any who
can repel His decree, He has created the Garden and created a people for it, and
He engages them in obedience. He has also created the fibre and created a people
for it, and He engages them in disobedience.
He has taught mankind the sign of the people of the Garden and of the
people of the fire. He said: “Surely the righteous are in bliss, and, verily, the
wicked are in hell." (Al-Infitar 13-14)
i

OJ3

J} J!jW' Oj >

Then He said, according to a narration of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”: "These are in the Garden and I care not, and
these are in the fire and I care not." So Allah, the King, the Real, is exalted; "He
shall not be questioned concerning what He does, but they shall be questioned."
(Al-Anbiya 23)

< ® ^L>.M.

& 'J& *5>

Let us then limit ourselves to this brief amount in mentioning the wonders of
the heart, for to survey it completely is not suitable for the science of practical
religion. But we have mentioned what is needed in order to know the depth and
secrets of the science of practical religion, in order that one may be profited
thereby who is not satisfied with things external, nor content to take the shell
instead of the kernel, but longs to have a detailed knowledge of the true nature of
causes. In what we have mentioned he will find that which, if Allah wills, will
both suffice and convince. Allah is Lord of success.
The Book of Wonders of Heart is ended, and to Allah be praise and gratitude.
It is followed by the Book of Discipline of Soul and Improvement of Character,
Praise be to Allah alone, and may His blessing be upon every chosen servant.

3 Gifte

Egg! gUelexSIQ): aim iMiii^iV^l.i^!.

1

This is the second book of the quarter of destructives
In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Praise be to Allah Who has managed affairs with His ordinance and justice,
and composed creatures and gave them good form, and adorned the form of
man with making him stand straight, and giving him good estimate, causing him
to be proportionate in shape and size, and referred the matter of improving
character to the effort of man, and urged him to improve his character by
frightening and warning him (of His punishment), and made it easy on the private
among His servants to improve theirs by granting them help and success, and
favored them with making easy its difficulty and complexity for them. Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon Muhammad, the slave and Messenger of Allah, His
beloved and well chosen, the bearer of His glad tidings and warnings, on whom
the lights of Prophethood were visible, and from his visions and glad news the
reality of the true nature of things seemed evident. Blessing and peace be also
upon his family and companions, who purified the surface of Islam from the
darkness and dimness of infidelity, and obliterated falsehood whose filth never
touched them.
To go further: the good character is the quality of the chief and master of the
Messengers, and the best conduct of the sincere lovers of truth, it represents,
with certainty, half of religion, and the fruit of the efforts of god-fearing, and
discipline of worshippers. On the contrary, the bad manners are the deadly
poisons, abrogating destructive, disgracing shames, evident vices, and the wicked
things that draw one far from (the mercy of) the Lord of the worlds, and rather
bring him into the way of devils. They are the doors that are opened to the
blazing fire of Allah Almighty, which burn hearts, whereas the good manners are
the doors that are opened from the heart to the pleasures and delights of the
Garden and the neighbourhood of (Allah) Most Gracious.
Of a surety, wicked manners are the diseases of hearts and ailments of souls.
But they differ from the ordinary diseases that do not go beyond the living body
in that they transcend to the eternal life (of the spirit). If the physicians care about
setting laws of remedy for bodily diseases, that do not go beyond the life of this
world, it should be preferable to set laws of treatment of the heart diseases that
transcend to the eternal life. However, it is incumbent upon every man of sound
mind to learn this sort of medicine, for all hearts could hardly be free from
diseases and if they were to be neglected, they would accumulate and become too
strong to remedy. For this reason, one needs to have knowledge of their sources
and causes, and exert his greatest effort to remedy and reform them. Treating
them is intended by the statement of Allah Almighty: “He has succeeded who
85

The quarter of the destructives

86
purifies it”, (Ash-Shams 9)
4

'-t

Whereas neglecting them is intended by the statement of Allah Almighty:
“And he has failed who instills it [with corruption].” (Ash-Shams 10)
In that book, we are going to refer to some of heart diseases and the way of
treating them, but briefly and with no minute details, for the details shall be
brought along the remaining books of that quarter. Our purpose is to have a
general overview of the improvement of character, and paving the way for
treating them, taking from the treatment of the body an example to make it more
understandable and perceptible. This matter shall be clarified by exposing first
the merit of good character; exposing the true nature of the good character;
exposing the changeability of character by discipline; exposing the means of
attaining good character; exposing the ways by which the means to improve
character and discipline souls are known; exposing the signs by which the heart
disease is known; exposing the ways by which a man knows his own defects;
exposing evidences from tradition that the way of treating heart diseases is to
leave desires; the signs of good character; exposing the way to discipline children
during their early childhood; and exposing the conditions of discipline and
commencements of self-mortification. Those are eleven chapters to be included
in this book, Allah willing.

CHAPTER ONE:
MERIT OF GOOD CHARACTER; AND DEMERIT OF BAD CHARACTER
Prophetic Narrations
Allah Almighty said addressing His Prophet “Peace be upon him” out of
praising him and showing his favour upon him: “And you (stand) on an exalted
standard of character.” (Al-Qalam 4)

4

(IP ^b|3 ^

It is narrated on the authority of A’ishah “Allah be pleased with her” that she
said: “The character of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” was taken from the Qur’an.” (This narration is reported by Muslim).
It is narrated that a man asked the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” about the good character, thereupon he recited the statement of
Allah Almighty: “Hold to forgiveness; command what is right; but turn away
from the ignorant.” (Al-A’raf 199)

Then he said: “It is to keep good relation with such as severs relation from
you, to give such as withholds from you, and to forgive such as wrongs you.”
(This narration is reported by Ibn Mardawaih on the authority of Jabir). The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: “I

Book two: Sclf-Disciplinc and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases --------

87

have been sent (as a Prophet) in order to perfect the noble manners.” (This
narration is reported by Al-Hakim, Ahmad and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of
Abu Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” also said: “The heaviest thing to be put in the scale of balance (on the Day
Judgement) will be a good character.” (This narration is reported by Abu
Dawud on the authority of Abu Ad-Darda’).
It is narrated that a man came to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” in front of him and said: “O Messenger of Allah! What is
religion?” He said: “It is to have good character.” He came to him on his right
side and said: “O Messenger of Allah! What is religion?” He said: “It is to have
good character.” He came to him for the third time on his left side and said: “O
Messenger of Allah! What is religion?” He said: “It is to have good character.”
Then, he came to him from behind his back and said: “O Messenger of Allah!
What is religion?” He turned his face to him and said: “Do you not understand?
It is not to grow angry.” (This narration is reported by Al-Marwazi on the
authority of Abu Al-Ala’ Ibn Ash-Shikhkhir).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” was asked:
“O Messenger of Allah! What is the bad omen?” he said: “It is the bad
character.” (This narration is reported by Ahmad on the authority of A’ishah). A
man said to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”:
“Advise me!” he said: “Fear Allah wherever you are.” He said: “Give me more.”
He said: “Make the good deed follow the evil deed so that it would erase it.” He
said: “Give me more.” He said: “Deal with the people depending upon good
character.” (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu
Dharr).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” was asked:
“Which deed is the best?” he said: ‘To have good character.” The Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: “Allah does not
make good the character and appearance of a man to let him to the fire (of Hell)
to devour.” According to Al-Fudail, it was said to the,: “So and so of women
stands for prayer at night and observes fast during the day, but she is of bad
character, and she causes harm to her neighbours with her tongue.” On that he
said: “She has no good; and she will be among the denizens of the fixe (of Hell).”
According to Abu Ad-Darda’ “Allah be pleased with him”: I heard the Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” having said: “The first thing to
be placed in the scale of balance (on the Day of Judgement) will be the good
character and generosity. When Allah Almighty created faith it said: “O Allah!
Give me power.” He strengthened it with good character and generosity. When
Allah created disbelief it said: “O Allah! Give me power.” He strengthened it with
bad character and stinginess.”
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: “Verily, Allah has chosen that religion for His Own Self; and your religion is
good only through the good character and generosity. So, adorn your religion
with them.” (This narration is reported by Ad-Daraqatni and Al-Khara’iti on the

The quarter of the destructives
88
authority of Abu Sa’id). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said: “The good character represents the greatest of Allah’s manners.”
(This narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Ammar Ibn Yasir).
It was said to die Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”:
“O Messenger of Allah! Who among the believers has the best faith?” he said:
“Who has the best character.” (This narration is reported by Abu Dawud, AnNasa’i, At-Tirmidhi and Al-Hakim on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “You
never satisfy the people with your property, but at least satisfy them with your
joyfulness and good character.” (This narration is reported by Al-Bazzar, Abu
Ya’li and At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: “The bad character spoils
the deed just as vinegar spoils honey.” (This narration is reported by Ibn Hibban
on the authority of Abu Hurairah; and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Ibn Abbas
and Abu Hurairah). It is narrated on the authority of Jarir Ibn Abdullah “Allah be
pleased with him” that he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: “Allah has made your good appearance, so, make your
good character.” (This narration is reported by Al-Khara’iti). It is narrated on the
authority of Al-Bara’ Ibn Azib “Allah be pleased with him” that he said: “The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” was the best of
people in character and appearance.” (This narration is reported by Al-Khara’iti).
It is further narrated on the authority of Abu Mas’ud Al-Badri “Allah be
pleased with him” that he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” used to say in his supplication: “O Allah! As You have made
my good appearance, make my good character.” (This narration is reported by
Al-Khara’iti; and Ahmad on the authority of A’ishah). It is narrated on the
authority of Ibn Umar “Allah be pleased with them” that he said: the Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” used to supplicate so much
saying: “O Allah! I ask You to provide me with good health and wellbeing and
good character.” (This narration is reported by Al-Khara’iti). It is narrated on the
authority of Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” that he said: the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “The
believer’s religion represents his honour, his good character represents his
ancestry, and his gallantry represents his mind.” (This narration is reported by Ibn
Hibban, Al-Hakim and Al-Baihaqi).
It is narrated on the authority of Usamah Ibn Sharik “Allah be pleased with
him” that he said: I was present when the desert Arabs asked the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” saying: “What is the best to be
given to a man?” He said: “The good character.” (This narration is reported by
Ibn Majah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
further said: “The dearest one to Allah Almighty who will have the closest seat to
me on the Day of Judgement is the one who has the best manners among you.”
(This narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu Hurairah). It
is narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with them” that he

Book two: Sclf-Disciplinc and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

89

said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said:
“There are three characteristics, which if one has not, or at least one of them, his
deeds will be fruidess: fear of Allah that prevents him from committing sins
therewith he disobeys Allah, forbearance therewith to hold back the weakminded, and good character therewith he lives among the people.” (This
narradon is reported by Al-Khara’iti; and At-Tabarani on the authority of Umm
Salamah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” used to
supplicate Allah in the beginning of his prayer saying: “O Allah! Guide me to
the best of characters, for none could guide to the best of them but You; and
keep me away from the worst of characters, for none could keep me away
from the worst of them but You.” (This narradon is reported by Muslim on
the authority of Ali). It is narrated on the authority of Anas “Allah be pleased
with him” that he said: While we were with the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” one day he said: “Verily, the good character
dissolves sin just as sun dissolves ice.” (This narradon is reported by AlKhara’iti; and At-Tabarani and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Ibn Abbas and
Abu Hurairah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “The
good character is out of one’s happiness.” (This narradon is reported by AlKhara’id and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Jabir). The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: “The good character is
out of one’s good fortune.” (This narradon is reported by Al-Khara’iti on the
authority of Ali). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said to Abu Dharr “Allah be pleased with him”: “O Abu Dharr! No mind is
better than to dispose of (the affairs), and no family status is better than the good
character.” (This narration is reported by both Ibn Majah and Ibn Hibban on the
authority of Abu Dharr).
It is narrated on the authority of Anas “Allah be pleased with him” that he
said: Umm Habibah “Allah be pleased with her” said to the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: “Tell me about a woman who has two
husbands in the world and they die and both are admitted to the Garden: to
whom should she be in the hereafter?” he said: “To the one of the better
character in her sight in the world. O Umm Habibah! The good character has
taken away all the good of the world and the hereafter.” (This narradon is
reported by Al-Bazzar, At-Tabaram and Al-Khara’iti). The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: “Indeed, the Muslim who
does deeds correcdy attains the rank of the fasting person who stands at night for
prayer (or the rank of the thirsty person during the scorching heat of noon,
according to another version) by virtue of his good character and noble
standing.” (This narradon is reported by Ahmad on the authority of Abdullah Ibn
Amr, and the other version on the authority of Abu Hurairah). It is narrated on
the authority of Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Samurah “Allah be pleased with him” that
he said: We were sitting with the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace

!

The quarter of the destructives
90
be upon him” when he said: “Yesterday, I saw (in a dream) an amazing thing. I
saw a man from my nation kneeling , and there was a screen between him and
Allah Almighty. Then, his good character came and admitted him to Allah
Almighty.” (This narration is reported by Al-Khara’iti).
It is narrated on the authority of Anas “Allah be pleased with him” that he
said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
“Verily, one might attain by virtue of his good character the great ranks in the
hereafter and the noble positions (given to the honoured people) no matter weak
* he might be in worship.” QThis narration is reported by Al-Khara’iti and AtTabarani on the authority of Anas).
It is narrated on the authority of Sa’d Ibn Abu Waqqas “Allah be pleased with
him” that he said: Umar Ibn Al-Khattab “Allah be pleased with him” asked the
permission of The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
to see him while some Quraishi women were sitting with him, talking to him,
asking him for more expenses, and raising their voices (above the voice of Allah's
Apostle). When Umar asked for the permission to enter, the women quickly went
behind the curtain. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” allowed him to enter. Umar came in while The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” was smiling.
Umar said: "O Allah's Aposde! May Allah always keep you smiling." The
Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "I was astonished at
these women who have been here, as soon as they had heard your voice, they
quickly went behind the curtain.” Umar said: "O Allah's Apostle! You have more
right to be feared by them than I." Then Umar addressed the women saying: "O
enemies of yourselves! Do you fear me more than you fear The Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”?" They said: "Yes, for you are
harsher and sterner than Allah's Apostle “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him”." Then The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: "O Ibn Al-Khattab! By Him, in Whose Hands my life is! Never does Satan
find you going on a way, but that he takes another way other than yours." (This
narration is reported by both sheikhs).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: “No doubt, the bad character is unpardonable sin; and the distrust (of
people) is a foul-smelling sin.” (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani on
the authority of A’ishah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” further said: “Verily, a servant might fall down, because of his
bad character, until he reaches the lowest bottom of the fire of Hell.” (This
narration is reported by Al-Khara’iti and At-Tabarani on the authority of
Anas).

Traditions And Sayings
The son of Luqman the Wise said to his father: “O my father! Which
characteristic is the best that a man should have?” he said: “Faith.” He said: “But
in case they should be two?” he said: “Faith and property.” He said: “In case they

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

91

should be three?” he said: “Faith, property and modesty.” He said: “In case they
should be four?” he said: “Faith, property, modesty and good character.” He said:
“In case they should be five?” he said: “Faith, property, modesty, good character
and generosity.” He said: “In case they should be six?” on that he said: “O my
son! If he combines those five characteristics he will be pious and pure, a devotee
of Allah, and far removed from Satan.”
According to Al-FIassan: “He, who has bad character will have tormented
himself.” According to Anas “Allah be pleased with him”: “A man might attain,
by virtue of his good character, the highest rank in the Garden regardless of his
weak worship; and a man might fall down to the lowest bottom of the fire of Hell
because of his bad character, regardless of his much worship.” According to
Yahya Ibn Mu’adh: “There lies in the good character the abundance of
sustenance.” According to Wahb Ibn Munabbih: “The example of the one of bad
character is like a broken pot which could neither be repaired nor be returned to
clay.” According to Al-Fudail: “It is better for me to have a wicked companion of
good character than to have a worshipping companion of bad character.”
Once, a man of bad character accompanied Ibn Al-Mubarak on journey, and
he endured from him and at the same time dealt with him kindly. When he left
him he wept for him. Being asked about that he said: “I have wept out of pity
and kindness towards him. It is true that I have left him, his bad character still
remains with him and has not left him.” According to Al-Junaid: “Four things
raise man up to the highest degree, regardless of his little work and knowledge:
forbearance, humbleness, generosity and good character; and this is the perfect
faith.” According to Al-Kinani: “Sufism makes one of good character. Thus, he
whose character is better than yours is more Sufi than you.” According to Umar
“Allah be pleased with him”: “Mix with the people depending upon your good
manners, and leave them with deeds.”
According to Yahya Ibn Mu’adh: “The bad character is a sin with which
much good deeds would not avail; and the good character is a good deed with
which much sins would cause no harm.” Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with
them” was asked about honour, thereupon he said: “It is what Allah Almighty
has exposed in His Holy Book: “Verily the most honoured of you in the sight of
Allah is (he who is) the most righteous of you. And Allah has full Knowledge and
is well-acquainted (with all things).” (Al-Hujurat 13)

He was further asked about family status, thereupon he said: “He who has the
best character among you is of the best family status among you.”
He further said: “Every structure should have a foundation, and the
foundation of Islam is the good character.” According to Ata’: “None among
those who has risen high (above others) has become so except by virtue of the
good character, and none has attained the perfection therein except the chosen
one, (i.e. the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”).
Thus, those among the creatures who are the nearest to Allah Almighty are the

i

The quarter of the destructives
92
followers of his traces with their good character.”

CHAPTER TWO
EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE OF GOOD AND BAD CHARACTER
It should be known that although the people talked much about the reality
of the good character and made attempts to define it, they in fact did not
mention its true nature in so much as they mentioned its fruits, which they did
not also encompass. Each of them mentioned of its fruits what occurred to
his mind, but they did not care about mendoning its definidon and true
nature, and all of its fruits in minute details. Al-Hassan, for instance, said:
“The good character comprises cheerfulness, openhandedness and holding
back harm.” Al-Wasid said: “It is not to fall in dispute (with anyone) due to
his great knowledge of Allah Almighty.” Shah Al-Karmani said: “It is to hold
back harm and bear food supplies.” According to another one: “It is that one
should be close to the people and strange among them.” According to AlWasid once again: “It is to please the creatures at both dmes of ease and
adversity.” According to Abu Uthman: “It is to be sadsfied and well-pleased
with Allah Almighty.”
When Sahl At-Tastari was asked about the good character he said: “At
least it is to suck to endurance, not to expect for reward, to show mercy
towards the wrongdoer, ask for forgiveness for him and sympathize for him.”
Once again he said: “It is to have no distrust of the Real about sustenance,
and rather to have confidence of Him, and admit the fact that He is going to
fulfill what He has ensured which causes him to obey Him, and not to disobey
Him in all affairs, in what is between both as well as in what is between him
and the people.” Ali “Allah be pleased with him” said: “Three qualities
constitute the good character: to avoid what is forbidden, to seek after what is
lawful, and to be openhanded with one’s dependents.” According to AlHussain Ibn Mansur: “It is not to be affected by the desertion of the people
after you have known the truth.” according to Abu Sa’id Al-Kharraz: “It is to
be concerned only with Allah Almighty.”
Those and many sayings alike refer to the fruits of the good character and not
to its true nature. Moreover, all of those do not encompass all of its fruits. But
even, to uncover the reality is preferable to transmit the different sayings.
Let’s say that both words of character and appearance are concomitant in
usage. It is said that so and so is of good character and appearance, i.e. both his
internal and external are good. The appearance is intended to mean the external
image, whereas the character the internal image. Man is composed of a concrete
body to be visible by the eye, and a soul and a spirit to be perceived by insight.
Each of those has an image, which might be either beautiful or ugly. The soul
that is perceived by insight is of more importance than the body that is visible
by the eye. This is why Allah Almighty gave it a great estimate when he ascribed
it to Himself as shown from His statement: “Behold! your Lord said to the
angels: "I am about to create man, from sounding clay, from mud moulded into

Book two: Sclf-Discijjlinc and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

93

shape; When I have fashioned him (in due proportion) and breathed into him
of My spirit, fall you down in obeisance unto him." (Al-Hijr 28-29)

4 CfJ

L?-jj

In this he alerted that the body is ascribed to clay, whereas the spirit to the
Lord of the worlds.
Both spirit and soul are synonyms here. The character then is a quality well
established in the soul from which all acts and behaviours issue easily with no
need of reasoning or reflection. If such quality is set in a way that from which
beautiful acts issue that is accepted by law and reason, it is named the good
character; and if it is set in a way that from which bad acts issue, it is named bad
character. However, we describe it as being well established in the soul for if one
gave money out of his property in a few cases in order to serve an accidental
need, he would not be described as generous unless the characteristic of
generosity is affirmed to him. The condition of easy issuance of acts with no need
of reasoning or reflection is necessary here, for he who forces himself to give
money out of his property, or he who exerts a great effort to have control over
himself when he becomes angry could not be ascribed to generosity or
forbearance.
There are then four things to be observed here: the first pertains to the
beautiful and ugly act; and second pertains to the power to do them; the third is
to have knowledge about them; and the fourth is the quality therewith the soul
inclines to any of both sides, and it is made easy for it to do either the good or
the bad act.
The character is not the act itself. How many a man who is generous, but he
does not give money either because of lack of property or of another
impediment; and how many a man who is niggard although he gives money either
because of a particular motive or out of showing off to be seen of men. It is also
not the power, because it is the same to ascribe the power to giving or
withholding. Everyone is created by nature with the power either to give or to
withhold, which does not require the quality of generosity or the quality of
niggardliness. It is not the knowledge, since knowledge pertains to both the
beautiful and ugly alike. Thus, it applies only to the fourth meaning, i.e. the
quality with which the soul is prepared in a way that from which either giving or
withholding should issue.
The character then is the quality and internal image of the soul. As well as the
external appearance is not perfectly good only by the beautiful eyes on the
exclusion of the beautiful nose, mouth and cheeks, but all the external features
should be beautiful in order for the good appearance to be perfect, four
principles should be beautiful in the internal image in order for the good
character to be perfect. Once those four become straight, upright and
proportionate the good character shall be achieved. They are the power of

The quarter of the destructives
94
knowledge, the power of anger, the power of appetence, and the power of
ma king proportionate those three powers.
The power of knowledge should be correct and good in a way that enables it
to perceive with ease the difference between the true and false of statements,
beliefs, the beautiful and ugly of acts if this power is valid, its fruit will be
wisdom, which is the fountainhead of good character. It is the wisdom about
which Allah Almighty says: “He grants wisdom to whom He pleases; and he to
whom wisdom is granted receives indeed a benefit overflowing; but none will
grasp the Message but men of understanding.” (Al-Baqarah 269)

i©

£*■ 03* & ^=^j'

cr-i >

The power of anger is good when it grows and shrinks in accordance to
wisdom. Similarly, the power of appetence is correct and good when it becomes at
the disposal of wisdom, i.e. at the disposal of mind and religious law.
The power of justice is to adjust both anger and appetence to come under the
disposal of mind and religious law. The example of mind is like the consultant
advisor; and the power of justice is like an executive power, and it undertakes to
implement the mind's orders and instructions. The anger is that on which the
order is implemented; and its example is like a hunting dog which needs to be
trained in order for its setting off and stoppage are subject to the disposal of
mind and not in accordance to the self-agitation. The example of appetence is
like the horse that is ridden in order to chase a game: sometimes it is trained and
well mannered and sometimes it is rebellious. Whoever has all of those qualities
moderate and proportionate, his character is absolutely good; and whoever has
some of those qualities moderate his character is good in relation to those on the
exclusion of the others, just like him who has some parts of his face goodlooking on the exclusion of the others. The good moderate power of anger is
called courage, whereas the good moderate power of appetence is called chastity.
If the power of anger exceeds the due bounds it is called recklessness; and if it
weakens and decreases from the due limit, it is called cowardice and half­
heartedness. Likewise, if the power of appetence exceeds the due bounds, it is
called greediness; and if it weakens and decreases from the due limits, it is called
lifelessness.
The praiseworthy is the moderate which is meritorious virtue, whereas both
extremes are blameworthy vices. Justice itself has no extremes of increase or
decrease: it has but one opposite, i.e. injustice.
When wisdom is overused particularly for evil purposes, it is called cunning
and sneakiness, and silliness in case it is short, and it is the moderate only that is
worthy of the name of wisdom.
The foundations of manners are four: wisdom, courage, justice and chastity.
Wisdom is intended to mean a state of mind therewith to distinguish right from
wrong in all optional and voluntary acts. Justice is intended to mean a state of
mind and power that adjusts both anger and appetence, and subjugates their
activity and stoppage to the requirements of wisdom. Courage is intended to

I

!

;

I

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

95

mean that the power of anger is, in its advance and retraction, subject to the
mind. Chastity is intended to mean that the power of appetence is disciplined in
accordance with the requirements of mind and religious law.
From the moderateness of those four foundations there issue the beaudful
and good manners:
The moderate power of mind brings about common sense, sound mind,
penetrating opinion, right suspicion, and making sense to the minute and fine
details of work, and the hidden diseases of souls. But excess in it brings about
cunning, craftiness, deception and sneakiness. Indulgence in it brings about
silliness, folly, naivety and madness. Naivety is intended to mean inexperience in
matters, but with sound imagination: a man might be naive about something
apart from another. The difference between folly and madness is that a foolish
might be right in purpose even though wrong in conduct, due to his shortage of
judgment while following the way that enables him to achieve his purpose. The
mad’s preferences are unsuccessful, which leads to his failure.
The manner of courage brings about generosity, relief, gallantry, self­
submission, forbearance, endurance, steadfastness, control of anger, reverence,
lovability, etc. all of those manners are praiseworthy. Excess in it, i.e. recklessness
brings about pigheadedness, profligacy, burst with anger and loss of temper,
arrogance and conceit. Indulgence in it brings about mortification, humiliation,
fright, baseness, subjection, and refraining from getting right.
The manner of chastity brings about openhandedness, modesty, patience,
tolerance, satisfaction, piety, kindness, helpfulness, gaiety, and non-covetousness.
Excess or indulgence in it brings about tightfistedness, greediness, rudeness,
cunning, extravagance, parsimony, showing off, depravity, debauchery, jest,
flattery, envy, schadenfreude, self-humiliation before the wealthy, and scorn of
the poor, etc.
These four virtues then constitute the fountainhead of all good manners, i.e.
wisdom, courage, justice and chastity; and the other virtues act as their shooting
branches.
None but the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
has ever attained the perfect moderateness of those four virtues, and after him
the people are of different degrees in closeness to and remoteness from him. The
more one becomes close to him in those good manners, the more he draws near
to Allah Almighty in proportion to his being close to the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”. If one combines (as much as he could
of) those manners, he deserves to be among the people an obeyed angel, whom
they all refer to and emulate in all of their behaviours and conduct. On the
contrary, whoever leaves all of those manners and rather is described with their
opposites, deserves to be removed from among the nation, for he has become
close to Satan, the accursed and despised, and it is for this that he should be kept
away, just as the former has become close to the angel that is near Allah, and it is
for this that he should be emulated, and to him people should draw near. Of a
surety, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” was sent

r

The quarter of the destructives
96
only to make perfect the noble manners as he himself said.
In description of the faithful believers, the Holy Qur’an refers to those
manners. Allah Almighty says: “Only those are Believers who have believed in
Allah and His Messenger, and have never since doubted, but have striven with
their belongings and their persons in the Cause of Allah: such are the sincere
ones.” (Al-Hujurat 15)

Faith in Allah and His Messenger with no doubt is the power of certainty,
which is the fruit of mind, and the utmost of wisdom. Striving with property is
the openhandedness that refers to the adjustment of the power of appetence.
Striving with soul and life is courage which refers to the use of the power of
anger in accordance with the prerequisites of mind and the due limit of
moderation. Allah Almighty described the companions “Allah be pleased with
them” saying: “and those who are with him (the Prophet) are strong against
Unbelievers, (but) compassionate amongst each other” (Al-Fath 29)
4

JyJj oliP ^

In reference to the fact that strength should be used when it is needed, and
compassion should be used when it is needed. Perfection does not lie in absolute
strictness or compassion.
This is an exposition of the concept of character, its goodness and badness,
its pillars, fruits and branches.

CHAPTER THREE
EXPOSmON OF CHANGEABILITY OF MANNERS BY WAY OF DISCIPLINE
It should be known that the idle among men regards self-mortification and
discipline hard upon himself, and feels it difficult to engage in justifying himself
and improving his manners. He does not admit that this is due to his indulgence,
shortage and wickedness in so much as it is due to his claim that manners are
unchangeable since disposition remains constantly fixed.
He supports his claim with two proofs: the first is that the character
represents the internal image as well as the appearance the external image, and
just as the external appearance is unchangeable, for the short could not make
himself tall, nor could the tall make himself short, nor could the ugly make
beautiful his features, so is the case of the internal ugliness. The other is that
they say that ‘the good character suppresses both appetence and anger, and we
have experienced it through a long mortification, and have come to know that
it is subject to the temper and disposition, and Thus, it never leaves man, who
spends his time in vain if he engages in attempt to get rid of it. The point is to
divert the heart from concern with the transitory fortunes of this present
world*.
In reply to that, let’s say that if manners are unchangeable, of no avail then

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

97

will be all advices, recommendations and preachings, and of no significance will
be the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him”: “Make good your manners.” How should we reject the changeability of
human character given that the conduct of a beast is changeable? The falcon, for
instance, is susceptible to turn from wildness to domestication, the dog from
greediness to self-discipline and abstinence, and the horse from rebellion to
obedience and submission. If this is not to change the character, what should it
be?
To unveil the abstruseness, let’s say that things are divided into those in
which mankind has no way to choose or put in different order, like the sky, stars
and planets, the internal and external members of the body, and the parts of
animals. In brief, this applies to all perfect things from whose existence and
perfection it have been finished, the other sort of things are those that exist with
shortage and are susceptible to change into perfection, once the necessary
conditions are fulfilled. The condition might be related with the choice of
mankind. Although the kernel is not an apple not a date-palm, it is created in a
way that enables it to turn into a date-palm once it is planted, but by no means
should it become an apple. Henceforth, based upon the case of the kernel that is,
by virtue of choice, susceptible to some states on the exclusion of others, if we
like to suppress and overpower both appetence and anger absolutely, in order to
become completely ineffective, of a surety, we would fail. But if we like to make
them obedient and submissive by way of discipline and mortification, we would
succeed to do so. It is with this that we have been commanded, and it is the
means and way of salvation that shall convey us to the Presence of Allah
Almighty.
It is true that dispositions are different: some are quick in response to change
and others are slow. There are two reasons for that difference. The first is the
power and duration of instinct. The powers of appetence, anger and arrogance
exist in man, but from among them, the power of appetence is the most difficult
and disobedient to change. It is the oldest. It is created within the child once he
becomes a baby, and in his seventh year the anger might be created within him,
and some time later, the power of discernment is created.
The other is that a particular manner might be confirmed by acting upon it so
much, and being subject to its requirements, and having the faith that it is good
and satisfactory. Mankind are divided into four types in this connection: the first
is the naive who could not distinguish true from false, beautiful from ugly: but he
remains on his innate nature on which he was created, void of any acquired
beliefs or opinions, and his appetence is not mature by seeking after pleasures.
Such is responsive to remedy. He needs only a tutor and a guide, and a self­
motive that leads him to strive with the result that his character would be
improved as soon as possible. The second is he who knows the ugliness of the
ugly, but he has not got accustomed to do good. His evil act has been made
alluring to him, and Thus, he does it in obedience to his appetence, and refraining
from his sound opinion because he is possessed by appetence. But he knows he

The quarter of the destructives
98
is indulgent in his deed. His case is more difficult than die former, for he has to
exert a double effort. First, he has to get rid of the evil and wickedness he has
been accustomed to, and then to plant within himself the quality of getdng
accustomed to do good. But he is susceptible to self-discipline if he takes it
seriously and decisively. The third is to believe that the bad manners is binding
nice-to-see and true and beautiful, on which he has been brought up. The
treatment of such is almost impossible, and his righteousness is unexpected save
very rarely, due to the multiple ways leading to misguidance. The fourth is that
although he has been brought up to wicked opinion upon which he acts, he sees
it virtuous to make much of evil of which he is proud before others, thinking that
thereby his rank is high. Such is the most difficult level. From amongst those, the
first is only ignorant; and the second is ignorant and misguided; and the third is
ignorant, misguided and dissolute; and the fourth is ignorant, misguided, dissolute
and evil.
As for their second proof, i.e. their claim that as long as man is living, he
could not leave anger, appetence, love for world and the other vices. But it is
false. Some people who committed such falsity had the impression that the
purpose of self-mortification is to absolutely suppress anger and appetence,
and exterminate them; and how far! Appetence was created for a particular
benefit and it is necessary for the sound disposition. If the appetite for food
discontinues man will be ruined; and if the appetite for sexual relation is
absent, there will be no propagation. If the power of anger does not exist,
man will not be able to defend himself against his destructives, and Thus, he
will be given to destruction.
As the origin of appetence remains, one will be in the habit of love for money
to enable him fulfill such appetence, after which he might refrain from money.
What is required is not to remove that entirely in so much as it is to adjust it to be
moderate, i.e. to be in the middle between excess and indulgence. What is
required in the quality of anger is the good zeal, which draws one far from both
recklessness and cowardice. In brief, it should be a power in itself and at the same
time be subject with its power to the requirements of mind (and religious law).
This is why Allah Almighty says: “and those who are with him (the Prophet) are
strong against Unbelievers, (but) compassionate amongst each other” (Al-Fath
29)
i

jU&i J*

}

In reference to the fact that strength should be used when it is needed, and
compassion should be used when it is needed. Of a surety, strength springs from
anger, and were anger to be idle, there will be no Jihad.
How should they intend to remove both anger and appetence absolutely,
given that the Prophets and Messengers “Peace be upon them” were not free
from those? The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: “I am but a human being and I grow angry (when my anger is provoked)
just as human beings grow angry.” (This narration is reported by Muslim on the

99

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

authority of Anas). (It is narrated by both sheikhs on the authority of Abdullah
Ibn Az-Zubair that he said about the Prophet): “If somebody spoke in front of
him with what he disliked, he would grow angry so much that the colour of his
cheeks would turn red, but he never said but the truth, and by no means did
anger keep him from the truth.” Allah Almighty says in description of the
righteous: “who restrain anger, and pardon (all) men” (A1 Imran 134)

4 © ^J* 0^*3 dalirf

}

And does not tell that they have no anger at all.
In this way, both anger and appetence are to be adjusted to be moderate in a
way that none of them should overpower the mind : on the contrary, it is the
mind that should adjust them, and might possibly overpower them; and this is
what is intended by change of character. Appetence might possess a man so
forcefully that his mind would have no power to avert it, and Thus, he dares to
commit shameful deeds. But through self-discipline, it might be reduced to the
limit of moderateness; and it is possible, as certainly attested from experience and
observation. That the moderate and not one of both extremes in all manners is
required is confirmed by the fact that openhandedness, that is praiseworthy under
religious law, lies in the middle between both extremes of profligacy and
parsimony. Allah Almighty praises it many dmes as shown from His statement:
“Those who, when they spend, are not extravagant and not niggardly, but hold a
just (balance) between those (extremes).” (Al-Furqan 67)

1jUj

lyuiflSj;yjtj }

He Almighty further says: “Make not your hand tied (like a niggard's) to your
neck, nor stretch it forth to its utmost reach, so that you become blameworthy
and destitute.” (Al-Isra’ 29)
4 C^i) 'jJLxJizb b.l J1 (JS* 1

j

jJjU

^

The same is true of the appetite for food, that should be moderate, and this
places it in between greediness and prevention. In confirmation of that, Allah
Almighty says: “eat and drink: but waste not by excess, for Allah loves not the
wasters.” (Al-A’raf 31)

JidJr’S

"iP Nj iiilj

>

He says about anger: “and those who are with him (the Prophet) are strong
against Unbelievers, (but) compassionate amongst each other” (Al-Fath 29)

i pL; rpjusdt ji

piij >

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “The
moderate is the best in all matters.” (This narration is reported by Al-Baihaqi on
the authority of Mutarrif Ibn Abdullah).
There is a great mystery that lies behind this fact. Happiness lies in the heart’s
soundness and freedom from the accidental causes of this present world. Allah
Almighty says: "But only he (will prosper) that brings to Allah a sound heart.”

3
:
i

The quarter of the destructives

100
(Ash-Shu’ara 89)
4

^ <J' Cj*

^

Both niggardliness and extravagance are among the accidental causes of this
present world. It is requisite for die heart to be safe from both, i.e. not to be
devoted to the money, nor be eager to spend or withhold it. The perfect heart is
that which is safe from both. But as this is not possible in this present world, we
seek after what is close to it, i.e. the moderate that is far from both extremes. The
tepid is neither hot nor cool, but it is in the middle between them; and Thus, it is
close to be safe from both. The same is true of openhandedness that lies in
between extravagance and niggardliness, courage that lies in between cowardice
and recklessness, and chasdty that lies between greediness and prevention, etc.
both extremes of all matters are blameworthy.
That is what is required; and it is possible. It is true that the man who guides a
novice should deface in his sight anger and criticize withholding of money
wholly, and give him no concession about anything of that, for in this case the
novice will depend upon the least amount in which concession is given to take
excuse to stick to niggardliness and anger. If he intends the origin and it is not
made easy for him but to be close to it, i.e. to be moderate, the right is that he
should intend to remove the origin in order for the intended amount to be made
easy for him. This secret should not be unveiled for the novice, for by which the
foolish is deceived, thinking that his anger and niggardliness are true.

CHAPTER FOUR
EXPOSmON OF WAY OF ATTAINING GOOD CHARACTER
You have known that the good character refers in the end to the moderate
power of mind and perfect of wisdom, as well as to the moderate powers of
anger and appetence, and their being obedient to mind and subject to religious
law. Such moderateness is attained by virtue of one of two ways: the first is
existence by nature and perfection by disposition, in the sense that man is created
with perfect mind and good character, as being guarded against the
overwhelming power of both appetence and anger, which are created moderate
and obedient to mind and subject to religious law. Such a man becomes educated
with no need to be educated, polite with no need to be disciplined, like Jesus, son
of Maty and Yahya, son of Zakariyya, and all the Prophets and Messengers
“Peace be upon them”. But there are things that should be attained by way of
acquisition. A child might be created as true and openhanded, and he might be
created on the contrary of that, and he acquires those good qualities by getting
accustomed to them and mixing with those who behave in accordance with them,
or attains them through learning.
The other way is to acquire those good manners by way of self-mortification
and discipline, i.e. to force oneself to do the deeds required by a certain character.
If one, for instance, likes to acquire the quality of generosity, he should force
himself to do all things a generous man does, pertinent to giving money. He

Book two: Sclf-Disciplinc and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

101

should press himself upon doing it, and mortify himself to do it regularly until he
gets accustomed to do it fluendy by nature. Thus, he becomes generous. The
same is true of him who likes to acquire the quality of humbleness, and he is
arrogant: he should do all things the humble do for a long time during which he
has to force himself with mortification and striving until he gets accustomed to
do it fluendy by nature. All good manners praiseworthy under religious law might
be acquired through that way. The end he should seek to achieve is to get
pleasure of the act he is doing. The innate openhanded is him who gets pleasure
of giving money, unlike him who does so unwillingly; and the humble by nature is
him who gets pleasure of behaving humbly towards others, and so on.
Indeed, the religious manners will not become deep-rooted in the soul unless
one gets accustomed to do all good deeds and leave all evil deeds, and does so
regularly as the one who has longing for beaudful deeds and gets pleasure
thereof, and aversion towards the ugly acts and is pained thereby. This is
confirmed by the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” who said: “The pleasure of my eye has been made in
prayer.” (This narradon is reported by An-Nasa’i on the authority of Anas).
When doing the acts of worship and avoiding what is forbidden is done
under compulsion, it is imperfection, and by no means could happiness be
attained thereby. It is true that to strive oneself to do it regularly is good, but
this applies to avoiding (what is forbidden) and not to doing (the acts of
worship) that should be done willingly. This is the significance of the
statement of Allah Almighty: “Nay, seek (Allah's) help with padent
perseverance and prayer: it is indeed hard, except to those who bring a lowly
spirit.”(Al-Baqarah 45)

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
4fWorship Allah with sadsfacdon; and if you could not do, (you should know)
that much good lies in your padence on doing what you dislike.” (This narradon
is reported by At-Tabarani).
Furthermore, the happiness that lies in getting pleasure of obedience and
feeling aversion towards disobedience should not apply to one time on the
exclusion of another: on the contrary, it should apply to all times along the
lifetime of men. The more the life is longer, the more the virtue becomes deeprooted and closer to perfection. When the Messenger of Allah “Ailah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” was asked about happiness, he said: “It lies in the long
life to be spent in worship of Allah Almighty.” (This narradon is reported by AdDailami on the authority of Ibn Umar). This is why the Prophets and Saints
disliked death, for indeed the present world is the farm of the hereafter. The
more worship is much because of the long life, the more reward becomes
abundant, soul clean and pure, and character strong and well established.
It is the impact of worship on the heart that is intended, and its impact
becomes stronger by doing it regularly. The final aim of good manners is that

The quarter of the destructives
102
one’s love for this present world should discontinue, for his love for ALlah
Almighty to become strong, in a way that nothing becomes dearer to him than to
meet Allah Almighty. He docs not use the whole of his property but in a way that
conveys him to that effect. He also subjugates both his anger and appetence to
serve that purpose, and does not use them but in a way that conveys him to the
way of Allah Almighty. He measures all of his acts and deeds with the measure of
both mind and religious law, and then becomes happy and well pleased therein.
He should strive as much as it lies within his capacity to make prayer the pleasure
of his eye.
However, the way of doing the acts of worship is pleasant, and the soul might
experience many things more wonderful. Many of kings and those who live in
luxury might been seen in perpetual sadness and grief, whereas the signs of
pleasure and joy might be visible on a gambler with his gambling, in such a way
that he feels it hard how the people live without gambling, given that gambling
might deprive him of his property, ruin his house, and leave him bankrupt. But
even, he loves and is proud of it, due to his long practice and familiarity with it,
and his wholehearted devotion to it. Similarly, the one who plays with birds might
stand on his feet along the day with its scorching heat, but he does not feel
trouble because of his pleasure and joy of the movement, flying and hovering of
birds in the air.
Moreover, a wicked dissolute might be seen to show pride of himself and his
power to keep patient on wickedness and debauchery. One of them might choose
to be cut off other than to confess of his own crimes or of the crimes of others,
and insist on denial, careless about punishment, seeing it a source of pride for
what he thinks to be courage, manhood and power of perfection. That is because
those have become the pleasure of his eye and the cause of his pride, regardless
of their harmful pain. There is no state more odious than that of an effeminate in
his imitation of women as shown from dilapidating hair, tattooing face, and
mixing with women. Such effeminate in his joy of his state and pride of his
perfect effeminateness vies in glory with his peers. Sweepers and cuppers also
might feel proud of their states in the same way as kings and learned might do of
their states. All of that is a result of the long and regular practice of one thing. It
might be seen in many people.
If soul is apt to get pleasure of falsity and inclined to what is shameful to
which it is accustomed, why should it not be inclined to get pleasure of the truth
once it is returned to it for a long time and get accustomed to it? This is due to
the fact that the soul's inclination to those odious things is unnatural, just like the
inclination to eating mud and clay. Some people might be so only by habit. But
one's inclination to wisdom, and love, knowledge and worship of Allah Almighty
is natural, like inclination to food and drink. It is an innate inclination instilled in
the heart and disposition by the Lord, whereas his inclination to the causes and
means of appetence is strange. The food of the heart is wisdom, and love and
knowledge of Allah Almighty. But man is diverted from it for being stricken by a
particular disease just as a stomach might be afflicted with a particular disease

Book two: Sclf-DiscipIinc and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

103

that causes it to abstain from food and drink, by which it survives. In short, every
heart is diverted to the love of anything other than Allah Almighty should be
under the influence of a particular disease in proportion to the degree of
diversion unless he loves that thing only to help him love Allah Almighty and
strengthen his faith.
You then have come to know that those good manners might be acquired
through self-discipline, i.e. to force oneself in the beginning to do a particular act
by effort in order for that act to spring from it by nature in the end. This is due to
the wonderful relation between the heart and the organs, i.e. the soul and the
body. Every quality in the heart has its effect flood on the organs in a way that
makes them move only in accordance to it. Similarly, every act issued from the
organs might have an effect in the heart. Let's illustrate that by an example: if one
likes to be skilled in writing and make it a natural characteristic well-established in
the soul, in order to become in the end a writer by nature, he should at first force
himself to do by his hand what a skilled scribe does, i.e. to remain for a long time
in the habit of regular imitation of the good handwriting, since the act of the
writer in the end is the good handwriting. Thus, he imitates the writer by force
and by doing so regularly and constantly, until it becomes a characteristic well
established within his soul. The good handwriting then will spring from him by
nature in the end in the same way as it used to spring from him by force in the
beginning. In the first stage, he makes the good writing by force, from which an
effect overflows on the heart, therefrom it is reflected on the organ of the hand,
and therewith he comes to write with good handwriting by nature in the last
stage.
Similarly, if one likes to become a jurisprudent by nature, there is no way for
him but to do repeatedly the acts of jurisprudents, until the quality of
jurisprudence is reflected on his heart therewith he becomes jurisprudent by
nature. Likewise, if one wills to become openhanded, chaste and humble by
nature, he should first do the acts of those (who have these characteristics) by
force, until those characteristics become integral to his disposition. This is the
only remedy for such a person. As well as the one who likes to be a jurisprudent
by nature would not attain such a degree by doing the act of jurisprudence for
one night, nor would he be deprived of it by stopping for one night, likewise the
one who seeks to justify, purify and make good his own soul by the good deeds,
who would not attain that by the worship of one day, nor would he be deprived
of it by the disobedience of one day.
This is the significance of our saying that in no way would a major sin assure
perpetual punishment, but stoppage from practice only for one day might
summon another one like it, and little by little they would invite each other and
accumulate on the soul until it gets sociable with idleness and abandons the
acquisition of knowledge, and Thus, loses the virtue of jurisprudence. Similarly,
the minor sins lead to each other until the origin of happiness is lost by ruining
the origin of faith in the end of one's lifetime. As well as the doing of
jurisprudence for one night has no immediate concrete effect on the soul, which

The quarter of the destructives
104
appears gradually along time, just like the growth of the body and the rising of
stature, similarly, doing an act of worship for one time has no immediate concrete
effect on justifying and purifying the soul. But at the same time, the single acts of
worship should not be regarded with slightness, for although much of them are
influential, this much in the end is a compilation of single acts of worship. Every
single act of worship has a share of effect, no matter invisible it might be, for
which one surely receives reward. The same is true of sin (in relation to
punishment).
How many a jurisprudent who regards with slightness to stop from learning
and studying for a single night and pacifies himself with hope he shall do later
and remains as such day after day until his disposition comes to reject learning at
all. The same is true of him who regards with slightness the minor sins and
pacifies himself with the future repentance day after day until death snatches him
suddenly before he repents, or the darkness of sins rusts over his heart until
repentance becomes difficult upon him. Of a surety, the little gradually summons
the much until the heart gets fascinated with the chains of lusts and desires which
it could not be released from. This is when the door is repentance is closed; and
this is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty: "And We have put a
bar in front of them and a bar behind them, and further, We have covered them
up; so that they cannot see." (Ya Sin 9)
4©

1J—

OXo? ^*^"3 ^

It is shown clearly from the statement: "Faith appears as a white dot in the
hart, which increases by the increase of faith and when one has his faith
complete, the heart becomes entirely white; and hypocrisy appears as a black dot
in the heart which increases by the increase of hypocrisy until when one has
hypocrisy complete, the heart becomes entirely black."
Perhaps you now have come to know that the good manners might be once
by disposition, once by getting accustomed to the good acts, once by seeing and
mixing with the masters of good acts, who are the companions of good and
brothers of righteousness, given that disposition is always affected by the
dispositions of others in good and evil. The most virtuous is he who has the good
manners by way of the three ways, i.e. by nature, habit and learning; and the most
vicious and remote from Allah Almighty is he who is wicked by nature, and
happens to have evil companions, from whom he learns, and the means and ways
of evil are made available to him, until he gets accustomed to them. Between
both extremes, there are various levels, different according to the strength or
weakness of one way of those three, and each level is close or remote (from
Allah) in accordance with its different states and conditions: "Then shall anyone
who has done an atom's weight of good, see it! And anyone who has done an
atom's weight of evil, shall see it." (Az-Zalzalah 7-8)
4 © J°ji

© J°ji *5^- &

t

"It is not Allah that has wronged them, but they wrong themselves." (A1

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart di seascs

105*

Imran 117)

4©

^-3—a'1'

^

y

CHAPTER FIVE
EXPOSITION OF DETAILED WAY OF IMPROVING MORAL CHARACTER
You have known that the moderate character is healthy, and the diversion
therein causes ailment, just as the moderate mood is healthy for the body and the
diversion therein causes ailment to it. So, let's take the body as an example (for
illustradon). Let's say that the example of the soul in being treated by removing
vices and bad manners from it and rather bringing virtues and good manners is
like the body in being treated by removing ailments and bringing health. As well
as the mood is supposed to be moderate, and the stomach receives harm by the
effect of food and the other factors, every child is born as moderate with sound
disposition, and it is his parents who convert him to Judaism, Christianity or
Magianism. This implies that by practice and teaching, vices might be obtained.
As well as the body is not created as complete, but it attains completion and
strength gradually by nourishment and rearing, the soul also is created as
incomplete, and obtains completion by education, improvement of moral
character and knowledge.
Just as if the body is healthy, the role of the physician is to prepare the law
that preserves it healthy, and if it is sick, his role is to bring health to it, likewise if
the soul is pure and clean, your role is to endeavor to preserve it pure and clean,
and bring more purity and transparency to it, and if it is lacking in perfection and
purity, your role is to seek to make it perfect and pure. Just as the cause that
changes the condition of the body and makes it sick is treated only by its
opposite, i.e. if it is from heat, it should be treated by cold, and if it is from cold,
it should be treated by heat, and so on, likewise the vice that causes the heart to
be sick should be treated by its opposite, i.e. the virtue: the ailment of ignorance
should be treated by learning, the ailment of niggardliness by becoming
openhanded, the ailment of arrogance by showing humbleness, and the ailment
of greediness by forcing oneself to refrain from what is desired. As well as one
should endure the bitterness of the medicine and keep patient on leaving the
desired things for the sick bodies to be treated, similarly, one should endure the
bitterness and pain of self-mortification and keep patient in order for the sick
heart to be treated well. But if one might get rid of the sickness of his body by
death, the sickness of his heart, we seek refuge with Allah, survives forever (since
its negative impact extends to the hereafter).
As well as the remedy of cold by heat is not beneficial unless it lies within a
certain limit, which is different in terms of strength and weakness, permanence
and intermission, muchness and littleness, and it should be measured on a
particular criterion to distinguish what is beneficial from what is harmful thereof,
for in case it goes beyond it, the damage shall be aggravated, similarly, the
opposites therewith the manners are treated should be subject to a particular

The quarter of the destructives
106
criterion, to be determined by the degree of the ailment. The physician does not
start to remedy unless he knows first whether the ailment is caused by heat or by
cold. If it is caused by heat, he should know its degree, and whether it is weak or
strong. If he knows that, he should turn to the conditions of the body, the
atmosphere, the profession and age of the patient, and then determine the
remedy according to all of those.
Likewise, the followed sheikh who remedies the souls of the novices, and
treats the hearts of those who seek guidance, should not surprise them with
discipline in a particular field unless he becomes well acquainted with their morals
and heart diseases. As well as if the physician remedies all the patients with one
medicine, he will bring the majority of them to death, similarly, if the sheikh
guides all the novices to the same sort of self-discipline, he will ruin the majority
of them, and cause their hearts to die. But rather, he should consider the patient's
state, age, mood, and capacity to endure self-discipline, and build his sort of
discipline on that.
If the novice is a beginner, ignorant of the limits of religious law, he should
first instruct him in the rules of purification and prayer, and the other outward
actions of worship. If he is involved in unlawful property, or committing sins,
he should first order him to leave it. If he outwardly gets adorned with the acts
of worship, and his organs get purified from the external sins, then, he should
consider ins inward, to know his morals and the diseases of his heart. If he
finds with him surplus money that is beyond his necessary requirements, he
should take it from him, and spend it on the sides of good, lest the novice
should devote himself to it. If he sees him haughty, arrogant and over­
confident, he should order him to go out to markets and engages himself in
begging, for indeed, the over-confidence and arrogance get broken only by
humiliation, and there is nothing more humiliating than begging. So, he should
oblige him to do so for a long time until his arrogance and over-confidence get
broken. To be sure, both arrogance and haughtiness are among the destructive
diseases.
If he sees him clean in body and clothes, which he is inclined to and fond of,
he should make him take care of the water closet, by cleaning it, sweeping the dirt
places, sticking to kitchens and the places of smoke, so that his fondness of
cleanness would be distracted. However, there is no difference between the one
who excessively cleans his garment, gets himself adorned, and seeks the
decorated pieces and colourful carpets and the bride who gets herself adorned
along the day. There is no difference between man's worshipping himself and
worshipping an idol, for if he worships anything other than Allah Almighty he
will be veiled from Allah; and if one observes in his garment anything other than
its being pure and lawful, in a way that occupies his heart, he then is engaged by
himself.
One of the fine things pertinent to self-discipline in relation to him who is
not able to leave a blameworthy character like haughtiness, all at once and move
to its opposite, is to make him turn from a certain blameworthy character to

i

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

107

another blameworthy character lighter and less harmful. The example of him is
like that of a man who washes off blood with urine, and then washes off urine
with water, in case the water could not remove blood by itself. Another example
is the boy who is fond of playing with ball and toss from which he is moved to
be concerned with adornment and expensive clothes, from which to the desire of
seeking authority and majesty, from which to be exhorted to seek the hereafter.
Likewise, he, who is not pleased to be moved from leaving majesty all at once,
should be moved to another kind of majesty, lighter and less harmful. The same
is true of all the characteristics. If one is seen to be greedy for food, he should
first be exhorted to observe fasts and diminish the food he takes, and then
obliged to prepare delicious food and serve others therewith on the exclusion of
himself, in order that he would become stronger and get accustomed to patience
and break his greediness. If one is seen to be a young man who has great longing
for marriage, although he does not have the financial wherewithal, he should be
commanded to observe fasts, perchance his sexual desire would be diminished.
He might be commanded to break his fast one night with water only, and on
another night with bread only. But he should be prevented from meat and other
condiments in order that his own soul would get broken, and his power
weakened. That is because there is no remedy in the beginning more influential
than hunger. If one is seen to have his anger provoked most frequently, he
should be commanded to stick to stillness and calmness, and obliged to serve
such of persons as of bad manners, in order to be trained to endurance and
patience.
It is reported about one of the predecessors that he used to habituate himself
to forbearance and remove anger from himself by hiring such as would insult him
at the presence of the people, and force himself to keep patient and control his
anger, until forbearance became his main habit, to the extent that he was an ideal
of forbearance. One of the people felt coward and weak-hearted, and in order to
acquire the characteristic of courage, he used to set out aboard the sea during the
severe winter and surging waves. Some Indian worshippers remedy their
indolence from worship by forcing themselves to keep standing for the whole
night on one state. One of the sheikhs used, at the beginning of his way, was lazy
from standing (at night for supererogatory prayer), hereupon he forced himself to
keep standing on his head for the whole night, in order that it would become
much easier upon him to stand on foot willingly. Another one remedied his love
for wealth by selling all his possessions and threw the money in the sea, for he
was afraid of the suspicion of haughtiness by being described with generosity and
showing off by being described with giving in case he distributed it among the

people.
Those examples let you know the way to remedy the diseases ot hearts. It is
not our purpose here to mention the medicine of every disease for this will be
mentioned along the coming books. But the point is to bring to the attention the
fact that the universal way to remedy in general is to follow the opposite of every
conduct that the soul has desire for, and inclination to. Allah Almighty gathered

The quarter of the destructives
108
all of that in a single statement in His Holy Book when He said: "But as for he
who feared the position of his Lord and prevented the soul from [unlawful]
inclination, Then indeed, Paradise will be [his] refuge." (An-Nazi'at 40-41)
i 0 (XjLLM

i^-Toj* @5

cr* ^(3 $

The basic rule is the self-mortificadon and fulfillment of determination. If one
is determined to leave a particular desire, its means shall have been available to
him, by way of trial and test from Allah Almighty, and Thus, he should keep
patient and continue to leave it. But if he gets accustomed to abandon
determination, it would weaken and he would return with failure. If he happens
to repeal his determination, he should betake himself to punishment for it, as we
have mentioned it earlier in the self-punishment in the Book of Self-Reckoning
and self-watch. But if he does not frighten himself with the punishment (for
cancelling his determination), he would see it good to fulfill his desire, which will
corrupt self-discipline entirely.

CHAPTER SIX
EXPOSITION OF SIGNS BY WHICH HEART DISEASE IS KNOWN, AND
SIGNS BY WHICH RECOVERY IS KNOWN
It should be known to you that every part of body is created for a certain
functioning, and its ailment represents in its failure to do it, or at least to do it
perfectly. The ailment of the hand for instance is to fail to do the particular
functioning for which it is created. All parts of body are created to help man
attain knowledge, wisdom, learning, love of Allah Almighty, worship, the pleasure
of celebrating His Praises, and giving it preference over any desire else, and seek
the aid of all desires and parts of body to achieve the act of worship. Allah
Almighty says: "And I did not create the jinn and mankind except to worship
Me." (Adh-Dhariyat 56)

Then, there is a benefit for every part of body.
The benefit of heart is wisdom and knowledge, which is the distinctive
characteristic that separates mankind from all animals. Indeed, mankind is not
distinguished from animals by the power of eating, drinking, having sexual
relation, or seeing, but by his knowledge of the real nature of things. The primal
source and creator Who causes things to come to existence is Allah Almighty,
Who causes them to be things. If man knows all things, but without knowing
Allah, their Creator, he indeed knows nothing. Furthermore, the sign of
knowledge is love, and whoever knows Allah Almighty surely loves Him, and
the sign of love is to give no preference over Him to this present world and any
of the loved things as confirmed by Allah Almighty in His statement: "Say, [O
Muhammad], "If your fathers, your sons, your brothers, your wives, your
relatives, wealth which you have obtained, commerce wherein you fear decline,
and dwellings with which you are pleased are more beloved to you than Allah
and His Messenger and jihad in His cause, then wait until Allah executes His

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

109

command. And Allah does not guide the defiantly disobedient people.,m (AtTawbah 24)
\*y>s3'jS\
^

o! LP ^

ls^*~

4
^

(*• 4=*c-lj
(}l)l

1

L* ills'

V 4&Tj <-6^1

So, whoever has a thing which he loves more than Allah, his heart is sick, just
as every stomach that loves clay more than bread and water, or loses its appedte
for bread and water is sick.
Those are the signs of ailment, therewith all hearts are known to be sick,
except what Allah wills. But there are diseases that the sick might not know, and
the heart disease is of those which the sick does not know. For this reason, he is
heedless of it; and even if he knows it, it is difficult on him to keep patient on its
bitter medicine, which is to oppose desires, and this is like the removal of one's
spirit. Moreover, if one is powerful enough to keep patient on such bitter
medicine, he might not find a skillful physician to remedy him therefrom. The
physicians are the learned and scholars, who have come to be possessed by
disease, and a sick physician could hardly make sense to remedy it. This is why
the disease has become chronic. This science has been obliterated, and the heart
medicine and disease have been entirely rejected, and the people devoted
themselves to the love of this present world, and doing the deeds which are
outwardly acts of worships, and inwardly no more than habits and means of
showing off. Those are the signs of the fundamental diseases.
The signs of recovery after remedy are to consider first the ailment which is
treated: if one treats the evil of niggardliness, which is a destructive ailment that
keeps one far away from Allah Almighty, and its remedy is to give out money and
spend (it properly). But spending might exceed the due limits which causes one
to become spendthrift, and over-spending itself is a disease which should be
treated. His example is like him who treats cold with heat so much excessively
until he becomes hot, and both are diseases. Moderateness between both
extremes then is required, in order for one to be in the middle, and it is this
which keeps him far from both extremes.
If you like to know the middle (between both extremes), consider the act
enjoined by the forbidden character. If it is easier and more pleasant to you than
its opposite, then, you frequently are on that character which enjoins it, like, for
instance, the case in which you find it more pleasant and easier on you to
withhold and gather property than to spend it properly: you should know then
that you are possessed by niggardliness. Then, you should increase your spending
until when you find that spending improperly has become easier and more
pleasant to you, you should know that you are possessed by extravagance; and in
this case, you should return to withholding once again. Continue to observe
yourself and see your character by way of finding acts easy or difficult on you,
until your heart is diverted from devotion to wealth, in the sense that you incline

The quarter of the destructives
110
neither to withholding nor to spending it, for it becomes in your sight like water,
which you do not withhold except to satisfy the need of a needy, or spend only to
fulfill the need of a needy, giving none of both preference over the other.
If die heart attains such a state, it is sound in this respect. It should be sound
in all respects until its relations with all the tilings of this present world are cut
off, enabling his soul to leave the world without being fastened to anything
pertaining to it. It is in this station that it returns to its Lord with satisfaction, well
pleased, and pleasing (to Him), and enters into the assembly of Allah's servants
who are nearest to Him, from among the Prophets, sincere lovers of truth,
witnesses, and righteous, and what a good company it is!
Since the middle that lies in between both extremes is abstruse, for it is
thinner than hair and sharper than the sword, there is no doubt that he who
stands straight on that path in the present world will be able to cross the bridge
(held over the Hell) in the hereafter. But a servant cannot hardly persist without
swerving, even a bit, from the straight path, i.e. that moderate, until he becomes
inclined to anyone of both extremes, with his heart attached to the side to
which he is inclined. This is why he will hardly come without punishment and
crossing over the fire (of Hell) even as swift as a lightning. In confirmation of
that, Allah Almighty says: "And there is none of you except he will come to it.
This is upon your Lord an inevitability decreed. Then We will save those w'ho
feared Allah and leave the wrongdoers within it, on their knees." (Maryam 7172)
jjSj

QijjTslXj'j 'Js>

liojij Vj

oJ3

Those who fear Allah are those who are nearer to the straight path in this
wwld than the others (who will be left in the Hell). In view of the difficulty of
remaining on the right course, it has become obligatory upon every servant to
invoke Allah Almighty seventeen times a day saying: "Guide us to the straight
path", (Al-Fatihah 6)

zJji

iSait >

For it is binding to recite Al-Fatihah in every rak'ah (in the prayer).
It is narrated that one of the predecessors saw the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" in a dream and asked him: "O
Messenger of Allah! You said: "The (Surah of) Hud has made me hoaryheaded: why have you said so?" the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him" said: "For Allah Almighty says: "So remain on a right
course as you have been commanded, [you] and those who have turned back
with you [to Allah], and do not transgress. Indeed, He is Seeing of what you
do." (Hud 112)
4.

^ ^1

cSja I Llff

^

Thus, to remain on the right course in this present world is very abstruse. But

Book two: Sclf-Disciplinc and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

Ill

man should do his best to do it as much as lies within his capacity if he is not able
to do it perfectly. Whoever wants to be saved should do righteous deeds, and
righteous deeds are produced only by good manners. So, let everyone consider
his characteristics and manners and enumerate them, and engage himself in
treadng them one by one according to the sequence of priorities. We ask Allah
Almighty to make us among the pious.

CHAPTER SEVEN
EXPOSITION OF WAY BY WHICH MAN KNOWS HIS DEFECTS
It should be known to you that if Allah intends good for a man, He lets him
see the defects of his own self; and if one has a penetrating insight, his defects are
not hidden from him; and once he knows his defects, he becomes able to remedy
himself. But unfortunately, most people are ignorant of their defects. One of
them sees the speck in the eye of his brother, even though he does not see it in
his own eye. However, if one wants to know the defects of his own self, he has
four ways to achieve that:
The first is to sit in front of a sheikh insightful of the self-defects, and
acquainted with the hidden diseases, and let him judge on him and then follow
his advice in relation to self-mordfication. This is the case of the novice with
his sheikh, and the student with his mister. The sheikh and mister should let
novices and beginners know the defects of their own selves, and put them on
the right way to remedy them. But regrettably, this could no longer be found
in this time.
The second is to seek a truthful, sincere, insightful and religious friend and
appoint him watchful over himself, in order to observe his states and deeds,
and alert him to what he dislikes of his deeds, acts, states and internal and
external defects. This was the practice of the intelligent and important imams of
religion. Umar "Allah be pleased with him" used to say: "May Allah bestow
mercy upon he who let me know my defects." He used to ask Salman "Allah be
pleased with him" about his own defects. When Salman "Allah be pleased with
him" came to him (from his governorate) he said to him: "What has reached
you about me of the acts you dislike?" he demanded that he should exempt
him, but he insisted thereupon he said: "I have been reported that you
combined two condiments on one table and that you have two suites, one you
put on by day and the other at night." He asked: "Has anything else reached
you?" he answered in the negative, thereupon he said: "As regards those, I have
been sufficed against them." He further used to ask Hudhaifah Allah be
pleased with him": "You are the keeper of the secret of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" concerning the hypocrites: do you see
in me any sign of those signs characteristic of hypocrites?" he thus, in spite of
his high rank and elevated position, used to suspect himself, "Allah be pleased
with him".
The more one is intelligent and high in rank, the less he is fond of himself
and the more he is suspicious of himself. But this also could hardly be found at

The quarter of the destructives
112
that time. A very few friends are those who abandon flattery in order to tell about
the defects, or are far from envy that causes them to go far beyond the real
defects. From among your friends, there are such as is envious or tendentious
who renders as defect what is not a defect, or such as is an adulator who conceals
from you some of your defects.
It is reported that Dawud At-Ta'i get himself isolated from the people and
when he was asked: "Why do you not mix with the people?" He said: "What
should I have to do with people who conceal from me my defects?" it was the
desire of the religious people to make sense to their own defects through being
alerted to them by others. But now, we have become in such a state as the most
hateful to us is he who gives us advice, and draws our attention to our defects.
This indicates to the weak faith. To be sure, the bad manners are like stinging
female-snakes and scorpions. If somebody draws our attention to the fact that
there is a scorpion underneath our clothes, of a surety, we would grow pleased
with him, and become under obligation to him, and occupy ourselves by
removing and killing that scorpion. The scorpion affects the body, and its pain
stands for a day or so, whereas the bad manners affects the heart, and I fear it
might survive forever. But in spite of that, we do not grow pleased with the one
who alerts us to it, nor do we engage ourselves in removing it: on the contrary,
we engage ourselves by confronting such as alerts us with a counter alert telling
him that he also does such and such (evil), and our enmity towards him diverts us
from getting benefit from his advice. This is out of the hardened heart which is a
fruit of much sins. The fundamental cause that lies behind all of that is the weak
faith. So, we ask Allah Almighty to put us on the right way, let us see our defects,
and occupy us by treating them, and help us, by His grace and bounty, be
thankful to such as shows us our shortcomings.
The third way is to seek to know his own defects from his enemies, for
indeed the eye of hatred always reveals the faults. It is better for a man to get
benefit from a disputing enemy who lets him know his own defects more than
from a flattering friend who praises and lauds him and conceals from him his
defects. But man is predisposed by nature to give lie to the statements of the
enemy, and construe what he says to be out of envy and jealousy. Therefore, the
insightful is he who gets benefit from what is said by his enemies about him, for
his faults are to spread on his tongue.
The fourth way is to mix with the people, and require himself to get rid of
such of deeds as he sees blameworthy among them, supposing it to be attributed
to him, for indeed the believer acts as a mirror for the believer. Thus, he sees his
own defects through the defects of others, regarding the dispositions to be
almost similar in following desires. Any quality that exists in one person might be
found, more or less, in his fellow. So, let one inspect himself, and purify it from
what is seen blameworthy by him. If all the people abandon what they dislike to
see in the others, of a surety, they would dispense with the educator.
It was said to Jesus "Peace be upon him": "Who has educated you?" He said:
"None has educated me. But I saw the ignorance of the ignorant a defect which I

Book two: Sclf-Disciplinc and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases -____

113

avoided.” But if one finds a sheikh who is knowledgeable and insightful of the
defects of the people, sincere in advice about the religion, disengaged from
disciplining himself and devoted to disciplining the servants of Allah, he indeed
has found a good physician whom he has to stick to, for it is he who will relieve
him of his disease, and save him from the destruction he is going to encounter.

CHAPTER EIGHT
PROOFS HANDED DOWN FOR INSIGHTFUL; AND EVIDENCES OF
RELIGIOUS LAW FOR THE FACT THAT WAY OF REMEDY OF HEART
DISEASES LIES IN ABANDONING DESIRES, AND HEART DISEASES LIE
IN FOLLOWING DESIRES
It should be known that if you take in consideration what we have
mentioned, your sight will be opened, and the heart diseases and their remedy will
be revealed to you by the light of knowledge and certainty. But if you fail to attain
it, you should, at least, give trust and faith by way of imitation to such people
who deserves to be imitated. Faith has a particular degree, and so does knowledge
which ensues from faith. Allah Almighty says: "Allah will raise those who have
believed among you and those who were given knowledge, by degrees. And Allah
is Acquainted with what you do." (Al-Mujadilah 11)
A

aAjTj

\y3\ iji^j

O3-^ ^

A

Whoever trusts the fact that the opposition of desires is the way to (know)
Allah Almighty, even without being acquainted with its cause and mystery is of
the believers; and whoever is acquainted with the assistants of desires we have
mentioned earlier is of those endowed with knowledge; and both are promised
good by Allah Almighty.
What makes faith in that matter binding in the Qur'an, sunnah and statements
of scholars are beyond calculation. Allah Almighty says: "But as for he who
feared the position of his Lord and prevented the soul from [unlawful]
inclination, Then indeed, Paradise will be [his] refuge.” (An-Nazi’at 40-41)

i0 CsilJi

op 0 Cs'$cf

Js>i *•#

O* ^'3 >

Fie further says: "they are the ones whose hearts Allah has tested for
righteousness. For them is forgiveness and great reward." (Al-Hujurat 3)

40

yr fj "VyA

iS'AQ fr-P*

1 J*

In comment on it, it was said that He deprived them of the love of desires.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and p eace be upon him" said: "The
faithful believer lies between five disasters: an envious believer who envies him, a
hypocrite who dislikes him, a disbeliever who fights him, a devil who misleads
him, and a soul that disputes him." (This narration is reported by Abu Bakr Ibn
Lala on the authority of Anas). He Thus, showed that the soul is a disputing
enemy which should be opposed.
It is narrated that Allah Almighty revealed to David "Peace be upon him": "O

The quarter of the destructives
114
David! Beware, and warn your companions of following their desires, for the
people whose hearts are attached to their desires of the present world, their
minds will be veiled from Me (in the hereafter)." Jesus "Peace be upon him" said:
"Blessed be he who leaves a present desire for an absent invisible promised
(reward)." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said
to a people who returned from Jihad: "Welcome to you! You have come from the
minor Jihad to the major Jihad." They asked: "O Messenger of Allah! What is the
major Jihad?" he said: "It is the self-mortification." (This narration is reported by
Al-Baihaqi). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "Tire Mujahid is him who mortifies himself in obedience of Allah
Almighty." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah on the
authority of Fadalah Ibn Ubaid). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" also said: "Withhold your harm from your soul and do not
follow its desire in disobedience of Allah Almighty."
According to Sufyan: "I have never treated anything harder on me than my
own soul: once 1 overpower it and once it overpowers me." Abu Al-Abbas AlMawsili used to address his soul saying: "O my soul! Neither you are in the
present world living in comfort with the sons of kings, nor do you strive seeking
for the hereafter with the worshippers (of Allah), as though you are detained in
between the Garden and the fire (of Hell). O my soul! Do you not feel shy?"
according to Al-Hassan: "There is no noncompliant beast in need to be reined
more than your soul."
According to Yahya Ibn Mu'adh Ar-Razi: "Strive against yourself with the
swords of discipline. Discipline is of four kinds: lack of food, lack of sleep, lack
of speech, and enduring harm of all the people. The lack of food diminishes
desires; and the lack of sleep purifies willpower; and the lack of speech saves
from faults; and enduring the harm of the people helps one attain his desired
purpose. To be sure, there is nothing harder on the slave than forbearance on
desertion, patience over the harm. If the will of desires is stimulated and the
sweetness of surplus speech is provoked, the swords of the lack of food are taken
out of the sheathes of the shortage of sleep to strike it with the hands of silence
and lack of speech until it stops from wrongness and vengeance. The result is
that it would be purified from the darkness of its desires and saved from the evil
of its defects, and become clean and luminous like a light spirit, roaming in the
fields of good, and following the ways of the acts of worship, like the horse that
attacks the enemy in the battlefield, or like the king who tours in the garden."
He said once again: "The enemies of man are three: his present world, his
devil and his own soul. So, beware of the present world by abstinence in it, of the
devil by opposing him, and of the soul by leaving desires."
One of the sages said: "He, who is possessed by his soul, becomes
captivated by the love of its desires, imprisoned in the custody of its whims,
oppressed and chained, and his rein is with its hand, driving it wherever it
wishes, and hindering his heart from any benefit." According to Ja'far Ibn
Humaid: "The scholars and wise men unanimously agree on the fact that he

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

115

blessing (of the hereafter) could be attained only by leaving the blessing (in the
present world)." According to Yahya Al-Warraq: "He, who pleases his organs
by desires has indeed planted the trees of regret in his heart." According to
Wuhaib Al-Word: "What is beyond the bread belongs to the appetence." He
said once again: "Whoever loves the desires of this present world, let him get
ready for humiliation."
It is narrated that after Joseph "Peace be upon him" became in charge of the
depositories of the land, the wife of Al-Aziz said to him, and she had sat on the
way in expectation for him while he was marching in a procession of nearly
twelve thousand from among the chiefs and nobles of his kingdom: "Glory be to
(Allah) Who has made the kings slaves because of their disobedience, and the
slaves kings by virtue of their obedience to Him. Verily, greediness and desire
have made the kings slaves; and this is the requital of the doers of mischief, and
padence and righteousness have made the slaves kings." On that Joseph "Peace
be upon him" said, as Allah Almighty tells about him: "Indeed, he who fears
Allah and is padent, then indeed, Allah does not allow to be lost the reward of
those who do good." (Yusuf 90)

Al-Junaid said: "One night I was befallen by insomnia and when I stood to
recite my daily portion, I did not detect the same sweetness I was accustomed to.
I tried to sleep but I failed. I sat but I could not endure sitdng. I came out and
behold! There was a man wrapped in a garment and he was lying in the street.
When he saw me he said: "O Abu Al-Qasim! Are you coming to me at that
hour?" I said: "But there is no appointment O sir." He said: "Nay! I asked Allah
Almighty to move your heart towards me." I said: "He has really done. What is
your need?" he asked: "When does the disease of the soul turn to be the
remedy?" I said: "When the soul opposes its desire." He addressed himself saying:
"Listen! I gave you the same reply seven dmes, and you insisted but to listen to it
only from Al-Junaid. Now, you have listened to it." Then, he turned away, and I
did not recognize him."
Yazid Ar-Raqashi said: "Keep away from me the cold water in this present
world, perchance I will not be deprived of it in the hereafter." A man asked Umar
Ibn Abdul-Aziz: "When should I speak?" he said: "When you desire for silence."
He further asked: "Then, when should I keep silent?" he said: "When you desire
for talking." According to Ali "Allah be pleased with him": "He, who has longing
for the Garden should abandon the desires in the present world." Whenever
Malik Ibn Dinar was roaming and he saw something which he desired, he would
say to himself: "Keep padent, for by Allah, I forbid you only for the honour you
have in my sight."
Thus, the religious scholars and wise men agree on the fact that the only
way to the happiness in the hereafter is to prevent the soul from the unlawful
inclinadons and oppose the desires. It is binding to have faith in this fact. We
have already introduced what lets one have knowledge of the details of the

The quarter of the destructives
116
forbidden and lawful desires. The basis and mystery of discipline are that the
soul should not be made to enjoy of anything that is not in the grave except as
much as is necessary. In this way, he should limit himself from food, marriage,
clothes and residence only to what satisfies his need. If one enjoys of anything
thereof, he will be affable with it, to the extent that if he dies, he will hope to
return once again to the present world because of it. Without doubt, none
hopes to return to the present world but he, who has no portion in the
hereafter. There is no salvation from it unless the heart is engaged in the
knowledge and love of Allah Almighty, thinking of Him, and devoting oneself
to celebrating Him; and one has no power to do it except by virtue of Allah
Almighty. One should limit himself only to what averts the obstructions of
celebration (of Allah).
But whoever has no power to do it as it should be in reality, he should, at
least, do it with proximity. The people are of four kinds in that respect: the first
is a man whose heart is devoted to the celebration of Allah, and does not turn to
this present world except to fulfill the necessities of living. He is of the sincere
lovers of the truth, a rank which could be attained only through long discipline
and patience over (the abandonment of) desires for a long time.
The second is a man whose heart is wholly devoted to the present world in
which there remains no place for the celebration of Allah Almighty except
through the self talk, that he remembers Him only by tongue and not by the
heart. This is among the ruined.
The third is a man who is engaged in both world and religion altogether,
even though religion is preponderant in his heart. Such should pass by the fire,
but in the end he will be saved from it as quickly as is equal to the prevalence of
the celebration of Allah over his heart.
The fourth is a man who is engaged in both altogether, even though the
world is dominant in his heart. This will stand longer in the fire, but he ultimately
will come out of it in view of the power of the celebration of Allah in his heart,
regardless of the fact that the remembrance of the present world dominates his
heart. O Allah! We seek refuge from Your putting the people to disgrace, for You
are the One with Whom refuge is sought.
But even, one might say: "As the enjoyment of the permissible is permissible,
how should it be a cause of being far from Allah Almighty?" however, this
thought is not accurate, for the love of this present world is the fundament of all
sins and mistakes, and the cause of rendering fruitless all good deeds. The
permissible that is beyond the need in this world is not praiseworthy, as will be
discussed in detail later in the Book of Criticizing the Present World.
Ibrahim Al-Khawas said: "Once, I was in the mountain of Lukam when I had
a desire for pomegranates thereupon I picked up one and split it open, and found
it sore. I left it and went away. On the way I found a man lying with bees over his
body. I greeted him with peace: "Peace be upon you." He replied: "Upon you be
peace O Ibrahim." I asked him: "How have you recognized me?" he said: "He
who knows Allah Almighty, nothing becomes hidden from him." I said to him: "I

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

117

see you have a good position with Allah, why do you not ask Him to protect you
from those bees?" on that he said: "And I also see that you have a good position
with Allah. Why do you not ask Him to protect you from the desire for
pomegranates? Of a surety, the pain caused by the sting of pomegranates extends
to the hereafter, whereas the pain caused by the sting of bees is detected only in
that present world." Then, I left him and went. As-Sari said: "For forty years, I
have been confronting the idea of dipping a morsel of bread in fat, but I have
never taken it."
Thus, the heart could not be amended and adjusted to be fit for following
the way to the hereafter unless it is prevented from the enjoyment of what is
permissible. If the soul is not prevented from some of the permissible, it surely
will covet of the forbidden. If one likes to safeguard his tongue from backbiting
and curiosity, he should stick to silence except from the celebration of Allah
Almighty, and the necessities of religion until the desire for talking vanishes
with him, and he talks only with what is true and right, with the result that both
his silence and talking become acts of worship. Likewise, if the eye gets
accustomed to look at all that is beautiful, it will not safeguard itself from
looking at the forbidden (as long as it is beautiful). The same applies to all
desires, for both lawful and unlawful are subject to the same desire. The desire
is one, and it is binding upon one to prevent it from the unlawful. Unless he
habituates it to be limited only to what is necessary, of a surety it will
overpower him.
This is one of the permissible things, and there lie behind it a great deal of
blights. The soul always rejoices at the enjoyment of this present world, in
which it feel secure and on which it relies, out of arrogance and haughtiness
until it becomes intoxicated like a drunk who never recovers from the
influence of intoxication. To be sure, this joy of the present world is like a
deadly poison that runs in the veins and removes from the heart the fear,
grief, reminder of death and the terrors of the Day of Judgement. This is,
therefore, the heart death. In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty says:
"Indeed, those who do not expect the meeting with Us and are satisfied with
the life of this world and feel secure therein and those who are heedless of
Our signs: For those their refuge will be the Fire because of what they used to
earn." (Yunus 7-8)
0y.jjf» tp iIbflaJ

<0

tL; jut

N

0] ^

0

He further says: "And they rejoice in the worldly life, while the worldly life is
not, compared to the Hereafter, except [brief] enjoyment." (Ar-Ra’d 26)
C

i egJ)

liys>S\ Lj

^

Allah Almighty also says: "Know that the life of this world is but amusement
and diversion and adornment and boasting to one another and competition in
increase of wealth and children." (Al-Hadid 20)

The quarter of the destructives

118
^(j^j) oJjSlij J’^Vi 4^^3

Llj' ij^IpT ^

The means that it (the present world) is blameworthy. So, we ask Allah to
grant us safety.
The people of determination from among the masters of hearts tried their
hearts in the state of jovfulness of he things of this present world, and found
them hardened and far from the effect of the celebradon of Allah and the Last
Day, and they tried them in the state of grief and found them lenient, smooth
and pure, suscepdble to the effect of the celebradon of Allah Almighty. They
came to know that salvadon lies in the permanent grief and remoteness from all
means of jovfulness and arrogance. Thus, they weaned them from its pleasures
and delights, and habituated them to keep padent over their desires, be they
lawful or unlawful, given that the lawful among them leads to reckoning,
whereas the unlawful among them leads to punishment, and the suspicious
among them incurs rapprochement, which is a sort of punishment; and of a
surety, whoever is called to account on the Day of Judgement will be punished.
They relieved themselves of its punishment, and attained permanent freedom
and dominion in the present world and the hereafter by releasing themselves
from all desires, and rather socialized with the celebradon of Allah Almighty and
engaged in obedience of Him. They did with their souls the same as one does
with a falcon which is to be disciplined and moved from uncontrollable flight and
wildness to obedience and submission. First of all, it is detained in a dark house
and his eyes are sewed in order to be weaned from flying in the air, and made to
forget its unruly wildness to which it was accustomed. At a second stage, it is
treated with lenience and gentility until it gets familiar to its owner to the extent
that whenever he invites it, it responds to his invitation, and whenever it hears his
voice, it returns to him.
Likewise, the soul becomes familiar with Allah Almighty and socializes with
the celebration of Him only when it is weaned from its old habits, and this is
achieved through living in privacy and seclusion for hearing and seeing to be
safeguarded against their habitual things. Secondly, it gets accustomed to
supplicating, celebrating and lauding Allah AJmighty until it becomes sociable
with the celebration of Allah Almighty in substitution for its being sociable with
the things of the present world and its related desires. The novice finds it difficult
on him in the beginning. But in the end, he comes to enjoy of its pleasure. His
example is like a baby who is weaned from the breast of his mother, to which he
is powerfully attached to the extent that he could not keep patient over leaving it
even for an hour: and Thus, in the beginning, he weeps and is scared so much,
and refrains from food that is served to him instead of milk. But when he is
prevented from milk all at once, and he gets tired and exhausted out of hunger,
he forces himself to take food. But across time, he comes to take it by nature to
the extent that if he is made to return to the breast once again, he will reject it,
refrain from milk, and rather become familiar with food. Similarly, the riding

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart disc ascs

119

mount in the beginning disdains saddle, rein and riding, and Thus, it is compelled
to it by force.
The soul then should be disciplined in the same way as the birds and animals
are disciplined. The way of disciplining it is to be prevented from looking at,
socializing with and enjoying of the good things of this present world, and in
total, from all things which it is going to leave by death. It is said to the soul:
"Love whatever you wish to love, but in the end, you are going to leave it." When
it is learnt that whoever loves anything should inevitably leave it and become so
much miserable of that departure, he then has to direct his longing and love to
that which he never leaves, i.e. the celebration of Allah Almighty, which
accompanies him in the grave, and never leaves him. All of that is achieved by
patience in the beginning for a few days, for the lifetime is very short in
comparison with the duration of the hereafter.
The rational is he who willingly accepts to set out on journey and be
involved in learning a profession for a month, in order to enjoy thereof for a
whole year, if not for his entire lifetime. The entire lifetime in comparison with
the duration of the perpetual time is shorter than the month in comparison with
the duration of the world lifetime. Patience and mortification then are necessary
in this respect. Every morning, the people sing the praises of daylight, and the
darkness that covers their eyes because of sleep leaves them, according to the
statement of Ali "Allah be pleased with him". The way of mortification and
discipline in relation to everyone of the people differs by the difference of his
particular states and conditions. The basic rule therein is that everyone should
leave that with which he rejoices of the things of this present world. The one
who rejoices with wealth should leave wealth; and the same applies to him who
rejoices with majesty, acceptability in preaching, honour and power in
judgement, increasing number of followers and devotees in teaching and
instructing, etc. Everyone then should leave at first that with which he rejoices.
If one is prevented from any of those and is told that prevention has not
affected his reward in the hereafter, for which he was aggrieved and disliked that
prevention, he then is of those who rejoices with the life of this world, and feels
secure therein; and the result is that he will be given to destruction. When one
leaves all means and causes of joyfulness, let him get isolated from the people and
remain alone in solitude, and watch his heart so that it would be engaged only in
the celebration of Allah Almighty. He also should lie in wait for such of desires
and suspicion as occur within himself, in order to suppress them, for there is a
reason for every kind of suspicion, and in order to vanish, its reason should
vanish first. Let him remain as such for the remaining portion of his life, for the
mortification comes to end only by death.

CHAPTER NINE

The quarter of the destructives

120

EXPOSITION OF SIGNS OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER
It should be known to you that every man is ignorant of his own defects; and
if he mortifies himself in die least until he leaves the shameful sins, he might
think that he has improved his own self and made good his moral character, and
thus dispense with self-mortification. For this reason, the sign of good character
should be made clear. The good character lies in the faith, whereas the bad
character lies in hypocrisy. Allah Almighty made a mention of the qualities of
both believers and hypocrites in His Book, and both are direct fruits of good and
bad character. Let's introduce a set of those qualities in order that you would
know the sign of good character.
Allah Almighty says: "Certainly will the believers have succeeded: They who
are during their prayer humbly submissive And they who turn away from ill
speech And they who are observant of Zakat And they who guard their private
parts Except from their wives or those their right hands possess, for indeed,
they will not be blamed - But whoever seeks beyond that, then those are the
transgressors - And they who are to their trusts and their promises attentive
And they who carefully maintain their prayers - Those are the inheritors." (AlMu'minun 1-10)

OiAJ 15 0 Cj'
fTp prW

0 b£'j

J* p-* oiA113 O Oj4 p*
L ji

Vj 0

r*
40 Oyj'jfi p-*

0

p-*

0 0\
0

,U

du;j> ;Tjj 'j£\

0 bjk*^

'jij]Tj

p-*

0

He Almighty further says: "[Such believers are] the repentant, the
worshippers, the praisers [of Allah ], the travelers [for His cause], those who bow
and prostrate [in prayer], those who enjoin what is right and forbid what is
wrong, and those who observe the limits [set by] Allah. And give good tidings to
the believers." (At-Tawbah 112)
o^,-^uT0_jy*£==>''J\

jj

He also says: "The believers are only those who, when Allah is mentioned,
their hearts become fearful, and when His verses are recited to them, it increases
them in faith; and upon their Lord they rely - The ones who establish prayer, and
from what We have provided them, they spend. Those are the believers, truly.
For them are degrees [of high position] with their Lord and forgiveness and
noble provision." (Al-Anfal 2-4)
I M3
^ by~Sy+)I (v-a viljlJjl (£|3)

4 0^j^=a

cuU-j ^>T
L-.j 5jliJl

13] o>-vjT 0
oijjl 0 by&

^

121

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

Allah Almighty says too: "And the servants of the Most Merciful are those
who walk upon the earth easily, and when the ignorant address them [harshly],
they say [words of| peace..." up to the end of the Surah (Al-Furqan 63)

4. (®)

*'>hi

'\13

3^

Therefore, if one finds it abstruse upon him to discover his own state, he
should then offer himself to those Holy Verses. The sin of good character lies in
the presence of all of those qualities, whereas the sign of bad character lies in the
loss of them all, and there are fields in between both according to the presence or
loss of some of them. So, let one engage in acquiring what he loses, and keeping
what he has got of them.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" described
the faithful believer with many qualities, all of which refer to the good moral
character. He said: "The believer is he who loves for his brother the same as he
loves for himself." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of
Anas). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "He, who has faith in Allah and the Last, should deal with his guest
generously; and he, who has faith in Allah and the Last Day should deal with his
neighbour generously; and he, who has faith in Allah and the Last day should say
good or (at least) keep silent." (It is reported by Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the
authority of Abu Hurairah and Abu Shuraih Al-Khuza'i).
He mentioned that the good moral character distinguishes the faithful
believers, as shown from his statement: "The one who has the most perfect faith
among the believers is he, who has the best manners among them." The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "If
you see the believer silent with reverence, then, approach him, for wisdom
appears on his tongue." (This narration is reported by Ibn Majah on the authority
of Abu Khallad). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" aid: "He, who is pleased with his good character, and displeased with his
bad manners, is then a believer." (This narrations reported by Ahmad, Al-Hakim
and At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu Musa and Abu Umamah).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "It is
unlawful for a believer to hint to his brother with a harmful glance." (This
narration is reported by Ibn Al-Mubarak). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "It is unlawful for a Muslim to
frighten another Muslim." (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the
authority of An-Nu'man Ibn Bashir; and Al-Bazzar on the authority of Umar).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said too:
"(When two persons sit with each other) they sit with safety of Allah Almighty.
So, it is unlawful for anyone of them to disclose what his brother dislikes."
One of the predecessors combined the signs of the good character saying:
"They are that one should be more modest, less harmful, more righteous, true in
speech, who talks little and works much, less stumbling, less curious, dutiful,
keeping of good relations (with his kith and kin), respectful, forbearing, thankful,

The quarter of the destructives
122
well-satisfied, wise, kind, chaste, sympathetic, who is neither cursing, nor abusing,
nor a talebearer, nor a backbiter, nor hasty, nor resentful, nor a niggard, nor
envious; and rather he is joyful, cheerful, who loves and hates, is pleased and
displeased only for the sake of and in (the religion of) Allah Almighty. The good
character lies in all of that.
Once, the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" was
asked about the sign of the believer and the sign of the hypocrite, thereupon he
said: "The believer directs his endeavor to prayer, fasting and acts of worship, and
the hypocrite directs his endeavor to food, drink, like the animal." According to
Hatim Al-Asamm: "The believer is occupied by thought and meditation, whereas
the hypocrite by greediness and hope; and the believer despairs of all except Allah
Almighty, whereas the hypocrite expects from all except Allah Almighty; and the
believer feels safe from all except Allah Almighty, whereas the hypocrite feels
afraid of all except Allah Almighty; and the believer gives up his property for the
sake of his religion, whereas the hypocrite gives up his religion for the sake of his
property; and the believer does good and weeps, whereas the hypocrite does evil
and laughs; and the believer loves seclusion and solitude, whereas the hypocrite
loves mixing and assembly; and the believer plants and fears corruption, whereas
the hypocrite uproots and expect for harvest; and the believer commands and
forbids for the sake of policy thereupon he amends, whereas the hypocrite
commands and forbids for the sake of sovereignty, thereupon he does mischief."
The first thing with which the good character is tested is to keep patience
over harm and endure desertion. Whoever complains of the bad character of the
others provides evidence for his bad character, for it is out of the good character
to endure the harm. It is narrated on the authority of Anas Ibn Malik “Allah be
pleased with him” that he said: I was walking with the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” who was wearing a Najrani garment
with a thick border. A Bedouin met him and pulled the garment so violently that
I saw the traces of its border on the neck of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” because of this violent pulling. He (the
Bedouin) said: “O Muhammad! Order that something should be given to me
from the wealth of Allah which is with you.” The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” turned to him, smiled, and ordered that a gift 1
(provision) will be given to him. (This narration is reported by Muslim).
When the Quraish people intensified their harming and beating him, the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said (by way of
supplication): "O Allah! Forgive for my people for they do not know (the truth)."
It is said that this happened on the day of the holy battle of Uhud. This is why
Allah Almighty revealed: "And you are indeed on a great moral character." (AlQalam 4)

4

^ v^,!3 ^

It is narrated that once, Ibrahim Ibn Adham set out to the desert where he
met a soldier who asked him: "Are you a slave?" he said: "Yes." He asked him

Book two: Scif-Disciplinc and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

123

to guide him to the habitations. He pointed out the graveyards to him. The
soldier said: "I meant the habitations." He said: "Those arc the graveyards." He
was exasperated and struck him with the whip over his head and wounded it
and took him back to the town. His companions received him and asked him
about the story, and the soldiers told them. They told the soldier that he was
Ibrahim Ibn Adham. On that the soldier dismounted from his horse and went
on kissing his hands and feet and apologized to him. Later on, he was asked:
"Why did you say to him that you were a slave?" he said: "He did not ask me
whose slave I was. He just asked me: 'Are you a slave?' and I answered in the
affirmative, for I'm the slave of Allah. When he struck my head I asked Allah to
admit him to the Garden." It was said to him: "How since he wronged you?" he
said: "I learnt that I would get reward for the harm I had received from him,
and I did not want that my portion from him be good and his from me evil."
Once, Abu Uthman Al-Hiri was invited by somebody who intended to
examine his character. When he reached the gate of the house, he returned him
and he did accordingly. He did so with him so many times and Abu Uthman did
not change. In the last time the inviter said to him: "O sir! I intended only to test
you; and how good your character is!" on that he said to him: "That character you
have seen from me is like the dog's character: whenever it is invited it would
respond, and whenever it is averted, it would return."
It is reported from him also that one day he was crossing the street when a
bowl of ashes was thrown at him. He dismounted and fell in prostration out of
thankfulness and then wiped the dust off his garment and said nothing. He was
asked: "Why have you not scolded them?" he said: "It is not possible for such as
deserves the fire to become angry, given that he is reconciled with ashes instead."
It is reported that Ali Ibn Musa Ar-Rida was of blackish complexion for his
mother was black. In front of his house, there was a public bath, and whenever
he liked to enter it, the worker would empty it for him. One day, he entered and
the worker closed the door on him and went to fulfill his needs. Then, a man
came and opened the door of the public bath and entered and put off his clothes
and then saw Ali Ibn Musa. Thinking him to be a servant working in the bath, he
asked him to stand up and bring water to him. He did accordingly, and executed
his other commands. When the worker returned and saw the clothes of the man
and heard his speech with Ali Ibn Musa, he feared and escaped. When All Ibn
Musa came out he asked about the bath worker and he was told that he had
escaped for fear of him. On that he said: "He has not to escape for it is the sin of
him who had sexual relation with a black slave-girl (and begot a black child from
her)."
It is narrated that Abu Abdullah Al-Khayyat (the tailor) used to sit in front of
his shop, and he had a Magian client, and whenever he made a dress for him, he
would give him the charge in the form of false coins, which he would accept
from him, without telling him about that, although he knew they were false. One
day, Abu Abdullah happened to go to fulfill some of his needs, and the Magian
came and gave his apprentice the charge and took the sewed garment. Since the

The quarter of the destructives
124
charge was a false Dirham, which the apprentice knew once he looked at it, he
rejected to take it. When Abu Abdullah returned, his apprentice told him about
that, thereupon he said to him: "How bad! This Magian has been treating me with
those (false coins) and I have been patient over him: I accepted from him the
false coins which I threw in the well lest he would deceive another Muslim by
them."
According to Yusuf Ibn Asbat: "Ten characteristics comprise the sign of the
good moral character: taking oaths rarely, good justice and fairness, keeping away
from pursuing slips of others, making good what seems of evil deeds, accepting
the excuses of others, enduring harm, blaming oneself, seeking to know one's
defects on the exclusion of the defects of others, cheerfulness of countenance in
the face of both the young and the old, and the kind speech for the higher and
lower."
When Sahl was asked about the good moral character he said: "The least of
which is to endure harm, leave seeking the reward (for favour), showing mercy
towards and asking forgiveness for the wrongdoer." Al-Ahnaf Ibn Qais was
asked: "From whom have you learnt forbearance?" he said: "From Qais Ibn
Asim." He was said: "To what extent was he forbearing?" he said: "While he
was sitting in his house, one of his slave-maids brought to him a tray having a
roasted meat, which fell from her hand over a child belonging to him,
thereupon the child died. The slave-maid was scared, and he said to her: "Let
no fear befall you! Go, you have become free for the Countenance of Allah
Almighty."
It is reported that whenever boys saw Uwais Al-Qarni they would throw him
with stones. On that he said to them: "O my young brothers! If it is necessary for
you to do so, then, let it be with small pebbles, lest you would cause my legs to
bleed and Thus, hinder me form performing prayer." A man insulted Al-Ahnaf
Ibn Qais and he did not reply to him. He kept pursuing and insulting him and AlAhnaf kept silent. When they became a short distance before the entrance of the
dwelling places, he turned his face to him and said: "O my brother! If there
remains anything with you to say (of insults), say it now before we enter the
habitations, lest some of the inhabitants would hear you and cause you harm
because of that."
It is reported that Ali "Allah be pleased with him" called a slave who did not
respond to him. He called him twice or thrice, and he did not respond to his
invitation. He stood to see him and found him lying. He asked him: "Have you
not heard my call O slave?" he said: "Yes I have heard." He asked: "Then, what
has led you not to respond to my call?" he said: "Since I felt safe of your
punishment, I have been too lazy (to answer you)." On that he said to him:
"Then, go, you have become free for the Countenance of Allah Almighty." A
woman called Malik Ibn Dinar, "may Allah have mercy upon him" saying: "O
adulator!" on that he said to her: "No doubt, you have discovered one of my
names from which the people of Basrah have gone astray." Yahya Ibn Ziyad AlHarithi had an evil slave, and it was said to him: "Why do you keep him?" he said:
'

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

125

"In order to learn forbearance through him."
Those souls have been subdued through self-discipline, resulting in the
moderateness of their manners, and their internals were cleansed from cheating,
rancour and resentment, resulting in their satisfaction with what has been
decreed by Allah Almighty; and this is the highest level of good moral character.
That is because the highest level of bad character is to dislike and be dissatisfied
with the act of Allah Almighty. The signs (of good moral character) then
appeared on the external behaviour of those in the very way we have
mentioned. If one does not detect within himself the same signs, he should not
deceive himself, thinking himself to be of good moral character. On the
contrary, he should engage in self-discipline and self-mortification until he
attains the degree of good moral character, for it is a high degree which none
attains but the nearest (to the Presence of Allah Almighty) and the sincere
lovers of truth.

CHAPTER TEN
EXPOSITION OF WAY TO DISCIPLINE KIDS FROM THEIR EARLY YEARS;
AND WAY TO IMPROVE THEIR MANNERS
It should be known to you that the way to discipline kids is one of the most
important things; and a kid represents a trust in the hands of his parents: his
heart is like a precious gem , pure and clean from every engraving and image,
and Thus, it is susceptible to every image that might be engraved and imprinted
on it. If one is accustomed to good, and instructed to do it, he surely will be
brought up on it, with the result that he will attain happiness in both the world
and the hereafter, and his parent besides all the teachers who contribute in his
learning will have a share in the reward. If one is accustomed to evil, and
neglected in the same way as an animal is neglected, he will become wretched
and be ruined in both this world and the hereafter, and the sin of that will be
due upon his guardian. Allah Almighty says in this respect: "O you who have
believed, protect yourselves and your families from a Fire whose fuel is people
and stones." (At-Tahrim 6)
4 (J|J
Ipl^)T lioyj
^
If a child's parent is to protect him from the fire of this world, then, it will
be preferable to protect him from the fire of the hereafter. To protect him is to
discipline him, improve his manners, instruct him in the good character, keep
him from the evil companions, not to habituate him to comfortable life, nor to
endear to him adornment and luxury, lest he would waste his time in pursuit of
them when he grows old, and be given to everlasting destruction. He rather
should watch him from his early childhood: he should choose a religious
woman who eats from lawful sources to wet-nurse and suckle him, for no
blessing lies in the milk that is produced from the unlawful. If the child happens
to drink it, his clay would be made up of malice, to which he will be
predisposed by nature.

The quarter of the destructives
Once he notices in him the commencements of discernment, he should
observe him. The first portent of that is modesty: if he is self-effacing and feels
shy of doing some tilings, this will be due to the shining of the light of mind on
him, in which he sees many tilings ugly and disagreeing with the requirements of
usage and practice, on the exclusion of others, and Thus, he feels shy of doing
many acts apart from others. Therefore, this is a gift bestowed upon him by
Allah, and a portent of the moderateness of character and pureness of heart, and
gives glad tidings of his would-be perfect mind at adolescence. The bashful child
should not be neglected: on the contrary, the aid of his bashfulness and
discernment should be sought to discipline him.
The first quality that prevails over him is the greed for food, in which he
should be disciplined: he should be accustomed to pick food only with the help
of his right hand, to mention the Name of Allah on it, to eat only from what is
close to him in the dish, not to start taking food before others, not to stare at it
or to those who eat, not to be swift in eating, to chew food well, not to stain his
hand or garment. Furthermore, he should be accustomed to cat bread alone with
no condiment in many times so that condiment would not become inevitably
necessary in his meals. On the other hand, eating much food should be dispraised
in his sight, by likening such as eats so much to the animals, and criticizing before
him the child who eats so much, and praising before him the child who eats little.
He also should be made to like giving others preference over him in terms of
food, about which he has to be careless, and to be satisfied with the rough kinds
of food whatever they might be.
He also should be made to like the white among the clothes, on the exclusion
of the colorful and silk garments, giving him the impression that those are the
clothes of women and effeminate apart from men. He should be made to disdain
it as a man to the extent that if he sees a silk or a colorful garment on a child, he
should disapprove of and criticize it. Furthermore, the child should be kept far
from the children who are accustomed to luxurious and comfortable life, and
dress themselves in the expensive dresses. He should also be kept far from
mixing with such of people as encourages him to do so, for however, if a child is
neglected in his beginning and early age, he will come to have bad manners, and
grow a liar, envious, going about with calumnies, and dissolute. He should be
kept from all of that through good discipline and being diverted to engage in
learning and memorizing Qur'an, the stories and narrations (of the Prophet and
the companions), the tales and states of the pious, in order to be brought up on
the love of the righteous from among all the people. At the same time, he should
be kept far from the poetic compositions of love and adoradon, and from mixing
with the poets and writers who allege this is out of kindness and smoothness of
disposition, for it sows the seeds of corruption in the hearts of children.
The child should be honoured and rewarded for such of good deeds and
praiseworthy acts as appear from him, which causes him to grow happy and have
a good position among the people. If he behaves in opposition to that only once,
his behaviour should be overlooked, and not to be disclosed nor should he be

126

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedv of heart diseases

127

encountered with it, giving him the impression that none has the courage to do
the like of it, particularly if the child himself does his best to screen it (out of
shyness and regret for it). That is because if it is disclosed to him, he might turn
to be more audacious and bald to repeat it once again. But in case he repeats the
same odious act, he should be encountered with, and blamed for it in secret, and
given the impression that it is too heinous that one like him should do the same,
with the warning statement: "I warn you of returning to the same act once again,
lest you would be scandalized among the people." Do not blame him so
frequendy at all times, for one by one, it would become easy upon him to hear
reprimand and do the evil things, and the warning speech would become of no
effect on his heart. The father always should keep the reverence of words with
him: he should not reproach him but sometimes; and the mother should always
frighten him with the father, out of averdng him from doing what is shameful.
He should be prevented from sleep during the day for it brings about laziness,
but he should not be prevented from it at night. He should be kept from the
smooth beds in order for his body members to get hardened, and his body not to
grow fat, with the result that he would not keep patient over leaving luxury. Thus,
he should be accustomed to coarseness and roughness in terms of food, clothes
and bed. Therefore, he should be prevented from doing anything in secret, for
one always conceals what he thinks to be shameful and in opposition to the
generally accepted practice. So, if he is left to do it, he will get accustomed to it.
He should be accustomed to practice regular walk, movement and sport during
the day in order not to be lazy and inactive. He should be habituated not to
uncover his limbs, nor to walk at a quick pace, nor to relax his hands, which
should be tightened to his chest.
He should be prevented from boasting over his fellows because of anything
his father possesses, or because of anything he has on the exclusion of them,
regarding food, clothes and money. On the contrary, he should be habituated to
behave humbly and generously with such as with whom he mixes. He also should
be prevented from taking anything from the other children depending upon the
high authority and majesty of his family: but he should be taught that supremacy
lies in giving rather than in taking, and that taking is out of baseness and
sordidness; and if he belongs to the offspring of the poor, he should be taught
that covet and taking are out of humiliation, mortification and disgrace, for one is
like a dog which peeps into the things of others in expectation for a morsel to be
thrown away to it.
In brief, the covet of and love for gold and silver should be defaced in the
sight of children, of which they should be warned more than they should be of
female-snakes and scorpions. Of a surety, the evil of love for and covet of gold
and silver is more harmful to the children, if not to the old too, than that caused
by the poison of female-snakes and scorpions. He should be habituated not to
spit nor to expectorate in the gathering, nor to yawn in the presence of others,
nor to turn his back to anyone, nor to put his leg over the other, nor to place his
palm underneath his chin, nor to support his head against his forearm, for this

The quarter of the destructives
128
indicates to laziness and idleness.
A child also should be taught the way to sit, and that much (useless) talk
indicates to rudeness and impoliteness, since it belongs to the acts of the sons
of the cunning persons. He should be prevented from taking oaths at any rate,
truthful or untruthful he might be, in order not to get accustomed to it since his
early childhood. He should be prevented from taking the initiative to speak
first, and rather not to talk unless he is required in reply and proportion to the
question. He should be encouraged to pay attention to the speech of others,
particularly if they are older than him. He should be instructed to stand up and
leave his place to the older and superior and make space for him to sit. He
should be prevented from false speech, foul and obscene language, cursing and
insulting, and from mixing with such of people as on whose tongue these foul
words run. To be sure, this is obtained from the evil fellows; and the basic rule
of disciplining children is to be prevented from mixing with the evil fellows. On
the other hand, if a child is beaten by his tutor, he should not cry so much, nor
prove unruly, nor invoke for the intercession of anyone: but he'd rather keep
patient and remember that patience over harm is always the behavior of the
courage and brave among men, whereas the cry is always the usage of slaves
and women.
After leaving the nursery school, he should be given permission to play in
order to relieve himself of the trouble of the day nursery. However, if a child is
prevented from play and rather given to the trouble and exhaustion of learning all
the time, his heart would die, and his intelligence would be idle, and his living
would embitter to the extent that he would seek a way to flee from it. He should
be instructed to obey his parents, his tutor who disciplines him, and anyone who
is older than him, be he a relative or a stranger, and show respect and exaltation
for them, and leave playing in front of them. Once a child has attained the age of
discernment, he should not be excused for leaving purification, ablution and
prayer. He should be encouraged to observe many fasts during the month of
Ramadan. He also should be prevented from wearing silk and brocade clothes, in
addition to gold. He should be taught everything required by the limits of
religious law.
He should be frightened from stealing, eating the unlawful, telling a lie,
deceiving and cheating, betraying, behaving shamefully and immorally, etc. if he
is warned of those in his early childhood, then, when he becomes adult, it is
possible (and easier) for him to be acquainted with their mysteries. A mention
may be made to him of the fact that different kinds of food are medicines
intended to strengthen the body and provide him with power enough to be able
to worship Allah; that the entire world is useless, for it should inevitably come
to end by death, which interrupts its blessing for it is only a pathway, and not
an abode of residence, whereas the hereafter is the abode of residence and not a
pathway; that death is expected to come at any time; that the intelligent is he
who takes from this world provisions for the hereafter in order for his rank to
become great in the Sight of Allah Almighty, and his blessing in the Garden to

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

129

be abundant.
If upbringing is good, then, all of this will have a strong effect on a child once
he becomes an adult, and is firm in his heart just in the same way as the engraving
is constandy firm on the stone. But if upbringing is on the opposite, in a way that
allows for the child to be accustomed to play, foul and obscene language,
impoliteness, rudeness, greed for food, clothes and adornment, inclination to
boast over others, he then will come to reject the truth. It is the commencements
of things then that should be observed. That is because every child is created with
readiness, by nature, to accept both good and evil, and it is his parents who make
him incline to any of them. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" said: "Every baby is born on the true religion (of Islam), and it is
his parents who convert him to Judaism, Christianity or Magianism." (This
narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
Sahl Ibn Abdullah At-Tastari said: "When I was three years old, I used to get
up at night and look at my maternal uncle, Muhammad Ibn Sawa', while he was
praying. He saw me and said: "Do you not remember AJlah Who has created
you?" I said: "How should I remember Him?" he said: "Say thrice in your heart,
without moving your lips therewith, whenever you turn: 'Allah is with me; Allah
is looking at me; Allah is seeing me'." I said it for many nights and when I told
him he said: "Then, say it seven times every night." I did and told him thereupon
he said to me: "Then, say it eleven times every night." I said it and I found its
sweetness in my heart. A year later my maternal uncle said to me: "Retain what I
have taught you, and say it regularly until you (die and) enter the grave, for it shall
benefit you in both this world and the hereafter." I have done it for many years
until I found its sweetness in my breast. One day my maternal uncle said to me:
"O Sahl! He, whom Allah is with, looking at and seeing, should not disobey Him.
So, beware of committing any sin." I used to sit in seclusion and when they (my
family) sent me to learn in the nursery school, I said: "I am afraid I might divide
my concern." They stipulated with the tutor the condition that I should go to him
to learn for some time and then return to the house. I then went to the nursery
school and learnt the Holy Qur'an which I was able to keep in full when I was six
years old. I used to observe fasts perpetually (i.e. on alternate days) when I was
twelve years old, and parley bread at that time constituted my main sustenance.
When I was thirteen years old, I had a problem, and I requested that my family
should send me to the learned of Basra to ask them about it. I went to Basra and
asked its learned about it, but none of them quenched my thirst. I then set out to
Abdan where there was a man called Abu Habib Hamzah Ibn Abu Abdullah AlAbdani, whom I asked about it, and he gave me a satisfactory answer. I spent a
period of time with him to get benefit from his speech, and obtain his morals.
Then, I returned to Tastar where I limited my sustenance so much. I asked that
as much parley as is equal to one Dirham be bought and ground and baked as
bread for me, and I used to break my fast with no more than an ounce thereof,
just a short while before dawn, with no salt nor condiment. This quantity should
suffice me for one year. Then I decided to keep fasting and tie my belly (out of

1

The quarter of the destructives
130
hunger) for diree nights and break my fast in the fourth; and those three rose
gradually to five, seven, up to twenty-five. I remained as such for twenty years. I
then set out and wandered through the different parts of the land for many years
after which I returned and stabilized in Tastar. I used to stand the whole night
(for supererogatory prayer) as much as Allah willed me to do." Ahmad
commented: "I have never seen him eating salt (or any kind of condiment) until
he died and met Allah Almighty."

\

CHAPTER ELEVEN
EXPOSITION OF CONDITIONS OF WILLPOWER AND COMMENCEMENTS
OF SELF-MORTIFICATION; AND NOVICE'S GRADUATION IN
FOLLOWING WAY OF SELF-DISCIPLINE
It should be known to you that he, who sees the hereafter with his heart by
way of certainty of faith has come to seek after its tilt, have longing for it, and
follow the way that leads to it, attaching no importance to the delights and
pleasures of this present world. If one has a bead and then he sees a precious
stone, he will have no desire for the bead, and rather will be inclined to sell it
for such precious stone. If one does not seek after the tilt of the hereafter, nor
does he have a desire for meeting Allah Almighty (in the hereafter), he is nearer
to have no faith in Allah and the Last Day. Of a surety, I do not mean by faith
self-talk and movement of tongue with both testimonies with no truthfulness
nor sincerity, for this is equal to the statement that 'the precious gem is better
than the bead, even though he knows only the word and not the real meaning
of the gem.
If such a man becomes familiar with the bead, he might not be inclined to
leave it, nor to have longing for the gem. Thus, it is the lack of following the
way that impedes from reaching (the end), and it is the lack of will that impedes
from following the way, and it is the lack of faith that impedes the will; and it is
misguidance that lies behind the lack of faith, due to the absence of the
reminders and those who have knowledge of Allah Almighty, who guide the
people to His Way, and bring to the attention the insignificance and extinction
of this present world, and the significance and permanence of the hereafter.
The people are heedless, since they have become involved in their desires and
lusts, and among the religious scholars, there is none to alert them. More
important, if anyone of them takes heed, he will fail to follow the way to the
hereafter because of his ignorance; and if he asks the learned to lead him to it,
he will find them more inclined to their desires and whims, and deviating from
the true and straight way. Thus, the weakness of will, the ignorance of the true
and straight way, and the scholars’ following their desires cause the people to
deviate from the true way of Allah Almighty. When the required thing is veiled,
the evidence is missing, the desire is prevalent, and the petitioner is heedless, of
a surety, that will lead to failure to reach the end, and all ways will inevitably
become idle.

!

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

131

If one takes heed by himself, or another person stimulates in him the will to
seek for the tilt and profit of hereafter, he should observe many necessary
conditions in the beginning, and hold fast to a protective fort in order to feel safe
of the enemies who might cut the road on him. Additionally, he has to fulfill
many duties during his following of the way.
As far as conditions to be observed first are concerned, they are to lift the
barrier and veil that lies between him and the truth. However, the people are
deprived of the gift of truth because of the accumulated veils and the barrier on
the way. Allah Almighty says: "And We have put before them a barrier and
behind them a barrier and covered them, so they do not see." (Ya Sin 9)

There are four things that constitute the barrier which lies between the novice
and the truth: property, majesty, imitation and sin. The barrier of property is
lifted when wealth becomes not in one's possession, and there remains with him
only what is necessary. That is because if there remains something beyond the
necessary, even though as litde as a Dirham, to which he turns, he then will
become fastened to it and veiled from Allah Almighty. The veil of majesty is
lifted by keeping oneself far from the positions of majesty, and sticking to
humbleness and anonymity, and flight from the means of celebrity. The veil of
imitation is lifted by abandonment of fanaticism for juristic doctrines, and having
sincere faith in the fact that there is none worthy of worship except Allah
Almighty, and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and confirming that
faith by leaving all things that could be taken as objects of worship other than
Allah Almighty, the greatest of which is one's inclination and desire. Once he
does so, the real nature of his faith which he has received by way of imitation at
first is revealed to him. He should seek to have this revealed to him by way of
self-mortification rather than argumentation. But if he remains zealous for his
own doctrine, which leaves in his heart no place for anything else, he will become
fastened to it, and veiled by it, for it is not requisite for a novice to abide by a
particular doctrine. In relation to sin, it is a veil in itself, and nothing lifts it except
sincere repentance from it, decision not to return to it once again, showing regret
for it, restoring rights to their real men, and pleasing foes. However, unless one
makes right his repentance, and leaves external sins, and at the same time, he likes
to be acquainted with the mysteries of religion by way of disclosure is like him
who likes to be acquainted with the mysteries and interpretation of the Qur'an
without having learnt the Arabic language yet. That is because one has to
understand first the language of the Qur'an, from which one should rise up to
know the mysteries of its meanings. Similarly, the Sharia should be acted upon
correctly first, from which one moves to its mysteries and depths.
If one does those four conditions first, and relieves himself of property and
majesty, he will be like him who gets purified and performs ablution in
preparation for prayer. Being so, he needs an imam to follow him, just as a novice
needs a sheikh and mister to copy his conduct, in order to guide him to the

i
The quarter of the destructives
132
straight path, for indeed, the path of religion is abstruse, whereas the ways of
Satan are obvious and evident. Whoever has no sheikh to guide him, becomes
vulnerable to Satan who drives him to one of his different ways. If one follows
the destructive ways of desert with no sentinel exposes himself, with no doubt, to
ruin and destruction. The man who depends on himself solely in this respect is
like the tree which grows independendy: it inevitably withers in the near future,
and even if it produces leaves, it will remain fruidess.
The protective shield which a novice should hold fast to after accomplishing
the four conditions is his sheikh: he should stick to him in the same way as a
blind on a river's bank sticks to his sighted guide, and depends on him in all of
his affairs, and does not disagree with him in the least. If such a protective shield
is found, it has to protect the protection-seeker with an impenetrable protection,
therewith to avert from him these which might cut the way on him; and those are
four: seclusion, silence, hungry and insomnia. The purpose here is to repair the
novice's heart in order to witness his Lord therewith, and become fit to come
close to Him.
The role of hunger is to decrease the blood of the heart and whiten it, and
in such whiteness lies its light. It also dissolves its fat which causes it to
become smooth; and its smoothness is the key to disclosure, whereas its
hardness veils it. When the blood of heart decreases, the way of the enemy
becomes narrow, for indeed, the veins that are filled with lusts and desires are
the paths which that enemy follows. In this respect, Jesus "Peace be upon
him" said: "O assembly of disciples! Make hungry your bellies, perchance your
hearts would see your Lord." Sahl Ibn Abdullah At-Tastari said: "The Abdal
(Substitutes) have become so only by virtue of four characteristics: exposing
themselves to severe hunger, insomnia, silence, and isolation from the
people." The benefit of hunger in enlightening heart is self-evident. The
gradual approach regarding it will be discussed in detail later in the Book of
Breaking Two Desires.
As for insomnia, it polishes, purifies and enlightens the heart. Taking it
together with the purity that resulted from hunger, it becomes like a shining star
and a polished mirror, in which there is reflected the beauty of truth, the high
rank in the hereafter in opposition to the contempt and baseness of this world. It
is that which makes one turn from this world and its vanities, and rather devote
himself to the hereafter. Insomnia results from hunger, since by no means could
it be achieved with satiety. Sleep always hardens the heart and causes it to die
unless it is as much as is equal to what is necessary, which makes it a means of
disclosing the mysteries of the unseen. In description of the Abdal (Substitutes),
it is said that they eat but are never satisfied, sleep only when they are
overpowered by slumber, and speak only when it is necessary for them to speak.
According to Ibrahim Al-Khawas: "About seventy sincere affirmers of truth
agree together on the fact that sleep so much results from drinking water in great

quantity."

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

133

Although silence becomes easier by seclusion, the one who lives in solitude
could hardly dispense with such as serves him. Thus, he should speak only when
it is necessary for him to speak, for indeed speech diverts the heart; and the heart
has great gluttony for it, since it gets comforted with it, to the extent that speech
makes it heavy and difficult upon the heart to return to be disengaged for
celebration and meditation. In this way, silence revises mind, brings about
abstention, and teaches piety. The benefit of living in seclusion is to push away
occupations and adjust both hearing and seeing, since they are the heart's
courtyard. The heart is like a fountain to which malodorous dirty water is poured
from the rivers of the five senses. The purpose of self-discipline is to empty such
fountain from that stinking water with its mud in order for the heart to burst and
the clean and pure water to gush forth therefrom. How could the fountain be
emptied given that the rivers (of the five senses) are open to it and what enters
into it is more than what comes out of it? For this reason, the senses should be
adjusted in order to receive only what is necessary. This could be achieved only
by living in seclusion in a dark house; and in case one has no dark house to live
in, let him cover his head with his shirt or wrap his body in a covering, for at that
time, he is susceptible to hear the call of the truth, and witness the majesty of the
Divine Presence.
Those four act as a shield and a fort that avert from him the evil and means
of those who cut the way on him. Once he does them, he becomes ready to
follow the way (to the hereafter) and eliminate the obstacles that might hinder
him. However, the obstacles on the way to Allah Almighty depend upon the
constitution of the heart itself, in its turning towards this present world. Some
obstacles are harder and more difficult than others. The right order for
eliminating them is to engage in the easiest then the easier and so on, i.e. the
ties which he cut at first (that relate him with the present world), and their
effects representing in property, majesty, love for this present world, devotion
to people, and longing for committing sins. One then should empty his interior
from their effects just as he has emptied the exterior from their apparent
means. In this respect, self-mortification might take a very long time, and vary
in accordance with the difference of states. A particular one might happen to be
sufficed against most of those qualities, and thus, his mortification shall take no
long time.
We have already mentioned that the way of self-mortification is to behave in
opposition to desires and appetence in all fields. If those desires and appetence
get broken or at least weaken through mortification, nothing then shall remain
in the heart to divert it from having a kind of regular celebration (supplication
of Allah Almighty) which makes him not in need of doing numerous external
daily portions: on the contrary, he limits himself to only the obligatory duties
and regular acts of worship in addition to a single daily portion. This is the core
and fruit of daily portions, i.e. to get the heart persist in the celebration of Allah
Almighty after disengaging it from the celebration of others than Him. Once,
Ash-Shibli said to Al-Husari: "If any thought other than Allah Almighty occurs

The quarter of the destructives
134
to your mind from the Friday on which you visit me to the next Friday, then, it
will be unlawful for you to visit me." That disengagement is attained only with
the sincere willpower and true possessing love for Allah Almighty in a way that
makes it preoccupy the whole concern of the lover.
Having done so, his sheikh then has to make him stick to a certain corner to
live in seclusion, and assign somebody to serve him only with the necessary
requirements of lawful sustenance, for the lawful sustenance is the basis for the
way of religion. At that point, he has to dictate to him a supplication to occupy
thereby his tongue and heart, like "Glory be to Allah; glory be to Allah", or
anything similar to it. He should persist in uttering it until the tongue stops from
movement and the word seems to run on the tongue without movement. He also
should continue to say it until its effect fades from the tongue, and only its image
remains reflected on the heart. He should continue until the image of the word
fades from the heart, and only its real meaning comes to predominate and
preoccupy it wholly. It is known that if the heart is occupied by a particular thing,
it will be disengaged from anything else. If it is occupied by the celebration of
Allah Almighty, and this is the intended goal, it will be disengaged from anything
else.
At that point, he has to watch such of doubts and passing thoughts as occur
to the mind, regarding the present world, and remembrance of the states and
affairs of him as well as of others. However, if he does his best to avert all doubts
and passing thoughts and reduces his soul to that word solely, some doubts and
passing thoughts will still occur to his mind from the direction of this word: what
does this word mean? What is the significance of our saying 'Allah'? what is the
reason for His being a God that is to be worshipped? This, therefore, opens to
him the gate of suspicions and evil thoughts brought about by Satan, which lead
him to disbelief and religious heresies. But if he dislikes that, and does his best to
push it away from the heart, it will not harm him.
Those are divided into things which it is evidently known that Allah
Almighty is deemed far beyond, but Satan dictates them to his heart and
makes them run on his passing thoughts. Those should be cared for, and one
should betake himself to celebrate Allah Almighty, and implore to Him to
avert them from his heart. Allah Almighty says in this respect: "And if an evil
suggestion comes to you from Satan, then seek refuge in Allah. Indeed, He is
Hearing and Knowing. Indeed, those who fear Allah - when an impulse
touches them from Satan, they remember [Him] and at once they have
insight." (Al-A'raf 200-201)

I
’

>! (2^

4©

B

{jA

LiJJ ^

l?irk g - tf cr? ijLio

The other things are those in which one has doubt; and those should be
offered to the sheikh, putting in mind that he should conceal it from anyone else
other than the sheikh.

Book two: Scif-Disciplinc and improvement of moral character anti remedy of heart diseases

135

The sheikh should then consider his state and intelligence: if he knows that
through meditation he might attain the truth, he then should leave him to
meditation and tell him to persist in it until a light is cast into his heart, thereby
the real nature of the truth is disclosed to him, otherwise, he should return him to
the certainty of faith through a suitable preaching and evidence that he could
endure and understand. The sheikh should be kind and gende to him, for those
are the destructive things and places of risk on the way. How many a novice
engaged himself in self-mortification, and, being occupied by a false thought
which he failed to remove and Thus, it cut the way on him, turned from self­
mortification to the opposite, i.e. the way of falsehood and dissoluteness; and this
is, to be sure, the great destruction.
Whoever devotes himself to celebration (of Allah Almighty), and drives away
from his heart all ties that relate him to anything else, could hardly be far from
such thoughts, for indeed, by so doing, he has ridden the ship of danger: if he is
safe, he shall be one of the kings of religion, and if he errs, he shall be given to
destruction. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "I advise you to stick to the faith of the old women." (This narration is
reported on the authority of Ibn Umar, and it is very weak). It is to receive the
fundamental faith and apparent belief by way of imitation and doing good deeds.
Much danger lies in swerving from that. For this reason, it is said that the sheikh
should gaze at the novice: unless he finds him too intelligent, prudent and ready
to be competent in the external faith, he should not engage him by meditation
and celebration: on the contrary, he should return him to the apparent deeds and
collectively contiguous daily portions, or by having him serve those who are
devoted to celebration and meditation in order to get benefit from their blessing.
However, the one who is unable to take part in fighting among the rows of
fighters should provide soldiers with water and look after mounts in order that
on the Day of Judgement he will be mustered in their company, regardless of
having a degree less than theirs.
On the other hand, the one who is devoted to celebration and meditation
might have many obstructions that hinder his way, like pride, showing off,
joyfulness of what is disclosed to him and what seems to him of the first
commencements of miracles. If he is to be diverted by those and turn himself
to them, his way might be closed against him. So, he should persist in his state
along his lifetime just as a thirsty persists in water who is not quenched even if
the water of oceans is poured over him. His capital should be to disengage
himself from the people and get devoted to the truth, and persist in seclusion.
One of the wanderers through the land said: I asked one of the Abdal who live
in seclusion from all the people: "What is the way to uncover the veils of
truth?" he said: "It is to be in this present world like a wayfarer." He said once
again: I asked him: "Guide me to a deed in which I could find my heart with
Allah Almighty perpetually." On that he said: "Look not at the people, for
looking at them brings about darkness." I said: "But, this matter is inevitable."
He said: "Then, hear not their speech, for their speech brings about harshness."

The quarter of the destructives
136
I said: "But this matter is inevitable." He said: "Then, deal not with them, for
dealing with them leads to desertion." I said: "But I live with them, and it is
necessary for me to deal with them." He said: "Then, get not comforted with
them, for indeed comfort with them leads to destruction." I asked: "What is the
reason for that?" he said: "O man! Do you look at the heedless, hear the words
of the ignorant, and deal with the false and at the same time, like to have your
heart with Allah Almighty perpetually? It is surely impossible."
The culminating peak of self-discipline is to find one's heart with Allah
Almighty perpetually, and this is impossible unless it is disengaged from anything
else; and it is not disengaged from anything else except through long self­
mortification. If his heart becomes with Allah Almighty, the majesty of Divine
presence will be disclosed to him, and the glory of the truth will appear to him.
But one of the hindrances here is that he might find himself speaking with that
by way of instructing and teaching, a thing in which the soul finds a great
pleasure, which summons him to think about the way how to bring about those
meanings, prepare and beautify the words expressive of them, adorn that with
supportive stories, tales and Qur'anic quotations, and improve the art of speech
in order for receivers to become more inclined to him. Satan might give him the
false impression that by so doing, he brings to life the dead hearts of those
heedless of Allah Almighty.
Satan's intrigue here is clear when one of his fellows appears to be of better
speech, more elegant words and more capable of attracting the hearts of laymen:
if he is moved by the scheme of acceptability, he will become envious of that
man, and if he is moved by the truth and eagerness to inviting the worshippers of
Allah Almighty to His straight path, he will rejoice with him and say: "Praise be to
Allah Who has helped and aided me with him who supported me to reform His
worshippers." His example is like him upon whom it is incumbent under Sharia
to carry the dead body of a man to bury him for he has none of his family to do
so, and when somebody comes to help him do so, he rejoices with him, and does
not envy such as aids him. The heedless are those whose hearts are dead, and
preachers are to give life to their hearts. For this reason, their increasing number
leads to comfort and mutual support, with which one should be pleased.
However, this hardly exists, and a novice should be very careful of it. It is
the longest snare of Satan, with which he cuts the way on him to whom it is
opened. Man, by nature, gives preference to this present world over the
hereafter. This is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty: "But
you prefer the worldly life, While the Hereafter is better and more enduring."
(Al-A'la 16-17)

In highlighting the fact that this evil is deep-rooted in disposition as of old as
mentioned in the previous scriptures, He Almighty says: "Indeed, this is in the
former scriptures, The scriptures of Abraham and Moses." (Al-A'la 18-19)

Book two: Self-Discipline and improvement of moral character and remedy of heart diseases

4©

{jjj

137

lOlA Oj ^

This is the method of novice's self-discipline and gradual approach to meet
Allah Almighty. But the details of each quality will be discussed later. Most evil
comes upon man from his abdomen, private parts and tongue, i.e. the desires that
are related to them, and the anger that acts as an army to protect those desires. If
man likes and gets affable with the desire of abdomen and private parts, he shall
love this present world, and it is by virtue of wealth and majesty that in which he
will be well established; and if both wealth and majesty are available to him, he
will become arrogant and haughty. Such being the case, his soul never accepts to
leave this world, and rather takes from the religion what supports his haughtiness.
Thus, after introducing those two books, it becomes incumbent upon us to
complete the quarter of destructives with eight books, Allah willing: a book
Concerning the breaking of the Two lusts: The Appetite of the Stomach and the
Sexual Desire; a book concerning The evil of Tongue; a book concerning the
breaking of Anger, Resentment, and Envy; a book concerning The Curse of the
World; a book concerning The breaking of love for Wealth, and Curse of
Niggardliness; a book concerning The Curse of Showiness and Hypocrisy; a book
concerning The Curse of Pride and Vanity; and a book concerning The Places of
Haughtiness. By making a mention of those destructives, and the way to remedy
them, our purpose will be achieved, Allah willing. The first book pertains to the
wonders of the heart which is the primal source of destructives and saviors, and
the second book is a total reference to the way of improving morals and remedy
of heart diseases. The details will be mentioned in the following books, Allah
willing.
The Book of Self-Discipline and Improvement of Moral character is ended,
praise be to Allah, by virtue of the aid and help of Allah Almighty, and it is
followed by the Book of Curbing Two desires.
Praise be to Allah Alone, and Allah's blessing and peace be upon Muhammad,
his family and companions, and upon every servant chosen by Allah Almighty,
from the inhabitants of the earth and the heaven. I depend in my success on
Allah Alone, on Whom I rely, and to Whom I return.

1
i
5
:
-

!

------------------------- -

»T»T»1 !< A

1M}

1

This is the second book of the quarter of destructives
In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Praise be to Him Who is Alone in His majesty and grandeur; who deserves
adulation, sanctification, praise and loftiness; who is just in what He establishes
and what He decrees; who is generous with what He bequeaths and what he
fulfills; who takes on the responsibility to safeguard His servant in all his comings
and goings; who grants him more than His commitments require that his wishes
might be fulfilled; for He is the one who guides him and sets him upon the
straight path, and He is the one who ordains when he lives and when he dies.
Should he (the servant) become ill, it is He who cures him. Should he become
weak, it is He who strengthens him. He is the one who guides him to obedience
and contentment He is the one who causes him to eat and drink; preserves him
from destruction; protects him, guards him with food and drink against the
agents of destruction and perdition; who causes him to be satisfied with little
food and to be tranquil that he might curb the ways of the devil who haunts him.
In so doing he curbs the lust of the self (An-Nafs), which opposes him, and
wards off its (the self-s) evil. He worships His lord and fears Him.
It results from His (the Lord) granting him (the servant) that which he desires
and delights him; kindles his initiatives and strengthens his motives. He tries him
therewith and afflicts him in order to test how He can curb his covetousness and
whims (and points to him) how he might safeguard His decrees and desist from
what He enjoins against in order that he (the servant) might resume his obedience
to Allah and cease his acts of defiance.
May prayer be upon His enlightened servant Muhammad "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him", His illuminating messenger, and may such prayer draw
him (the Prophet) ever nearer to Allah and to (good) fortune, raise his station,
and lift him to ever loftier heights.
It should be known to you that the greatest pain afflicting man is the lust
of the stomach. It is on account of it that Adam "AJlah's blessing and peace
be upon him" and Eve were ejected from the abode of tranquility (the garden
of Eden) to the abode of humiliation and impoverishment (this world). The
fruit of the tree (apple) had been proscribed to them but they allowed their
covetousness to overwhelm them, so they ate of it and the evil thereof
became clear to them.
In truth, the stomach is the fount of lust and the source of ailment and evil in
that its cravings are followed by the craving of the penis for coitus with women.
Food and sex lead to intense desire for ostentation and wealth, to all kinds of
envy and greed. Both give rise to the evil of deception, boastfulness,
excessiveness, and ostentation (or, in modem terms, elitism). This in turn leads to
138

i

l

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites

139

hatred, envy, jealousy, enmity, and hostility, which (in turn) induces one to
commit (what is) outrageous, objectionable, and adultery. Such are the fruits of
yielding to the stomach and its strong demands for food and satiation.
If the servant (of Allah) were to humble himself through hunger and
deprive the devil (power to) work (within himself), the self would meekly yield
to the obedience of Allah, may He be praised and glorified, and would refrain
from pursuing the path of arrogance and oppressiveness. It would not cause
him to become preoccupied with the world and to prefer that which soon
passes away (the transient world) over the (day of) Accounting (Judgment and
the Hereafter and its rewards). Nor would he persist in pursuing (offerings of)
the world. And should the evil of the stomach's lust intensify (much), then it
becomes necessary to view its disasters and evils as (constituting) a warning
(to him).
It is incumbent (upon us) to explain the way to combat it (lust) and point out
the virtue thereof as an incentive in itself. The same applies to the lust of the
penis, in that it follows a similar course. We shall make this clear, with the help of
the Lord, in those chapters treating this subject, showing hunger to be a virtue,
also how to exercise in order to curb the appetite of the stomach by reducing and
delaying food intake. We shall also point out preferences decreed by hunger, and
the virtue thereof, in terms of differing conditions in people, as well as those
exercises that are necessary for abandoning lust. Next we shall relate sayings
concerning the lust of the penis and why the one who seeks the path (the novice
or Murid) should set aside marriage and what is required by such an
abandonment. Lastly, (we shall recount) the virtue of the one who combats the
lust (induced by) stomach, penis (sic) and sight

CHAPTER ONE
VIRTUE OF HUNGER AND REJECTION OF SATIETY
The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Combat the self
with hunger and thirst, for the reward thereof is like the reward of the one who
strives (Mujahid) for the sake of Allah. There is no commitment dearer to Allah
than that of hunger and thirst. Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with him”, quoted
the Prophet saying, "no one who has filled his stomach will enter the kingdom of
heaven." When he (the Prophet) was asked: "who among mortals is the more
virtuous?" he replied: "he who eats and laughs less and is content with that which
conceals his nakedness." He also said that the best way to achieve hunger and
subjugation of the self is to wear wool. Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri “Allah be pleased
with him” quoted the Prophet "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" as
having said: "to be fair to the stomach, (one must) dress, eat, and drink for it is a
quality of Prophethood." Al-Hassan also quoted the Prophet “peace be upon
him” as saying: "he who has hungered the longest and reflected upon Allah, may
He be glorified, enjoys the highest status with Allah on the Day of Resurrection.
He, may He be glorified, detests most on the Day of Judgement the one who
eats, drinks, and sleeps, much."

140

The quarter of the destructives

There is a saying that the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
used to hunger without need, that is by choice. He "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" also said that Allah Almighty has proclaimed that "he who drinks and
eats less in this world is a rival of the angels." Allah Almighty has declared:
"behold my servant: I have tempted him with food and drink in the world. He
was patient and abandoned both. Bear witness, O my angels, for every meal he
forsakes I shall compensate him many times more (for it) in paradise." He
(Muhammad, "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him") has stated: "do not kill
your hearts with abundant food and drink, for the heart is like a plant, it will die if
overwatered." He also said: "when man fills a vessel with evil from his stomach
he believes that litde morsels (of food) will strengthen his body. If so, then let a
third (thereof) go to (satisfy his need for) food, a third for his drink, and a third
for his self.
A saying attributed to Usamah Ibn Zaid, and a longer one to Abu Hurairah,
both stress the virtue of hunger and state that those nearest to Allah, may He be
glorified, on the Day of Resurrection are the ones who hunger and thirst the
longest. His (God's) grief on earth is for the barefooted-pious (ones), who if they
should bear testimony (to Allah) would not be recognized and if they should
disappear would not be missed. They are scattered on earth and the angels of
heaven hover over them. Men enjoy the comforts of the world while they obey
Allah. Men bed down in ease while they (lie down) on their bellies and knees.
Men caused the work and manners of the prophets to be lost, while they
preserved them. The earth would weep should they disappear and the mighty
would vent their anger on every place wherein one of them is not to be found.
They pursued not (offerings of) the world as persistendy as dogs pursue
carcasses. They ate fodder and wore tattered rags. Their hair was dusty and
matted. People looked at them and thought that they were ill, but they were not
ill. It might be said that they are confused and their minds lost, but their minds
are not lost. They obeyed with their hearts the decrees of Allah who placed
them apart from the world. To the people of this world they walk mindlessly,
but they became wise when the wisdom of men disappeared. They have honor
in the Hereafter. O Usamah, should you encounter them in a town, It should be
known to you that they are a trust for the inhabitants of that town. Allah will
not cause a people among whom they dwell to suffer. The earth rejoices in
them and the mighty are pleased with them. Take them brethren unto yourself
that ye may be saved through them. And should death overtake thee on an
empty stomach, (or) a thirsty liver, accept it; for you will attain thereby the
honor of the dweller (in Paradise) and you will be among the prophets. The
angels will rejoice at the arrival of your soul and the mighty will pray for thee.
Al-Hassan quoted Abu Hurairah saying that the Prophet "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" declared: "wear wool, roll up your sleeves, and be fair to the
stomach and you will enter the kingdom of heaven." And Jesus "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" has declared: "O disciples, starve your livers and bare
your bodies so that your hearts will see Allah, may He be glorified." Our Prophet

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites

:

-------------

141

(Muhammad) has declared the same, as has Tawus.
They say it is written in the Torah that Allah detests a fat rabbi because
fleshiness is a sign of neglect and much eating. This is objectionable, especially
for a rabbi, because of it Ibn Mas'ud "may Allah be pleased with him, declared:
"Allah despises the reciter (of the Qur'an in public) who has grown fat from
eating much." In a tradition of limited authenticity, it is alleged that the devil
flows through man like blood; Thus, man must narrow the passageways (of the
devil) through hunger and thirst. In another tradition (it is stated that) to eat
when one is satiated leads to leprosy.
The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" declared: "the faithful
(one) eats with one gut, the infidel with seven," that is, he eats seven times as
much because his gluttonous appetite absorbs food as does the gut (only seven
times more). This does not mean that the gut of the hypocrite is greater than that
of the faithful. Quoting 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, Al-Hassan
relates: "I heard the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" say,
'continue knocking on the door of Paradise, it will be opened for you;' I asked,
how do we continue knocking on the door of Paradise?' and he replied, 'with
hunger and thirst'."
It is related that Abu Juhaifah burped in an assembly of the Prophet "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" who told him: lessen your burping (by eating
less) for those who hunger the longest on the Day of Judgement are the ones
who are most satiated in this world." 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her,
used to say that the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" would
never eat to satiation and "I often wept out of pity for him because of the way he
used to hunger. I would rub his stomach with my hand and say, 'I will offer
myself as a sacrifice if only you would chew enough (food) to give you strength
and prevent you from being hungry'. His reply to that was: O 'A'ishah, my
brethren, the strong-willed messengers (of Allah) endured greater hardship (than
hunger); they persevered and came into the presence of their Lord, who
welcomed them and rewarded their righteousness. Were I to be comfortable in
my life, I would be ashamed lest tomorrow I be less than they. To be patient a
few days is dearer to me than to lose my fortune tomorrow in the Hereafter.
Furthermore, there is nothing more preferable to me than to follow my
companions and brethren. It was less than a week later," added 'A'ishah, "that the
Lord called him unto Himself."
Anas “Allah be pleased with him” said that Fatimah “Allah be pleased with
her” brought a morsel of bread to the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" who asked: "what is this morsel?" to which she replied: "a small loaf
which I baked and which it would not have pleased me not to bring you a piece
(of it)." His reply (to Fatimah): "this is the first bit of food to enter your father's
mouth in three days." Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” related that the
Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" took care of the food needs of
his family for three days before departing this world.
He (Muhammad "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him") has declared:

The quarter of the destructives
142
"Those who hunger in this world are the ones to be filled in the Hereafter. Verily,
the most detested by Allah are the satiated gluttonous ones. The servant who
avoids a meal which he craves will earn a (higher) level in paradise."
As concerns effects, ’Umar "may Allah be pleased with him" said: "avoid
gluttony, for it is a burden in life and rot in death." Shaqiq Al-Balkhi
maintained that "worship is a craft; its form is solitude and its tools are
hunger." Luqman the Wise told his son: "my son, when the stomach is filled,
thinking falls asleep, wisdom is silenced, and the organs cease to perform acts
of worship." Al-Fudail Ibn 'Iyad used to say to himself: "what do you fear?
Are you afraid of being hungry? Do not fear it! You are less of a burden to
Allah than it (is for you)." Muhammad "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him", also his companions, would go hungry as if it was being whispered to
his Lord: "you caused me to go hungry but not naked; in the darkness of night
you sat me down without a lantern; by what means did you teach what I
learned from thee?"
Fath Al-Mawsili would say when overtaken by illness and hunger, "my Lord,
you have afflicted me with illness and hunger, Thus, do you treat your saints; by
what deed may I thank you for that which you have bequeathed unto me?"
Malik Ibn Dinar related that he had said to Muhammad Ibn Wasi': "O Abu
'Abdullah, blessed is he who has an ardent desire to satisfy his need and to
render him needless of people." He replied: "O Abu Yahya, blessed is he who
goes to bed and wakes up hungry and is content with Allah." Al-Fudail Ibn Iyad
used to say: "my Lord, you caused me and my family to go hungry, and you left
me in the darkness of night without a lantern; but that is how you treat your
saints; by what station (level of devotion) have I earned this (favor) from you?"
Yahya Ibn Mu'adh declared: "the hunger of those who seek is theft; the hunger
of the repentant is tribulation; the hunger of the one who strives is a blessing;
the hunger of the patient one is an art, and the hunger of the ascetic is
wisdom."
It is stated in the Torah: "Fear Allah; and if you should be satiated (with food)
then remember the hungry. Abu Sulaiman said: "it is dearer for me to give up a
portion of my supper than to stay up a whole night." He also said: "hunger is a
store with Allah; He grants of it only to those who love Him."
Sahl Ibn 'Abdullah At-Tastari used to spend more than twenty nights
without eating. One dirham satisfied his food requirements for a whole year.
He would glorify hunger and exaggerate it, saying: "there is no deed worthy of
the Resurrection like abandoning desire for food and emulating the eating
habits of the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"." "To seek
profit from anything besides hunger," he continued, "wisdom and knowledge
were placed in hunger; defiance and ignorance, in satiation; there is no better
way for the servant (of Allah) to oppose whim than to abandon that which is
lawful."
It is related in the Traditions that "a third (of one's acts of devotion) is in
food; he who exceeds this is surrendering (a portion of) his good deed (s). When

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites

143

asked: "what constitutes excess?" he replied: "to exceed the level in eating when
refraining is more preferable; and when one hungers for a night, he asks Allah to
make it two (nights); that is when one knows the excess." He maintained that
such a preference can be achieved by constraining the stomach and staying up at
night observing silence and seclusion." He also said that "at the head of every
pious act descending from heaven to earth is hunger while heading every
licentious one is a full stomach." Furthermore, "he who allows himself to go
hungry will be free of anxiety." He maintained furthermore that hunger, sickness,
and affliction are visited upon the servant chosen by Allah. "Know ye," said he,
"this is a time when no one will gain salvation except by deadening the (physical)
self through hunger, staying awake at night, and striving." Moreover, "no one
passes through this world drinking to fill without committing an act of defiance;
and offer thanks to Allah filled with food."
A wise man was once asked, "how do I curb my self?" to which he replied:
"bind it by hunger and thirst; humble it by stifling its vanity and restrain the
penis and the self s trifles by placing it under the feet of those who have
earned the Hereafter (Paradise). Curb it (the self) by forsaking the apparel of
the affluent. Deliver yourself of its evils by always thinking ill of it and by
opposing its whims."
'Abd-Al-Wahid Ibn Zaid used to take an oath in the name of Allah Almighty
saying that He never purified anyone except by (causing him/her to) hunger.
"Nor did they (the pure) walk upon water except through Him or the earth cater
to them except by hunger."
Abu Talib Al-Makki declared: "the stomach is like a Mazhar; its tunes are
sweet because it is light and delicate, and because it is hallow, not filled; and
because it is empty (hallow), it is sweeter for recitation, more conducive to
wakefulness, and requires less sleep."
According to Abu Bakr Ibn Abdullah Al-Mazini, Allah loves three (types of
people): he who sleeps less, eats less, and rests less. It is said that Jesus "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" spent sixty days contemplating the Lord
without food. It was when bread came to his mind that his contemplation ceased.
A loaf was placed between his hands, but he sat up weeping over the loss of
contemplation (instead of eating it). An old man suddenly cast his shadow upon
him and Jesus said to him: "Allah bless you O friend of Allah; please entreat Him
on my behalf. I was in state of contemplation when bread came to my mind and I
lost it (the state)." The old man cried out: "O Lord, if you knew that bread
crossed my mind since I knew you, then forgive me not, for whenever anything
came to mind, I ate without thinking or deliberating."
It is said that when Allah Almighty decided to manifest Himself to Moses
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him", he (Moses) had already gone without
food for forty days — thirty plus ten according to the Qur'an; another ten were
added when he was unable to hold back sleep one day.

The quarter of the destructives

144

CHAPTER TWO
BENEFITS OF HUNGER AND EVILS OF SATIETY
The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "combat your
self with hunger and thirst, for there is reward in that." One might perhaps ask:
"wherefrom is this great virtue of hunger? What is the reason for it when there is
but pain for the stomach and harmful suffering? And if it is to be so, then man
should be granted greater rewards for allowing the self to suffer such harm in
denying the flesh what it craves and forcing it to accept the objectionable and the
like." It should be known to you that this (question) resembles the saying of the
one who drinks medicine and benefits there from thinking that this benefit is due
to the repugnance of medicine and its bitterness. Therefore, he proceeds to taste
all that he hates. This is wrong. Benefit derives from the peculiar quality of
medicine, not from its being bitter. Doctors attest this particular quality. Likewise,
nobody speaks ill of the benefits of hunger but the brokers of the learned.
Whoever suffers himself to endure hunger as an act of faith in keeping with the
Sharia's commendation thereof, he will benefit there from, even if he does not
understand the effect of the benefit, in the same manner as he who drinks
medicine benefits there from, even if he does not know the nature of the benefit.
This can be explained for those who seek to rise above faith to that of 'Urn
(cognition, formal theological knowledge). Allah Almighty said that "I will raise
those who have believed among you and acquired 'Urn to higher levels." (AlMujadilah 11)
4

Ob*Ob*jf

^

Benefits of Hunger
We say, then, that hunger has ten benefits:
The first is purification of the heart and awakening of intuition, as well as
giving vent to perception. Satiation causes dullness and blinds the heart. It
increases fuzziness in the brain, in the same manner as does drunkenness, until it
overpowers the elements of thought, burdens the heart, and slows down both the
thinking process and quickness of perception. The lad who indulges food is
unable to memorize (the Qur'an); his thinking is distorted, his understanding and
perception slowed.
Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani said: "indulge hunger because it humbles the self,
renders the heart tender, and allows one to inherit heavenly knowledge." The
Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "enliven your hearts with
less laughter and less satiation; (for it is by means of) hunger that they (hearts) are
purified and softened." It is alleged that hunger is like unto thunder, contentment
like unto the cloud, and wisdom like unto rain. He "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" also said: "he who renders his stomach hungry, increases his thinking
and sharpens the awareness of his heart. Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with him”
told that the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "he who
sleeps on a full stomach, his heart hardens." He added further that "everything
has its nourishment, and the nourishment of the body is hunger." Shibli said: "I

i

i
I
=

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites
145
hungered not a day (for the sake of Allah) without experiencing in my heart, like
nothing before, a door opened by wisdom and example.
It is no secret that what one seeks in acts of worship is the contemplation that
leads to knowledge and pondering the truths of Allah. Satiation detracts there
from while hunger opens its door (there to). Knowledge is one of the gateways of
Paradise. It is on account of this that Luqman told his son: "my son, if the
stomach is filled, thinking falls asleep and wisdom is muted, and faculties cease
their acts of worship."
Abu Yazid Al-Bastami said: "hunger is (like) a cloud: if the servant is hungry,
wisdom rains down upon (his) heart." The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "the light of wisdom is hunger and what creates distance
between one and Allah, may He be glorified, is satiation. Nearness to Allah
Almighty is (in) loving the poor and drawing near to them. Do not become filled
(with food) lest ye turn off the lights of wisdom in your hearts. He who sleeps
with less food, the Houris sleep around him until he awakens."
The second benefit is tenderness and purity of heart, which prepare it to
attain the delight of contemplation and the impact of Dhikr. How often
remembrances (Dhikr) flow on the tongue with the presence of the heart but
there is no delight for the heart nor any satisfaction because it is screened by
coarseness. Occasionally the heart might soften under certain circumstances
permit Dhikr a greater impact there on; indeed, it might even delight in
contemplation. A precondition for this experience However, is an empty
stomach.
Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani declared: "the best form of worship for me is an
empty stomach attached to my back." Junaid said that "one (should) leave
between the self and the chest a space free of food in order to discover the
delight of contemplation." Abu Sulaiman argued that "if the heart is made to
endure hunger and thirst, it would become pure and soft. But should it be filled,
the heart becomes blind and harsh. Treating the heart with sweetness and
contemplation facilitates thought and gains it knowledge." This is the second
benefit (sic.)
The third benefit lies in submission, humiliation, the elimination of
ungodliness, rejoicing, and what is more evil, namely oppressiveness and
obliviousness of Allah Almighty. Nothing will curb the self and humble it more
than hunger. For through hunger the self-reposes in its Lord and reveres Him,
becoming thereby aware of its incapacity and abject nature. If its quest should be
weakened and its urges circumscribed by means of a morsel of food, the world
would turn away from the lower self and cast its darkness upon it (in reward) for
not having food or drink for one day. If man does not recognize the abject nature
of his self and its limitations, he cannot see the glory of the Lord, nor His power.
His happiness lies in always reflecting upon the self with the eye of humility and
incapacity, and upon his Lord with the eye of glory and capacity. So let him go
hungry at all times and depend on his Lord, a witness for Him by choice. It is for
such reason that when the world and its treasures were offered to the Prophet

The quarter of the destructives
146
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" he said: "No, I would rather hunger a
day and be filled a day; for if I were to hunger, I would become patient and
humble. Were 1 to be filled, I would be grateful." As he put it, "the stomach and
the genitals are gateways to Hellfire." The cause lies in satiation. Humility and
submission constitute one of the gateways of Paradise. Both originate in hunger.
He who closes one of the doors of the Fire (Hell) opens one of the doors of
Paradise by necessity, because they are as opposite as east and west; for nearness
to one (is) distance from the other.
The fourth benefit lies in not forgetting the affliction of Allah and His
torment, nor for those afflicted to forget; for, he who is satiated is oblivious of
the one who hungers, and of hunger itself. The mindful servant does not see the
affliction in others without remembering the affliction of the Hereafter. He
becomes mindful through his own thirsting — the thirsting of created beings in
the halls of Resurrection — and own hungering — the hungering of those
destined to the fire (Hell). Indeed they will hunger, and (they) will be fed
humiliation and deadly food. They will be given purulent substances to drink and
the puss of corpses.
It is fitting for the servant to be mindful of the torments of the Hereafter
and its pains, for it is indeed what excites fear. He who has not suffered
depravity, or affliction, or wantonness, or ailment, forgets the torment of the
Hereafter and sets no example through himself, nor exercises control over his
(own) heart.
It also behooves the servant to endure pain and to experience affliction.
The foremost affliction he can endure is hunger. In it are many benefits
besides his being aware of the torments of the Hereafter. This is one reason
why affliction became the mark of prophets and saints (which is) the greatest
example they could set. Joseph "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was
told: "You shall not hunger while in your hands are the treasures of the
earth," to which he replied: "I fear in being filled that I would forget the
hungry." Remembering the hungry and needy is one of the benefits of hunger,
for it invokes mercy and (is conducive to) feeding (those in need) and
showing pity for God's created beings, because he who is filled is oblivious to
the pain of the hungry.
The fifth benefit, and one of the greatest of all, is in curbing the lusts of all
defiances. To take charge of the self is to overcome evil. The source of all
defiances is lust and power, and the ingredients thereof. Without doubt, lust is (a
form of) nourishment; curbing it weakens every desire and urge. Happiness lies in
taking charge of one's self, and misery is in it (the self) taking possession of it.
The self is like unto a runaway beast of burden, it can be controlled only when
weakened by hunger. Should it be fed to fill, it gains strength, becomes
uncontrollable and runs away.
Such is also the self. When someone was told, "why is it with age you have
shown no concern for your body, which has deteriorated?" to which he replied:
"because it is quick to enjoy merriment in excess of most evil. So I fear that it

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites

147

might overwhelm and hurl me into the abyss. It is better that I make it (the self)
endure hardship than to let it propel me towards (committing) excesses."
Dhun-Nun said: "I never was satiated without becoming defiant or being
preoccupied by it." 'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said, "the first
religious innovation after (the passing away of) the messenger (Muhammad,
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"), was satiation. When the stomach of
man is filled, the self propels him into the world" (i.e. towards worldliness.)
In this there is not just a single, but rather a store of benefits, on account of
which hunger was deemed one of the treasures of Allah. A leading benefit is (to
be able) to contain through hunger the lust of both genitals and speech. He who
hungers is not affected by the lust of inquisitive talk. He is delivered thereby from
the evils of the tongue, such as backbiting, garrulousness, mendacity, deceiving,
and the like. Hunger prevents all this. If, on the other hand, one becomes filled,
he would seek desert, and his desert inevitably leads to his amusing himself with
the honor of people. Nothing would hurl such folk into the Fire like the harvest
of their tongues.
As concerns the lust of the genitals, its evils are not concealed. Hunger is
sufficient to avert such evils. A man who is filled cannot control his genitals, even
when restrained by piety, because he cannot avert what the eye sees, and the eye
sins as much as the genitals do. Should one control the eye by not looking, he
might not control his thoughts; bad thoughts would come to him like the
murmurings of the self because of the enticements of lust, Thus, defiling his
contemplations, which might occur in the course of (his) praying.
We have cited the evil of the tongue and of the genitals as examples.
However, all defiances of the seven members (of the body) are caused by
compulsiveness wrought by satiation. A wise man once said: "every Murid
(novice) who is patient in his conduct abstains from (eating) pure bread for a year
and mixes no lust with it. He eats only on half a stomach. Allah (already) has
relieved him of the need for women."
The sixth benefit lies in warding off sleep and (in maintaining) continuous
wakefulness. He who satisfies his appetite drinks a lot, and he who drinks a lot
sleeps a lot. For this reason a certain (Sufi) sheikh said when food was being
prepared: "O disciples, do not eat a lot because you will drink a lot and become
content a lot, so you lose a lot." Seventy believers were of the same opinion,
namely that excessive sleep is wasteful to life, causes one to miss his nightly
devotional recitals , leads to a lazy disposition, and hardens the heart.
Life is a most precious tool and the servant's capital, with which he trades.
Sleep is (like) death, by increasing it one, decreases life. The virtue of night
prayers are not hidden, but in sleep they elapse; and when sleep overtakes night
prayers, there can be no rewards. Moreover, he who sleeps on a full stomach is
susceptible to night emission, and that also prevents him from performing his
night prayers and obliges him to perform major ablution either with cold water,
which could harm him, or require a full bath, which would not be possible to
have at night, so he misses the Witr because he was delayed in performing his

The quarter of the destructives
148
night prayers. Moreover, he would need provisions for the bath and perhaps his
eye would be attracted to a naked body while entering the (public) bath. So
there are many dangers, such as we discussed in the Book of Purification.
All this is die result of satiation. Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani maintained that
punishment. He said tiiis
being forced to dream (have night emission) is
because it detracts from many acts of worship on account of one not being able
to perform full ablution in every situation. Sleep is Thus, a fountain of sin and
satiation is a magnet for it, while hunger is a cessation thereof.
The seventh benefit lies in facilitating continuous worship. Food prevents
many acts of worship because it requires time, Thus, preoccupying one with
eating. Perhaps it would also require time to buy food and to cook it. Then
one has to wash his hands and to excrete; this might entail frequenting the
bathroom on account of drinking (which accompanies eating). The time spent
on all this if spent on Dhikr and contemplation would redound with greater
benefit to him (the worshipper). Sari (al-Saqati) said: "I saw a gruel of parched
barley (Sawiq) in the possession of 'Ali Al-jurjani who was picking at it. I said
to him: what has made you do this? His reply: Between each picking and
chewing I recited seventy praises (of Allah), and have not chewed bread for
forty years." Behold how he carefully apportioned his time and did not waste
it in chewing.
Every soul is a precious jewel of life that has no value (in itself), so one must
distill from it a lasting unending store for the Hereafter by devoting himself to
the Dhikr of Allah and obedience to Him.
Among endeavors prevented by much eating is (a state of) continuous purity,
(obliging one to) frequent the mosque (for prayer) because it (eating) requires
exiting (the place of prayer) for drinking much water and quenching (of thirst).
Fasting is another (store). Someone accustomed to enduring hunger finds it easy
to fast, pray, practice seclusion, maintain purity, and spend time away from food.
Such inducements to worship yield much benefit. But those who are oblivious,
that is the ones who do not appreciate the value of faith, and who are content
with life in this world and are satisfied with it, would detest these (benefits).
"They know only the outer (things) but of the end of things, they are heedless."
(Ar-Rum 7)
4 CP OjtoiP

o>/3l^ pAj \£j}\

oy&J ^

Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani mentions six sins resulting from satiation: the
first, one loses the sweetness of contemplation; the second, one is prevented
from retaining wisdom; the third, he is deprived of pity for created beings
because when he is full he believes that they too are full; the fourth,
worshipping becomes a burden (for him); the fifth, lusts increase; and the sixth,
others tarry in mosques while he moves around garbage piles (looking for more
food).
The eighth benefit is in the soundness of body. It is achieved by eating less
and warding off sickness caused by excessive food intake and by much mixing in

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites

149

stomach and veins. Sickness detracts from acts of worship, impairs the
(functioning of) the heart (Qalb), prevents Dhikr and thinking, increases the
pressures on life, necessitates blood letting and cupping, (recourse to) doctors
and medicine. All this requires provision (money or payment in kind) and
expenses which man cannot avoid after much striving to combat defiances and
curb lusts. In hunger are the means for preventing all this.
It is told that Ar-Rashid gathered together four doctors: an Indian, a Greek,
an Iraqi, and a Black. He told them: let each one of you describe the (cause of)
disease that has no cure. The Indian replied: "for me the incurable disease is
(caused by) myrobalan"; the Iraqi replied: "it is the white seed of garden
peppergrass "; the Greek said: "for me, it is hot water;" and the Black, who was
the most knowledgeable among them, answered: "myrobalan, because it causes
constipation for the stomach and this is a disease, while peppergrass renders the
stomach slippery, which also is an ailment. Hot water loosens the stomach, and
this too is an ailment." He (Harun Ar-Rashid) said to him: "what do you
suggest?" And he (the Black doctor) replied: "I say that one should not eat so
much food as would (make him) lust for more, and that he should stop (eating)
while he is still in need of more." Harun answered: "you are right."
Addressing a certain philosopher and doctors from the People of the Book,
Harun related (to them) the saying of the Prophet (Muhammad, "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him"): "a third (of food intake) is for nourishment, a third for
drink, and a third is for (satisfying) the self." He (the doctor) was surprised and
said: "I never heard words about food wiser than these. It is indeed the words of
a wise man." He (the Prophet, "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him") said:
"gluttony is the cause of disease; dieting is a source of treatment, so train every
body to (accept) what it has been accustomed (to accept)." I (al-Ghazali speaking)
believe that the surprise of the doctor stemmed from this, not the other, saying.
Ibn Salim said: "he who eats the bread of pure wheat with propriety will
be afflicted with no more than the affliction of death." When asked about
propriety, he replied: "that you eat after being hungry, and stop before you are
full."
An honorable doctor said in condemning excess that the best thing a man can
put into his stomach is pomegranate, and the worst he can put in it is salt. Lessen
the intake of salt; it is better than to increase the intake of pomegranate. There is
a saying: "fast, for through fasting you can cure hunger." In eating less the body is
cured of sickness and the heart from the ailment of oppressiveness and
excessiveness caused by other things.
The ninth benefit is in lessening the intake. He who eats less requires little
money; but he who is accustomed to satiation becomes a constant debtor to his
stomach, which has him by the throat every day asking him: "what will you eat
today?" So he is obliged either to seek unlawful gain, and Thus, commit a crime,
or (seek) lawful gain, and is Thus, humiliated. Perhaps he is compelled to extend
imploring looks at people, which is an extreme form of humiliation and
contemptibility.

The quarter of the destructives

150

The faithful require Light provision. A certain wise man said: "I usually satisfy
my needs through abandonment. It is more restful for my heart." Another said:
"If I had to borrow from others to satisfy a lust or an excess, I would rather
borrow from myself, Thus, abandoning lust, for it is the best debtor for me."
Ibrahim lbn Adham, Allah rest his soul, used to ask his companions about
the price of food; and when told that it was expensive, he would reply: "render it
cheap by abandoning it." Sahl (al-Tastari), may Allah forgive him, said that food
can be blamed in three situations: rendering a worshipper lazy, afflicting with evil
(misfortune) the gainfully employed, and preventing the one who is (easily)
affected from giving of himself freely to Allah Almighty.
In short, the cause of perdition for people is their possessive attitude toward
the world; and the cause of their eagerness for things worldly lies in both the
belly and the genitals; and the cause of the genital’s lust is the lust of the stomach.
So in reducing food intake, one finds barriers to all of these entries as they are the
gateways to Hell; and in closing them, the gateways of Paradise are opened. He
(the Prophet, "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him") said: "persist in knocking
on the gates of Heaven with hunger. He who is satisfied each day with a loaf of
bread is immune from other lusts, is liberated, and is in no need of other people;
he is immune to fatigue and is free to worship Allah, may He be glorified."
Trading (for) the Hereafter is (a preoccupation) by those who are not
detracted by buying and selling from mentioning (the name of, i.e. Dhikr) Allah.
They are not detracted (therefrom) because they have no need for it and because
they are content. He who is need of it, however, is detracted regardless (of the
circumstance).
The tenth benefit is in being responsive and generous by giving food to
orphans and to the poor so that on the Day of Resurrection one would dwell in
the shade of His generosity in accordance with a tradition that states: "what one
eats is stored in a public lavatory; and what one contributes is stored in the grace
of Allah Almighty." The servant does not possess other than what he contributes.
If he hoards and eats, he is lost; if he clothes himself, he is afflicted. So being
generous with surplus food is more commendable than (suffering) indigestion
and satiation.
When repeating the words of Allah, "We did indeed offer the trust to the
heavens and the earth, and the mountains but they refused to undertake it, being
afraid thereof. Man, however, undertook it and he was indeed unjust and
foolish," (Al-Ahzab 72)

oiii'j

j£ iicVT ui> bj}

Al-Hassan "may Allah forgive him" interpreted it to signify that He offered it
to the Seven Heavens, to match the paths which He adorned with stars and the
bearers of the great Throne. Allah, may He be praised and glorified, asked: "will
you bear this trust and all that attends it? And the heavens replied: "what is the

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites

151

reward?" He replied: "if you do good, you will be recompensed; and if you do
wrong, you will be punished." They refused (the trust). So he offered it to the
earth, and it, too, refused. Then He offered it to the tall, mighty and impregnable
mountains saying: "will you bear this trust and what attends it?" They asked, "and
what is the reward?" He mentioned both reward and punishment, and they said
"No." Then He offered it to man, and he accepted, but he was an oppressor,
ignorant of God's command.
We have seen them, by Allah, purchase this trust with their wealth and cause
suffering to thousands; but what did they do with it? They expanded with it their
power, and narrowed thereby their tombs, while fattening their workhorses. They
made a mockery of their faith and burdened themselves by running to and from
the door of the sultan, Thus, exposing themselves to affliction when they already
enjoyed health from Allah.
One of them says: "I would like to have this and that; bring me this or that"
while reposing on the left and eating from that which is not his. His attendants
are charmers and his possessions unlawful. Were he to over indulge and become
a victim of gluttony, he would say: "young man, bring me something with which I
can digest my food!" How contemptible! "It is food you would digest when it is
your faith that you should digest! How about the poor? What about the widow?
Where is the destitute, or the orphan? Those whom Allah Almighty commanded
that you care for! (asks Al-Ghazali).
This (argument) is in reference to the benefit (deriving) from transferring the
best food to the poor in order to build up store for reward (in the Hereafter)
which is better than for one to consume (the would-be recompense) Thus,
increasing his burdens.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" looked at
a pot-bellied man and pointed to his stomach with his finger saying: "were it
(stored) in other than this (your stomach), it would have been better for you;
that is, it should have been sacrificed for the sake of the Day of Reckoning by
benefiting someone else with it (excess food). Al-Hassan is alleged to have said:
"I knew people among whom a man would pass a night with more food than he
needed. Had he wished, he could have eaten it, but he would say, instead: by
Allah, I will not have all of this for my stomach, rather I shall give Allah His
due of it."
These are the ten benefits of hunger. From each derives coundess other
benefits whose rewards are endless. Hunger, then, is a great store for the
rewards of the Hereafter. On account of it a righteous forefather once said
"hunger is the key to the Hereafter and the gateway to piety, while satiation is
the key to the world and the gateway to lust." This is clearly evident in the
accounts that we have related. In knowing the details of these benefits, one
perceives the meaning of these accounts, a realization based on cognition and
perception. If one is unaware of this and becomes righteous by virtue of
hunger, he would be ranked among the traditional imitators. Allah knows best
what is right.

152

The quarter of the destructives

CHAPTER THREE
EXERCISING TO CURB LUST OF STOMACH
It should be known that the novice (Murid) has four obligations as
concerns both his stomach and what he eats. The first is that he should eat
only what is lawful. To perform acts of worship while eating what is unlawful
is like building upon the waves of the sea. We have mentioned what needs to
be observed (in this regard) in the "Book on What is Lawful and Unlawful."
There are in addition three other obligations relating to eating: to assess the
merit of food in terms of small and large quantities; to judge the pace (of
eating) in slowness and hurriedness, and to determine what type of food to eat
and what to avoid.

Obligations To Be Observed
The first obligation is to reduce intake of food and exercise to accomplish
this (reduction) by steps. He who is accustomed to eating much, his temperament
will not permit him suddenly to eat less. He would become weak and his
suffering intensifies. He must build up to it gradually by reducing a little at a time
his food intake. If he were in the habit of eating two loaves (of bread), for
example, then seeks to accustom himself to eating one loaf, he should reduce his
consumption by a fourth of seven loaves, that is one out of twenty-eight or one
out of thirty portions in order to reach a consumption level of one loaf a month
without harming himself in the process or suffering side effects. Should he
choose, he might do it by weight or by estimation, that is, eating each day one
portion less than the day before.
There are four steps in accomplishing this, the most extreme being to master
the capacity of being wakeful, which is imperative for him (the Murid), and which
is also the manner of the sincere lovers of truth. It was also the choice of Sahl AtTastari "may Allah be pleased with him" when he said that Allah imbued human
beings with three (qualities): life, intelligence, and strength. Should the servant (of
Allah) respect two of these, that is life and intelligence, he eats or breaks the fast,
if he is fasting, and obliges himself to ask for something should he be poor. If
through strength he cannot avoid either, then he should not be concerned if he
becomes (so) weak that he (is able to) pray (s) only from a sitting position. He
(Sahl) preferred praying sitting up weakened by hunger over praying standing up
satiated by much food.
Someone asked Sahl about how he got started (being a Sufi) and what he
was accustomed to eating (as a Murid). He replied: "my consumption each
year was three dirham's worth. I would buy with one-dirham molasses; with
another, rice flour; and with the third, butter. I would mix it all together and
make out of it little balls, three hundred and sixty of them. Every night I
dined on one of the balls. "At what time?" he was asked. "At no set time," (he
would answer). It is said that some monks could satisfy the self with one
dirham of food.
The second step is to appease the self through training day and night (to

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites
153
accept) half a Mudd, which is a loaf (sic) and a bit more, equivalent to four
(loaves) as a favor to it (the self). Most probably this is equivalent to one third of
a stomach (full) for most people, according to the Prophet "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" who did not concern himself with small mouthfuls. This is a
form of the plural (of words) applied to a measure less than ten. It used to be the
habit of 'Umar “Allah be pleased with him”, who would eat seven or nine
mouthfuls.
The third step is to appease it (the stomach) to the limit, that is (letting it
have) two loaves and a half, which is more than a third of a stomach for most
people, approximating indeed two thirds of the stomach, Thus, leaving a third for
drink and nothing for Dhikr. In some expressions, "a third for Dhikr" rather than
his "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" saying: "for the self."
The fourth step is to increase a Mudd by a Mann which, if exceeded, would
not be deemed over indulgence or contradicting God's words, "do not indulge"
(Al-A'raf 31)
(I.e., exceed the limits), which applies to most people. The need for food
differs with age and the individual, as well as the work engaged in. We have here
a fifth way that has no value because it is misplaced, namely that one should eat if
his hunger is real and hold back if something truly appeals to him afterwards.
Most probably he who does not apportion for himself a loaf or two would not
discover the limit of true hunger and would resort to estimating this through false
desire.
It has been said that true hunger has manifestations, one of which is for the
body to reject the eating of condiments in favor of plain bread, any (kind of)
bread, but with appetite. However, much it covets bread with the eye, or seeks
condiments, that is not the result of true hunger. It is also said that one of the
signs (of hunger) is spitting without attracting flies, suggesting that the spittle has
no grease or fat (in it). This would signal an empty stomach, although verifying it
is uncertain.
What is proper for the Murid is that he should estimate for himself the
amount which would not weaken him so much that he cannot perform (acts of)
worship, which is his quest. Were he to attain it, he then should stop. But if his
desire should persist, (then it must be assumed that) one cannot always estimate
how much is proper to consume since it (the amount) varies according to
conditions and individuals.
Certain companions (of the Prophet, "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him") nourished themselves on one Sa';l) of wheat. If they ate dates, they
consumed a Sa' and a half. A Sa' of wheat is four Mudd(2), Thus, averaging half a
(1) Sa' is a measurement unit of volume equals to 2512 ml. One Sa' is approximately 4
Mudd. And in weight, it is 2.600 Kg.
(2) Mudd (or injection) is a measurement unit of volume equals to 628 ml. And in
weight it is equal to 650 grams.

The quarter of the destructives
154
Mudd each day. This, as said before, approximates a third (of the stomach's
need). More dates are required because diey are pitted.
Abu Dharr "may Allah be pleased with him" used to say: "my food (need)
every week since the days of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" has been a Sa' of barley. By Allah, whatever exceeded it by the
slightest, I threw out." I heard him (the Prophet, "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him") say: "he who dies in the state he enjoys today will be closer (to me) in
rank and dearer to me on the Day of Resurrection." In criticizing some of the
companions he (the Prophet, "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him") would
say: "you have changed; barley is (now) sifted for you when it was never sifted
before; it is baked into thin bread, combined with condiments; your menus have
become varied; you arrive with one set of clothes and depart with another. This is
not the way it was in the days of the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him", when nourishment for the pious consisted of one Mudd of pitted dates per
day for each two (individuals).
Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him" would say: "the faithful (one),
like a small goat, is content with a handful of grass and a pinch of dates and a
swallow of water, while the hypocrite is like a wild beast; he gobbles up food in
huge quantities without satisfying his stomach. He does not curb his appetite for
the sake of his neighbor, nor bestows upon his brother from his generosity. Be
generous with such surpluses!" Sahl (al-Tastari) used to say: "if the world
consisted of flowing blood streams, it would be lawful nourishment for the
faithful because the food of the faithful by necessity is judged only by his need to
maintain himself (in his state of worship)."
The second obligation concerns the time of eating and the length of its
postponement. It, too, has four levels; the highest is to allow three days or more.
Some Murids, however, would approach their exercises with intention not
quantity, up to thirty or forty days. Among the learned who reached the limit are
Muhammad Ibn 'Amr Al-Qarni, 'Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Ibrahim, Adham and
Ibrahim At-Taimi, Hajjaj Ibn Farafisah, Hafs Al-'Abid AJ-Massisi, Muslim Ibn
Sa'id, Zuhair and Sulaiman Al-Khawas. Abu Bakr As-Siddiq "may Allah be
pleased with him" used to take six days while 'Abdullah Ibn Az-Zubair, seven: as
did also Abu Jawz, a companion of Ibn Abbas. It was related that Ath-Thawri
and Ibrahim Ibn Adham each used to take three times as much. They relied on
hunger to pave the way for themselves to the Hereafter.
One of the learned claimed that "power descends from heaven upon the one
who endures forty days (of hunger) for the sake of Allah." It is certain that
heavenly secrets would be revealed to him. It is related that such a person (once)
encountered a monk and discussed with him his state, suggesting that he (the
monk) might wish to adopt Islam and abandon the state that he (himself) was in.
He talked to him much about it, and the monk told him that Christ used to spend
forty days (fasting), a miracle reserved only to a prophet or a righteous believer.
The Sufi replied: "if I should (fast) for fifty days, would you abandon the state
you are in and accept Islam as the (true) faith and concede that it is the truth

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites

155
while the state you are presently in is false?" "Yes," answered the monk. The Sufi
sat without moving (from the same spot) so that the monk could see him until he
passed the fiftieth day fasting, then added: "I will increase it for you," continuing
(his fast) for a full sixty days. The monk was astonished and said: "I never
believed that anyone could surpass Christ!" And that was the reason he converted
to Islam.
This is a great attainment, equaled by very few who have not received
revelation or have been totally absorbed in the vision (of Allah) to the point of
becoming separated from their own nature and habits and so taken up by the
ecstasy that they would forget hunger and need (physical).
The second step is to spend up to two or three days (fasting), which is not
abnormal, indeed attainable by earnest striving. The third step, which is the
lowest, is to be content with one meal per day and night. This is the minimum;
anything exceeding it is indulgence and commitment to satiation and the absence
of a state of hunger. Such is the way of those who seek comfort, which is a
departure from the sunnah. Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri “Allah be pleased with him”
recounted that when the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" took
his evening meal he did not have lunch (before then) and if he did take lunch he
would not have dinner. The forefathers would consume (only) one meal per day.
The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" told 'A'ishah: "do not
indulge; two meals a day are excessive; one every two days (leads to)
enfeeblement; one meal a day suffices for sustenance, is both proper and the
right balance." It is also lauded in the book of Allah (Qur'an), may He be praised
and glorified.
He who confines himself to one meal a day and chooses to eat it early in the
morning, at dawn or before daybreak, or right after awakening in the morning,
will be able to sustain the hunger of the day for fasting and that of the night for
wakefulness. An empty stomach renders the heart free, thoughts tender, and
(enables) the self to experience the convergence of energy and tranquility, for it
would not contend with him before his appointed prayer time.
'Asim Ibn Kulaib was told by his father, as narrated by Abu Hurairah, that
"the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" never stayed up the way
you do even though he stood until his feet were swollen; nor did he persevere as
you do although he did delay breaking the fast until dawn." 'A'ishah related that
the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" persisted until dawn.
If the heart of someone fasting should be distracted by food after sunset and
prevented from concentrating on prayer, it is preferable that he should divide
food into two portions; if it consists of two loaves, for example, then he should
eat one to end his fasting, and another at dawn to quiet the self and lighten the
body for night prayers without being made to experience intense hunger during
the day. One loaf helps him at dawn, the other contributes to his fasting (during
the day). It is acceptable for someone who fasts a whole day and breaks the fast
another (day) to eat during the day when he breaks the fast at noon and the day
of fasting at dawn. These paths are within the time frame of eating or avoiding
(it) and abstaining.

The quarter of the destructives
The third obligation concerns types of food (to be eaten) and the avoidance
of condiments. The choicest food is the kernel of wheat, which if sifted is
extremely delicious. The middle type is sifted barley, and the lowest is unsifted
barley. The best of condiments is meat; the worst, salt and vinegar; in between,
trimmings and fat without meat.
It is not unusual for those (proceeding) on the path to the Hereafter to
abstain from condiments altogether; indeed, from all appetites. Every sweetmeat
coveted and consumed by man enfeebles the self and hardens the heart. He is
attracted to the delights of the world, grows accustomed to them and oblivious to
death and meeting Allah AAmighty. The world becomes his Paradise and death a
prison for him. Were he to deny the self its desires or curb them, in so doing he
would strip it (the self) of its delights rendering the world a prison and (a form
of) confinement for it. The self would seek to escape, and death becomes its
release.
With regard to this (argument) we cite Yahya Ibn Mu'adh who proclaimed:
"O ye who are righteous suffer hunger (in preparation) for the feast of Paradise."
The lust for food is in proportion to the degree of the seifs hungering. All that
which we have mentioned concerning the evils of satiation applies to eating what
one desires and to partaking of delights. So we shall not prolong discussion by
repeating them.
Rewards are greater in abandoning desires, even if lawful, and danger is
greater in partaking of them. The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "the wicked among my people are those who eat the kernel of wheat."
This in itself is not forbidden; rather, it is permissible in that he who eats it once
or twice does not commit a defiance, nor does one who continues to do so (i.e.
to eat). The self, however, is accustomed to luxury and is drawn to the world and
its delights, demanding more of the same. This is what induces it (the self) to
(commit) defiances. These are the evil members of the community, because this
kernel of food leads to committing defiances, which is at the root of the matter.
The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "the most evil
among my people are those who have been nourished by luxury, upon which
their bodies are built; who are preoccupied with all kinds of food and clothing,
and who choke on their words."
Allah Almighty inspired Moses "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" to
believe that he dwells in a tomb, Thus, helping (him) to bypass many desires.
Forefathers were afraid to partake of tasty food and accustom the self to it.
They saw in that a sign of hardship, and in Allah Almighty forbidding it (a sign
of) happiness.
Wahb Ibn Munabbih related that two kings met in the fourth heaven. One
said to the other: "where are you from?" The other replied: "I was commanded
to fetch a whale from the sea which a certain Jew, Allah curse him, desired."
The former retorted: "I was ordered to pour out oil which a certain worshipper
desired." In this is a warning that to make easy that which leads to pleasure is
not a sign of prosperity. It is on account of this that 'Umar “Allah be pleased

156

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites
157
with him denied himself a cold drink of water (mixed) with honey saying (to
the one offering it): "take it away!" There is no greater (expression of) devotion
to Allah Almighty than to deny the self its lusts and abandon delights, which we
have discussed in our book "Self-Discipline". Naff related that the son of
'Umar “Allah be pleased with them” told him that he was ill and asked (him) for
a fresh fish. "I looked in Medina," (said he) "but did not find any. Later I found
one and bought it for him for a dirham and a half. I grilled it and took it to him
on a loaf of bread. A bearer came (with it) to the gate. He ordered the servant
to wrap it in the loaf and give it to him. The servant said to him: may Allah set
you straight; you wanted it (the fish) for so long and we could not find it; then
when you found it, we bought it for a dirham and a half; so we should pay him
its price; his reply: wrap it and give it to him! The servant asked the bearer:
would you take a dirham for it? and he answered, yes. So he gave (him) the
dirham and took it from him. He (Ibn 'Umar “Allah be pleased with them”) told
him (the servant): wrap it up and give it back to him (the bearer) and do not
take the dirham (back) from him, for I have heard the Messenger of Allah
(Muhammad, "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him") say: whoever
experiences a desire, suppresses it, and influences the self positively, Allah will
forgive him.
He (the Prophet, "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him") also said: "if one
appeases the dog (sic) of hunger with a loaf and a small jug of pure water,
catastrophe will befall the world and its inhabitants." The aim behind this
(appeasement) as the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" pointed
out, is to ward off the pain of hunger and thirst and to avert the ill effects of both
without enjoying the delights of the world.
'Umar “Allah be pleased with him” learned that Yazid Ibn Abu Sufyan used
to eat all sorts of food. 'Umar “Allah be pleased with him” said to one of his
attendants: "when you hear that his supper has been brought to him, let me
know!" He did so. 'Umar “Allah be pleased with him” entered upon him (Yazid)
at suppertime and sat close to him. Soup and meat were offered, and 'Umar
“Allah be pleased with him” dined with him. When it came time to thank him,
Yazid stretched out his hand but 'Umar “Allah be pleased with him” did not
respond saying, "By Allah, by Allah, O Yazid, son of Abu Sufyan, when my soul
is in His (God's hands) and when you are turned away from the ways of the ones
you defy (the righteous) would you enjoy meals such as this one?"
It is related that Yasar Ibn 'Ammar (once) said: "I never sifted flour for 'Umar
“Allah be pleased with him” without being in defiance of him." He also related
that 'Utbah Al-Ghulam used to knead flour (into dough), dry it in the sun, then
eat it saying, "a small piece and a bit of salt to make ready for grilling (of meats)
and the good food in the Hereafter." He would take ajar and scoop it with seed
lying in the sun the whole day. A female servant would say to him: "O 'Abdullah,
if you give me your flour I will bake it for you and cool your water for you; but
his reply to her was: "O mother of so and so (the name of the son not known to
the author), I have warded off the dog of hunger from myself."

158

The quarter of the destructives

Shaqiq Ibn Ibrahim said: "I encountered Ibrahim Ibn Adham in Mecca at the
night bazaar during the Prophet's "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
birthday sitting on die curb of a street weeping. I approached him, sat down next
to him, and asked, repeadng once, twice and three times: what is this crying
about, O Abu Ishaq? He replied: O Shaqiq, do not embarrass me!
One said to him: O brother, say whatever you wish! He answered: for thirty
years I have desired a stew cooked with vinegar and was able through my effort
to control it (this desire) until yesterday when, while sitting, sleep overcame me
and behold a young man (before me) with a green goblet in his hand from which
steam was rising, and the odor of stew! I called upon all my strength to ward it
(temptation) off, but he (the lad) insisted, saying: O Ibrahim, eat! No, I will not
eat, I said, because I have given this (the stew) up for the sake of Allah, may He
be glorified. But Allah has given it to you to eat, so eat! was his answer. Since I
had no reply, I wept. He said to me: eat, may Allah be merciful with you! and I
replied: we have been enjoined to place in our containers (stomachs?) only that
which its origins we know. He replied: eat, may Allah give you strength, for I
have granted it unto you! I was told: O Khadir, take it and feed it to Ibrahim Ibn
Adham's self for the sake of Allah, who has sanctioned it on account of its long
patience and enduring what it had been denied. Know, O Ibrahim, that I have
heard the angels say: he who gives and does not make a request will not receive. I
replied: if that is the case, then here I am, ready to enter a covenant with Allah
Almighty. He then turned and behold, I was with another young person who had
been handed something and told: O Khadir (symbolic reference) you feed it to
him! and he kept on feeding me until I became sleepy, and its taste remained in
my mouth." Shaqiq continued, one said to him: let me see your palm! He
stretched out his palm to me and I accepted it saying: O you who grants the
hungry his desire in justification of (his) abstinence; you who grants assuredness
to conscience and cures the heart through love, do you see for Shaqiq, your
servant, a state? I then lifted Ibrahim's hand to heaven and said: by the deference
of this palm (stretched) before You, grant this poor servant (Shaqiq) of Your
generosity, benefaction and mercy, even if he does not deserve it! Ibrahim rose
and walked until we reached home."
It has been told that Malik Ibn Dinar spent forty years yearning for milk, but
would not have it. One day he was given fresh (milk). He said to his companions:
"drink it, for we have not tasted it for forty years!"
Ahmad Ibn Abu Al-Hawari said that Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani desired a
hot loaf with salt and I brought it to him; he took a bite from it then cast it
aside and began to weep saying: "I hastened to satisfy my desire after a long
resistance and distress and am now determined to atone (for it), so belittle
me!" Ahmad went on to say: "before he had finished eating the salt he met the
Lord (died)."
Malik Ibn Daigham said: "I passed through the bazaar of Basra and looked at
the vegetables; my self said to me: if only you would feed me one night of this! I
swore (instead) not to feed it (vegetables) for forty nights." Malik Ibn Dinar spent

’

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites

159

fifty years without eating any greens from the people of Basra, not even a bit,
declaring: mO people of Basra, I have lived among you for fifty years without
eating a tiny morsel of vegetables; this has not made you richer, nor me poorer;
for I have been divorced from the world for fifty years, forty of which my self
has desired milk and by Allah I would not feed it; not even for the sake of the
Almighty."
Hammad Ibn Abu Hanifah related that he called on Da'ud At-Ta’i and found
his door closed. "I overheard him say to himself: you have desired a carrot, and I
fed you carrots, then you desired dates, and I recommended that you do not eat
dates ever. I greeted him and entered and found him alone."
Abu Hatim one day passed through the bazaar and saw fruit; he desired it; so
he said to his son: "buy for us some of this forbidden fruit that we might journey
to the fruit that is not forbidden!" When he (the son) bought it and brought it to
him, he said to himself: "you have enticed me into buying it, but by Allah I will
not let you taste it." He sent it to the poor orphans instead.
Someone related that Musa Ibn Al-Ashajj once said: "my self has craved
coarse salt for twenty years." Ahmad Ibn Khalifah is alleged to have maintained
that his self-wanted in twenty years only water to quench its thirst but he would
not give it to drink. It was also said that 'Utbah Ibn Ghulam coveted meat for
seven years, but when it (his self) continued to yearn for it, "I was ashamed to
resist it year after year, so I bought a piece of meat on bread, grilled it, and left it
on the loaf. I found a boy and asked (him): are you not the son of so and so
whose father has died? Yes, he replied; so I handed it to him."
They say that he began to weep while reciting: "and they feed the poor and
the orphan and the captive with food for the love of Him." (Al-Insan 8)
@ b*-? Ij 1-^3

^

He never tasted meat after that, but he continued to crave dates for two
years. One day he bought a Qirat of date and saved it for the night in order to
break his fast with it. But a very strong wind blew and the world turned dark.
People were frightened and 'Utbah began to blame himself saying, "this is my
punishment for buying a Qirat of date," and addressing his self he continued,
"I believe people are critical oh account of you and you are not going to taste
it!"
Da'ud At-Ta'i bought greens with half a fils and spent his whole life saying
to himself, "woe unto thee O Da'ud; how long your account will be on the
Day of Judgement!" After that he would eat only unseasoned food. 'Utbah AlGhulam said one day to 'Abd Al-Wahid Ibn Zaid: "so and so described a stage
which he had experienced and I had not, saying: it is because you eat dates
with your bread while he eats only bread." I asked, "were I to stop eating
dates would I experience that stage?" "Yes," he answered, "and even more!"
He ('Utbah) began to weep. One of his companions said to him: "has Allah
caused you to shed tears over dates?" to which 'Abd Al-Wahid replied: "leave
him alone; his self recognizes the truthfulness of his intention in abandoning

The quarter of the destructives
160
(something), for he is one who should he abandon something he would not
take it up again."
Ja'far Ibn Nasr related that Junaid had ordered him to purchase Waziri figs
for him. When he bought them, he (Junaid) took one at breakfast and put it in
his mouth, then cast it out and began to weep telling Ja'far to take them away.
"I asked him why?" and he replied: "because a voice whispered into my heart:
are you not ashamed? you abandoned it for my sake (God's) then you
returned to it (eating figs)!"
Salih Al-Murri (once) declared: "I told 'Ata* As-Sulami: I am going to give
you something and do not reject my offer! to which he replied: do as you
please! He said: I sent him a drink with my son made from Sawiq with which
I had mixed butter and honey and told him (the son) not to leave until he had
drunk it. Next morning I took it to him but he returned it to me without
drinking it. I rebuked him and blamed him for that saying: praise be to Allah,
you have rejected my generosity! When he noticed how serious I was, I urged
him not to be offended (because) I had drunk it the first time and coaxed
myself to drink it the second time, but to no avail. Whenever I so wished, I
would remember the words of AJiah: "He drinks it in gulps but is unable to
swallow it", (Ibrahim 17)

Whereupon Salih said: I wept and told myself: I am in one chasm and you are
in another!"
Sari Al-Saqati once declared: "for thirty years my self has been urging me to
dip a carrot in molasses and I would not respond to it."
Abu Bakr Al-Jalla' once said: "I know a man whose self told him: I will be
patient for they sake up to ten days; after that feed me what I desire! His reply: I
don't want you to wait ten days. I want you to abandon this desire!"
Someone related that an ascetic invited one of his brethren and offered him
loaves (of bread). The brother began to sort through them to pick the best. The
ascetic said to him: "what are you doing? Don't you know that in the loaf that
you reject there is such wisdom and labor (invested in its making)? So many
people have labored on it until it became round (the loafs shape), from the cloud
that bears water, the water that gives the earth to drink, besides the winds, the
earth, animals and man until it reached you! And after all this you start to sort
through them and are not satisfied!"
There is a saying that a loaf does not become round (fully formed) to be
placed between your hands except after three hundred and sixty work on it. First
among them is Michael (the Archangel) who measures out water from the stores
of (God's) mercy; then the angels who draw the clouds, the sun, moon, and
heavenly bodies; the angels of the skies and the beasts of burden on earth; and
lastly, the baker. "If you count up the favors of Allah, never would you be able to
remember them."
Someone said: "I came upon Qasim Al-Jaw' I and asked: what is piety? He

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites

161

answered: what did you hear about it? I recounted to him the sayings (thereon)
and he fell silent. I asked him: and what do you say? He replied: It should be
known to you that the stomach is the world of the servant; to the extent that he
controls his stomach, he gains piety; and to the extent that his stomach possesses
him, the world possesses him."
Bishr Al-Harth fell ill one day. 'Abd-Ar-Rahman At-Tabib (physician)
came to him to ask for something appropriate to eat. He said (to him): "you
ask me, but if I recommend something, you won't accept it from me." He told
him to describe it, and he said to him: "drink oxymel and suck a quince then
eat afterwards asfinaj." Bishr asked: "do you know anything less that can
substitute for oxymel?" He replied: "No." he said: "But I do know." He
asked: "What is it?" "Dandelion with vinegar," he replied. Again he asked: "do
you know anything less than quince which can substitute for it?" "Yes," he
replied. "What is it?" he asked. "Syrian carob," was his reply. "Do you know
anything less than asfinaj which can substitute for it?" he asked. "No," he
answered. He said: "But I know." He asked: "What is it?" he said: "the water
of the chick mixed with the fat of the well-fed cow, or something like it."
Whereupon 'Abd Al-Rahman said to him: "you know more than I do about
medicine, so why do you ask me?"
Through this I learned that these people have refrained from every delight
and satiation involving food for the sake of the benefits mentioned before. And
when at times what is lawful was not available to them, only in cases of extreme
necessity did they yield to cravings not regarded as necessities, to the extent that
Abu Sulaiman (Ad-Darani) declared: "salt is a craving because it is superfluous to
bread, beyond which is excessive craving."
Such is the limit; and he who is not capable of staying within it, must not be
oblivious to the self, nor indulge appetites. It suffices someone to eat all what he
desires and do all that pleases the self, but he must not persist in eating meat. 'Ali,
Allah be pleased with him, said: "he who abandons meat for forty days his
manners would worsen and he who continues to eat meat for forty days his heart
would harden."
It is said that constant eating of meat is as harmful as (drinking) wine.
Regardless of how much one might hunger and yearn for coitus, he must not
indulge or partake of coitus when, (in so doing) he would be granting the self
two appetites to overpower it. It is likely that the self might require food to
gain strength for coitus, but it is preferable that one does not go to sleep with
a full stomach Thus, combining two foolish acts and becoming accustomed to
listlessness, which again causes the heart to harden. So let that person pray or
sit and mention the name of Allah Almighty because it is nearer to
gratefulness.
It is stated in the Hadith (which is the Prohetic tradition) that one should
dilute food with Dhikr and prayer, and sleep not on food so as not to cause the
heart to harden. The lesser (choice) is to perform four prostrations (ritual prayer),
tecite one hundred praises (of Allah) or read a section of the Qur an in

The quarter of the destructives
162
compensation for each meal (forsaken).
Whenever Sufyan Ath-Thawri was satiated for one night, he passed it in
prayer, or for one day, he passed it continuously in prayer and Dhikr. One time
he would say. "compensate the black man for his toil;" another time he would
say: "compensate the donkey for its toil." However, much one desires some food
and delicious fruit, he must forsake bread and eat only fruit, so it would be for his
nourishment and not for pleasure, in order to avoid causing the self to combine a
habit with an appetite.
Sahl (al-Tastari) saw Ibn Salim with bread and dates in his hand and told him
to start with dates; if it is enough, then he should stop; otherwise, take only as
much bread as needed. Whenever one encounters delectable and coarse food, let
him give preference to the delectable, for he would not choose the coarse after
that. Were one to eat the coarse first, he would still want the delectable because
of its good taste.
A certain companion used to say to others: "do not eat what your
appetites crave; but if you do, do not seek it again. Should you desire it once
more, do not acquire a taste for it." He asked for a certain kind of bread
because he craved it. 'Abdullah, the son of 'Umar, may Allah be pleased with
both of them, said: "we get no better fruit from Iraq than bread." He looked
upon bread as fruit.
All in all, there is no need to prevent the self from craving when pursuing
what is permissible and the like under all circumstances. However, for the
servant (of Allah) who responds to his cravings it is feared that he would be told
on the Day of Resurrection: "You received your good things in the life of the
world and you took your pleasure out of them." (Al-Ahqaf 20)

To the extent that one combats the self and abandons craving (in this world),
he is permitted to enjoy it (the craving) in the abode of the Hereafter.
A person from Basra said: "my self craved bread and fish but I denied it
both. Its demands continued and got stronger, and the struggle within me not
to respond became more intense during the whole of twenty years." After he
died someone saw him in a dream and asked him: "what did the Lord do with
you?" He replied "I cannot do justice in describing the gifts and graces with
which He offered me. The first thing He did was to welcome me with fish and
bread saying: "eat, drink, and enjoy what you craved without end." (Al-

Haqqah 24)
<£ 0

j j^'ahiLL, iLi i

Ijg }

The Lord said: "Eat ye and drink ye with full satisfaction because of the
(good) that ye sent before ye on the days that are gone." What they had stored up
is the abandonment of cravings.
It is on account of this that Abu Sulaiman (Ad-Darani) said, to give up a
craving is more beneficial for the servant than to fast and pray a whole year.

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites

163

May the Lord bless us with the success that brought con tenement to
Muhammad "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him", to his household, and
to his companions.

CHAPTER FOUR
DIFFERENCES CONCERNING IMPACT OF HUNGER; ITS VIRTUES; AND
HOW IT AFFECTS DIFFERENTLY CONDITIONS IN PEOPLE
It should be known to you that the ultimate goal in all matters and manners is
moderadon, for the best choice lies in the middle path. Either extreme is frowned
upon. What we have discussed concerning the virtues of hunger stresses the need
to indulge it. Far be it. Among the secrets of the Sharia's wisdom is recognizing
that there is an extreme side to what temperament commands. In it lies
corruption, which law struggles to prevent, in a way that might cause an ignorant
person to believe that what is sought is the opposite of what nature decrees to
the extent possible. But the knowledgeable learns that what is sought is
moderadon, because if nature decrees extreme satiation, the law must then praise
the extreme form of hunger. So in a way, nature is an inducement and law a
prevention; the two struggle with each other and the result is moderation. He
who can fully curb temperament is compelled to realize that he will not attain the
end he desires. He who indulges in opposing temperament will find in the law
what points to the abuse of it.
Similarly, Allah's law exaggerates the praise of praying at night and fasting by
day. When the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" learned that
someone was fasting the entire period and remaining wakeful the whole night, he
forbade it. If you are aware of this, then know also that what is more preferable
in addition to a temperate nature is to eat without overburdening the stomach or
sensing the pain of hunger. Rather, one should ignore the stomach so that hunger
would not affect it in the first place.
The purpose of eating is to stay alive and strengthen worship. A heavy
stomach deters from worship and the pain of hunger distracts the heart and
preoccupies it (with other than worship). The aim is to eat that which would
not have an effect in order to allow one to be like the angels, who are sacredly
immune to the burden of food and the pain of hunger. Man's goal is to
emulate them. If humans cannot avoid satiation and hunger, then the farthest
position from both (extremes) is the medial, or moderation. The best example
for a human being is staying away from these opposite extremes by returning
to the moderate.
It is like unto the example of an ant tossed into the middle of a circle
surrounded by a fire cast upon the earth. The ant runs away from the heat of the
circumference that surrounds it and prevents it from exiting. But it will not stop
attempting to escape until it settles on a point in the middle. Should it perish, it
would die in the middle, for the middle position is the farthest one from the heat
that engulfs the circle.
Similarly, appetites engulfing man are like unto the circle of the ant. Angels,

The quarter of the destructives
164
on the other hand, are outside the circle. Man has no ambition to exit, but at the
same time he washes to emulate the angels in (attaining) salvation. So the closest
he can come to resemble them is in distance, and the farthest position from the
extreme is the middle. And so the middle becomes the desired end in all related
manners.
There is an example in the Hadith (which states): the best state is moderation.
And in die words of the Almighty: "Eat and drink but do not indulge." (Al-A'raf
31)
To the extent one does not experience either hunger or sadadon, worship and
meditation become easier for him. He feels lightness and exerts more energy for
work because of this lightness. This, however, can come about only after one
moderates his nature.
If at the beginning of a spiritual state the self is capricious, strongly inclined to
excessive desires, leaning towards indulgence (then) moderation would not
benefit it. The only solution is to intensify its pain by hunger, as one intensifies
the suffering of a beast of burden which has not been trained by hunger,
inflicting a beating, and other (disciplinary) measures until it moderates (its
conduct). Should it become moderate and steady and revert to a medial position,
(then) one stops tormenting it and causing it pain. It is on account of this
necessity (secret) that the sheikh orders his novice (Murid) to do what he does
not, that is to endure hunger while he does not; denies him (the novice) fruit and
(fulfillment of) appetites while he himself might not (deny it to his self) because
he (the sheikh) has already completed the training of his own self and no longer
needs to discipline it.
Because the self is naturally inclined towards gluttony, lust, capriciousness,
and circumventing acts of worship, the best way to combat this (inclination) in
most circumstance is with hunger and pain, until it is curbed. By constraining the
self, it becomes moderate and takes food moderately.
There are two types (of individuals) who have set themselves on the path to
the Hereafter without the need to have recourse to hunger: a righteous person
and a misguided fool. As concerns the righteous person, it is on account of his
pursuit of the straight path and not being in need to be led by means of hunger to
the Truth (al-Haqq, i.e. Allah). But as concerns the fool, it is because of his
having deluded himself into believing that he is righteous and is not in need of
self-training. He thinks well of it, and in so believing lies the great deception.
This type (of individual) is in the great majority, because rarely does the self
become completely trained. Often it is deceived by looking upon the righteous
and the way he tolerates his (own) self in order to forgive his own. It is like the
patient who looks upon someone who has been cured from his illness and starts
to emulate him in what he does, believing that he himself is being cured, and
Thus, perishes.
Proof of (preference for) using food sparingly at a set time and in limited

165
Book three: Curbing Two Appetites
amounts, not for its own sake but rather as a striving for the self that has deviated
from the path to Allah without having attained the rank of perfection is in the
Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" not setting a formal priority or
time frame for his meals.
'A'ishah, may Allah be pleased with her, said that the Prophet "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" used to fast so we would not say he eats not;
and he would eat so that it would not be said that he fasts. He would call upon
his wives and ask if they had anything. If they answered yes, he would eat; if they
said no, he would say: "then I shall fast." Should they offer him something, he
would say: "I intended to fast," but would eat.
He went out one day saying that he was fasting.' A'ishah told him that they
had received a gift of hays. He replied that he wanted to fast but would have it
(hays) anyway. Similarly, it was said that Sahl (al-Tastari) was asked: "how was
it for you at the beginning of your training?" He responded with examples of
exercises, one of which was to feed the self-leaves of Lote-tree once and the
grind of figs for three years. He claimed that he fed himself with one dirham
for three years. "How are you doing now?" he was asked. "I eat without limit
and at no set time," came the reply. What he meant by eating often at no set
time is not that he ate much, but rather that he did not attach much value to
what he ate.
Ma'ruf Al-Karkhi used to receive gifts of fine food, and he would eat it.
Someone said to him: "your brother Bishr does not eat like this!" His reply: "my
brother Bishr is obsessed with the fear of Allah. I, on the other hand, have
already been rewarded with the (gift of) knowledge"; moreover, "I am but a guest
in the abode of my Lord; should He offer me something to eat, I would eat (it); if
He causes me to hunger, I will wait padendy. What need have I to object or show
preference?"
Ibrahim Ibn Adham paid a brother saying, "buy us some butter, honey,
and white bread." "O Abu Ishaq, with all this money?" he asked. "Woe unto
you," he answered; "if it is available, we shall eat the food of men; if it is not,
we will endure the padence of men." One day he obtained much food, so he
invited a large group, among them AJ-Awza'i and Ath-Thawri. Ath-Thawri
said to Abu Ishaq: "are you not afraid that this might be a form of
indulgence?" His reply: "there is no indulgence in food, but rather in dress
and possessions."
He who has received gnosis from audition and learned about it, so they beat
him, broke his ribs and caused his death. He was buried in Baghdad. He preached
love as a gift of Allah, not an acquired quality; "gifts come from striving, not
from arguing," he would say.
Imitative transmission according to tradition can accept this from Ibrahim
Ibn Adham and Malik Ibn Dinar, who claimed: "no salt has entered my abode in
twenty years." And also from Sari Al-Saqati who alleged that he had a strong urge
for forty years to dip a carrot in molasses but would not do so. To such a person
this might seem contradictory and bewildering, concluding there from that one of

The quarter of the destructives
166
them is wrong. Yet he who knows the secrets of'Urn knows that this is true, but
with the additional knowledge that conditions differ (in differing situations). He
who hears about these different situations surmises that one is limited, foolish or
deceived. The victim might say: "I am not among those who have attained
knowledge (Gnostic knowledge), so I should forgive my self because it is more
obedient than that of Sari As-Saqati's or Malik Ibn Dinar's (self)." But these
(men) are immune to lustful appetites and one can follow their example. The one
who is deluded might say: "my self is not harder on me than Ma'ruf Al-Karkhi's
or Ibrahim Ibn Adham's, (each on himself), so I will emulate them and place no
limit on what I eat. If I am a guest in the abode of my Lord, why should I
object?" Yet if someone fails to respect that person's right, majesty, possession,
and self- expression in any way, he would invoke upon himself the retributions of
the Day of Judgement. If, rather, he should prefer to occupy himself with acts of
defiance (of Allah), the devil would welcome such a path from the foolish ones.
Raising the limits on food, fasting and cravings is suitable only for those
who cast their sights out from the niche of sainthood and prophecy. There is
a sign for him in abandonment and contraction which occur only after the self
completely abandons submission to pleasure and habit. He eats or abstains
(there from) by intention, thereby becoming an agent of Allah when eating
and breaking fast.
He should learn determination from ' Umar "may Allah be pleased with him"
who noticed that the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" loved
honey, ate it and did not deny it to himself. When offered a cold drink mixed
with honey, he would turn the vessel in his hand and say, "I shall drink it; its
sweetness will disappear, and only the after taste would remain. So let it not be
(charged) to my account!" Thus, did he abandon it.
A sheikh must not reveal such secrets to his Murid; rather he should limit
himself only to praising hunger. He should not even enjoin upon him to be
moderate lest he fail in this endeavor. He (the sheikh) must counsel extreme
hunger for him in order to facilitate (his achieving) moderation. Nor should he
mention to him (the Murid) that the perfect Gnostic does not need spiritual
exercise because the devil might attach himself to his heart, telling him every
hour: "you are a perfect Gnostic! What do you lack in knowledge of Allah and
perfection?" It was customary for Ibrahim Al-Khawas personally to immerse
himself in every exercise he ordered for his Murid so that the latter would not
think that his sheikh was ordering him to perform exercises which he would not
himself undertake. When the strong preoccupies himself with training and
reforming others, he must descend to the level of the weak; be like them, and
gentle in leading them to happiness. This is a great affliction for prophets and
saints.
If the limit of moderation is concealed from every one, resolve and caution
decree that it not be abandoned in every situation. With this in mind 'Umar "may
Allah be pleased with him" scolded his son 'Abdullah saying: "have you no
mother!" after entering upon him and finding him eating meat sauced in butter

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites ------------------and topped by corn. He said to him: "eat one day bread and
meat; another, bread
and milk; still another, bread and butter; then
bread and oil, bread and
condiments and one day, plain bread.”
. ™s is moderation; for to persist with meat and lustful appetite constitutes
mdulgence and excessiveness. To abandon meat completely is niggardliness. Such
is the proper position between one (extreme) and the other. Allah, however
knows best.

chapter five
IMPACT OF AILMENT OF DISSIMULATION ON SUCH AS ABANDON
LUSTFUL APPETITES AND EAT LESS
It should be known to you that he who abandons lustful appetites is
afflicted with two great evils which are greater than partaking thereof. One,
the self cannot forsake certain appetites and, though it desires them, it does
not want to admit that it desires them. So, he conceals his craving and eats in
seclusion what he would not eat in public. This is the secret (sin of) shirk.
One of the learned was asked about a certain ascetic but he would not answer.
He was asked again if he knew anything about that person's strength; to which
he replied that he ate in secret what he would not eat in public, which is a
great evil.
It is proper for the servant when afflicted with a lustful appetite pleasing to
him that he display it openly because it would be more honest and points to (his)
striving with deeds. To conceal it and display the opposite in a form of perfection
constitutes two deficiencies. Untruth accompanied by concealing constitutes two
lies and is deserving of two detestations which cannot be compensated for except
by two genuine repentances. For this reason hypocrites were hard pressed. The
Lord says: "Hypocrites are in the lowest ring of (Hell) Fire," (An-Nisa' 145)
4 jii)T {ja

jJjj$\ ^

o! ^

Because the blasphemer commits and displays his blasphemy then attempts to
conceal it, and the act of concealment constitutes another blasphemy. He seeks
thereby to unburden his heart in the eyes of fellow created beings by attempting
to remove this act of blasphemy in open while Allah, may He be glorified, is not
unaware of his motive.
Gnostics are afflicted with appetites, even by defiances, but are not (afflicted)
with dissimulation, deception and concealment. The Gnostic's perfection is in
abandoning such an appetite for the sake of Allah Almighty. Displaying a lustful
appetite should be as an act of belittling the self in the sight of created beings.
One of them used to buy something he coveted and display it in the house
wherein he observed abstinence. He did that in order to conceal his condition
and divert the attention of those who were unaware of it so as not to
compromise the mystical state he was in.
The Aim of Abstinence
What is abstinence? True abstinence lies in revealing the opposite thereof,

The quarter of the destructives
168
which is the lot of the righteous. He Thus, reconciles two opposites in one
vein, while he who is self deluded seeks to reconcile two lies. The latter is
simply doubling the burden of the self and causes it to drink from the cup of
patience twice; one time by (literally) drinking, the other by shunning it. There
is no crime in so doing. The former will be rewarded twice as much for his
patience.
This resembles the way of someone who was offered something publicly,
takes it then responds quiedy in order to break the self by humiliating it openly
and impoverishing it secretly. He who has not had such an experience must not
avoid displaying his lust and its defects, and being honest about it. He must not
be deceived by the words of the devil: "if you should display something which
someone else might emulate, then conceal it out of righteous consideration for
the other (person)." If his aim is to reform others, then it is more important for
him to reform his own self instead.
This is the aim of pure dissimulation, inspired in him by the devil, in the
guise of reforming another person. For this reason it was burdensome for him
to manifest it. It should be known to you that he who is aware of this, would
not emulate it in deed; nor would he waver in the belief that he is abandoning
lusts.
The second evil lies in one's ability to abandon lusts but rejoices in acquiring
the reputation of being immune to lusts. In resisting lesser lust, that of eating, he
succumbs to a more evil one, that of ostentation or the hidden lust. Whenever he
senses that (lust) in himself, curbing this lust is more certain than curbing the lust
of food. So let him eat, it is better for him.
Abu Sulaiman (Ad-Darani) once said: "if you are offered an appetizer after
you had abstained from it, take a small portion of it, but do not give free rein to
the self. In such a manner you rid yourself of this lustful desire, for you would be
disturbing it by not heeding its craving.
Ja'far Ibn Muhammad Al-Sadiq said: "should I come upon something
appetizing, I (first) look to my self; were it to display lust (for it), I would feed
it, which is better than denying (this) to it. Should it conceal this lust and
distance itself from it, I would punish it by abandoning it and not letting it
(self) have any part of it (lust). This is my way of punishing the self for having
this secret lust."
To sum up, he who abandons the lust of food and falls into the lust of
dissimulation is like the one who escapes the scorpion and fears the snake
because the lust of dissimulation is more harmful than that of eating. Allah is the
guardian of success.

CHAPTER SIX
SAYINGS CONCERNING LUST OF GENITAL
It should be known to you that coitus has dominated humanity for two
benefits. One of them is to allow humans to experience its pleasures and measure
thereby the pleasures of the Hereafter. Should the pleasure of coitus persist, it

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites---- ----------------------------------------- 169
becomes the strongest of all physical pleasures. Conversely fire and its pain are
the greatest pains the body can experience. By inducement and intimidation
people are led to happiness, which can be achieved only by experiencing pain and
pleasure. That which one does not experience by taste is no great endearment for
him.
The second benefit (of coitus) is perpetuating progeny and (mankind’s)
existence. This is the real benefit. But there is also an evil (side) which threatens
with destruction both faith and existence if not controlled, overcome, and
moderated. In the words of the Almighty, "Our Lord: do not burden us with that
which we cannot bear!" (Al-Baqarah 286)
^ t-Aj ill 4-3 lL>

bJUL>o

Ljj ^

By which is meant intense awareness, as related by Ibn Abbas in the words
of the Almighty: "And from the evil of Nightfall when it becomes dark." (AlFalaq 3)

By this is meant the erection of the penis. Some transmitters of Hadith
attribute this saying to the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him".
However, in interpreting it they meant: if the penis penetrates. It is also said that
if man's penis achieves erection he loses two-thirds of his mind. The Prophet
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" used to say in his invocation: "I seek
refuge in Thee from the evil of my hearing and my seeing, my heart and my
delights and my desires. The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
also said: "women are the snares of the devil. Were it not for this lust, women
would have no power over men."
It is said that Moses "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was engaged
in one of his sessions when Iblis came to him wearing a robe that was changing
colors. As he came close, he took off his robe, put it down, and approached
him (Moses) saying: "Peace be upon thee Moses." "Who are you?" asked Moses,
to which he replied: "I am Iblis." Whereupon Moses retorted: "May Allah not
grant thee peace! What brings you here," he asked. "I came to greet you on
account of your nearness to Allah and stature in His eyes," replied Iblis. Moses
asked: "What is this that I saw you wearing?" Iblis answered: "A hooded cloak
with which I abduct the hearts of men." "What does one do to appeal to you?"
asked Moses. Iblis replied: "becoming enamored of himself, magnifying his
deeds, and being oblivious to his faults. I caution you in three things: do not
seclude yourself with a woman who is not lawful to you, for never has a man
secluded himself with a woman who is not lawful to him without my becoming
his exclusive possessor, because I enamor him of her and her of him. Secondly,
never has the Lord made a commitment that I have not fulfilled. Thirdly, never
was there a pious act that I myself did not dissipate. Nor has man made such a
commitment and not fulfill it without my becoming his sole owner, Thus,
coming between him and its fulfillment." Then he departed saying: "Woe unto

The quarter of the destructives
170
me; Moses now knows what he needs to know for warning mankind."
It is related that Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab said: "whenever the Lord sends a
prophet, Ibiis despairs and seeks to destroy him through women. Nothing
frightens me more than them (women). The only homes I enter in Medina are
mine and my daughter's, in which I perform ablution for the Friday (noon)
prayers, then I depart."
Someone said: "the devil tells woman: you are half my army; you are my
arrow with which I strike and do not miss; you are the repository of my secrets;
you are my messenger in time of need." Half his army is lust and the other half is
anger. The greatest lust of all is lusting after women. It also has its exaggerations,
excessiveness, and moderations. Its excessiveness overpowering the mind to the
point that men dedicate much of their energy to the enjoyment of women and
their concubines, Thus, being distracted from pursuit of the Hereafter. It might
overpower faith (to a point that) he commits fornication.
Anyone who indulges these (lustful desires) faces two abhorrent situations:
one, partaking of that which strengthens lusts for indulging coitus, as some
people take medicine to strengthen the stomach to increase lust for food. Such (a
conduct) is like that of someone who has been accosted by ferocious lions and
menacing snakes. They might let up (on him) sometimes, but then he would
connive further to arouse and excite them (lusts) and is Thus, diverted towards
taming and appeasing them.
Verily, the lust of food and of coitus are pains which man seeks to
abandon in order to experience the pleasure of deliverance (from error). It has
been related in the (collection of) rare Hadith that the Prophet "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "I complained to Gabriel about the
weakness of coitus and he ordered me to eat Harisah." It should be known to
you that he (the Prophet, "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him") was
responsible for nine women and he had to fordfy them with contentment. If
he divorced them, he forbade others from marrying them. He sought thereby
strength not pleasure.
The second situation: such lust could lead through misguidance to excessive
love, which is extreme ignorance of the purpose of coitus. It is excessive even for
the female animal, given the limits set for animals. For, he who is in love is not
content with satisfying the lust of coitus, which is the worst of lusts and most
deserving of shame, indeed, in my opinion such lust can be curbed only in a
special place, whereas the female beast satisfies her lust wherever she might be,
and is content with it.
This (lust) can not be satisfied except with one specific person (partner),
Thus, compounding his (own) abasement and (state of) servitude by more of the
same until his mind is enslaved in the service of this lust, albeit he was created to
be obedient, not to be a slave of lust or to connive to serve its ends.
Excessive love is no more than a symptom of indulging lust It is an evil of
the heart, void and mindless. One must be careful from the very outset. He must
not cast a second glance (at a woman) nor contemplate (her) because once it

171
Book three: Curbing Two Appetites ---------------------------(lust) takes hold (of him), it is difficult (for him) to ward it off.
Such is also (the effect of) excessive love of possession, ostentation, property,
and progeny (not unlike addiction to) playing with birds, nerdeshir and chess.
These can overpower a group (of people), diminish their faith and render them
captives of the world to the point that they lose patience and are unable to refrain
(from succumbing thereto).
The example of someone who seeks to break the grip of excessive love is that
of the one who gives the beast of burden full rein as she heads towards a gate to
enter. How much easier it would have been to prevent her from doing so by
holding back the rein. The example of the one who treats it (excessive love) after
it has taken hold (of him) is that of the person who allows the beast of burden to
enter and go past the gate then grabs her by the tail and starts to drag her
backwards. How great the difference between the two oversights in terms of ease
and hardship.
So let one be cautious at the start of undertakings because in the later stages
they (undertakings) cannot be treated except with great effort; so great, indeed,
that it (the strain) might lead to the wrenching of the spirit. Indulgence of lust to
the extent that it overpowers the mind is utterly condemned. Permitting it
through helplessness or weakness to enjoy the sex partner is also condemned.
What is praiseworthy is moderation and obedience to reason and the law of the
faith (Shari'ah) in abstaining or responding (to the urge of lust). Whenever it
exceeds the bounds, then it should be curbed with hunger or marriage. The
Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Young men, beware of
fornication; he who is not capable of restraint, let him fast; for, it will diminish his
sexual desire"

CHAPTER SEVEN
MARRIAGE AND ABSTINENCE FOR NOVICE
It should be known to you that the novice at the start of his commitment (to
the Sufi program of training) must not be preoccupied with the self; nor his heart
with marriage, because it is a full commitment and it (marriage) would distract
him from (pursuit of) the path and divert him towards intimacy with a wife. He
who seeks intimacy with other than Allah is turned away from Allah. He (the
novice) should not be misled by the multiple marriages of the Prophet "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" because nothing in the world could turn his
heart away from Allah. One cannot compare angels to smiths. For such reason
Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani declared: "He who marries is bound to this world." He
also said: "I never knew a novice to marry and remain firm to his initial
commitment (i.e. spiritual exercises). "Someone once asked him: "Do you not
need the pleasures of a woman?" to which he replied: "May Allah not cause me to
enjoy one, because intimacy with her prevents intimacy with Allah." He also said:
"Whatever turns you away from Allah, be it family, possessions or offspring, it is
a curse upon you."
How can one have any person other than the Prophet "Allah's blessing and

The quarter of the destructives
172
peace be upon him" as a standard of comparison? He was steeped in the love of
Allah to such an extent that it was like being consumed by fire. Indeed, he feared
at dmes that it would penetrate his heart and demolish it. Sometimes he would
tap die thigh of'A'ishah with his hand and say to her: "Talk to me O 'A'ishah!" in
order to be distracted by her words from what so intensely preoccupied him (i.e.
the contemplation of Allah), because his heart could not bear such a heavy
burden. His very nature was to be intimate with Allah, may He be glorified. Thus,
intimacy with human beings was a (form of) restraint out of sympathy for his
body. Moreover, he did not display patience for human company. When he was
bored, he would say: "Comfort us O Bilal!" so he could revert to a state of ease.
A weak person viewing this state (in the Prophet) might be deluded, because to
assume he is Thus, enlightened is to be prevented from learning the secrets of his
(the Prophet's) deeds.
The state for the novice at the commencement of his undertaking, and until
he acquires strength through gnosis, is celibacy—if in the meanwhile he is not
overtaken by lust. His enemy is lust. He must curb it by continuous hunger and
fasting over a long period of time. If he cannot curb lust in such a manner, or by
restraining the eye, for example, even if he restrains his genitals, then it is better
that he appease this lust by marriage. Because to the extent that he cannot
restrain his eye, his mind cannot be clear and his concerns are multiplied. He
might even become afflicted with something which he cannot tolerate. Sinning by
sight is one of the greater of the lesser (category) of sins leading one closer to the
greater sin, that of the genitals, or adultery. He who cannot lower his sight is
unable to safeguard his faith.
Jesus " peace be upon him" said: "Beware of looking; it plants lust in the heart
when it is already rebellious enough." Sa'id Ibn Jubair (once) said: "Rebelliousness
came to David "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" through (his) sight, for
which reason he said to his son: "O my son Amos, walk behind a lion, even lions,
but not behind a woman!"
John " peace be upon him" was asked, "What is the beginning of sinning?"
to which he replied, "looking and desiring." Fudail, claimed that Iblis says: "It
is my old bow and arrow with which I never miss," by which he means
"looking." The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"looking is one of Iblis' poisoned arrows. He who abandons it out of fear of
Allah, Allah will grant him faith, the sweetness of which he finds in his (own)
heart." He "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" also said "Henceforth,
no temptation is to be avoided on account of its harmfulness to man than
(that of) women." He "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" also said:
"Beware of the rebelliousness of the world and the rebelliousness of women,
for the first rebelliousness by the children of Israel came from women." The
Lord said: "Say to the believing men to lower their sights." (An-Nur 30)

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites

173

The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Every human
being has his share of sinning. Both eyes sin and their sin is looking. Both hands
sin, and their sin is violence. The two legs sin, and their sin is walking. And the
mouth sins, and its sin is kissing. And the heart wishes and desires, and that is
proved or disproved by the genital."
Umm Salamah related that "the blind (man) Ibn Umm Maktum sought
permission to visit with the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
while I and Maimunah were sitdng (with him). He said (to us): veil yourselves,
and we retorted: is he not blind? He cannot see us! His answer: but can you not
see him?" Here is proof that women are not permitted to be in the presence of
the blind as used to be the custom during funerals and feasts.
Similarly, it was forbidden for the blind to seclude themselves with women,
and for women to consort with the blind and fix their sights upon them for no
purpose. It was permitted, however, for women to converse with men and to
look at them for recognized need. If he can avoid staring at women but cannot
avoid looking at boys, then it is better for him (the novice) to be married.
The evil associated with boys is greater than if his heart were to be inclined
towards women, because they can become lawful unto him (i.e. in marriage).
Fixing one's eye upon the face of a boy through lust is forbidden. Indeed,
whenever one's heart is capdvated by the image of a beardless one (boy), to the
extent that he is aware of the difference between him and the bearded one, then
it is not lawful for him to look at him. If someone should say that everyone who
can see can tell the difference between the beautiful and the ugly, there is no
disputing this because the faces of young boys are not covered. Moreover, I do
not mean by this simply discernment of the eye because he should be able to
recognize the difference as one would between a green tree and a dead tree;
between pure and polluted water; between a tree in bloom and flowery, and one
whose leaves have fallen. One inclines towards the one or the other by sight and
temperament. It is, however, an inclination void of lust. For such reason one
does not seek to touch flower and blossom, nor pure water with one's lips.
It is likely in a given situation that the eye might be attracted to a handsome
grey-haired one (older person) knowing the difference between that and an ugly
face, but (again) it is a matter of discernment not lust. One knows this through
the self-s inclination to nearness and touching. To the extent that one senses this
inclination in his heart and recognizes the difference in a handsome face, nice
plants, decorative clothes and gold-plated roofs, his gazing is motivated by lust
and it is forbidden. This is something people tend to overlook and are led
(consequendy) to perdition without their knowing it.
One of the companions (of the Prophet, "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him") said: "I fear not the wild lion as much as I fear the company of a beardless
ascetic young man." Sufyan (Ath-Thawri) said: "if a man cajoles a young man
with two of his toes out of lust, he is a Sodomite." One of the forefathers is
quoted saying: "there will be three types of Sodomites in this community (Islamic
Ummah): one that gazes, one who embraces, and one who acts." Should the evil

The quarter of the destructives
174
of looking for the beginner be great, However, much he tries he will fail to lower
his sight and control his thoughts. It is more proper (under such circumstances)
for him to curb such a lust with marriage. It is possible that the rage of a certain
self cannot be quieted by hunger.
Another (companion) said: "lust burdened me at the beginning of my
commitment (to an ascetic life) with that which I could not bear. I cried out to
Allah (to unburden me), then someone appeared to me in a dream and asked:
what is wrong with you? I complained to him and he asked me to draw near (to
him) and I did. He put his hand on my chest and I felt its coldness in my heart
and in my entire body. When I awoke, what had troubled me was gone and I
remained immune to it for a year. Then it came back to me. Once again I
increased my appeal for help (from Allah) and another person appeared in my
dream and said: do you want what bothers you to go away by (my) striking your
neck? Yes, I replied. Stretch out your neck then, he commanded, and I did. He
then unsheathed the sword of light and struck my neck with it. When I awoke in
the morning, what had been disturbing me disappeared and I remained immune
for another year. Then it came back to me (once again) even more strongly (than
before) and 1 felt as if there was someone between my side and my chest saying
to me: woe unto thee, how often (must) you ask Allah to lift from you what He
does not like to do! After that, said he (the companion), I got married. It put an
end (to my suffering) and I begot children."
However, much he (the novice) needs to marry, he must not abandon the
requirement of his intention (to become a practicing Sufi) at the beginning (of his
undertaking) and during marriage. It should start with good intention and
continue in good manner, firm conduct, and the fulfillment of required duties.
This is something we have explained in detail in the book Rules of Marriage and
it will not be repeated here in detail.
Proof of genuine intention is in his (the novice) marrying a poor religious
woman and not seeking a rich one. Someone said: "he who marries a rich one
will be inflicted by her with five demands: excessive dowry, delayed
consummation of the marriage, forestalling of service (to Allah), heavy
spending, and, should he wish to divorce her, he would not be able to do so
because he would fear the loss of her wealth. All this in contrast to the poor
woman."
Another person said: "a woman must be inferior to the man in four
things, otherwise she would despise him: age, height, possessions, and status.
But she should be superior to him in four: beauty, upbringing, religiosity, and
good manners."
A sign of true commitment is in perpetuating marriage among human beings.
A novice married one woman and continued to serve her until she felt ashamed.
She complained to her father: "this man puzzles me; I have been in his house for
years and could not go to the bathroom once without him carrying water in front
of me."
Another (novice) married a beautiful woman. When the day of consummation

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites

175

drew near, she was afflicted with smallpox and her folks grieved a great deal
fearing that he would find her ugly. But the man showed them that he was
(himself) afflicted with trachoma and had lost his sight, so she was married to
him. Sadness disappeared and she remained with him twenty years. Only after she
died did he open his eyes. They asked him: "why did you do that?" He replied: I
pretended it (to be blind) for the sake of her folk so that they would not grieve."
Their retort to that: "you are far ahead of your brethren with such a display of
manners."
One Sufi married a woman of bad character and was very patient with her.
He was asked: "why don't you divorce her?" His reply: "I am afraid someone
(else) might marry her, would not be patient with her, and would be harmed by
her!" So if a novice marries, he should act in like manner. If he is able to abstain,
it would be better for him, especially if he cannot reconcile between the virtue of
marriage and (that of) undertaking the path, and if he believes that by marriage he
would be diverted from his state.
It was related that Muhammad Ibn Sulaiman Al-Hashimi used to earn from
this world's yield 80,000 Dirhams. He wrote to the people of Basra and its
learned seeking a woman to marry. They all agreed that he should marry Rabi'ah
Al-'Adawiyyah. He wrote to her as follows: "In the name of Allah, Most
Gracious, Most Merciful. The Lord has endowed me from this world's wealth
80,000 Dirhams each day, and by the time night follows day it becomes 100,000.
I shall be like that unto you and more (i.e., increase his bequests to her). Please
answer me." She wrote back to him: "In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most
Merciful. Verily, to abstain from this world is to gain a tranquil heart and body.
Indulging it causes one to inherit worry and sadness. When you receive this letter
of mine, prepare your provision and get ready for your return (to Allah) and be a
guarantor of yourself and do not let men become your guarantor so they might
divide your inheritance. Fast for eternity and let death be your fast breaking. As
for myself, the Lord Allah, may He be glorified, has given me what he has given
you, and many times more. Not by a blink of the eye would I turn my
preoccupation away from Him."
This is proof that whatever turns one's attention away from Allah constitutes
a deficiency. Let the novice, therefore, look to his state and to his heart. If he can
be content with being unmarried, it is nearer (to what is desired); if he cannot
(concentrate) then marriage is better for him.
There are three treatments for this disease: hungering, averting sight, and
concentrating on that which preoccupies the heart. Should these three not be
profitable, then let marriage be the cure. It is on account of this that the righteous
forefathers engaged in marriage and gave their daughters in marriage. Whenever
Iblis despaired, he came to Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab as an envoy of women. When
he was eighty-four years old, he had already lost the sight of one eye, and was
about to depart for the Hereafter when he declared: "I fear nothing worse than
women."
'Abdullah Ibn Abu Wada'ah was quoted saying: "I used to visit with Sa'id Ibn

The quarter of the destructives
176
Al-Musayyab, and when I called on him after not seeing him for some days he
asked: where were you? 1 told him my wife had died and I was preoccupied with
her, whereupon he responded: why did you not let us know so we could have
borne witness for her. When I was about to rise he asked if I would like to have a
wife I replied: may Allah be merciful with you; who is going to give me in
marriage when I only possess two or three Dirhams? I will, he answered. You
would! I exclaimed. Yes, said he. So he praised the Lord and prayed for the
Prophet and had me married (sic) with two or, as he put it, three Dirhams. I rose
not knowing what to do on account of my joy. I went home and began to
consider whom I should marry and from whom I might borrow. I lit the lamp
and performed the sunset prayer. I had been fasting. My dinner was brought
forth. It consisted of bread and oil. Suddenly there was a knock at the door. I
asked who it was. Sa'id, came the answer. I thought of every one named Sa'id
except Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab because for forty years he never called on anyone,
remaining at home or going to the mosque. I went to answer (the door) and
behold it was Sa'id Ibn AI-Musayyab. I felt it was an inconvenience for him and
said to him: O Abu Muhammad, had you sent for me I would have come to you.
No, he replied, you are more deserving that I should come to you. I asked: what
do you command? You were an unmarried person, he answered, and now you are
married, for I did not wish you to spend the night alone. Behold your wife! There
she stood, behind him, the same height. He took her by the hand and put her
through the door and closed it. The woman fell down out of shame. She rose
supporting herself with the door then came towards the large bowl containing the
bread and the oil. I placed it in the shadow of the lamp so she would not se it. I
then ascended to the roof and called out to the neighbors. They came and asked
me what was the matter? I replied: woe unto me, Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab has
given me his daughter in marriage today and brought her over suddenly tonight.
Said is the one who married you? they asked in surprise. Yes, I replied. They then
approached her.
Word reached my mother and she came to me and said: face to face I tell you
it is unlawful for you to touch her for three days, until she is made ready. I waited
three days praying and then entered upon her. Lo! she was most beautiful (of
people), most respectful of the word of Allah (Qur'an), the most knowledgeable
of sunnah (traditions) of the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him",
and most aware of the husband's rights.
A month went by during which I neither visited Sa'id nor he me. Soon
thereafter, I called upon him while he was sitting in his circle (with disciples)
and greeted him. He returned the greeting but did not talk to me until those
attending his session departed. He inquired about the condition of "that
person" (sic) (meaning his daughter) and I said, fine, O Abu Muhammad, (she
is) in the manner of the righteous not the defiant. He said: if you have doubt
about anything do not resort to the stick. I went home and he sent me 20,000
Dirhams."
'Abdullah Ibn Sulaiman related that Abd Al-Malik Ibn Marwan sought the

E-

¥■

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites
hand of the daughter of Sa'id IbnAl-Musayyab in marriage for his $on
the heir apparent, but Said refused to marry her to him. 'Abd Al-Malik it is said’
did not stop looking for a way, even ordering one hundred lashes inflicted on’
Said on a cold day and having a large jug of water poured on him while he wore a
woolen cloak, and still he would not change his mind. Sa'id's hastening to give his
daughter away in marriage that night is testimony to the calamity of lust and the
need to quench its fires through marriage as ordained by the Faith (Islam). May
the Lord be pleased with him and forgive him.

CHAPTER EIGHT
VIRTUE OF ONE WHO DEFIES LUST OF GENITAL AND EYE
It should be known to you that this lust (of the genital) is the most
overpowering of lusts confronting man and the most defiant when it excites the
mind. Moreover, its aims are ugly. One is ashamed of its ends and fears its
assaults. When most people abstain from its urges either through impotence,
shame or fear, or to safeguard one's body, and not because of any reward therein,
it is the result of one coincidence prevailing over another in the self.
The benefits of chastity are inestimable, and in abstinences like these are
rewards, namely to avert sinning, for he who avoids fornication abandons sinning
regardless of how it is done. There is much repentance and compensation in
abandoning it out of fear of Allah Almighty. With determination and increased
resistance comes the facilitation of means, particularly when lust is real. Such is
the way of the righteous.
The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said in this regard: "he
who has loved and abstained, remained silent about it until he died, he is a
martyr." The Prophet “peace be upon him” also said: "the Lord will cast His
(protective) shade upon seven on the Day of Judgement in the shade of His
throne, when it is a day on which there will be no shade other than Allah s,
among them is the man who had been enticed by a beautiful woman but
responded with 'I fear Allah, the Lord of the worlds'.
The story of Joseph “peace be upon him” resisting Zulaikha with firmness
in spite of her lusting (for him) is well known. And Allah Almighty has
praised him on account of that in His noble book (Quran). He, Joseph, is a
leader (model) for everyone who succeeds in resisting the devil as concerns
this great lust.
It was said that Sulaiman Ibn Yasar was very good looking. A woman entered
upon him and he was tempted but he kept away from her. He fled his home and
left her behind. Sulaiman said: "I saw Joseph "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" in my dream that night and found myself saving to him: are you Joseph?
Yes, he replied, I am Joseph, the one who was tempted; and you are Sulaiman,
the one who was not tempted, referring to the words of the Almighty: And (with
passion) did she desire him, and he would have desired her, but that he saw the
evidence of his Lord." (Yusuf 24)

The quarter of the destructives

178
4

hj 0*

^ (*-*3

c—*_A -LiJj ^

Something still more extraordinary is related about him (Sulaiman). It is that
he left Medina to perform the pilgrimage (to Mecca) with a companion. When
they reached Al-Abwa' his companion got up, dined and went to the bazaar to
buy something while Sulaiman sat in the tent. A Bedouin woman spotted him
from die top of the mountain and came down to him. When she saw the beauty
of his face, she came closer and stood close before him (between his arms)
wearing a veil and cover. She was one of the best looking and God-fearing of
women. She removed the veil from her face and it was like a half moon (mark of
great beauty). She said to him: "give me a treat!" and he thought she meant food.
He took what was left of the meal to give her some of it, but she interjected
saying: "I don't want this. I want what a man offers his wife!" "So the devil has
arranged you for me," he replied. He placed his head between his knees and
began to weep and went on weeping. When she saw that, she put the veil back
over her face and returned to her folk.
His companion came back and nodced that his eyes were puffed from
crying until he could cry no more and his throat was parched. "What made
you weep?" he asked. "You would remind me of my youth?" said he. "No,"
but by Allah you do have a story. You do remember the period of your youth,
since (age) three or more." He kept urging him until he told him the story of
the Bedouin woman. The companion put down the meal and began to weep
profusely. Sulaiman said to him: "and what makes you weep?" to which he
replied: "I deserve more to weep than you because I fear that had I been in
your place I would not have resisted her." And so they went on weeping
together.
When Sulaiman reached Mecca and performed his Sa'i and
circumambulation of the Ka'bah, he came upon the Black Stone, sat down,
wrapped his cloak around his leg and fell asleep. He beheld (in his dream) a
comely tall man with fine outward appearance and alluring scent. "Allah have
mercy! who are you?" Asked Sulaiman. "I am Joseph," came the reply.
"Joseph, the righteous one?" He inquired further. "Yes," came the answer.
"There is something to marvel in your affair with the wife of Al- 'Aziz
(Potyphor)!" "But your encounter with the woman of Al-Abwa' is more
wondrous still!" (answered Joseph).
It is said that 'Abdullah, the son of Umar, related that he heard the Prophet
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" say: "three people before you went out
one night to a cave, and as they entered it a stone came tumbling down from the
mountain and blocked the entrance. They said (to themselves): "nothing will save
you from this stone other than to appeal to Allah Almighty with your virtuous
deeds." One of the men proclaimed: "Lord, You know that I had two elderly
fathers (sheikhs) when before (them) I had no family or money. One day I had to
seek a tree but I would not move before obtaining (for them) their evening milk.

179
Book three: Curbing Two Appetites
They were, however, asleep. Since I did not wish to have my evening milk before
they did, out of respect (for them), not for gain, I stood waiting with the cup in
my hand until dawn and boys began to mill around me. They awoke and drank
their milk. Lord, if I had done this to please Thee, then relieve us from our
predicament and remove this rock!" It moved a little, but not enough for them to
exit.
The other said: "O Lord, You know that I had a wife who was dearer to
me than any other (person). I trained her to be abstemious and she abstained
from me until she became afflicted one year (with need). She came to me and
I gave her a hundred and twenty dinars on condition that she separate herself
from me. She did. When I sought to force her, she called upon me to fear
Allah and not to break the tie except by what is right. It was very difficult for
me to stay away from her when she was the dearest person to me. So I
abandoned the gold I had given her. Lord, if I had done this to please You
then grant us relief from our predicament." The rock moved again, but (still)
they were unable to exit.
The third said: "Lord, I hired runners and gave all except one their salaries.
One man left before collecting his. I kept investing his salary until it had made
much money. He came to me after some time and said: "'Abdullah, let me have
my due!" I said to him: "all that which you see of camels, cattle, sheep and slaves
are from your salary!" He replied: "O Abdullah, you are mocking me." "No," I
said, "I am not mocking you; take it!" He rounded them up and led them away
leaving none behind. Lord, if I had done this to incur your pleasure, (then) help
us out of our predicament!" The rock moved and they exited.
Such is the virtue of those who are able to overcome lust and are fortified
against it. It is the lot (also) of someone who can overcome the lust of the eye,
because the eye is the start of sinning. To safeguard it is important. It is difficult
because it is easily overlooked. One cannot, however, exaggerate the fear it causes
because looking is the source of all evil.
Looking for the first time, the unintentional first look, one can forgive;
repeating it, however, evokes rebuke. The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "the first (transgression) is forgiven, but the second counts
against you." By it he meant looking.
Al-'Ala' Ibn Ziyad stated: "let not your sight be fixed upon the raiment of
women, because looking plants lust in the heart and rarely can one refrain
afterwards from repeating gazing at women and boys. However, much he
imagines that his intention is good, nature decrees that he cast a second glance.
He must then determine within himself that this defiance is the essence of
ignorance. For, were he to fix his gaze and like it, the self would be excited by lust
and he would not be able to reach his goal, experiencing frustration instead.
Should he be repulsed (there from), not enjoy (looking) but endures pain after he
had set out to experience pleasure, he would not necessarily be immune to
defiance and to enduring pain and frustration."
To the extent that one can refrain from gazing, he wards off many evils

The quarter of the destructives
180
from his heart. For his eye not to err and his (sexual) organ to be restrained
with firmness would require a great deal of strength and would lead to ultimate
success.
Abu Bakr Ibn 'Abdullah Al-Mazini related that a certain butcher was
enamored of a slave women belonging to one of his neighbors. Her family sent
her on an errand to another village. He followed her and enticed her away from
her self. She told him not to do so because "I am more in love with you than you
are with me, but I fear God!" "You fear Allah and I do not?" was his reply. He
returned home repentandy and suffered so much thirst that he almost died. One
of the prophets of the children of Israel (sic) appeared to him and asked what
was ailing him. "I suffer from thirst," he replied. "Come along, let us call for a
cloud to shade us until we reach the village." He asked the prophet what
righteous work he had done to earn such a favor and suggested he (the prophet)
do the invoking (of the cloud). The prophet said to him: "I will invoke and you
trust in my invocation." He invoked the Prophet (Muhammad, "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him") and (the other) trusted. A cloud (appeared and) cast its
shade upon them until both reached the village. He escorted the butcher to his
place and the cloud departed with him. The prophet (Muhammad, "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him") said to him: "you claim that you do not possess
righteous work! I was the one who invoked and you showed faith and the cloud
did protect us both! I accompanied you so you could tell me about your state, so
do it!" The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "the repentant
enjoys a state with Allah unmatched by any other (person)."
Ahmad Ibn Sa'id, the ascetic quotes his father saying: "there was with us in
Kufah a young worshipful lad who always confined himself to prayer in the
mosque. He was good looking, tall, and fine in appearance. An intelligent
beautiful young woman looked at him and became enamored of him for a long
time. One day she intercepted him on his way to the mosque and said: young
man, listen to what I say to you then do as you please! He continued on without
speaking to her. She intercepted him again as he was returning home and
repeated: please listen to what I wish to say to you! He swerved away from her
saying: this is a posture of someone who is being accused and I do not wish to be
the target of blame! She replied: may Allah be my witness, I have not taken this
position out of ignorance of your lot! Allah forbid that worshipers should
experience this from me! What has induced me to find you in such a predicament
on account of me is the knowledge that what is seen as little may be (regarded as)
much to other people. You Allah fearers are like (something) supple, bending too
much for me to shame. In short, what I wish to say to you is that my limbs are
totally preoccupied with you. Allah is the master of both, my lot and yours!" He
(Ahmad) went on (to say): "the young lad continued on his way home. He
wished to pray but his mind was unsettled. He took a pen, wrote a letter then
left the house. But the woman was still standing where he had left her. He
thrust the letter at her and returned to his home. In it (he wrote): in the name of
Allah, the compassionate, the most merciful. Know ye, O woman, that Allah,

Book three: Curbing Two Appetites

181

may He be glorified, if defied by a servant will forgive; if the defiance is
repeated, He will shield him; but if he (the servant) should disguise it in
different forms, He becomes silendy angry, to such an extent that heaven and
earth tremble, as do mountains, forests, and creatures that crawl. Who is it that
can tolerate His anger? If what you say is false, I remind you of a day when
heavens are helpless and mountains (soft as) colored wool and nadons on
bended knee before the great force of the All-powerful (God). Allah be my
witness, I have failed to reform my self; how can I reform others? If what I say
is true, I point you to a doctor of guidance who treats festering wounds and
scorching pains: He is Allah of the worlds. Seek Him out with your true state,
for I am preoccupied with someone else." In His (Allah's) words: Warn them of
the Day when hearts are stuck in throats concealing what awaits tyrants, for
whom no protectors or intercessors are heeded. He knows what have betrayed
eyes and what hearts have concealed." (Ghafir 18-19)

Whereto is the escape from such a reveladon?"
She came back a few days later and (again) intercepted his path. When he
saw her at a distance, he wanted to return to his home in order to avoid her bu
she said to him: "Young man, do not go back; there will be no more encounter,
between us after today except in the presence of Allah Almighty!" She wept
profusely and said: "ask Allah who possesses the keys to your heart to make
easy (for me) what he has made difficult for you!" She followed him to ease her
pain with a bit of wisdom which she could attribute to him and provide her
with advice that would comfort her. He said to her: "I counsel you to protect
your self from yourself, and I remind you of His saying: It is He who does take
your souls by night, and has knowledge of all that you have done by day." (AlAn'am 60)
>•>>•
JcJ kj
<s
^
She left crying more profusely than before. When she awoke to her condition,
she confined herself to her home and proceeded to pray, continuing that way
until she died of a broken heart. The young man remembered her after she died
and wept. When asked for whom he was weeping, "when you were the one who
caused her to despair of you?" he replied: "I killed her lust for me at the
beginning of her state and made of her estrangement (from me) a treasure for
myself before Allah Almighty. I am ashamed to ask back from Him the treasure I
have stored with Him."
Thus, ends the book of curbing the two appetites by virtue of His mercy and
kindness.

r iTftra !»<

It___ ■ ... .: ■---■-___......................... ... .

a; rerrravte

___ .;*££S8as®L±^._______ Jl

It is the fourth book of the third quarter of destructives
In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Praise be to Allah Who made good the creation of man, and formed him in
due proportion, and inspired him the light of faith with which He has adorned
and beautified him, and revealed to him the faculty of speech therewith He gave
him superiority over all of His creatures, and overflowed his heart with
depositories of knowledge, and sent upon him a curtain from His mercy which
He hung on it, and provided him with a tongue therewith to interpret what lies
within the heart and mind, disclose what is concealed in him, tell the truth, and
send praises and thanks for His favors on him.
I bear witness to the fact that there is none worthy of worship but Allah
Almighty, the One and Only, Who has no partner with Him, and that
Muhammad is His slave and Messenger, whom He honoured and exalted, and
sent with a Book He revealed to him, made superior his favor, and clarified his
ways ’’Peace be upon him".
Coming to the point: verily, tongue is one of the great favors bestowed by
Allah on man, and His amazing and fine things. Although it is small in size, its sin
and obedience have a great consequence. It is that the faith could be
distinguished from disbelief only through the witness of tongue, and they
represent the utmost degree of obedience and disobedience. Furthermore, there
is neither exisdng nor non-existing, neither creator nor created, neither imagined
or concrete, but that the tongue deals with it and either affirms or denies it. The
tongue expresses of all the objects of knowledge whether in truth or in falsehood.
This characteristic is lacking in all the other organs of the body. The eye, for
instance, perceives only images and colors, the ear sounds, the hand the concrete
bodies, etc.
The field of tongue is expansive and limitless, and it applies to both good and
evil. If the tongue is released with nothing to rein it or bind its freedom, Satan
then takes it to all fields of evil, and drives it to the verge of a bank that is about
to collapse, until it leads liim to perdition. Of a surety, nothing draws the people
prone on their faces into the fire of Hell other than the evil of their tongues.
None is saved from the evil of the tongue except he, who reins it with the rein of
religious law: he releases it only in what benefits him in the world and the
hereafter, and stops it from anything whose evil consequence is feared.
The knowledge of the praiseworthy and blameworthy states in which the
tongue should be released, and acting upon that accordingly are abstruse and
difficult. The tongue is the most disobedient organ upon man. There is no
trouble to be exerted to release and move it. The people have indulged in
avoiding its evils and vices, and its traps and snares. It is the strongest tool Satan
182

183

Book four: evil of tongue

utilizes to subjugate man. By virtue of Allah's help and guidance, we are going to
make a mendon of the details of the evils and vices of tongue one by one, with
their reasons and evil results, and clarify the way to avoid them and transmit the
traditions and sayings in dispraising them.
Let's first make a mention of the virtue of silence, followed by the evil of
speaking in what concerns not, then the evil of surplus talk, the evil of delving
into falsehood, the evil of argumentation, the evil of disputation, the evil of loudmouthing, the evil of using an obscene language, the evil of cursing, whether an
animal or a man, the evil of singing with poetry, the evil of joking, the evil of
ridicule, the evil of disclosing secret, the evil of the false promise, the evil of
untruth in statement and oath, the evil of backbiting, the evil of talebearing, the
evil of going about with calumnies, the evil of eulogy, the evil of heedlessness of
the subdeties of errors in the speech content, and finally the evil of the laymen's
asking about the attributes of Allah Almighty, the total then is twenty evils. We
ask Allah to help us with His favor and bounty.

CHAPTER ONE
EXPOSITION OF GREAT DANGER OF TONGUE AND VIRTUE OF SILENCE
Prophetic Traditions
It should be known to you that a great danger lies in the tongue, and we could
be saved from it only by silence. For this reason, silence is praised anc
encouraged in Shari’a. The Messenger of AJJah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "Whoever keeps silent would be saved." (This narration is
reported by At-Tirmidhi and At-Tabarani on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr).
The Messenger of AJlah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said:
"Wisdom lies in silence, and only a few among men who do it." (This narration is
reported by Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of Ibn Umar; and AlBaihaqi on the authority of Anas). It is narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn
Sufyan from his father that he said: "I said to the Messenger of Allah "AHah's
blessing and peace be upon him": "O Messenger of Allah! Tell me about Islam
with something, about which I shall ask none after you." On that he said: "Say: 'I
have faith in Allah' and then be upright." I asked: "What is piety?" he beckoned
to his tongue." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Ibn
Majah).
It is narrated on the authority of Uqbah Ibn Amir "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: "I asked the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him": "O Messenger of Allah! How should one be saved?" he said: "Keep
your tongue and stick to your house, and continue to weep in regret for your
sins. llll (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi). It is narrated on the authority
of Sahl Ibn Sa'd, "Allah be pleased with him" that he said: the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "I assure the Garden to him who
is complete to safeguard his tongue and private parts." (This narration is reported
by Al-Bukhari). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" further said: "He who safeguards himself against the evil of his belly, tongue

The quarter of the destructives
184
and private parts has indeed safeguarded himself against all kinds of evil."
It is with those three desires that most of people are ruined. This is why we
have engaged in discussing the evil of tongue after finishing from discussing the
evil of both desires, i.e. the belly and the private parts. It is reported that the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was asked about
the thing that causes most of people to enter the Garden, thereupon he said:
"Fear of Allah and good moral character." He was asked about the thing that
causes most of people to enter the fire (of Hell), thereupon he said: "Both mouth
and private parts." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah on
the authority of Abu Hurairah).
The mouth in this Hadith might refer to the evil of tongue, or to the
abdomen for it represents the passage of food to the belly. It is reported that
Mu'adh Ibn Jabal, "Allah be pleased with him" said to the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "O Messenger of Allah! Would we be
blamed for what we say?" he said: "Let your mother be bereaved of you O Ibn
Jabal! Would the people be thrown prone on their nostrils into the fire (of Hell)
but because of the evil of their tongues?" (This narration is reported by AtTirmidhi, Ibn Majah and Al-Hakim). Abdullah Ath-Thaqafi said: I said: "O
Messenger of Allah! Guide me to something therewith to protect myself." He
said: "Say: 'My Lord is Allah' and then stand straight (on the truth)." I further
asked: "O Messenger of Allah! What is that which you fear most for me?" he
beckoned to his tongue and said: "This." (This narration is reported by An-Nasa'i,
At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah).
It is narrated that Mu'adh Ibn Jabal "Allah be pleased with him" said: "O
Messenger of Allah! Which deed is the best?" the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" brought out his tongue and placed his finger on
it (in reference to the excellence of keeping one's tongue from speech). (This
narration is reported by At-Tabarani and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya). Anas Ibn Malik
"Allah be pleased with him" said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: "The faith of a servant does not stand straight until his
heart stands straight; and one's heart does not stand straight until his tongue
stands straight; and one would not enter the Garden as long as his neighbour
does not feel safe from his evil behaviour." (This narration is reported by Ibn
Abu Ad-Dunya and Al-Khara'iti).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "He, who is pleased to be safe, let him adhere to silence." (This narration is
reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya, Abu Ash-Shaikh and Al-Baihaqi on the
authority of Anas). It is narrated on the authority of Sa'id Ibn Jubair, tracing it up
to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" that he said:
"Whenever morning comes upon the son of Adam, all of his organs remind the
tongue saying: "Fear Allah concerning us, for if you stand straight, we will stand
straight consequently; and if you are crooked, we shall be crooked consequently."
^This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu Sa'id AlKhudri).

Book four: evil of tongue

185

It is narrated that once Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him"
saw Abu Bakr As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased with him" beating his tongue with his
hand. He asked him: "What are you doing O successor of the Messenger of
Allah?" he said: "This (my tongue) has caused ruin to me. The Messenger of
Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" said: "There is no part of the
body but that he complains to Allah of the tongue for its sharpness." (This
narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya, Abu Ya'li, Al-Baihaqi and AdDaraqatni). It is narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud "Allah be
pleased with him" that he was on Safa (mountain) reciting Talbiyah and saying:
"O tongue! Say good perchance you would gain felicity, and stop from saying evil
perchance you would be safe before you regret (in sigh for it)." It was said to him:
"O Abu Abd-Ar-Rahman! Is this something you devise or something you heard
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" saying?" on that
he said: "It is something I heard the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" saying." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya,
At-Tabarani and Al-Baihaqi).
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with him" that
he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" saicj
"He, who holds back his tongue (from the evil speech) Allah screens his defects
and he, who has control over his anger, Allah safeguards him against His
punishment; and he, who apologizes to Allah, Allah accept his excuse." (This
narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya). It is narrated that Mu'adh Ibn Jabal
"Allah be pleased with him" said: "O Messenger of Allah! Advise me." He said:
"Worship Allah as if you see Him, and regard yourself among the dead. But if
you like, let me guide you to what is better for you than anything else." He then
beckoned to his tongue. (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and
At-Tabarani).
It is narrated on the authority of Safwan Ibn Sulaim that he said: the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Should I not
tell you about the act of worship that is the easiest on the body? It is to keep
silence and adhere to good moral character." (This narration is reported by Ibn
Abu Ad-Dunya). Abu Hurairah said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: "He who has faith in Allah and the Last day, let him
speak good or keep silent." (This narration is reported by both Al-Bukhari and
Muslim). Al-Hassan said: It was mentioned to us that the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "May Allah bestow His mercy
upon a servant who speaks (good) thereupon he has attained felicity, or keeps
silent (from speaking evil) thereupon he has become safe." (This narration is
reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Anas).
It was said to Jesus "Peace be upon him": "Guide us to a deed that causes us
to enter the Garden." He said: "Speak not at all." They said: "We could not do
so." He said: "Then, do not speak but good." Solomon, son of David "Peace be
upon them" said: "If speech is of silver, then, (you should know that) silence is of
gold." It is narrated on the authority of Al-Bara' Ibn Azib "Allah be pleased with

The quarter of the destructives
186
him” that he said: A Bedouin came to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" and said: "Guide me to a deed that causes me to enter
Paradise." He said: "Serve the hungry with food, provide the thirsty with water,
enjoin what is good and forbid what is evil; and if you have no power to do all of
diat, then (at least) hold back your tongue (from speaking) but good." (This
narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
The Messenger of Allah "AJlah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Keep your tongue (from speech) except what is good." (This narration is
reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu Sa'id; and Ibn Hibban on the
authority of Abu Dharr). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" further said: "Verily, Allah watches over the tongue of every
speaker: so, let anyone fear Allah in what he says." The Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" also said: "When you see a believer
silent and venerable, approach him for it is inspired wisdom." (This narration
is reported by Ibn Majah on the authority of Abu Khallad but with a slight
change of wording). Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud said: the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "People are of three kinds:
winner, safe and loser. The winner is he who celebrates Allah Almighty; and
the safe is he who keeps silent; and the loser is he who engages in falsehood."
(This narration is reported by At-Tabarani and Abu Ya'li on the authority of
Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri).
The Messenger of AJlah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The
believer's tongue lies behind his heart and if he likes to say something, he would
first think about it, and then conduct it with his tongue, unlike the hypocrite,
whose tongue is ahead of his heart, and if he intends to do anything, he would
conduct it with his tongue, without thinking about it." ^This narration is reported
by Al-Khara'iti). Jesus "Peace be upon him" said: "Worship is of two parts, nine
of which lie in silence, and the remaining part lies in the flight from the people."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "He, who
speaks so much, slips much, and he who slips much commits much mistakes; and
the fire (of Hell) has more right to get the one who commits much mistakes."
(This narration is reported by Abu Na'im on the authority of Ibn Umar; and Ibn
Hibban and Al-Baihaqi, ending it with Umar).

Sayings
It is reported that Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" used to put a pebble
into his mouth to prevent himself from speaking, and he used to beckon to his
tongue and say: "It is that which caused ruin to me." Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud "Allah
be pleased with him" said: "By Allah other than Whom there is no god, nothing
is in need of a long prison more than the tongue." Tawus said: "My tongue is like
a wild animal and if I let it loose,, it would eat me." Wahb Ibn Munabbih said
relating from the wisdom of the family of David: "It is incumbent upon a rational
to have acquaintance with his time, keep his tongue, and devote himself to his
own affairs." According to Al-Hassan: "One will not understand his religion well

- 187
Book four: evil of tongue
unless he keeps his tongue."
According to Al-Awza'i: "Umar Ibn Abdul-Aziz wrote to us: "Coming to
the point: whoever remembers death so much, he will be satisfied only with the
little from this world; and whoever regards his speech a part of his deeds, he
will hardly speak but in what concerns him." A man said: "Silence combines
two virtues for man: safety in his religion and understanding from his talker."
Muhammad Ibn Wasi' said to Malik Ibn Dinar: "O Abu Yahya! Of a surety, to
keep tongue is harder upon the people than to keep Dirham and Dinar." Yunus
Ibn Ubaid said: "I have never seen a man who takes heed of his tongue but that
the good impact of it is reflected on all of his deeds." Al-Hassan said: "Some
people spoke in the presence of Mu'awiyah, and Al-Ahnaf Ibn Qais kept silent.
He said to him: "What is the matter of you O Abu Bahr that you do not
speak?" he said: "I fear Allah if I speak falsely, and I fear you if I speak with the
truth. mi
Abu Bakr Ibn Ayyash said: Once, four kings gathered together: the Indian
and Chinese kings, in addition to Caesar and Khosrau. One of them said: "I
regret for what I have said, and regret not for what I have said not." Another
said: "If I say a word, it possesses me, and I possess it not, and if I do not say a
word, I possess it and it possesses me not. The third said: "I wonder at the
speaker: if his word returns to him, it will harm him; and if it does not return t
him, it will not benefit him ." The fourth said: "I am capable of retracting froi
what I have not said more than from what I have really said." It is reported tha.
Al-Mansur Ibn Al-Mu'tazz kept in the state of silence after performing Isha'
prayer for forty years. It is also reported that Ar-Rabie Ibn Khaithamah remained
for twenty years without speaking in the worldly affairs and matters, and
whenever morning came upon him, he would place a paper, an inkpot and a pen
to record all he spoke, with the intention to reckon himself therewith in the
evening.
If you ask about the reason that lies behind the great virtue of silence, let me
say in reply to that: it should be known to you that the reason for that is the
much evil caused by tongue due to falling in mistakes, telling lies, backbiting,
talebearing, showing off, hypocrisy, obscenity, argumentation, giving prestige to
oneself, delving in false discourse, disputation, curiosity, perversion, addition,
reduction, harming people and tearing the screen of privates. Those are the vices
of tongue, and it finds them not hard nor difficult on it: on the contrary, the heart
feels their pleasure and sweetness, and the disposition and Satan lie behind them.
Such as delves into them could hardly withhold his tongue in order to unleash it
in what he likes and hold it back from what he likes not. This is abstruse as will
be discussed later in detail. In short, danger lies in delving, whereas safety lies in
silence. This is why its virtue is great. Add to that what it brings about in terms of
unifying concern, reverence, continuous respectability, and devotion to
meditation and celebration (of Allah Almighty) and worship, and safety from the
evil consequences of harmful words in this world and reckoning about it in the
hereafter. Allah Almighty says in this respect: "Man does not utter any word

The quarter of the destructives
188
except that with him is an observer prepared [to record]." (Qaf 18)
4^
Cr?
^
There is a proof to support the virtue of adherence to silence. It is a wellknown fact that speech is of four kinds: what is entirely harmful, what is entirely
beneficial, what is partly harmful and pardy beneficial, and what is neither
harmful nor beneficial. One should keep silence from what is entirely harmful
and what is pardy harmful and pardy beneficial, in case the benefit thereof is less
than the harm. But to engage in what is neither harmful nor beneficial is out of
useless gossip in which one wastes his time; and this is a clear loss. Thus, there
remains only the fourth kind, which is entirely beneficial. In this way, threefourths the speech lapse and only a quarter remains working; and even danger lies
in this quarter, for it is vulnerable to be mixed with what is sinful caused by the
subdeties of showing off, ostentation, backbiting, giving prestige to oneself, and
useless talk.
One might not make sense to such mixing, which leads him to be at risk.
Whoever knows well the subdeties of the evils of tongue, should come to learn
that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was
decisive in his statement: "Whoever keeps silent has been saved (from harm)."
That is because the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
was endowed with the gift of wisdom and the shortest phrases expressive of the
longest and most comprehensive meanings (according to the narration of Muslim
on the authority of Abu Hurairah). None but the private scholars could perceive
the deep meanings that underlie his words, a fact that will be shown from the
presentation of the different evils of tongue, and how it is difficult to avoid them.
Now, let us count the different evils of tongue, beginning with the easiest and
the lightest of them, moving up to the heavier, and defer the discussion of
backbiting, talebearing and telling lies, i.e. the most difficult and the heaviest of
them. The evils of tongue are twenty and they go as follow.

CHAPTER TWO: DIFFERENT EVILS OF TONGUE
The First Evil: Speaking In What Concerns You Not
It should be known to you that the best state you might be in is to keep your
tongue from all evils we have already mentioned, such as backbiting and
talebearing, telling lies, argumentation, disputation, etc, and rather to speak in
what is permissible from which no harm befalls you. But if you speak in what you
need not to speak in, you shall waste your time, and be reckoned for the evil deed
of your tongue, for you will replace what is bad with what is good. That's because
if you divert your attention during the time you spend in that kind of speech to
meditation and reflection, the gifts of Allah's mercy might be opened to you,
causing a great benefit to you. Moreover, if you sing the glorifications, praises,
magnifications and oneness of Allah Almighty, it will be good for you.
How many a word for which a palace is constructed in the Garden! If one
has the power to get one of the treasures and instead he gets what harms and

189
Book four: evil of tongue
not benefits him, he will be a clear loser. The is an example for leaving the
celebration of the Praises of Allah Almighty, and rather engaging in what is
permissible, but which concerns one not. Although he commits no sin, he has
lost the great profit of skipping the celebration of Allah Almighty. The true
believer is he, whose silence is meditation, vision a lesson to be learnt, and
speech a celebration (of Allah Almighty). It is reported on the authority of
Muhammad Ibn Zakariyya from Ibn A'ishah from his father that he said:
Once, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
addressed the people saying: "Indeed, Allah commanded me to have my
speech a celebration, my silence a meditation, and my vision a lesson to be
learnt."
To be sure, time is the main capital of a servant; and if he spends it in what
concerns him not, and does not use in saving a reward to benefit him in the
hereafter, he will lose his capital. For this reason, It is narrated on the authority of
Abu Hurairah that he said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him” said: “It is out of one's good (faith in) Islam to leave that which
concerns him not.” (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah).
More grievous, it is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: On the day of (the batde of) Uhud, a man from among us fell
as a martyr, and a rock was seen to be tied to his belly out of severe hunger. His
mother wiped dust off his face and said: "Blessed be you O my son with the
Garden!" on that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "What does make you know? Perhaps, he used to speak in what
concerned him not, and withhold what benefitted him." (This narration is
reported by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
According to another narration, it is reported that once, the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" missed Ka'b "Allah be pleased
with him", and when he asked about him he was told that he was sick. He went
out walking and when he entered upon him he said: "Receive the glad tidings O
Ka'b!" his mother said: "Blessed be you with the Garden O Ka'b!" the Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" asked: "Who is that woman
that decides a matter without (knowing the decree of) Allah Almighty?" Ka'b
said: "She is my mother O Messenger of Allah." On that he said: "What does
make you know Umm Ka'b? perhaps Ka'b has said what concerned him not, and
withheld what benefitted him." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya
on the authority of Ka'b Ibn Ujrah). The meaning is that the Garden is prepared
for him who will not be reckoned, and whoever speaks in what concerns him not
will be reckoned. If his speech is impermissible, the Garden will not be prepared
for him since he will be called to account, and calling to account is a kind of
punishment.
It is narrated on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Ka'b that he said: the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The first one
to enter from that gate is a man from the inhabitants of the Garden." Then,
Abdullah Ibn Salam "Allah be pleased with him" entered, to whom the

The quarter of the destructives
190
companions of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
stood and told of what he had said. They further asked him: "Tell us about the
most trustworthy deed for which you expect reward." On that he said: "I am a
weak, but the most trustworthy deed for which I expect (reward from) Allah
Almighty is the purity of my breast and leaving what concerns me not." (This
narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya). Abu Dharr "Allah be pleased with
him" said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said
to me: "Should I not guide you to a deed which, though being light on the body,
is heavy in the scale of deeds?" I said: "Yes O Messenger of Allah." He said: "It is
to keep silent, adhere to good moral character, and leave what concerns you not."
(This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
Mujahid said: I heard Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with him" having said:
"Five qualities are dearer to me than anything else: do not speak in what concerns
you not, for it is useless, and more convenient to leads you to sin; and do not
speak in what concerns you unless you find it proper, for how many a man who
speaks improperly in what concerns him and he is put to difficulty; and do not
argue with a forbearing or a weak-minded, for the forbearing might desert you,
and the weak-minded might harm you; and remember your absent brother with
the same as you like him to remember you when you are absent, and excuse him
from the same as you like him to excuse you from, and treat your brother with
the same as you like him to treat you with; and do die deeds of a man who knows
that he is given reward for kindness and dealt with for respect."
It was said to Luqman the Wise: "What is your wisdom?" he said: "I never ask
about that which I know, nor do I work hard to know what concerns me not."
Muwarriq Al-Ajli said: "I have been seeking after a matter for twenty years, and I
failed to get it, but even I shall never leave seeking after it." He was asked about
it, and he said: "To keep silent from what concerns me not." Umar "Allah be
pleased with him" said: "Do not ask about what concerns you not, keep yourself
away from your enemy, and beware of your friend among the people except the
trustworthy, and there is no trustworthy except he who fears Allah Almighty. Do
not accompany the wicked lest you would learn from his wickedness, nor disclose
to him your secret, and seek the advice of such of people as fear Allah Almighty."
The definition of speaking in what concerns you not is to speak with such
words as if you keep silent you will not be sinful, nor will you receive harm in
your soul or property. It is like the case in which you sit with people and talk to
them about your journeys and tell them about your scenes and experiences there,
as the mountains and rivers you have seen, the kinds of food and clothes you
have enjoyed, and the sheikhs and incidents you have wondered at. If you keep
silent from those things, you will not be sinful, nor will you receive harm at any
rate. If you do your best in order to make no change by addition or reduction,
nor justification of yourself, nor pride of seeing the great events, nor accusation
of anyone, nor criticism of anything created by Allah Almighty, you will have
wasted your time.
How should you be safe from all evils we have already mentioned? It is like

Book four: evil of tongue

191

your asking anyone about what concerns you not: by asking him, and forcing him
to reply to you, you will have wasted the time of both you and him. This is clear
in things asking about which is evil. You may ask somebody about his worship
saying: "Are you fasting?" If he answers in the affirmative, he will demonstrate
his worship and a suspicion of showing off shall touch his act of worship, and
even if there is no suspicion of showing off, his act of worship will not become
secret, given that the worship in secret is many degrees superior than the worship
in public. If he replies in the negative, he will be a liar. If he keeps silent, he will
seem to scorn you, and you will be bothered by him. If he uses trickery to escape
from reply, he will be forced to exert effort to do so. In this way, by asking him,
you will have exposed him to showing off, telling lies, scorning or even exerting
effort to escape from the answer.
The same is true of asking him about the rest of his acts of worship, and even
about his sins, and about all that he conceals and feels shy to demonstrate.,
likewise, your asking about what the others say or think is included here, like your
asking somebody, for instance: "What do you say or think about that matter?"
Similarly, you may see a man on the way and ask him: "Where are you going?"
Perhaps, there is a particular impediment to prevent him from mentioning it, and
if he mentions it, he will receive harm and feel shy, and if he does not prove true
he will be a liar, and you will be the one who caused him to do so. In other case*
you may ask about what concerns you not, and the asked may feel shy to tell yoi
that he does not know, which causes him to give you answer with no knowledge.
I do not mean by speaking in what concerns not those things, in which there
is harm or sin to be received. But a typical example of what concerns not is the
narration that once Luqman the Wise entered upon David "Peace be upon him"
who was making an armor, which he had not seen before that day. He wondered,
and liked to ask him about it, but his wisdom prevented him and Thus, he kept
silent and did not ask him. When David finished from making it he stood and
wore it and said: "How good this armor is for war!" on that Luqman said:
"Silence is wisdom, and people rarely do it." That is because he learnt what he
liked to learn without asking. It is reported that he frequented him for a year with
the intention to know that without asking. If this kind of asking does not lead to
harm, removing screen, causing one to be seen of men or to tell a lie, it, at least,
belongs to those things which concern not, and leaving it is out of good (faith in)
Islam. This is its definition.
Its causes lie in eagerness to know that in which there is no need to know,
affability with somebody through speech by way of having affection for him, and
consuming time in useless tales and stories. The remedy lies in his learning that
death is ahead of him, that he is responsible for every word he utters, that his
breaths represent his main capital in this present world, that his tongue is a net
therewith to catch the beautiful women with big lustrious eyes (in the Garden).
To neglect and waste that is a big loss. This is its remedy in terms of learning. In
relation to action, he has to be in seclusion, or to place a pebble in his mouth,
therewith he forces himself to keep silent from some of what concerns him, in

The quarter of the destructives
192
order that the tongue would get accustomed to leave what concerns it not.
However, it is very difficult for such as does not live in seclusion to adjust his
tongue in that way.
The Second Evil: Surplus Talk
It is blameworthy. It includes to speak with what concerns not, and make
much of what concerns more than what is needed. One might talk about what
concerns him with brief words, as well as he might amplify, state and repeat it. If
it is possible to convey his purpose with a single word, and he expresses it with
two, then, his speech would be surplus and beyond the need. This is why it is
blameworthy regardless of being not sinful or harmful. According to Ata' Ibn
Abu Rabah: "Those who were before you disliked surplus talk, and regarded
surplus any words other than the Book of Allah Almighty, the sunnah of the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" enjoining good and
forbidding evil, or one's necessary need: "When the two receivers receive, seated
on the right and on the left. Man does not utter any word except that with him is
an observer prepared [to record]." (Qaf 17-18)
i

4-cLS

Jjs & iiL: £ @) S-ji julrto*j

cf 9^

Does anyone of you feel shy, when his scroll is spread out, to find that most
of what is dictated in it does not belong to the matter of his world or religion?
One of the Companions said: "A man might ask me about something, and I have
longing to give reply to him just as a thirsty has longing for cold water, but even I
leave it for fear it might possibly be surplus." According to Mutarrif: "Let the
Majesty of Allah Almighty be exalted in your hearts and souls, so that you do not
mention Him like the statement of anyone of you to the dog or donkey: "O
Allah! Disgrace it."
It should be known to you that the surplus speech is limidess; and the most
important is limited to the Book of Allah Almighty Who says: "No good is there
in much of their private conversation, except for those who enjoin charity or that
which is right or conciliation between people. And whoever does that seeking
means to the approval of Allah - then We are going to give him a great reward."
(An-Nisa 114)

^

£ \j>-1

4—$4JJI

(. lilj I

The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Blessed be who withholds the surplus of his talk and spends the surplus of his
property." (This narration is reported by Al-Baghawi and Al-Baihaqi). Consider
how the people reversed it by withholding the surplus of property and rather
unleashed the surplus of speech. It is narrated on the authority of Mutarrif Ibn
Abdullah from his father "Allah be pleased with him" that he said: I came to
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" among
members of Banu Amir, and they said: "You are (in the position of) our father

193
Book four: evil of tongue
and chief, and you are the best of us all, etc. on that he said: "Say what you like
to say (in his praise), on condition that Satan should not make it alluring to
you." (This narration is reported by Abu Dawud and An-Nasa'i).It refers to the
fact that if one prolongs his speech in praising even with truth, there is fear that
Satan might make alluring to him to plunge into the dispensable surplus. Ibn
Mas'ud "Allah be pleased with him" said: "I warn you of the surplus speech. It
suffices a Muslim of words only what enables him to convey his need."
According to Mujahid: "Words are written even when a man asks his child to
keep silent by saying to him: "I shall buy such and such a thing for you", with
the result that he is written as a liar." According to Al-Hassan (Allah Almighty
says): "O son of Adam! I have spread out a scroll for you and it is entrusted to
two angels to record your deeds. So, do as you like, be it more or less." It is
reported that Solomon "Peace be upon him" sent one of his demons and sent
after him some to watch him and tell him what he would say. They told him
that when he passed by the market he raised his head to the sky and then cast a
glance at the people and nodded. Solomon asked him about that and he said: "I
wonder at the angels who stand by the heads of people and how fast they
record what they do, and at those below them how fast they dictate them."
According to Ibrahim At-Taimi: "If a faithful believer intends to speak, he
would consider: if it concerns him, he would speak, otherwise, he would keep
silent, unlike the wicked, whose tongue is ahead of his mind." According to A1
Hassan: "He, who talks so much, tells much lies, and he who has much property
commits much sins, and he, who has bad manners gives himself to punishment."
It is narrated on the authority of Amr Ibn Dinar that he said: A man talked so
much in the presence of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" thereupon the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" asked him: "How many veils do you have to conceal your tongue?" he
said: "My lips and teeth." On that he said: "Would you not have what repel your
words?" (This narradon is reported on the authority of Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
According to another version, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" said so about a man who was involved in praising him
exaggeradngly, thereupon he said: "Man was given no worse than surplus talk."
Umar Ibn Abd AJ-Aziz "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "Nothing
prevents me from speaking with most of words but my fear of seeming proud."
According to a wise man: "If a man is in a gathering and speech is made alluring
to him, let him keep silent; and if silence is made alluring to him, let him speak."
According to Yazid Ibn Abu Habib: "Among what tempts a learned is to admire
speaking more than listening. However, if he finds such as suffices him (the
burden of speaking), let him then know that safety lies in listening whereas
adornment, addition and reduction lie in speaking." According to Ibn Umar
"Allah be pleased with them": "Tongue has the most right to be purified." Once
Abu Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased with him" saw a woman of offensive tongue,
thereupon he said: "Had she been mute, it would have been better for her."
According to Ibrahim: "Two things ruin man: surplus talk and surplus property."

194

The quarter of the destructives

This is the criticism of surplus talk. As regards the motive that causes it, and
its remedy, they have already been mentioned in the discussion of speaking in
what concerns not.
The Third Evil: Engaging In Falsehood
It is to talk about sins like relating about the states of women, gatherings of
wine, stations of mischief, comfortable life of the rich and wealthy, tyranny of the
oppressive tyrants and kings, their blameworthy decrees and hateful states. It is
unlawful to engage in such discourses. It differs from speaking in what concerns
not is to leave the preferable, but there is no prohibition in it. But even, such as
talks much about what concerns him not is not safe from engaging in falsehood.
Most people gather together to entertain themselves with talk, and their speech
more often leads them to make fun of the honours of people, and engage in
falsehood. The kinds of falsehood are limidess. For this reason, there is no way
of salvation from it but to restrict one's speech to what concerns him of the
affairs of his religion and world.
In this respect, there are words which ruin their sayer even though he regards
them with slightness. It is narrated on the authority of Alqamah Ibn Waqqas that
an honourable man came upon him, to whom he said: You are of such kinship as
gives you a right (upon me to advise you): I’ve seen you visiting those chiefs and
speak in their presence with what Allah wills you to speak. I heard Bilal Ibn AlHarith Al-Muzani, the companion of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him”, having said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” said: “Anyone of you might say a statement on account
of which Allah’s Good Pleasure is acquired, even though he does not think how
far it would reach, by which Allah Almighty will keep writing His Good Pleasure
for him until the Day of Judgement; and anyone of you might say a statement,
which draws Allah’s Anger upon him, even though he does not think how far it
would reach, by which Allah Almighty will keep writing His Anger for him until
the Day he will meet Him.” Alqamah further said to him: So, consider, mercy be
upon you, what you say, and with which you speak. Perhaps, there are statements
which I refrained from saying on account of what I heard from Bilal Ibn AlHarith. (This narration is reported by Ibn Majah and At-Tirmidhi).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "A
man might utter a word with the intention to bring his sitters to laughter, because
of its (evil) he falls down in the fire (of Hell) farther than stars (from the earth)."
(This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Abu
Hurairah). Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him" said: "A man might utter a
word carelessly, because of its (goodness) Allah raises him up to the highest
portion of the Garden." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "Such of people as shall have the greatest sins on the Day of
Judgement are those who engage most in falsehood." (This narration is reported
by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Qatadah).
In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty says: "What led you into Hell-Fire?"

195
Book four: evil of tongue
They will say, "We were not of those who prayed; Nor were we of those who
fed the indigent; But we used to talk vanides with vain talkers." (AlMuddaththir 42-45)
h^=»3 ((Jj)

jJj (cj))

IjT ^ j* si-b jj fyilS (^

He Almighty further says: "Already has He sent you word in the Book, that
when you hear the Signs of Allah held in defiance and ridicule, you are not to sit
with them unless they turn to a different theme: if you did, you would be like
them. For Allah will collect the Hypocrites and those who defy Faith, all in Hell."
(An-Nisa'140)
lj>-

'\! O'4—Jj ^4=^slc-

i (0)^>- j

'(j3la±!S\ y £

oj ^4 '\!

uij ^

^4^ ci

According to Salman "Allah be pleased with him": "Those among the people
who shall have the greatest number of sins on the Day of Judgement are those
who talk most in disobedience of Allah Almighty." It is reported that Ibn Sirin
said: A man belonging to the Ansar passed by one of their gatherings and say to
the people: "Perform abludon, for some of what you say is worse than Hadath
(breaking abludon through urinating, defecating, passing wind or making
sound)."
This is the significance of engaging in falsehood, and it lies behind backbiting,
talebearing, obscenity, which will be discussed later. It includes engagement in
forbidden things already exists without no religious need. It also implies to talk
about religious innovations and invalid opinions, and the fighting that broke
between the companions of the Prophet in a way that leads to slandering some of
them. All of that belongs to falsehood, and engagement in it is to engage in
falsehood. We ask Allah Almighty to help us with His favor and bounty.

The Fourth Evil: Disputation And Argumentation
It is clearly forbidden. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "Do not dispute with your brother, nor make fun of him, nor
give him a promise and then break it." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi
on the authority of Ibn Abbas). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" further said: "Leave disputation, for its wisdom is beyond
reason, and its temptation is not safe." (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani
on the authority of Abu Ad-Darda', Abu Umamah, Anas and Wathilah Ibn AlAsqa*). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Fie who leaves argumentation although he is on the right, a house in the highest
portion of the Garden will be built for him; and he who leaves disputation and he
is on the false, a house in the middle portion of the Garden will be built for him."
fThis narration is reported by Abu Dawud on the authority of Abu Umamah).
It is narrated on the authority of Umm Salamah "Allah be pleased with her"
that she said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"

The quarter of the destructives
196
said: "The first thing my Lord confided to me and forbade me to do after
worshipping idols and drinking wine is the quarrel between men." (This narration
is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya, At-Tabarani and Al-Baihaqi). The Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "No people went
astray after Allah Almighty had guided them except when they were given to
argumentation." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of
Abu Umamah). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said too: "No servant has his faith complete in truth unless he leaves
argumentation even though he is on the right." (This narration is reported by Ibn
Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Six
characteristics cause one to attain the real nature of faith if they exist in him: to
observe fast in summer, to strike the enemies of Allah with the sword, to hasten
to offer prayer on the day of hard atmosphere, to keep patient over afflictions, to
perform ablution perfectly at times one dislikes (to have water touch his body
because of ailment or cold atmosphere), and to leave disputation even though he
is true." (This narration is reported by Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority
of Abu Malik Al-Ash'ari). Az-Zubair "Allah be pleased with him" said to his son:
"Argue not the people with the Qur'an, for you could not do it, but you may do
with the Prophetic sunnah." Umar Ibn Abd Al-Aziz "may Allah have mercy upon
him" said: "He, who exposes his religion to disputes is forced to moves more
often from one place to another."
Muslim Ibn Yasar said: "Beware of disputation for it is the time at which the
learned is exposed to ignorance, and Satan seeks after his slip." It is said that no
people went astray after they had been guided aright except by argumentation.
Malik Ibn Anas "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "Argumentation never
belongs to religion." He further said: "Disputation hardens hearts and develops
grudges." Luqman said to his son: "O my son! Argue not the learned lest they
would hate you." Bilal Ibn Sa'd said: "If you see that a man is quarrelsome,
argumentative and swollen with pride, know that his loss has been complete."
Sufyan said: "If I disagree with my brother about a pomegranate which he
describes as sweet and I as sore, I should be taken and brought before the
ruler." He further said: "If you clarify the atmosphere with such of people as
you like and then make him angry through disputation with him, then, he will
throw you with a calamity that hinders you from living." According to Ibn Abu
Laila: "I never dispute with my companion lest I would either give lie to him or
cause him to become angry." According to Abu Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased
with him": "It suffices you for sin to remain argumentative."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "A
two-rak'ah prayer is necessary to make expiation for every quarrel." (This
narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu Umamah). Umar
"Allah be pleased with him" said: "Do not learn knowledge for three things, and
do not leave it for other three things: do not learn it therewith to dispute nor to
vie in glory because of it, nor to be seen of men by it. Furthermore, do not

197
Book four: evil of tongue
leave learning out of shyness of seeking after it, nor out of abstinence in it, nor
out of pleasure with ignorance of it." Jesus "Peace be upon him" said: "He, who
tells much lies causes his majesty to vanish, and he who quarrels men causes his
gallantry to fall down, and he who has much concerns causes his body to be
weak, and he who has bad manners throws himself into punishment." Maimun
Ibn Muhran was asked: "Why do you not desert your brother?" he said:
"Because I neither dispute with him nor quarrel him." However, the narrations
about criticizing argumentation and disputation are beyond calculation.
The definition of disputation is to make objection to the other's speech
through showing fault in it either in word or in meaning or in the intention of the
speaker. If you leave such objection you shall have abandoned disputation. In
case you listen to anything: if it is true, then give belief to it, and if it is false or
untrue, but it does not pertain to the affairs of religion, then, keep silent of it. To
slander the other's speech is to criticize either the words by showing such of
defects and mistakes as they contain in terms of grammar, usage of language, and
syntax. Regardless of the cause that lies behind such defect, there is no point to
demonstrate it. It also might pertain to the meaning like saying: "The point is not
as you say, and you have committed mistake in it from such and such
viewpoints." As regards the mistake of intention, it is like your saying: "Although
this statement is true, it is not truth which you intend thereby." If it occurs in a
scientific matter, it is called argument, and it is also blameworthy. It is binding
here to keep silent or at least ask for the purpose of getting benefit and not for
rejection or refutation.
Argumentation is to silence the other, incapacitate and discredit him, through
slandering his speech, and ascribing it to shortage and ignorance. Its portent is
that you notify him to the truth from another perspective that is hateful in the
sight of such as involved in the argumentation, and show him his mistake in a
way that enables you to demonstrate your superiority to him. There is no
salvation from that but to keep silent from all that which, if one stops from
stating it, he will not become sinful.
The motive that lies behind that is to attain supremacy through demonstrating
knowledge and superiority, and to attack others through demonstrating their
shortcomings. Those are internal desires. The appetence of demonstrating
superiority is to justify and give prestige to oneself, resulting from the claim for
loftiness and majesty, and both are Divine and not human attributes. As for
discrediting others, it ensues from the brutal nature, which is to tear, break and
harm the others. Those characteristics are blameworthy and destructive without
doubt. They get their power from both argumentation and disputation. Thus,
whoever is engaged in argumentation and disputation regularly strengthens those
destructive characteristics. This is not only undesirable, but it is sinful as long as it
leads to harming the other. The argumentation could hardly be free from causing
harm, irritating the anger and forcing the adversary to support his words as much
as he could, no matter in truth or falsehood it might be, in attempt to disgrace his
opponent, and of a surety, the result is that both adversaries fall in dispute just in
the same way as fight breaks up between two dogs.

198

The quarter of the destructives

Its treatment is to break the arrogance which motivates him to
demonstrate his superiority, and the brutality which motivates him to discredit
the other; and this matter will be discussed later in more detail in the Book of
Criticizing Arrogance and Haughtiness, and the Book of Criticizing Anger. To
be sure, the remedy of each ailment is to remove its cause. The cause of both
argumentation and disputation is the same as we have already mentioned. To
be engage in it regularly turns it to be a custom and integral to disposition,
and so on until it establishes itself deep in the soul and becomes difficult to
leave it. It is narrated that Abu Hanifah said to Dawud At-Ta'i: "Why have
you preferred to live in seclusion?" he said: "In order to mortify myself to
leave argumentation." He said to him: "Attend the gatherings of knowledge,
and listen to what is said, but do not speak." He did so and nothing was
harder on him than this.
However, this is true for if one listens to a mistake from another and he has
the power to disclose it, it is difficult on him not to do so. For this reason, The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "He who
leaves argumentation although he is on the right, a house in the highest portion
of the Garden will be built for him." This is due to its difficulty on the souL This
occurs more often in the matters that are subject to different religious beliefs and
juristic schools. Disputation is integral to disposition, and if one thinks he will
receive a reward for what he does, he will become keener on it, and both
disposition and religious law will go hand in hand to support it; and of a surety,
this is an evident mistake. Man has to withhold his tongue from the Muslims and
if he sees a religious innovator, he should be kind in his counsel to him: he
should advise him in privacy and not in public, and not by way of argumentation,
for argumentation gives him the impression that it is only a trick for
dissemblance, since argumentation is an art to be mastered by the debaters who
belong to his own juristic school if they like; which gives continuance to the
religious innovation.
But if one is sure that advice will be of no use, he should then engage in
himself and leave him. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "Allah's mere)' be upon him who withholds his tongue from
Muslims except in the best manner he could." (This narration is reported by Ibn
Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Hisham Ibn Urwah; and Abu Mansur AdDailami on the authority of A'ishah). Hisham Ibn Urwah said: the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" used to repeat this statement of
him seven times (per day). If one gets accustomed to argumentation for a long
time, because of which the people have praised him and he has attained power
and acceptability among the people, those destructives shall become strong
within himself in a way that it will become difficult on him to get rid of them,
since the authority of anger, arrogance, haughtiness, showing off, love for
majesty, and power of being superior to others will have gathered on him. As it is
difficult to strive against anyone of those alone, what should it be if one is to
strive against all at once?

199

Book four: evil of tongue

The Fifth Evil: Dispute
It is also blameworthy. It stands behind argumentation and disputation.
Disputation is to slander the other's speech through showing fault in it for no
purpose other than discrediting him and showing one's superiority and
intelligence. Argumentation is to demonstrate opinions and state them clearly.
Dispute is to be contendously quarrelsome in speech with the intention to take
back one's due in full, either in the beginning or by objecting to previous speech.
Disputation is to object to previous speech. A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her"
said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The
most hateful of men in the Sight of Allah Almighty is the contentious
quarrelsome." (This narration is reported by Al-Bukhari).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "He who argues in a dispute with no knowledge remains in the wrath of
Allah until he retracts." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya). A
man said: "Beware of dispute for it blights religion." It is said that no pious ever
falls in dispute (with anyone) over religion." Ibn Qutaibah said: Once, Bishr Ibn
Abdullah Ibn Abu Bakrah came upon me and said: "Why are you sitting here?" I
said: "A litigation I have against one of my paternal cousins." On that he said:
"Verily, I am under obligation to your father, and I like to reward you for his
favor. By Allah, I have never seen anything which removes religion, decreases
gallantry, wastes pleasure and diverts the heart than dispute." I stood up to turn
away, thereupon my foe said to me: "What is the matter with you?" I said: "I shall
not dispute with you." He said: "Then, you have come to know that the right is
with me." I said: "No, but I like to refrain from that." He said: "I do not demand
from you anything that is your right."
You may say: "If one has his right with another, he has to bring a lawsuit
against him in order to take it back from his wrongdoer: how then should be his
ruling? And how should litigation in this case be criticized?" In reply to that, let's
say that such criticism includes him who disputes with falsehood and him who
settles disputes without knowledge, like the judge's agent who setdes the dispute
before being certain of the party with which the right is. It also includes him who
demands back his right but not fairly and reasonably in so much as querulously,
for the purpose of harming and investing himself with authority over his
opponent. It also implies him who mixes with litigation dispute words that are
harmful although they are needless to support his right and claim. It includes him
who makes his litigation over a small amount of money which he regards with
slightness, and some of people states it clearly saying: "My intention is only to
break his nose and if I take back that money from him, perhaps I may throw it
into a well carelessly." The real intention of such is dispute, dissention and
quarrel. It is blameworthy.
But the wronged who supports his claim by way of religious law, without
contention, quarrel, obstinacy, or harm, his act is not unlawful, although it is

The quarter of the destructives
200
preferable for him to leave it as much as he finds a way to do so for it is difficult
to adjust tongue so as not to go beyond the limit of lidgadon; and dispute always
causes resentment, provokes anger, and once anger is provoked, the object of
dispute itself will be forgotten, and only resentment and hatred remain prevalent
to the extent that each rejoices at the misfortune of his foe, grieves because of his
good luck, and unleashes his tongue to disgrace him. So, whoever takes the first
move towards dispute has indeed exposed himself to the forbidden things, the
least of which is to distract his mind so that in his prayer he is occupied by the
way he has to argue his foe, and so on. Dissention then is the origin of every kind
of evil; and the same is true of disputation and argumentation. Its gate should not
be opened unless it is necessary, and at necessity, one should keep his tongue and
heart from the evil consequences of such dissention. This, therefore, is very
difficult.
So, one who restricts himself only to what is necessary his dispute will not be
blameworthy, although it is preferable for him to leave it in case he could
dispense with that over which he disputes. But if he does not leave it he will not
be sinful. It is true that in the least, in dissention, argumentation and disputation,
he loses the good speech, and their related reward. The least degree of good
speech is to show approval. There is nothing in speech harsher than slandering
and rejecting the words of the other, either by giving lie to him or by ascribing
him to ignorance. Whoever argues, disputes or quarrels with another, he indeed
has belied him, or rendered him ignorant, which causes him to lose the good
speech.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "It is
the good speech and serving others with food that shall admit you to the
Garden." (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Jabir).
Allah Almighty says: "speak fair to the people."
Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with him" said: "If anyone salutes you with
peace, return salutation to him even if he is a Magian, for Allah Almighty says:
"When a (courteous) greeting is offered you, meet it with a greeting still more
courteous, or (at least) of equal courtesy. Allah takes careful account of all
things." (An-Nisa' 86)

4. ©

ils*

& b^Toj lj' ^

\^

Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with him" further said: "If even Pharaoh says
good to me, I shall reply to him (with similar good)." Anas "Allah be pleased with
him" said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"In the Garden there are mansions which (are so much transparent that) their
outward is seen from its inward, and its inward from this outward, prepared by
Allah Almighty for him who serves food (to the needy) and talks with kindness."
(This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi).
It is reported that once a pig passed by Jesus "Peace be upon him" thereupon
he said: "Pass by peacefully!" it was said to him: "O Spirit of AJlah! Do you say so
to a pig?" he said: "I dislike to habituate my tongue to speak with evil." The

Book four: evil of tongue

201

Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The good
word is (an object of) charity." (This narration is reported by Muslim on the
authority of Abu Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" further said: "Safeguard yourselves from the fire (of Hell) even
with half a date (to give in charity), and if you could not find, then, with a good
word (to say)." (This narration is reported by both Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the
authority of Adi Ibn Hatim).
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: "Righteousness is easy: a cheerful
countenance and a good and kind word." A wise man said: "The kind words
wash off the grudges that are lurking in the organs." Another sage said: "Do not
withhold such of words as do not provoke the anger of your Lord therewith you
please your sitter, perchance you shall be recompensed with the reward of the
doers of good."
This is the superiority of the good words, in opposition to disputation,
argumentation and litigation, which imply the hateful odious and loathsome
words, which harm the heart, embitter the living, provoke the anger, and cause
resentment. We ask Allah to help us with His favor and bounty.

The Sixth Evil: Loud-Mouthing
It is to make utterances from both corners of one's mouth, be ostentatious in
using much rhymes and eloquent words, and flamboyant in bringing prologues
and rhapsodies: all of this is out of hateful ostentation and hateful pretention, in
connection with which the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "I and the pious among my people are disassociated from
ostentation." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
further said: "Those who are the most hateful to me, that will have their seats the
farthest from mine (on the Day of Judgement) are chatterers, loudmouths and
ranters." They said: "O Messenger of Allah! Who are ranters?" he “peace be upon
him” said: "They are the arrogant. "(This narration is reported by Ahmad on the
authority of Abu Tha'labah; and At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Jabir).
It is narrated on the authority of Fatimah "Allah be pleased with her" that
she said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "The worst of my nation are those who are provided with blessing: they
eat the various kinds of food, wear the various kinds of clothes, and prove
loudmouthed in their speech." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu AdDunya and Al-Baihaqi). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" further said thrice: "Behold! Let such as involved in (saying and
doing what is beyond the reason, and exceeding the due limits) be ruined!”
(This narration is reported by Abu Dawud on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud).
According to Umar "Allah be pleased with him": "Splitting of words results
from the splitting of Satan." It is reported on the authority of Amir Ibn Sa'd
Ibn Abu Waqqas that once he came to his father Sa'd to ask him for some
need, and he sent forward for his need with an introduction, thereupon Sa'd
"Allah be pleased with him" said to him: "You have never been farther from .

The quarter of the destructives
202
your need than you are today. No doubt, I heard the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" having said: "A time will come upon
my people in which they will make spaces between their words with their
tongues in the same way as a cow makes spaces between grass with its
tongue. nil (This narration is reported by Ahmad). He seemed to have
disapproved of the rhapsody and ostentatious introduction he sent forward
for his speech.
This belongs to the evils of tongue, which include also all pretentious rhyme
and seeking eloquence that is beyond the customary habit; and the same is true
of the usage of pretentious rhyme in dialogues. Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased
with him” narrated: Two women from Hudhail fought with each other, one of
whom threw the other with a stone that killed her and what was in her womb.
They (i.e. the relatives of the killer and the relatives of the victim) filed their
case to The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” who judged that
the blood-money for the fetus was a slave or a slave girl, and the blood-money
for the killed woman was to be paid by the killer’s family. He made her son and
those with him her heirs. Hamal Ibn An-Nabighah Al-Hudhali said: “O
Messenger of Allah! Why should I pay blood money for one who neither drank,
nor ate, nor spoke, nor cried (after miscarriage by which it would be known that
he died after he was alive). It is like a nonentity (which deserves no bloodmoney).” Allah's Apostle “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “He
seems to be one of the brothers of soothsayers in view of the rhymed speech he
composed.” (This narration is reported by Al-Bukhari and Muslim).
He seemed to have disapproved of that due to the evident traces of
ostentation on the speech. One should limit his expression to his intention, and
the intention of every kind of speech is to make his purpose understandable,
and what is beyond that is out of blameworthy ostentation and pretention. But
embellishing the words of discourse without hyperbole does not belong to such
blameworthy kind. That is because the purpose there from is to move hearts
and cause them to have longing for something, to make them rejoice or grieve;
and the smoothness of word plays a great role in that respect, which makes it
fitting for that, unlike the dialogues which aim at fulfilling needs and demanding
back rights: ostentatious rhymes, declamation and ranting are not fitting for
them. To engage in it is out of blameworthy ostentation, and nothing motivates
it other than showing off, and demonstrating the faculties of rhetoric and
eloquence. All of that is hateful and deterred by religious law.

The Seventh Evil: Shamelessness And Foul Language
It is blameworthy and forbidden, and it originates from wickedness and
baseness. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Beware of obscenity for Allah Almighty never likes obscenity or using foul
language." (This narration is reported by An-Nasa'i and Al-Hakim on the
authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr, and lbn Hibban on the authority of Abu
Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"

203
Book four: evil of tongue
forbade that the polytheists who were killed in the holy batde of Badr be insulted
and said: "Nothing of what you say would reach them, and you do but harm the
living. Behold! The foul language is out of sordidness." (This narration is
reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Ali AlBaqir).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "The faithful believer never slanders (others) nor curses, nor uses foul
language, nor is he naughty in speech." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi
on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" further said: "The garden is forbidden to every shameless in
speech." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and Abu Na'im on
the authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said: "Four things harm the denizens of the fire besides
the harm they receive and cause them to walk between boiling water and Hell,
and supplicate with woes and destruction: a man from whose mouth pus and
blood flow, thereupon it will be said to him: "What is the matter with the farthest
(from Allah's mercy) have harmed us besides the harm we are receiving?" he will
say: "The farthest used to pick up every slanderous vile word and take pleasure
from it in the same way as one takes pleasure from sexual intercourse." (This
narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Shafayy Ibn
Mani1).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to
A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her": "O A'ishah! Had obscenity been a man, he
would have been an evil man." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu AdDunya on the authority of A'ishah). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said: "Both vulgarity and articulate exposition are
among the branches of hypocrisy." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi
and Al-Hakim on the authority of Abu Umamah). He seemed to have meant
the disclosure of such of things as it is impermissible to be disclosed, or
exaggeration of clarification until it becomes ostentatious, or exposition in the
religious matters pertinent to the attributes of Allah Almighty, which should be
dictated to the laymen in brief more than in detail, for the details might arouse
suspicions whereas briefness causes hearts to have faith in them in general. But
the context of vulgarity here gives the impression that what is intended is such
of things as it is shameless to be exposed. It is preferable to over look and not
to clarify them.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Verily, Allah Almighty never likes the shameless whose language is foul, who
cries in markets." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the
authority of Jabir). It is narrated on the authority of Jabir Ibn Samurah "Allah be
pleased with him" that he said: I was sitting in the presence of the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and my father was in front of me
when he (the Prophet) said: "Certainly, using foul language and shamelessness
never belong to Islam; and the one whose Islam is the best among the people is

The quarter of the destructives
204
he who has the best manners among them." (This narration is reported by
Ahmad and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya). According to Ibrahim Ibn Maisarah: "It is said
that the shameless whose language is foul will be brought on the Day of
Judgement in the form of, or inside a dog." Al-Ahnaf Ibn Qais said: "Should I
not tell you about the most chronic among the diseases? The vulgar tongue and
base character."
This is the criticism of shamelessness. It definition is to express of shameless
things with the help of clear words. Most of this occurs in the words of sexual
intercourse and its related affairs. The mischievous have clear words expressive
of it directly, which they use in reference to it, unlike the righteous, who avoid
using those, and rather refer to the matter indirectly and implicitly. Ibn Abbas
"Allah be pleased with him" said: "No doubt, Allah Almighty adheres to shyness
and generosity, and He always pardons and makes allusions (in direct reference to
things): He refers to sexual intercourse with contact, and so on." Contact, touch,
companionship and consummation are references to sexual intercourse, and they
are not shameless. On the other hand, there are shameless phrases whose
mention is odious, and they are used most frequently in insulting and abusing.
They are unequal in vulgarity, and some of them are more vulgar than others, and
the difference thereof is determined by the difference of the habits and customs
of the different countries. As well as the least of them is undesirable, the utmost
is forbidden, and in between them there are degrees, some of which are
forbidden and others are only desirable.
Therefore, it implies not only sexual intercourse, but also the words that refer
to urination and defecation; and it is preferable to refer to those with the answer
of the call of nature. That is because those are among the things to be done in
secrecy, and one feels shy of making a mention of all that is done in secrecy with
clear and evident words, for it is out of shamelessness. It is also favorable to refer
to women indirectly. For example, one should not say: "Your wife has said so
and so", but rather: "It has been said in the chamber, or from behind the screen,
or the mother of children has said so and so." It is praiseworthy to be subtle in
using those words for clear usage of them leads to shamelessness. The same is
true of such of people as has defects of which he feels shy. He has not to express
of them with clear words, like leprosy, baldness and piles, for clear expression of
such things belongs to shamelessness. All of those are among the evils of tongue.
Al-AIa' Ibn Harun said: "Umar Ibn Abd Al-Aziz used to be diffident in his
speech. Once, he had an ulcer under his armpits, and we came to him to ask him
about it, with the intention to know how he would express of it. We asked him:
"From where has it come out?" he said: "From the inside of the hand."
As for the motive of shamelessness, it might be meant to cause harm to
others, or it might be caused by a habit acquired from mixing with the shameless,
wicked and sordid among the people, who are recognized for their abuses and
insults. It is reported that a Bedouin said to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him": "Give me advice." He said: "I advise you to
fear Allah Almighty ; and if a man disgraces you with any defect he knows about

205

Book four: evil of tongue

you, do not disgrace him with any defect you know about him, perchance the evil
consequence of his (disgracing) would be drawn upon him, and the reward of it
would be for you." He said: "Afterwards, I have never insulted anything." (This
narradon is reported by Ahmad and At-Tabarani on the authority of Jabir Ibn
Sulaim). It is narrated on the authority of Iyad Ibn Himar that he said to the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "O Messenger of
Allah! It happens that a man of my people insults me: is there any harm on me to
repel his abuses?" on that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "Both men involved in abusing each other are two devils who
exchange lies and abuses." (This narration is reported by Abu Dawud).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "To
abuse a faithful believer is wickedness, and fighting him is disbelief." (This
narration is reported by Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said:
"If two are involved in abusing each other, the sin of that is on the one who
abuses first until the wronged transgresses the due limits (of reply)." (This
narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah). The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Curse be he
who abuses his parents." (This narration is reported by Ahmad, At-Tabarani and
Abu Ya'li on the authority of Ibn Abbas). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said according to another narration: "One of
the greatest major sins is to abuse one's parents." They asked: "O Messenger of
Allah! How should a man abuse his parents?" he said: "He abuses the father o
another, who, in turn, abuses his (the former's) father." (This narration is
reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr).

Hihe Eighth Evil: Cwsing
One might curse an animal, a non-living being or a man; and all of this is
blameworthy. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "The faithful believer is not he who always sends curses." (This
narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Ibn Umar). The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said:
"Curse not each other by the curse of Allah, nor by His anger nor by Hell."
(This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi and Abu Dawud on the authority
of Samurah Ibn Jundub). Hudhaifah "Allah be pleased with him" said: "No
people curse each other but that the sentence (of punishment) has become
due upon them."
Imran Ibn Hussain “Allah be pleased with him” reported: We were in the
company of The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” in
some of his journeys, and there was a woman from the Ansar riding a she-camel
which shied with the result that she invoked curse upon it. The Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” heard her and said: “Unload it
and set it free for it is accursed.” Imran said: It is as if I am seeing it walking
amongst people and none paying any heed to it. (This narration is reported by

The quarter of the destructives
206
Muslim). According to Abu Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased with him": "None
curses the earth but that it says: "May Allah curse such of us as is more
disobedient to Allah Almighty."
It is narrated on the authority of A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" that she
said: Once, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
heard Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" cursing one of his slaves, thereupon
he turned to him and said: "O Abu Bakr! How should one be a sincere lover of
truth and a curser simultaneously? No, by the Lord of the Ka'bah!" he said it
twice or thrice. (This narration is reported on the authority of Ibn Abu AdDunya). On that day Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" emancipated his
slave, and went to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" and said: "I shall never do it once again."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "By
no means shall cursers be intercessors or witnesses on the Day of Judgement."
(This narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Abu Ad-Darda'). It is
narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he said: A
man was proceeding on a camel in the company of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" when he cursed his camel. On that die
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "O slave of
Allah! Do not proceed in our company on an accursed camel." (This narration is
reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya). He said it to him out of disapproval of his
cursing his camel.
To curse is to drive away and avert far from the mercy of Allah Almighty; and
this is impermissible but for him who has a quality that keeps him away from the
mercy of Allah Almighty, like disbelief and injustice, saying: "Behold! Let Allah's
curse be upon the wrongdoers or on the disbelievers." One should abide in it by
the words stipulated in religious law, for the curse is of great danger because in it
one judges that Allah Almighty has driven away the accursed from His mercy,
and this belongs to the unseen which none knows but Allah Almighty, and the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" since Allah
Almighty made it known to him.
Cursing is required by three qualities: disbelief, religious innovation and
wickedness. Cursing in each of those has three levels: The first is to curse by the
general description, like your saying: "Allah's curse be upon the disbelievers, the
religious innovators and the wicked." The second is to limit the curse to a
particular quality, like your saying: "Allah's' curse be upon the Jews, Christians,
Magians, Qadarites (Anti-Fatalists), Khawarij, Rafidites, adulterers, devourers of
usury and wrongdoers. To curse all of those is impermissible, but a great risk lies
in cursing the religious innovators, for the knowledge of a religious innovation is
abstruse, and no clear word is reported in connection with cursing it. For this
reason, the laymen should be prevented from it for it summons reply with the
like of it, which leads to disputes and mischief among the people.
The third is to curse a particular person in which a great danger lies, like your
saying: "Zaid was cursed by Allah Almighty; and he is a disbeliever, a wicked and

207
Book four: evil of tongue
a religious innovator." However, it is permissible to send curse upon everyone
proven to be cursed under law, like: "Pharaoh was cursed by Allah; and Abu Jahl
was cursed by Allah", for those were proven to have died as disbelievers as
known from law. But if you are to affirm Allah's curse to a particular person, say
a Jew, belonging to our time, it has a great risk, for it might embrace Islam, and
die while being near to Allah Almighty: how then should he be judged to be
accursed?
But you may say that he is cursed for being a duly disbeliever, just as one says
about a Muslim: "May Allah have mercy upon him" for his being a duly Muslim,
who might possibly renegade as apostate, it should be known to you that when
we say "May Allah bestow mercy upon him", we supplicate Allah to make him
firm on Islam and obedience to Him, which is the cause of such mercy, and it
could not be required that Allah should make a disbeliever firm on disobedience
and disbelief which is the cause of curse. It is impossible, for it is to ask for
disbelief although one is already in disbelief. But it is permissible to say: "Allah's
curse be upon so and so if he died as a disbeliever, and Allah's curse be not on
him if he died as a Muslim." This matter belongs to the unseen which is beyond
perception; and the absolute cursor wavers between both.
This is why a great danger lies in cursing certain persons, for they turn
from one state to another, except for him whose matter was made known tr
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him". He sec
curse upon a particular people in his invocation of evil against Quraish saying
"O Allah! Send Your curse upon Abu Jahl Ibn Hisham, Utbah Ibn
Rabie'ah..." and made a mention of a group of pagans who were killed as
disbelievers (according to the narration of both sheikhs on the authority of
Ibn Mas'ud). But in another context, he cursed some people whose end was
unknown to him, thereupon he was forbidden by Allah. It is narrated that he
cursed for a month those who killed the companions of Bir Ma'unah, but
Allah Almighty revealed: "Not for you, (but for Allah), is the decision:
whether He turn in Mercy to them, or punish them; for they are indeed
wrong-doers." (A1 Imran 128)

(This narration is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Anas). He
means that they might possibly become Muslims, so, how should you know that
they are accursed?
Similarly, it is permissible to curse such of people as proven to have died as
disbelievers so long as it causes no harm to a Muslim. In this respect, it is
narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
asked Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" about a grave he came upon on his
way to Ta'if, and he said: "This is the grave of one who was disobedient and
rebellious against Allah and His Messenger, i.e. Sa'id Ibn Al-As." His son Amr
grew angry and said: "O Messenger of Allah! This is the grave of a man who used
to serve food (to the needy) and strike the heads (of the enemies) more than Abu

The quarter of the destructives
208
Quhafah did." Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" said: "Is it fitting for such a
person to address me with the like of those words O Messenger of Allah?" the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to him: "Stop
from Abu Bakr." He turned away and the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" faced Abu Bakr and said: "O Abu Bakr! When you make
a mention of disbeliever, let it be general, for if you make it particular (to certain
persons), the sons would grow angry in fervor for their fathers." The people then
stopped from that. (This narration is reported by Abu Dawud on the authority of
AH Ibn Rabie'ah).
It is narrated that Nu'aiman drank wine many times and was brought to have
the legal punishment executed on him during the Hfetime of the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him", thereupon one of the
companions said: "May Allah curse him! He often is brought for legal
punishment to be implemented on him." On that the Messenger of AHah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Do not be in the aid of Satan against your
brother." fThis narration is reported by Ibn Abd Al-Barr on the authority of
Muhammad Ibn Amr Ibn Hazm). He said according to another version: "Do not
say so, for by AHah, I do not know but that he loves Allah and His Messenger."
Thus, he forbade them in an indication to the fact that it is impermissible to curse
a particular wicked in name.
In brief, there is a great danger in cursing individual, so, one should not cease
to do it. Moreover, it is permissible to keep silent from cursing IbHs and anyone
else in particular. But it may be asked: "Is it permissible to curse Yazid for he
fought or at least commanded to fight with Al-Hussain "AHah be pleased with
him"?" in reply, let's say that as it is not certainly proven that he killed him or
commanded that he be killed, then, it is impermissible to curse him. This is
because it is impermissible to ascribe a Muslim to a major sin without
verification. But it is permissible to say that Ibn Miljam killed AH "AHah be
pleased with him" and Abu Lu'lu'ah kiHed Umar "AHah be pleased with him" for
both cases have been proven through contiguous narrations.
But in general, it is impermissible to make a charge against a Muslim with
wickedness or disbeHef without verification. The Messenger of AHah "AUah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "No man makes a charge against a man
with disbeHef or wickedness but that the charge returns to him unless he (the
charged) is so." (This narration is reported by both Al-Bukhari and Muslim on
the authority of Abu Dharr). The Messenger of AHah "AHah's blessing and peace
be upon him" further said: "No man witnesses to the disbeHef of another but that
it should be incurred upon one of them: if he is reaUy a disbeHever, then, he wiH
be the same as described, otherwise, the charger then wiH become a disbeHever by
ascribing the other to disbeHef." (This narration is reported by Abu Mansur AdDaHami on the authority of Abu Sa'id).
This impHes him who renders another as disbeHever although he knows that
he is a Muslim. But in case he ascribes him to disbeHef depending upon a
reHgious innovation or heresy, he wiH be mistaken and not a disbeHever. It is

209
Book four: evil of tongue
narrated on the authority of Mu'adh "Allah be pleased with him" that he said: the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to me: "I
forbid you to insult a Muslim or disobey a just ruler, and it is more severe to
abuse the dead." (This narration is reported by Abu Na'im). Masruq "may Allah
have mercy upon him" said: I entered upon A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her"
and she asked me: "What is the state of so and so, may Allah curse him?" I said:
"He died." She said: "may Allah have mercy upon him." I asked her: "How
should (both curse and mercy) be combined together?" she said: the Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Insult not the dead for
they have come to what they had sent forward." (This narration is reported by AlBukhari).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Do
not insult the dead therewith you might cause harm to the living." (This narration
is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Al-Mughirah Ibn Shu'bah). The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "O
people! Observe my (right on you) in my companions, brothers and relatives, and
do not insult them. O people! When one dies, remember but good about him."
(This narration is reported by Abu Mansur on the authority of Iyad Al-Ansari).
But even, if it is asked: "Is it permissible to say 'Allah may curse the killer of
Al-Hussain or the one who ordered that he be killed'?" The right is to say that if
the killer of Al-Hussain died before repentance, Allah Almighty will curse him.
However, he might possibly have died after repentance like Wahshi who killed
Hamzah, "Allah be pleased with him", the paternal uncle of the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and when he killed him he
(Wahshi) was a disbeliever, and later on he repented, gave up disbelief and rather
embraced Islam, and Thus, it is impermissible to curse him. It is true that killing
is a major sin, but the killer does not become a disbeliever by doing it. More even,
if he does not repent and continues on his state, there is a danger in cursing him,
although no danger lies in keeping silent from doing so, let alone its being
preferable.
The people indulge in the matter of cursing in which they unleash their
tongues, although the faithful believer should not be an invoker of curse. He
should not unleash his tongue to curse but him who died as a disbeliever, or
particular types in general famous for disbelief (like Khawarij, Rafidites, etc) and
not particular persons, otherwise, it is preferable to engage in the celebration of
Allah Almighty, otherwise, safety lies in keeping silent. Makki Ibn Ibrahim said:
We were sitting in the house of Ibn Awn and they made a mention of Bilal Ibn
Abu Burdah, and went on cursing him and speaking bad about him, while Ibn
Awn was silent. They said: "O Ibn Awn! We curse him for his abuses against
you." Ibn Awn said: "Only two words shall come out of my account on the Day
of Judgment: 'There is none worthy of worship except Allah' and 'May Allah
curse so and so'; and it is dearer to me to have 'There is none worthy of worship
except Allah' than 'May Allah curse so and so'."
It is narrated that a man said to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and

The quarter of the destructives
210
peace be upon him”: "Advise me." He said: "I advise you not to be an invoker
of curses." (This narration is reported by Ahmad and At-Tabarani on the
authority of Jurmuz Al-Hujaimi). According to Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased
with him": "The most hateful in the Sight of Allah Almighty is every slanderer
and invoker of curses." According to Hammad Ibn Zaid: "Cursing a believer is
equal to killing him." Then he commented: "I do bear the responsibility of
saying that this narration is Marfu'." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs
on the authority of Thabit Ibn Ad-Dahhak). It is narrated on the authority of
Abu Qatadah that he said: He (the Prophet) used to say: "Cursing a believer is
like killing him."
Close to cursing is to invoke evil against a man, even if he is a wrongdoer, like
saying: "May Allah damage his body or May Allah not keep him safe" etc. all of
this is blameworthy. According to a certain tradition: "A wronged continue to
invoke evil against his wrongdoer until he rewards him (because of his
invocation), and there remains for the wrongdoer a surplus to demand back from
him on the Day of Judgement."
The Ninth Evil: Singing And Poetry
In the Book of singing, we have mentioned the unlawful and lawful kinds of
singing, and we shall not repeat it here. Concerning poetry, it consists of words,
and the good thereof is good and the bad thereof is bad. But it is blameworthy to
devote oneself wholeheartedly to it. It is narrated on the authority of Sa’d “Allah
be pleased with him” that he said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: “It is better for anyone of you that his belly be stuffed
with pus which might eat away than to have his mind stuffed with poetry.” (This
narration is reported by Muslim). It is reported that Masruq "may Allah have
mercy upon him" was asked about a poetic verse which he disliked. When he was
asked about the reason for that he said: "I dislike to have even a single poetic
verse in my account." One of the righteous was asked about some poetry,
thereupon he said: " I replace it with the celebration (of Allah) for it is better than
it."
In brief, to recite and compose poetry in itself is not unlawful as long as it
contains nothing odious. In this respect, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Verily, wisdom lies in some of the
poetry." It is true that the main purpose of poetry is eulogy, satire or
rhapsody, which might mix with lies and untrue speech. The Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" commanded Hassan Ibn
Thabit Al-Ansari "Allah be pleased with him" to lampoon the disbelievers and
praise extensively (the faithful believers). (This narration is reported by both
sheikhs on the authority of Al-Bara': "Lampoon the pagans and the Holy
Spirit (Gabriel) is with you). Although it contains lies, it is not subject to the
same ruling of telling lies.
Consider the following poetic verse: "Even were he to have but his spirit at
his hand, he would have spent it (out of generosity), so, let him fear Allah who

211

Book four: evil of tongue

asks him for anything." This is no more than to ascribe one to the utmost limit of
openhandedness: if the described is not generous, the sayer will be a liar, and if he
is generous, then, exaggeration here is required by the art of poetry, by which it is
not intended to have the listener and receiver believe in its real form. Some poetic
verses were recited in front of the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him" containing the like of that, but he did not cease to listen to them.
In that respect, it is narrated on the authority of A'ishah "Allah be pleased
with her" that she said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" was stitching his sandal and I was spinning beside him I cast glance
of him and behold! his forehead, of a sudden, sweated and light came out of his
sweat. 1 was confounded, and when he turned his face to me he said: "What is
wrong with You A'ishah that you have been confounded?" I said: "O
Messenger of Allah! I looked at you and behold! Your forehead sweated and
light came out of your sweat; and had Abu Kabir Al-Hudhaii seen you, he
would have known that you are more deserving of his poetry." He asked: "What
does Abu Kabir Al-Hudhali saying O A'ishah?" I said: "He says: "How pure you
are from the filth of menses, the pollution of suckling, and the evil of disease. If
you cast a glance of his countenance, it would sparkle like the lightning of the
cloud which portends approaching rain."" On that the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" put down what was in his hand and
stood towards me and kissed in between my eyes and said: "May Allah reward
you O A'ishah! I have never been pleased with you more than I am today."
(This narration is reported by Al-Baihaqi in his Dala'il An-Nubuwwah).
When the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
distributed the spoils on the day of the holy battle of Hunain, he commanded
that Al-Abbas Ibn Mirdas be given four camels, (out of anger) he composed the
following poetic verses: "In no way were Badr (Uyainah's grandfather) nor Habis
(Al-Aqra's father) to have priority to Mirdas in a gathering; and in no way was I
to be inferior than any of them, and whomever you lower today shall never been
raised in the future." On that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" said: "Keep his tongue from me." Abu Bakr As-Siddiq "Allah be
pleased with him" took him and made him choose one hundred camels, and
when he returned he was the most contented among the people. The Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to him: "Do you say
poetry against me?" he apologized to him saying: "I feel the creeping of poetry on
my tongue like the creeping of ants on the ground, and it bites me in the same
way as ants do to the extent that I find no way but to say poetry." The Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" smiled and said: "Arabs will
never leave poetry until camels leave propensity." (This narration is reported by
Muslim).

The Tenth Evil: Joking
It is blameworthy and forbidden in its nature, barring a litde to be excepted
from it. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:

:

The quarter of the destructives
212
"Do not dispute with your brother nor joke with him." QThis narration is
reported by At-Tirmidhi). But you may say: "Disputation causes harm since it
implies to give lie to one's brother or ascribe him to ignorance, unlike joking
which is to please one's brother: why should it be forbidden?" in reply to that, it
should be known to you that it is forbidden to be excessive or regular in doing it.
As for regularity, it is forbidden to engage in playing and jesting wholeheartedly.
Although playing in its nature is permissible, it is blameworthy to be regular on it.
Furthermore, to be excessive in it leads to much laughter, which causes heart to
die, develops resentment in some cases, and removes reverence and respect. But
what is free from all of those is not blameworthy.
In confirmation of that, it is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "I sometimes joke and say but what is
true." The like of him could hardly achieve the same equation, i.e. to joke and say
only the truth. If somebody else opens the gate of joking, his purpose will be to
cause the people to laugh However, it seems to him to do. The Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "A man might utter a word
with the intention to bring his sitters to laughter, because of its (evil) he falls
down in the fire (of Hell) farther than stars (from the earth)." (This narration is
reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Abu Hurairah). According to
Umar "Allah be pleased with him": "He, who laughs much, becomes less
respectable, and he who jokes is regarded slightly, and he who does a thing so
much is recognized for it, and he who speaks much commits much mistakes, and
he who commits much mistakes becomes less shy, and he, who is less shy
becomes less pious, and he who is less pious causes his heart to die."
Of a surety, laughter indicates to the heedlessness of the hereafter. The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Were you
to know that I know you would weep much and laugh little." (This narration
is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Anas and A'ishah). A man said
to his brother: "O my brother! Has the news reached you that you should
inevitably enter the Fire (of Hell)?" he answered in the affirmative. He further
asked him: "Then, has the news reached you that you shall come out of it?" he
answered in the negative, thereupon he said: "Then, why do you laugh much?"
afterwards, he was never seen laughing until he died. According to Yusuf Ibn
Asbat: "Al-Hassan remained thirty years during which he never laughed." Ata'
As-Sulami was said to have remained forty years during which he never
laughed.
Once, Wuhaib Al-Wurd looked at a people and found them laughing in Id AlFitr, thereupon he said: "If it has been forgiven for those, then, their behavior is
not the one of the thankful; and if it has not been forgiven for them, then, their
behavior is not the one of the fearful (of Allah Almighty)." Abdullah Ibn Abu
Ya'li used to say: "Do you laugh although (death might have approached you
that) your shroud has been brought out from the tailor?" according to Ibn Abbas
"Allah be pleased with him": "He who commits a sin while laughing will enter the
fire (of Hell) while weeping." Muhammad Ibn Wasi' said: "When you see a man

213
Book four: evil of tongue
weeping in the Garden, would you not wonder at his weeping?" It was said:
"Yes." On that he said: "He who laughs in the world without knowing his destiny
in the hereafter is more astonishing."
This is the evil of laughter. It is blameworthy to laugh so deeply and noisily,
but only smile is praiseworthy, in which the teeth are uncovered but with no
voice to be heard. This was the way the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" used to laugh. It is narrated on the authority of Al-Qasim,
the freed slave of Mu'awiyah that he said: A Bedouin came on a rebellious camel
to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and paid
salutation. Whenever he tried to come close to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" to ask him, his camel fled away with him, and
the companions of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" laughed at him. After he had done so many times the camel dropped him
and he got broken and died. It was said: "O Messenger of Allah! The Bedouin
has been dropped and ruined by his camel." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Yes and your mouths (which were
laughing) are filled with his blood." (This narration is reported by Ibn AlMubarak).
In confirmation of the fact that joking might remove respect, Umar "Allah be
pleased with him" said: "He who jokes is regarded slightly." Muhammad Ibn AlMunkadir said: My mother said to me: "O my son! Joke not with children lest you
would be trivial in their sight." Sa'id Ibn Al-As said to his son: "O my son! Joke
not with a dignitary lest he would rancor you, nor the lowly lest he would dare to
talk to you rudely." According to Umar Ibn Abd Al-Aziz "may Allah have mercy
upon him": "Fear Allah and avoid joking for it summons resentment and leads to
what is odious. Speak with the Qur'an and make it the object of your gatherings,
and if this is heavy on you, then, let it be with a good speech from those of men."
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: "Do you know why joking is called
Mizah (remover)?" they answered in the negative thereupon he said: "For it
removes the joker from the truth." It is said that everything has seeds, and the
seeds of enmity lie in mockery. It is also said that joking is to steal mind, cut off
friends and companions.
But you may say: "Since the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" and his companions are reported to have been involved in joking,
how should it be forbidden?" in reply to that, let me say that if you have the
power to do the same as the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" and his companions did, i.e. to joke and not say but the truth, nor
harm a heart, nor indulge in it, then, there will be no harm on you. But it is a
great mistake that a man takes joking a profession to do regularly, and indulge in
it, and then adhere to the practice of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" and his companions.
His example is like him who engages his day with the negroes, watching their
dance and viewing their plays, under pretext that he adheres to the practice of the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" who authorized

The quarter of the destructives
214
A'ishah nAUah be pleased with her" to watch their show on the day of Id. It is a
mistake. Some minor sins turn to be major sins as a result of persisting in them,
as well as some permissible things turn to be minor sins as a result of insistence
on doing them regularly. So, this fact should be cared for.
But it is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: They said: "O Messenger of Allah! Verily, you sometimes have
fun with us." On that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "Yes, although I sometimes make fun with you, I do not say but what
is true." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi). It is narrated on the
authority of Ata' that he said: A man asked Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with
him": "Did the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" use
to joke?" he answered in the affirmative. He further asked: ""Then, what was his
joking?" he said: "Once, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" dressed one of his wives in a large dress thereupon he said to hen
"Wear it, praise (Allah) and drag there from a tail like a bridegroom's tail.'"* It is
further narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: "Verily, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
was from among the people the most joking with his wives." It is further
reported that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
used to smile so often.
It is narrated on the authority of Al-Hassan that he said: An old woman came
to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" who said to
hen "No old woman (or man) should enter the Garden." She wept thereupon the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to hen "At
that time, you will not be old. Allah Almighty says: "Indeed, We have produced
the women of Paradise in a [new] creation And made them virgins, Devoted [to
their husbands] and of equal age," (Al-Waqi'ah 35-37)

6$

<D

(This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi; and Ibn Al-Jawzi on the authority
of Anas).
It is narrated on the authority of Zaid Ibn Aslam that he said: A woman called
Umm Ayman came to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" and said: "My husband invites you." He said: "Who is your husband?
Is he in whose eye there is whiteness?" she said: "No, by Allah, there is no
whiteness in his eye." He said: "Nay! There is whiteness in his eye." She said:
"No, by Allah!" on that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "There is no man but that there is whiteness in his eye." Of a
surety, he means the whiteness surrounding the eyeball. (This narration is
reported by Az-Zubair Ibn Bakkar; and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of
Ubaidah Ibn Sahm Al-Fihri with a slight variation in wording).
It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that a
woman came to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
and said: “O Messenger of Allah! Give me a riding mount!” the Messenger of

Book four: evil of tongue

215

Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “You should be carried on
such as bom by a she-camel.” The woman asked: “What should I do with such as
bom by a she-camel (since it is too young to carry me)?” the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “Are all the camels but the
offspring of she-camels?” (This narration is reported by Abu Dawud).
It is narrated by Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he said: Abu Talhah
"Allah be pleased with him" had a child called Abu Umair and whenever the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" came to visit them
he would say to him (by way of joking): "O Abu Umair! What has happened to
An-Nughair?" (He refers to a nightingale he had with which he used to play).
fThjs narration is reported by both sheikhs). It is narrated on the authority of
A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" that she said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" took part in a race with me, and I preceded
him. When put on flesh and we were engaged in a race once again he preceded
me and then said: "this is in return for that" (This narration is reported by AnNasa'i and Ibn Majah).
It is further narrated on the authority of A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her"
that she said: Once, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" was in my house and Sawdah Bint Zam'ah was with him. I prepared food
and brought it to them and asked Sawdah to eat thereof. She said: "I do not like
it" I said: "By Allah, you should eat it otherwise I would stain your face with it"
She said: "I am not going to taste it" I took with my hands something from the
bowl with which I stained her face and the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" was sitting between us. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" lowered his knees for her to exact retribution
from me, and then she took something from the bowl and stained my face with
it, while the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was
laughing. (This narration is reported by Az-Zubair Ibn Bakkar and Abu Ya'li).
It is narrated that Ad-Dahhak Ibn Sufyan Al-Kilabi said to the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "I have two wives who are
prettier than this red-complexioned (A'ishah, and this was before the Holy Verse
of veiling was revealed): should I not give up anyone of them for you to marry?"
at the same time, A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" was sitting and hearing. She
asked him: "Who is more beautiful: she or you?" he said: "No, I am prettier and
more generous than her." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" laughed at her asking him for he was ugly. (This narration is reported
by Az-Zubair Ibn Bakkar on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Hassan).
It is narrated on the authority of AJqamah from Abu Salamah "Allah be
pleased with him" that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" used to move his tongue to Al-Hassan Ibn All "Allah be
pleased with them" who, on seeing it, would rejoice so much. When Uyainah Ibn
Badr Al-Fazari saw that he said: "By Allah! My son might grow old and marry
and I have never kissed him." On that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said: "No doubt, he who does not show mercy (to

The quarter of the destructives
216
others), would not receive mercy (from Allah Almighty)." (This narration is
reported by Abu Ya'li on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
Most of those pleasing funs are transmitted from the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" with women and children, in which he
dealt with their weak hearts, but without inclination to excessive joking. Once,
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to Suhaib
"Allah be pleased with him" who was sore-eyed and he was eadng dates: "Are
you eadng dates although you are sore-eyed?" on that he said: "I am eadng with
the other side O Messenger of Allah." On that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" smiled. (This narration is reported by Ibn Majah
and Al-Hakim on the authority of Suhaib).
Once, Khawat Ibn Jubair Al-Ansari was sitting with some women from Banu
Ka'b on the way to Mecca when the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" appeared to him and asked him: "O Abu Abdullah! What is
the matter with you that you are sitting with women?" I said: "They are twisting a
nose-string for an errant camel belong to me." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" then left for his need and when he returned he
said: "O Abu Abdullah! Has this camel not ceased to run away yet?" I kept silent
and felt shy of him and afterwards I used to flee from him whenever I saw him
out of shyness of him until I arrived in Medina. When I arrived in Medina he saw
me in the mosque praying; and when I prolonged the prayer he said to me: "Do
not prolong the prayer for I am waiting you." When I concluded with the end
salutation he asked me: "O Abu Abdullah! Has this camel not ceased to run away
yet?" I kept silent and felt shy of him. He then stood and left and afterwards I
used to flee from him whenever I saw him out of shyness of him until one day he
caught me up on his donkey and he was placing his feet in one side. He said to
me: "O Abu Abdullah! Has this camel not ceased to run away yet?" I said: "By
Him Who has sent you with the truth. It has never run away since I embraced
Islam." He said: "Allah is Greater! Allah is Greater! O Allah! Guide Abu
Abdullah!" Thus, he proved good in faith and Allah guided him to the right. (This
narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Zaid Ibn Aslam from
Khawat Ibn J ubair).
Nu'aiman was a man of fun. He used to drink alcohol more often in Medina,
and whenever he did so, he would be brought to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" to execute the legal punishment on him, and he
would beat him with his sandal, and order his companions to do the same. When
he did so repeatedly, one of the companions said to him: "May Allah curse you!"
on that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to
him: "Do not curse him for he loves Allah and His Messenger."
Furthermore, no foodstuff entered Medina but that he bought from it and
brought it to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
saying: "O Messenger of Allah! I have bought this as a gift for you." Whenever
the seller came to demand its price he would bring him to the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" saying: "O Messenger of Allah! This is

217
Book four: evil of tongue
the seller: give him the price of his things." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" would say to him: "Have you not given it to us
as a gift?" he would say: "O Messenger of Allah! At that time, its price was not
with me but I liked that you should eat thereof." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" would smile and order that the price be given to
the seller. (This narration is reported by Az-Zubair Ibn Bakkar and Ibn AbdulBarr on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Hazm).
Those kinds of pleasing funs are permissible but in rare cases and not
regularly, for regularity on it is blameworthy joking which causes much laugh that
is to bring the hearts to death.
The Eleventh Evil: Ridicule And Mockery
This is forbidden as long as it is harmful. In confirmation of that, Allah
Almighty says: "O you who believe! let not some men among you laugh at others:
it may be that the (latter) are better than the (former): nor let some women laugh
at others: it may be that the (latter) are better than the (former): nor defame nor
be sarcastic to each other, nor call each other by (offensive) nicknames: illseeming is a name connoting wickedness, (to be used of one) after he has
believed: and those who do not desist are (indeed) doing wrong." (Al-Hujurat 11)
O' If**' 5Vi f-r-?
i -

^

^

pYl

ijj*L *3) ^

i®bi £ icJd jj
Mockery means to ridicule, contempt, scorn and highlight one's defects and
shortcomings in a way that causes the others to laugh at him. This might be done
through mimesis of words and deeds, or reference and hint. If it is in the
presence of the one at whom ridicule is made, it will not be called backbiting,
although it carries its meaning.
A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" said: I imitated a man (by way of making
fun of him) thereupon the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said to me: "By Allah! I do not like to imitate a man (by way of
making ridicule at him) and have such and such (property)." (This narration is
reported by Abu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi). In his comment on the following
statement of Allah Almighty: ""Ah! woe to us! what a Book is this! it leaves out
nothing small or great, but takes account thereof!" they will find all that they did,
placed before them: and not one will your Lord treat with injustice." (Al-Kahf 49)
I^JU_P L

V]

*31-.1:

4 (0)

\'Xl*

1

Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with him" said: "The small is to smile by way of
mocking at a believer, and the big is to laugh noisily at him." This refers to the
fact that laughter at people is one of ht major sins.
It is narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Zam'ah "Allah be pleased

The quarter of the destructives
218
with him" that he said: I heard the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" in his sermon admonishing them of laughing at making
sound saying: "Why does anyone of you laugh at what he does?" QThis
narration is reported by both sheikhs). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "As to those who mock at the people, a
gate of the Garden will be opened to anyone of them and he will be invited to
enter, and he will come with his distress and anxiety and once he approaches
it, it will be closed in his face. Another gate will be opened to him and he will
be invited to enter, and he will come with his distress and anxiety and once he
approaches it, it will be closed in his face, and so on until he comes to a state
in which whenever a gate is opened to him and he is invited to enter, he
rejects to go to it." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the
authority of Al-Hassan).
It is narrated on the authority of Mu'adh Ibn Jabal "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "He who disgraces his brother for a sin from which he has repented,
will not die until he himself commits it." (This narration is reported by AtTirmidhi). That is because in all of that, one mocks at another, and laughs at his
misfortunes, out of ridicule and contempt for him. To it Allah Almighty draws
the attention as shown in His statement: "it may be that the (latter) are better
than the former." (Al-Hujurat 11)

4©

!£*■1

o' Is** £

This is forbidden in particular to him who is harmed by it, unlike him who
makes himself an object of ridicule to the extent that he rejoices when one laughs
or mocks at him: in which case, it belongs to joking and not mockery. In brief,
what is forbidden thereof is that which causes harm to others by way of scorning
and regarding him with slightness. It is done through many ways: sometimes one
laughs at another's words in case he is troubled, and sometimes at his deeds if
they are distracted, like mocking at his handwriting, profession, features and so
on, in case he is defective or suffers from any fault like shortness. Laughing at
anything of that belongs to the forbidden mockery.

The Twelfth Evil: Disclosure Of Secret
It is forbidden, for the harm it causes to others, and regarding as slight the
rights of one's friends and acquaintances. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "If a man tells something to another and
then he turns his face, his talk has become a trust (to be kept by the listener)."
(This narration is reported by Abu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi on the authority of
Jabir). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "Any talk among you is a trust (to be preserved)." (This narration is reported
by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Ibn Shihab).
Al-Hassan said: "It is out of betrayal to disclose the secret of your brother." It
is reported that Mu'awiyah told a secret to Al-Walid Ibn Utbah, who went to his
father and said to him: "O my father! The Commander of Believers has told me a

219

Book four: evil of tongue

secret, and I do not think that he is to conceal from you what he has disclosed to
anyone else." He said: "Then, do not disclose it to me for indeed, whoever
conceals his secret, good will be his portion; and he who discloses his secret, evil
will be his portion." I said: "O my father! Is it applicable also to the relation
between a man and his son?" he said: "No, by Allah, O my son. But 1 don't like
that you habituate your tongue to disclose secrets." I went to Mu'awiyah and told
him, thereupon he said to me: "O Walid! Your father has emancipated you from
the slavery of error."
To be sure, the disclosure of secret is betrayal, and it is forbidden if it is
harmful, and in case it is not harmful, it is cunning. We have already made a
mention of the benefit of concealing the secret in the Book of the Etiquettes of
Companionship, and there is no need of repeating it here.

The Thirteenth Evil: The False Promise
The tongue always hastens to make promises, even though the soul might not
be willing to fulfill it, which causes one to break his promise; and this is a sign of
hypocrisy. Allah Almighty says: "O you who believe! Fulfill (all) obligations." (AlMa'idah 1)

40

iyj1

^

The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said
"Promise (takes the position of) gift." (This narration is reported by AtTabarani on the authority of Qibath Ibn Ashyam; and Abu Nairn on the
authority of lbn Mas'ud). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" said also: "The promise is like the debt or even better (which
should be fulfilled)." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the
authority of Ibn Lahi'ah; and Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of

Ali).
Allah Almighty praised His Prophet Ismael "Peace be upon him" in His Book
when He said: "Also mention in the Book (the story of) Isma'il: he was (strictly)
true to what he promised, and he was a Messenger (and) a Prophet." (Maryam 54)

i0

''iyLj otf)

TjjU

J^J>

It is said that he made an appointment to a man who forgot and did not come
to him in the promised place, and Ismael remained twenty-two days in
expectation for him in the same place. When death approached Abdullah Ibn
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" he said: "A man from Quraish demanded the
hand of my daughter and I almost promised him, and by Allah, as I dislike to
meet Allah with a sign of the three signs of hypocrisy, I make you witness that I
have given my daughter to him in marriage."
It is narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Abu Al-Hamsa’ that he said: I
purchased something from the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" before his being sent (as a Prophet), and a portion of its price
remained due upon me for him, and I gave him a promise to bring it to him in
his place, but I forgot it Three (nights) after (the time of the promise) I

The quarter of the destructives
220
remembered that, and I went to him and behold! He was in the same place,
thereupon he said to me: “O young man! You’ve put me to trouble! Indeed, I’ve
been here for three (nights), expecting for your coming.” (This narration is
reported by Abu Dawud).
It was said to Ibrahim: "What about him who is given an appointment by
another who does not come to him?" he said: "He has to wait him until the
coming prayer is due." It is said that whenever the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" made a promise, he should say: "It
may be!" Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud "Allah be pleased with him" never gave a
promise but that he said: "Allah willing"; and this is preferable. Therefore, if
the promise is given with decision, he has to fulfill it unless it is difficult upon
him to do so. But if he, at the time of promise, has the intention not to fulfill
it, he will be a hypocrite.
Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him" said: The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “The sign of a hypocrite is to
have those three characteristics... even if he offered the prayers, observed the
fasts, and claimed to be a Muslim: If he talked he would tell a lie; if he made a
promise, he would break it; and if he was entrusted, he would prove to be
treacherous.” (This narration is reported by both sheikhs). Abdullah Ibn Amr
"Allah be pleased with him" said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: “If anyone has those following four characteristics, he
will be a clear hypocrite, and if he has anyone of them, he will have a
characteristic of hypocrisy until he gives up it: If he talked (to anyone) he would
tell a lie; if he made a treaty (with anyone) he would prove to be treacherous; if he
made a promise, he would break it; and if he quarreled (anyone), he would
deviate from the truth.” (It reported by both sheikhs).
This pertains to the intention to break the promise or not to fulfill it with
no legal excuse. But if one has the intention to fulfill his promise and then he
encounters a legal excuse which hinders him from doing so, he will not be a
hypocrite, although the form of hypocrisy will appear in him. But even, he has
to beware of the form as well as he does of the real nature of hypocrisy, and
keep himself far from seeking excuses with no need. It is narrated that the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" promised Abu
Al-Haitham Ibn At-Taihan to give him a servant. Three were brought to him
from the captives, and he gave two of them and one remained with him.
Fatimah "Allah be pleased with her" came to him to ask him to give her a
servant saying: "Do you not see the trace of the millstone in my hand?" he
remembered his promise to Abu Al-Haitham and said: "What should I do with
my promise to Abu Al-Haitham?" thus, he favored him with that servant and
Thus, gave him preference over Fatimah "Allah be pleased with her". (This
narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu Hurairah). Thus,
he gave preference to him over Fatimah for his previous promise to him, in
spite of her fatigue resulting from her turning the stone with her own weak
hand.

- 221
Book four: evil of tongue
On another occasion, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" was sitting at Hunain to distribute the war spoils of Hawazin when a
man stood in front of him and said: "O Messenger of Allah! You have made a
promise to give me!" the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "You have told the truth. Give your judgement on what you like." He
said: "I give my judgement on a herd of eighty sheep with its shepherd." He said
to him: "It is for you. Indeed, how easy your judgement is! No doubt, the woman
who guided Moses "Peace be upon him" to the bones of Yusuf was more
decisive and strong in her judgement when she said to him: "My judgement is
that you should restore me to my youth and admit me to the Garden with you."
(This narradon is reported by Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim on the authority of Abu
Musa). It is said that the people came to regard as weak his judgement and elicit a
proverb on that occasion saying: "This man is more stingy than the lord of the
eighty sheep and their shepherd."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "If a
man gives a promise to another with the intention to fulfill it, he will not be
regarded to have broken it if he fails to achieve it." (This narration is reported by
Abu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Zaid Ibn Arqam). According to
another version, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "If a man gives a promise to his brother with the intention to fulfill it
and he fails to achieve it as it is beyond his capacity, there will be no sin on him."
The Fourteenth Evil: Telling Lies In Word And Oath
It is one of the odious sins and shameful defects.
The Prophetic Narrations
From among the Prophetic narrations, a mention may be made of the
following:
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Bakr that just after the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” had died, he said: “Last year, the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” took this position
of mine...” and then Abu Bakr went on weeping, after which he resumed: “I
advise you to stick to telling the truth, for it is in the company of dutifulness (and
piety), and both will (admit one) to the Garden; and I beware you of telling lies,
for it is in the company of wickedness, and both will (admit one) to the fire (of
Hell). You further should invoke Allah (to endow you with) power and health,
for none has been given, after certainty (of faith) a thing better than power and
health. You should not envy one another, nor should you show hatred to one
another, nor should you sever the relation with one another, nor should you
show desertion to one another, and rather be Allah’s servants, brothers (in the
religion of Allah)!” ^This narration is reported by Ibn Majah and An-Nasa'i).
According to Abu Umamah "Allah be pleased with him": the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Indeed, telling lies is
one of the gates of hypocrisy." (This narration is reported by Ibn Adi).
According to Al-Hassan: "It is said that one of the signs of hypocrisy is to

The quarter of the destructives
222
have the secret different from the public, the word from the deed, the inside
from the outside, and telling lies is the basis on which hypocrisy is built." It is
narrated on the authority of Sufyan Ibn Asid Al-Hadrami that he said: I heard
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" having said:
“How treacherous it is to tell your brother something, to which he gives trust,
even though you give lie to it.” (This narration is reported by Al-Bukhari in
Al-Adab Al-Mufrad and Abu Dawud; and At-Tabarani on the authority of
An-Nawwas Ibn Sam'an).
It is further narrated on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud "Allah be pleased
with him" that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "A man continues to tell lies and seek after lies until he is
written as a liar with Allah Almighty." (This narration is reported by both
sheikhs). The Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him"
came upon two men involved in a transaction of a sheep, and one of them
was saying to the other: "By Allah, I never decrease for you from such and
such." The other was saying: "By Allah, I never add for you to such and
such." One of them bought the sheep, thereupon the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "No doubt, sin and expiation
have become due upon one of them." (This narration is reported by Abu AlFath Al-Azdi on the authority of Nasikh Al-Hadrami).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "No
doubt, telling lies decreases sustenance." (This narration is reported by Abu AshShaikh on the authority of Abu Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "Indeed, traders are the wicked." It
was said: "O Messenger of Allah! Is it not that Allah Almighty ahs made lawful
trade?" the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Yes, but they always take oaths therewith they commit sins, and talk and tell lies
(in their talks)." (This narration is reported by Ahmad, Al-Hakim and Al-Baihaqi
on the authority of Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Shibl). Abu Dharr "Allah be pleased
with him" said: The Prophet “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said:
“There are three with whom Allah would not speak on the day of judgement.
They are: the one who never gives a gift (to people) but that he reminds them of
it, the one who sells his goods by false oaths, and The one who hangs down his
lower garment (out of haughtiness).” (This narration is reported by Muslim).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "No
one swears by Allah Almighty over even the like of a mosquito's wing but that it
becomes a dot in his heart until the Day of Judgement." (This narration is
reported by At-Tirmidhi and Al-Hakim on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Unais).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Dharr that Allah's Apostle" Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said: "Three are loved by Allah Almighty, and other
three are disliked by Allah Almighty: as for those whom Allah Almighty loves,
(The giver of) a man who came to a people and asked them (to give him) by
Allah, and not by a certain kinship he had with them and they withheld him,
thereupon a man followed him from amongst them, and gave him in secrecy, and

223

Book four: evil of tongue

none knew his gift barring Allah Almighty and its giver; and a (man among a)
people who proceeded on (during their journey) at night until sleep became
dearer to them than anything like it, they ascended and lay down their heads (and
fell asleep) thereupon he got up, supplicated Me (AJlah Almighty), and recited My
Holy Verses; and a man who was in a military detachment, who faced the enemy
and then they were defeated, thereupon he faced them until he was killed (as a
martyr) or emerged victorious. As for those whom Allah Almighty dislikes, the
trader who swears so much, the arrogant poor, and the niggard who always
reminds others of his generosity." (This narration is reported by Ahmad and AnNasa’i).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Woe
to him who talks to the people and tells lies in his talk in order to cause them to
laugh: woe to him, woe to him, woe to him!" (This narration is reported by AtTirmidhi, Abu Dawud and An-Nasa'i on the authority of Bahz Ibn Hakim from
his father from his grandfather). The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said: "I saw (a dream) last night that two men came to me, caught
hold of my hands, and took me to the Sacred Land (Jerusalem). There, I saw a
person sitting and another standing with an iron hook in his hand pushing it
inside the mouth of the former till it reached the jawbone, and then tore off one
side of his cheek, and then did the same with the other side; in the meantime the
first side of his cheek became normal again and then he repeated the same
operation again. I said: “What is this?” They said: “He was a liar and he used to
tell lies, and the people would report those lies on his authority till they spread all
over the world. So, he will be punished like that till the Day of Resurrection. HH
(This narration is reported by Al-Bukhari On the authority of Samurah Ibn

J undub).
Abdullah Ibn Jarad "Allah be pleased with him" said: I asked the Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "Does the believer commit
adultery?" he said: "It may be." I further asked: "Does he tell a lie?" he said:
"No." then the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
recited the following statement of Allah Almighty: "It is those who believe not in
the Signs of Allah, that forge falsehood: it is they who lie!" (An-Nahl 105)
I

a!

^

io^y-t'y- voylivustf ^ulj»
(This narration is reported by Ibn Abdul-Barr and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya). Abu
Sa'id Al-Khudri "Allah be pleased with him" said: I heard the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" saying in his supplication: "O Allah!
Purify my heart from hypocrisy, my private parts from adultery, and my tongue
from falsehood." (This narration is reported by Al-Khatib but on the authority of
Umm Ma'bad).
Abu Hazim narrated from Abu Hurairah that The Prophet “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” said: “There are three whom Allah would neither
speak with on die day of judgement, nor would He purify (of their sins), nor
would He look at, and for them is a painful penalty. They are: an old man who

The quarter of the destructives
224
is adulterer, a liar king, and a proud destitute.” (This narration is reported by
Muslim). It is narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Amir that he said: One
day, my mother called me (and I was still young) and the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was sitdng in our house, and she said:
“Come to me so that I would give you such and such.” The Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" asked her: tcWhat have you intended
to give him?” she said: “I’ve intended to give him dates.” On that he said: “You
should know that if you do not give him, it will be written as a lie (in your
record of deeds for which you will have a sin).” (This narration is reported by
Abu Dawud).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Were Allah Almighty to endow me with property as much as is the number of
those pebbles, I would distribute it among you, and you would not find me a
niggard, nor a liar nor a coward." (This narration is reported by Muslim). AbdAr-Rahman narrated from his father Abu Bakrah "Allah be pleased with him":
The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said thrice: "Should I
inform you what the greatest of the major sins are?" They said: "Yes, O Allah's
Apostle!" He said: "To join others in worship with Allah and to be undutiful to
one's parents." The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" then sat
up after he had been reclining (on a pillow) and said: "And I warn you against
giving a false witness.” He kept on saying that warning till we said (to
ourselves): “Would that he might stop!” (This narration is reported by both
sheikhs).
Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "A servant might tell a lie because of
whose stench the angel (entrusted to him) moves as far as a mile from him."
(This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi). Anas "Allah be pleased with him"
said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Come to me with six characteristics, perchance I would assure the Garden to
you." They said: "What are those?" he said: "If anyone of you talks, he should
not tell a lie; and if he gives a promise, he should not break it; and if he is
entrusted, he should not prove treacherous; furthermore, you should lower your
gazes; safeguard your privates (from the unlawful); and withhold your hands
(from the evil)." (This narration is reported by Al-Hakim and Al-Khara'iti).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "Satan has kohl, gum and snuff. His gum is falsehood; his snuff is anger; and
his kohl is sleep." (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani and Abu Na’im on
the authority of Anas). It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Umar "Allah be
pleased with him" that he said: Once, Umar addressed the people with a sermon
in which he said: One day, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" stood from us at the same position I am standing from you now and
said: "Be kind to my companions and the generation to follow them, for after
that falsehood would become so widespread that a man would take oath although
he is not asked to do so, and give witness although he is not asked to give it."

'f

225
Book four: evil of tongue ------------------------------------(This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "He, who tells a false narration about me, is one of the liars." (This narration
is reported by Muslim on the authority of Samurah Ibn Jundub). The Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" also said: "He, who takes a
false oath to usurp the property of a Muslim with no just cause, will meet Allah
Who will be angry with him." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on the
authority of Ibn Mas'ud). It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" rejected the witness of a man because of a lie he
told. (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Musa
Ibn Shaibah).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Each
evil deed done by a believer might possibly be removed except for falsehood and
betrayal." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Shaibah on the authority of Abu
Umamah; Ibn Adi and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Sa'id Ibn Abu
Waqqas). A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" said: "Falsehood was the most
difficult among the characters upon the companions of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him", and he used to check anyone of his
companions about falsehood, and he would not clarify his breast to him until he
knew that he had repented to Allah Almighty from it." (This narration is reported
by Ahmad and Abu Ash-Shaikh).
Moses "Peace be upon him" said: "O Lord! Which of Your servants does the
best deed in Your Sight?" he said: "He, whose tongue never lies, whose heart
never proves wicked, and whose privates never commits adultery." Luqman said
to his son (by way of admonishing him): "O my son! Beware of telling lies for it is
as delicious as a sparrow's flesh, and after a short while, its doer would desert it."
In praising truthfulness, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "If you have the following four characteristics, no harm shall
befall you for losing anything else in this world: true speech, keeping trust, good
moral character, and pure and lawful sustenance." (This narration is reported by
Al-Hakim and Al-Khara'iti on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr).
In a sermon he delivered after the death of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him", Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" said: the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" stood like my
standing in front of you last year and wept and said: "Beware of telling lies for it,
taken together with righteousness leads to the Garden." (This narration is
reported by Ibn Majah and An-Nasa'i). Mu'adh "Allah be pleased with him" said:
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to me: "I
advise you to fear Allah, be true in speech, give back the trust, fulfill the pledge,
salute with peace whomever you meet, and lower the wing (to the weak and
helpless)." (This narration is reported by Abu Na'im).

The Traditions And Sayings
Ali "Allah be pleased with him" said: "The worst mistake in the Sight of Allah

The quarter of the destructives
226
Almighty is that which results from a tongue that tells lies; and the worst regret
will be that on the Day of Judgement." Umar Ibn Abdul-Aziz "may Allah have
mercy upon him" said: "I*ve never told a lie since I (grew up and) straightened my
lower garment on my waist." Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him"
said: "The dearest of you to us in case we do not see you is he, who has the best
name among you; and in case we see you, then, the dearest of you to us is he who
has the best moral character among you, and in case we check you, then the
dearest of you to us is he who is the truest in speech and the most trustworthy
among you."
Maimun Ibn Abu Shabib said: "I sat to write a book and came upon a word,
which, if I write it, it would adorn it, although I would be a liar, thereupon I
decided to leave it. On that I was called from outside the house: "Allah will
establish in strength those who believe, with the Word that stands firm, in this
world and in the Hereafter; but Allah will leave, to stray, those who do wrong:
Allah does what He wills." (Ibrahim 27)
J\ A 1')qI 1

I

3

^

-d l 51 ij S--H

1 (J]^J Lj i

I C -sd-jid] I

1

Ash-Sha'bi said: "I do not know which of both will sink deeper in the fire (of
Hell), the liar or the niggard." Ibn As-Sammak said: "I do not think I shall receive
reward for leaving falsehood, for indeed, I give it up because I disdain it." Subaih
was asked: "Should a man be called a liar only for a single lie he tells?" he
answered in the affirmative.
According to Malik Ibn Dinar: "I have read in a book that there is no orator
but that his sermon is compared to his deed: if his deed is true to his word, he
will be truthful, otherwise, his lips will be filed with files from fire, and whenever
they are filed, they would grow once again (in order to be filed anew)." According
to Malik Ibn Dinar once again: "Both falsehood and truth fight within the heart
until one of them should drive the other away." Once Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz
talked to Al-Walid Ibn Abd-Al-Malik about something, thereupon he said to him:
"You have told a lie." On that he said: "By Allah, I have never told a lie since I
came to know that falsehood disgraces the one who does it."
Exposition Of Allowable Lies
It should be known to you that telling lies is not unlawful in its real nature
in so much as in the harm it causes to the addressee. At the least, the addressee
might have the false impression that a particular thing is true even though it is
not really so, which causes him to ignorant. But even, in many cases, ignorance
might serve the benefit, and since it is caused by telling lies, it then might be
allowable, if not obligatory. According to Maimun Ibn Muhran: "Telling lies in
some cases is better than telling the truth. Tell me: if a man chased another man
with the sword to kill him, and the latter ran until he entered your house (to flee
from him), and he (the chaser) came to ask you whether or not you have seen
him: what then would you say? Would it not be better if you say 'I have not

Book four: evil of tongue

:
:

227

seen him'? but if by saying so you are not truthful, telling lies as such is
obligatory.”
Let's say that speech is a means to achieve praiseworthy purposes: if it is
possible to achieve a praiseworthy purpose by means of telling truth or telling
lies alike, telling lies therein is unlawful, and if it is possible to achieve it only by
telling lies, then, telling lies is permissible in case achieving that purpose is
permissible, and obligatory in case achieving that purpose is obligatory. It is
obligatory to protect the blood of a Muslim, and if telling the truth is to lead to
shedding the blood of a Muslim who has hidden himself from a wrongdoer,
then, telling lies is obligatory as long as it will save his blood. Furthermore, if it
is impossible to accomplish war or mend the relation between two adversaries
and attract the heart of the plaintiff but through telling lies, then, telling lies in
this case is allowable.
But at the same time, one should avoid it as much as he could, for if its door
is opened so widely, there is fear it might lead to what is dispensable and
unnecessary. Thus, telling lies is unlawful unless it is necessary. The exception is
confirmed by the statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" on the authority of Umm Kulthum "Allah be pleased with her" in
which she told that she never learnt that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" gave concession to tell lies but in three cases: in battle
for bringing reconciliation amongst persons, and in the husband’s talk to his wif
or the wife’s speech to her husband (just in order to bring reconciliation betwe(
them). (This narration is reported by Muslim). Umm Kulthum "Allah be please
with her" further said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "Not a liar is he who makes reconciliation between two
adversaries and says good or tells good (to each about the other)." (This narration
is reported by both sheikhs). Asma' Bint Yazid "Allah be pleased with her" said:
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "All kinds
of lies are written (as sins) against the son of Adam, except when a man tells lies
therewith he seeks to make reconciliation between Muslims." (This narration is
reported by Ahmad).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Kahil "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: There was a quarrel between two Muslims which resulted in their
schism. I met one of them and said to him: "What has happened between you
and so and so given that I heard him mentioning you with good?" I met the
other and said to him the same. They reconciled and I said to myself: "No
doubt, I have ruined myself in the way of making reconciliation between them."
I told the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" about
that, thereupon he said: "O Abu Kahil! Make reconciliation between the people
(even by means of telling lies)!" (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani).
Ata' Ibn Yasar said: A man said to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him": "I sometimes tell lies to my wife." He said: "There is no
good in telling lies." He said: "I sometimes promise her and say to her such and
such (to attract her heart)." On that he said: "There is no sin on you." (This

The quarter of the destructives
228
narration is reported by Ibn Abd-Al-Barr and Malik in his Muwatta').
It is reported that Ibn Abu Udhrah Ad-Du'ali who lived during the caliphate
of Umar "Allah be pleased with him" used to beat the women whom he married
until a bad talk about him became in circulation among the people. Learnt about
that, he caught hold of the hand of Abdullah Ibn Al-Arqam and accompanied
him to the house and addressed his wife saying: "I beseech you by Allah: do you
dislike me?" she said: "Do not beseech me by Allah." He said: "But I beseech you
by Allah to tell me." She said: "Yes." He said to Abdullah: "Do you hear?" they
both went to Umar "Allah be pleased with him" and he said to him: "You talk
that I am in the habit of wronging and beating women. But, ask Abdullah Ibn AlArqam about that." He asked him and Ibn Al-Arqam told him (about what he
had heard). He sent to invite the wife of Ibn Abu Udhrah and she came in the
company of her paternal aunt. He asked her: "Is it you who tell your husband
that you dislike him?" she said: "I am the first to repent and comply with the
command of Allah Almighty. He besought me by Allah and I felt shy of telling a
lie: should I tell a lie O Commander of Believers?" he said: "Yes, you might tell a
lie in that concern. If anyone of you (women) does not like her husband, she
should not tell him about that. A very few houses that are based on mutual love,
but most frequendy people treat each other on the basis of Islam and ancestry."
It is narrated on the authority of An-Nawwas Ibn Sam'an "Allah be pleased
with him" that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "Why do I see you competing each other to tell lies in the same
way as flies compete each other to the fire? Of a surety, all kinds of lies are
written (as sins) against the son of Adam except when a man tells lies in war for
indeed war is a guile; or when he makes reconciliation between two adversaries;
or when he talks to his wife with what pleases her." (This narration is reported by
Abu Bakr Ibn Bilal and At-Tabarani). According to Thawban "Allah be pleased
with him": "All lies are sins except that therewith one benefits a Muslim or averts
harm form him." Ali "Allah be pleased with him" said: "If I tell you anything
about the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" then, it is
better for me to fall down from the sky than to tell lies about him. But were I to
tell you something frankly about me, let me tell you that war is guile."
In those three, telling lies is reported to be allowable; and it is true of their like
in case the related purpose to be achieved thereby is valid and praiseworthy,
whether it is for his own benefit or for the benefit of others, like the instance
according to which a wrongdoer arrests him and asks him about his property to
usurp it illegally and wrongfully, or a ruler arrests him and asks him about an
evildoing he has committed in what is between him and Allah Almighty, in which
case he has the right to deny it and say: "I have never committed adultery or
theft." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "If
one commits anything of those dirt (and shameful) things, he should screen
himself with the screen of Allah Almighty." (This narration is reported by AlHakim on the authority of Umar). That's because to disclose a shameful deed is
itself another shameful deed.

229
Book four: evil of tongue
One has the right to safeguard his soul and property if it is to be usurped with
no just cause, and his honour with his tongue, even if he is to tell a lie.
Concerning the honour of another, he has the right to deny what he knows about
his secrets. He has the right to tell lies in making peace between two foes, or
between his fellow-wives, by showing to each of them that she is the dearest to
him. Furthermore, if his wife does not obey him unless he achieves for her
something he has no power to do, let him promise her immediately, with the
intendon to please her. If he is to apologize to another man who is not pleased
unless he denies a particular sin and shows more affection for him, there is no
harm in it.
But the limit which one should not go beyond is that telling lies is
forbidden, and were he to be truthful in those instances, what is forbidden
would ensue there from. So, he should make comparison between both cases
and measure with the just and fair scale of balance. If he learns that the
forbidden that ensues from telling the truth is more grievous under religious
law than that which ensues from telling a lie, then, he ahs the right to tell a lie.
But if the purpose to be achieved by telling a lie is more trivial than that to be
achieved by telling the truth, then, it becomes binding upon him to tell the
truth.
But in some cases, both might become equal in a way that makes him waven
as to which of them he should incline. In this case, to tell the truth is preferable
for as we know telling lies is allowable only to serve a severe necessity or dire
need. If he has doubt as to the importance or necessity, then, the basic rule is the
prohibition to which he should return. As it is abstruse to know the different
levels of purposes, one should avoid lying as much as he could. Likewise, if it is
his own need, it is desirable for him to leave it than to tell a lie; and if it pertains
to another, it is impermissible for him to indulge in the rights of others, or cause
harm to them. But unfortunately, the people lie most frequently for their own
portions, and to increase their property and majesty, or for such of things as
skipping them is not harmful or forbidden. You see a wife tell lies about her
husband to show pride and vie in glory with her fellow-wives; and this is, to be
sure, unlawful.
Asma “Allah be pleased with her” reported that a woman came to The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and said: “I have a
fellow-wife. Is there any harm for me if I tell her falsely of getting something
from the wealth of my husband which he has not really given me for the purpose
of enraging her?” The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: “The one who falsely tells of getting what he has not been given is like
one who wears two garments of falsehood.” (This narration is reported by both
sheikhs). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
further said: "He, who claims to eat what he has really not eaten, or to have what
he does not really have, or to be given what he has not really been given, is like
him who will put on two garments of falsehood on the Day of Judgement." This
applies to the learned who does not verify of what he says or narrates. He

The quarter of the destructives
230
narrates the tradition which is not proven to him just for the sake of showing his
superiority and preeminence to others, and disdaining of saying that he does not
know. This is unlawful.
The same rule of women is true of children. If a child does not like to go to
the nursery school unless he is given a false promise or falsely frightened, it is
permissible. It is true that we have already transmitted that this kind is also
written as lies, but the permissible lies might be written for which one will be
reckoned and required to justify his purpose therein, and then it will be forgiven
for him for telling lies has been made permissible only for the sake of reform.
But a great deception lies in this respect. One's motive of telling a lie might be
his own benefit and fortune, although he justifies it by the purpose of reform
and this is why it is written (as sins). Whoever is engaged in a lie has indeed
come under the risk of diligence in order to know whether or not the purpose
for which he tells a lie is more important under religious law than to tell the
truth. This matter is very abstruse. So, it is more decisive to leave it unless it is
obligatory in a way that makes it impossible to leave it, like the case in which
leaving it will lead to the shedding of the blood of a Muslim or committing a
sin.
But this is quite different from the case in which some think, though falsely,
that it is permissible to fabricate Prophetic traditions to confirm the virtues and
rewards of good deeds and aggravate the punishment of sins, alleging that the
purpose there from is right; and of a surety, it is clearly invalid. The Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "He, who attributes lies
to me intentionally, let him occupy his seat in the fire (of Hell)." Telling lies is
impermissible unless there is a severe necessity; and there is no necessity in
fabricating Prophetic traditions since the Holy Verses and authentic traditions
are sufficient. There is no necessity at all to justify the attribution of lies to the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him". To open such a
gate leads to distracting the religious law. To be sure, telling lies about the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" is one of the
major sins which are unjustifiable: we ask Allah to pardon us as well as all of the
Muslims.

Exposition of Avoidance of telling lies by Way Of Implicit references
It is transmitted from the righteous predecessors that one might dispense
with telling lies by implicit reference. Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said:
"The implicit reference suffices man for telling lies." The same is reported from
Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with him" and others. But they mean when one is
forced by necessity to tell a lie; and in case there is no necessity, then, neither
implicit reference nor explicit statement (in which one lies) are permissible. But at
any rate, the evil and harm of implicit reference are easier. The example of
implicit reference is the narration that Mutarrif was invited to visit Ziyad, and
when he delayed to come, and Ziyad asked him about that, he justified his delay
by his ailment saying: "I have not raised my side since I left the governor, except

231
Book four: evil of tongue ---when Allah Almighty raises me."
According to Ibrahim: "If something was attributed to you and you dislike
to tell a lie, just say: "Verily, Allah Almighty knows what I have really said of
that." This statement will give the negative to the listener, though not clearly.
Mu'adh Ibn Jabal "Allah be pleased with him" was appointed by Umar "Allah
be pleased with him" in some office and when he returned his wife asked him:
"What have you brought with you from those things which the appointed
officers bring to their wives (when they return)?" as he brought nothing to her
he said: "A watcher has been sent over me." She said: "You were a trustworthy
in the sight of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
and the same in the sight of Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him": how should
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" send watcher over you?" she stood and
conveyed that news to her family and made a complaint against Umar "Allah be
pleased with him". When the news of that reached Umar "Allah be pleased with
him" he invited Mu'adh "Allah be pleased with him" and asked him: "Have I
sent a watcher over you?" he said: "I did not have any way to apologize for her
but that." Umar "Allah be pleased with him" laughed and gave him something
and said: "Please her with that." He intended by the watcher Allah Almighty.
An-Nakh'i used to say to his daughter: "What do you see if I buy sugar for
you?" He used to say so for perhaps he might not be able to realize it.
Whenever Ibrahim was invited by him whom he disliked to meet and he was in
the house, he would say to his slave-girl: "Tell him to demand him in the
mosque, and do not tell him that I am not in the house in order not to be a
liar." Whenever Ash-Sha'bi was invited by him whom he disliked to meet and
he was in the house, he would draw a circle and ask his slave-girl to place her
finger in it and say to the inviter: "Tell him that he is not in that (circle)." This is
properly applicable when there is a dire need for it. But in case there is no need,
it should be avoided, for it gives the impression of telling something different
from the reality and even though it is with no clear words, it is undesirable in
general.
In this respect, it is narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Utbah that he
said: I entered in the company of my father upon Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz "may
Allah have mercy upon him" and when I came out there was a garment over me.
The people went on saying: "This garment has been given to you by the
Commander of Believers." I said to them: "May Allah reward the Commander of
Believers." On that my father said to me: "O my son! Safeguard yourself against
telling lies and the like of it." He forbade him for his statement confirmed to
them a false impression, just for the sake of vainglory, which is, in itself, a false
purpose of no benefit
It is true that implicit references are permissible to serve simple purposes like
pleasing by way of joking, such as, for instance, the statement of the Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" to an old woman: "No old
should enter the Garden" and his statement to another woman: "There is
whiteness in the eye of your husband", and to a third one: "Let us carry you on

The quarter of the destructives
232
the camel's baby", etc. this is unlike the clear lie like the statement of Nu'man AlAnsari to Uthman "Allah be pleased with him" in the story of the blind one: "He
is Nu'aiman", and the jokes of the follies common among the people with which
they deceive one for example that such and such a woman has a desire for
marrying him: if it is to cause harm to a particular person, it is evidendy unlawful;
and if it is intended only to please somebody, the perpetrator is not regarded a
wicked but his faith will decrease.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"One's faith shall not be complete until he loves for his brother the same as he
loves for himself, and until he avoids telling lies even in his jokes." (This
narration is partially reported by Ibn Abd-Al-Barr on the authority of Abu
Mulaikah; and partially by both sheikhs on the authority of Anas; and partially by
Ad-Daraqatni on the authority of Abu Hurairah). The statement of the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "A man might
utter a word with the intention to bring his sitters to laughter, because of its (evil)
he falls down in the fire (of Hell) farther than stars (from the earth)", he means
thereby backbiting or harming a Muslim, but not the pure joke. Among the lies
that bring about no wickedness is the exaggerations that are customary among
the people in such statements as "I have asked for you such and such times", and
"I have said to you that such and such time", and die like of those things which
are not intended to give the impression of the exact number of times but just the
impression of exaggeration. But if he has done the thing only once, he will be a
liar, and if he has done it so many times the like of which is not customary, he
will not be sinful.
From among the lies that are also customary in which the people indulge is
one's statement to another: "Eat food" and the other's reply: "I have no appetite
for it". However, this is forbidden if not unlawful, if it does not mean the real
sense. In this respect, it is narrated on the authority of Mujahid that he said:
Asma' Bint Umais "Allah be pleased with her" said: "I was in the company of
A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" on the very night she was prepared for the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" to consummate
marriage with her. There were some women with me. By Allah, we found in his
house nothing other than a vessel of milk. He drank and then gave it to A'ishah
"Allah be pleased with her" who felt shy. I said to her: "Do not return (with
failure) the hand of the," but rather take it form his hand." She took it form him
with shyness and drank thereof. He said to her: "Give to your companions to
drink thereof." We said: "We have no appetite for it." On that he said: "Do not
talk in the plural about yourselves in the matters in which you tell lies." I said: "O
Messenger of Allah! If anyone of us says about anything she likes that she has no
appetite for it: is it regarded a lie?" he answered: ""No doubt, a lie is written as a
lie (with no exception)." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and
At-Tabarani).
The people of piety used to avoid indulgence in this kind of lies. According to
Al-Laith Ibn Sa'd: "The eyes of Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab used to be covered with

233
Book four: evil of tongue
dust until it would come out of them, and it was said to him: "Why do you not
wipe your eyes?" he said: "Then, what about the statement of the physician: 'Do
not touch your eyes', and my reply to him that I would not do?" this is the way
men of piety used to watch over themselves, and if one leaves it, his tongue
might be drawn stealthily to tell lies even though without feeling. Khawat AtTaimi said: A sister of Ar-Rabie Ibn Khuthaim came to visit a sick child of his
and inquire about his health, and when she turned over him she asked him: "How
are you O my son?" on that Ar-Rabie said to her: "Have you suckled him?" she
answered in the negative, thereupon he said: "Then, what is the matter with you if
you call him 'son of my brother'?" she gave trust to it.
It is customary to say: "Allah knows" about things which he himself knows
not. Jesus "Peace be upon him" said: "One of the greatest sins in the Sight of
Allah Almighty is to say 'Allah knows' about things which he himself knows not."
Furthermore, one might tell lies in dreams, although telling lies therein is a great
crime. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"One of the greatest falsehoods is that a man claims to a person other than his
father, to ascribe to his eyes a dream vision which he saw not, and to attribute to
me what I said not." (This narration is reported by Al-Bukhari on the authority of
Wathilah Ibn Al-Asqa'). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" further said: "He who tells a lie about a dream will be required on the
Day of Judgement to make a knot between two hair, and in no way would he be
able to do it." (This narration is reported by Al-Bukhari on the authority of Ibn
Abbas).
The Fifteenth Evil: Backbiting
The discussion of it is very lengthy. But let's first mention its criticism
supported by quotations and proofs from religious law. Allah Almighty stated
that it is severely blameworthy, and likened its doer to the eater of the flesh of a
dead, saying: "nor speak ill of each other behind their backs. Would any of you
like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? Nay, you would abhor it. But fear
Allah: for Allah is Oft-Returning, Most-Merciful." (Al-Hujurat 12)
4J)T o] 4&T ijijlj 0yisAJxi

b O'

U^lV;

^

The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Everything belonging to the Muslims is sacred (and inviolable) to the Muslim,
his blood, property and honour." (This narration is reported by Muslim on the
authority of Abu Hurairah).
Of a surety, backbiting touches the honour, whose sanctity Allah Almighty
placed in combination with blood and property. It is narrated on the authority of
Abu Barzah that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "Envy not each other, nor dislike each other, nor speak to each
other shamelessly, nor desert each other, nor backbite each other, and be, O
slaves of Allah, brothers (in the religion of Allah)." (This narration is reported by

The quarter of the destructives
234
both sheikhs on the authority of Abu Hurairah). It is further narrated on the
authority of Jabir and Abu Sa'id at, that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said: "Beware of backbiting for indeed, backbiting is
more grievous than adultery. The adulterer commits adultery and repents,
thereupon Allah Almighty turns to him in repentance, while the backbiter will not
be forgiven until the backbitten himself pardons him." (This narration is reported
by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and Ibn Hibban).
It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "On
the night I was made to set out on a Night Journey, I came upon people
lacerating their faces with their nails, and I asked: "O Gabriel! Who are those?" he
said: "They are these who backbite the people and plunge in their honours." (This
narration is reported by Abu Dawud). Sulaim Ibn Jabir said: I went to the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and said: "Teach
me something good to get benefit therewith." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Do not look down upon a favor whatever
it might be, even if it is only to get some water by your bucket from the fount of
the water provider, and receive your brother cheerfully, and if he turns his back
to you, backbite him not." (This narration is reported by Ahmad and Ibn Abu
Ad-Dunya).
Al-Bara' "Allah be pleased with him" aid: One day, the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" addressed us with a sermon so
impressive that even the women in their houses heard it, in which he said: "O
assembly of those who believe with their tongues and not with their hearts!
Backbite not Muslims nor seek after their defects, for whoever seeks after the
defects of his brother, Allah Almighty seeks after his defects and whomever Allah
Almighty seeks after his defects puts to shame while he is amidst his house."
(This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya; and Abu Dawud on the
authority of Abu Barzah).
It is reported that it was revealed to Moses "Peace be upon him" that
Whoever dies while repenting from backbiting will be the last to enter the
Garden, and whoever dies while insisting on backbiting will be the first to enter
the fire (of Hell)." Anas "Allah be pleased with him" said: Once, the Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" commanded the people to
observe a fast and said: "None of you should break fasting until I give him
permission." The people observed fast and when it was sunset, one came to
him after another saying: "O Messenger of Allah! I have fasted, so, please, give
me permission to break my fasting", and he gave permission to them in
succession. Then, a man came and said to him: "O Messenger of Allah! Two
young women from your family have fasted, and they now feel shy to come to
ask for your permission to break fasting." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" turned away from him. The man repeated the
statement to him and the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" turned away from him once again. When he repeated it to him for

235
Book four: evil of tongue
the third time the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said to him: "No doubt, they have not fasted, and how should one who
continues to eat the flesh of others during his day be regarded as fasting? Go to
them and tell them, if they are still fasting, to force themselves to vomit" He
returned and told them, and they did accordingly, and each vomited a leech-like
clot of blood. He returned and told him, thereupon the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "By Him in Whose Hand is my
soul, had they remained in their bellies, the fire would have devoured them."
(This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and lbn Mardawaih).
According to another version, when the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" turned away from him he came to him later and said: "O
Messenger of Allah! By Allah! They died or are about to die." The Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Bring them to me." They
were brought and the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" asked for a vessel, and told one of them to force herself to vomit and she
vomited pus and blood so abundant that the vessel was filled. He told the other
to force herself to vomit and she vomited the same. On that the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "No doubt, those have
fasted from what Allah has made lawful for them, and broken their fast on wha'
Allah has made unlawful for them. One of them sat with the other and both wer
on eating the flesh of people (by backbiting them)." (This narration is reported b
Ahmad and Abu Ya'li on the authority of Ubaid, the freed slave of the Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him").
Anas "Allah be pleased with him" said: One day, the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" addressed us with a sermon in which
he made a mention of usury and made grievous its evil consequence, and said: "A
single Dirham to be gained from usury is more grievous in sin in the Sight of
Allah Almighty than committing adultery thirty-six times; and the most grievous
usury is to plunge in the honour of the Muslim." (This narration is reported by
Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
Jabir "Allah be pleased with him" said: We were walking in the company of
the Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” when he passed through
one of the graveyards of Medina thereupon he said: “These two persons are
being tortured in their graves, not for a major sin (to avoid)." The Prophet
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” then added: “Yes! (they are being
tortured for a major sin). Indeed, one of them never saved himself from being
soiled with his urine while the other used to backbite others." The Prophet
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” then asked for a green leaf of a datepalm tree, which he broke into two pieces and put one on each grave. On being
asked why he had done so, he replied: “I hope that their torture might be
lessened, till these get dried." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya;
and both sheikhs on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
When Ma'iz Ibn Malik was ordered by the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" to be stoned to death (as a corporal

The quarter of the destructives
236
punishment for committing adultery), a man said to his friend: "No doubt,
this man (Ma'iz) has been lying just as a dog lies." Later, the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" came upon a corpse and they
were with him, thereupon he said to them: "Tweak (and eat) thereof!" they
said: "O Messenger of Allah! Should we eat out of a corpse?" he said: "No
doubt, your ill speech about your companion (Ma'iz) is more stinking than it."
(This narration is reported by Abu Dawud and An-Nasa'i on the authority of
Abu Hurairah).
The companions "Allah be pleased with them" used to meet each other
cheerfully, and they were never engaged in backbiting, seeing that meeting each
other with cheerfulness to be of the best deeds, and the opposite of it the habit
of the hypocrites. Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him" said: "He who eats
the flesh of (i.e. backbites) his brother in the world, it will be brought close to
him in the hereafter, and he will be asked to eat it while dead in the same way as
he ate it while living in the world; and he will do accordingly." (This narration is
reported by Ibn Mardawaih). It is narrated that two men were sitting at one gate
of the mosque when a previously effeminate man passed by them, thereupon one
part of
of them said to the other: "But there still remains in him
effeminateness." Then, prayer was established and they entered and performed
prayer with the people. But the evil of what they said aroused doubt in their
breasts, thereupon they went to Ata' and asked him about that, and he
commanded them to repeat ablution and prayer, and compensate fast if they did
so while fasting.
In his comment on Allah's statement: "Woe to every (kind of) scandal­
monger and backbiter" (Al-Humazah 1)

i0

jMLfe >

Mujahid "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "The scandal-monger is he
who slanders the people, and the backbiter is he who tweaks their flesh (by
speaking ill about them in their absence)." According to Qatadah "may Allah
have mercy upon him": "It is reported to us that the grave punishment is of three
thirds: one-third results from backbiting, one-third from going about with
calumnies (among the people), and one-third from being soiled with the traces of
urine (without removing it)." According to Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy
upon him": "By Allah! Backbiting is swifter to obliterate the religion of a Muslim
than are the eaters of the body."
One of the righteous said: "We caught up with the righteous predecessors,
and they did not regard worship in prayer or fasting in so much as in withholding
from the honours of people." According to Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with
him": "If you like to remember the defects of your friend, you should first
remember your own defects." According to Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with
him"" "One of you is ready to take heed of the dust in the eye of his companion,
although he is complete to be heedless of it in his own eye." Al-Hassan "may
Allah have mercy upon him" used to say: "O son of Adam! You shall not attain

Book four: evil of tongue

237

the real nature of faith until you do not criticize anyone with a defect which you
yourself have, and once you start to improve that defect in yourself, it will
become your main concern; and such is the dearest worshipper to Allah
Almighty."
Malik Ibn Dinar "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: Jesus "Peace be
upon him" was in the company of his disciples when he passed by the corpse of a
dog, thereupon they said: "How stinking the smell of that corpse is!" he "Peace
be upon him" said: "How white its teeth are!" he seemed to have disliked to
criticize it. Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with him" saw a man backbiting another,
thereupon he said to him: "Beware of backbiting, for it is the condiment of the
dogs of the people." Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: "Stick to the
celebration of Allah Almighty for it is a cure (from all diseases), and beware of
remembering people for it is a disease." We ask Allah Almighty to help us obey
Him.
Exposition Of Meaning And Definition Of Backbiting
It should be known to you that backbidng is to mention your brother in his
absence with what he dislikes in case he is informed about it, whether it
pertains to defects in his body, ancestry, character, deed, word, religion, world,
and even his garment, house and riding mount. As for the body, it is like your
mentioning his blindness, baldness, shortness, tallness, blackness, yellowness,
etc, of the characteristics which one dislikes to be described with. In relation to
ancestry, it is like your saying that one's father is a peasant, an Indian, a wicked,
a baseborn, a lowly, etc, of those which one dislikes to be described with.
Pertaining to character, it is to say, for instance, that he is ill-mannered, niggard,
arrogant, haughty, hypocrite, bad-tempered, coward, weak, reckless, etc. as far
as the religious deeds are concerned, it is to say that he is a thief, a liar, a drunk,
a betrayer, a wrongdoer, indulgent in prayer or alms, or that he does not bow or
prostrate perfectly, or that he does not avoid filth, or that he is undutiful to his
parents, or that he does not spend alms properly, or that he does not distribute
it with justice, or that he does not safeguard his fasting from obscenity,
backbiting and harming the honours of people. As for his worldly deeds, it is to
say that he is impolite, who regards people with slightness, and sees no right
due to anyone on him, or no duty on him to anyone, or that he is a big mouth,
who eats and sleeps much improperly. As for his garment, it is like your saying
that he is of large sleeve, long tail, and dirty garment.
But according to some people, there is no backbiting in the matters of
religion, for it is to criticize with such of things as Allah Almighty criticized, and it
is permissible to criticize him, and remind him of the sins he commits. It is
confirmed by the narration that a mention was made to the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" of a woman who used to pray and fast
so much, but at the same time, she used to harm her neighbours with her tongue.
On that he said: "She will be in the fire (of Hell)." (This narration is reported by
Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim on the authority of Abu Hurairah). Another woman

The quarter of the destructives
238
was mentioned to him with her niggardliness thereupon he said: "Then, what
good docs she have afterwards?" (This narration is reported by Al-Khara'iti on
the authority of Abu Ja'far: Muhammad Ibn Ali).
But even, this saying is invalid, for they mentioned that to serve their need
of learning the rulings through questioning and by no means depreciation was
their purpose. There is no need for the like of it except in the gathering of the
Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him". The proof is the
consensus that whoever mentions another in his absence with what he dislikes
is a backbiter, for he is involved in the definition of backbiting given by the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"; and even in case
he is truthful in what he mentions, he is a backbiter, disobedient to his Lord,
and eater of the flesh of his brother as attested from the narration in which the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “Do you
know what backbiting is?” They (the Companions) said: “Allah and His
Messenger know best.” On that he said: “Backbiting is to talk about your
brother in such a way that he does not like.” It was said to him: “What is your
opinion if I found (such a fault) in my brother which I mentioned?” He said:
“If this (fault) is really in him (which you mentioned in his absence), you would
be regarded to have backbitten him, and if it is not in him, that (which you did)
is a slander.” (This narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Abu
Hurairah).
Mu'adh Ibn Jabal "Allah be pleased with him" said: A mention of a man was
made in the presence of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" and they said: "How powerless he is!" on that the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Indeed, you have backbitten your
brother." They said: "O Messenger of Allah! We have mentioned no more than
what he really has." He said: "(By so doing you have backbitten him and) in case
you have mentioned what he has not, you will have slandered him." (This
narration is reported by At-Tabarani). It is further narrated on the authority of
Hudhaifah "Allah be pleased with him" that A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her"
mentioned a woman to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" and said: "How short she is!" on that he said: "No doubt, you have
backbitten her." (This narration is reported by Ahmad, Abu Dawud and AtTirmidhi).
According to Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him": "To make a
mention of another in his absence is of three kinds, all of which are in the Book
of Allah: backbiting, slander and untruth. To backbite him is to mention him with
what he really has. To slander him is to mention him with what he really has not.
To fabricate untruth about him is to say only what has reached you about him."
Once, Ibn Sirin "may Allah have mercy upon him" mentioned a man saying: "Ah!
This is the black man!" then, he said: "I pray for Allah's forgiveness! I think I
have backbitten him." On another occasion, Ibn Sirin "may Allah have mercy
upon him" mentioned Ibrahim An-Nakh'i thereupon he placed his hand over eye
in avoidance of saying 'the one-eyed'. It is narrated that A'ishah "Allah be pleased

Book four: evil of tongue

239

with her" said: "Do not backbite each other! Once, I made a mendon of a woman
in die presence of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" and said: "She is of long tail!" he said to me: "Eject! Eject!" I then ejected
something like a piece of flesh." (It is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and Ibn
Mardawaih).
Exposition Of The Fact That Backbiting Is Not Exclusive To Tongue
It should be known that mendoning with tongue is forbidden for it is
intended to make others make sense to the shortcomings and defects of your
brother, and let them know what he dislikes them to know about him. In it,
both explicit and implicit reference are equal as well as both word and deed are
equal. In short, every movement or act that is intended to make others have
such impression is included in backbiting, which is evidendy unlawful. A
mention may be made here of the narradon on the authority of A'ishah "Allah
be pleased with her" that she said: A woman came to visit us, and when she left
I beckoned with my hand expressing of her being very short. On that the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "No doubt,
you have backbitten her." (This narradon is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya
and Ibn Mardawaih).
Included in that also is the imitadon in act and behaviour, which is
backbidng, if not more grievous than backbidng, for it is more illustrative and
expressive. When the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upor
him" saw A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" having imitated a particular mar.
he said: "I would not be pleased to imitate a particular man in return for my
having such and such property." The same is true also of backbiting with
writing, for indeed, pen is one of both tongues. It is a part of backbiting that a
composer or a compiler makes a mention of a particular man in his
composition and criticize his words unless there is a dire need for it as will be
discussed later. But to say that 'Some say so and so' is not backbiting; for actual
backbiting is to refer to a particular person in name, no matter living or dead he
might be.
It is a part of backbiting to say 'One of those who have come upon us
today', if it leads to making the addressee understand that it is a particular
person who is intended, for what is forbidden is to make him have such
understanding and not the way whichever. But in case it leads not to that, it
will be permissible. Whenever the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" disliked anything from a particular person, he would say:
"What is the matter with some people who do such and such?" (This
narration is reported by Abu Dawud on the authority of A'ishah). If you say
"One of those who have returned from journey" or "One of those who claim
knowledge" thereby a particular person is presumably to be designated, it will
be backbiting.
But even, the most wicked backbiting is that of the reciters who behave in
order to be seen of men, for they make others understand their purposes while

The quarter of the destructives
240
being dressed in die dress of men of piety, in order to show how far they are
from backbiting. But while doing so, they do not know, due to their ignorance,
that they combine two shameful deeds: backbiting and showing off. A typical
example is diat a mention is made to him of a man thereupon he says (in implicit
reference to him): "Praise be to Allah Almighty Who has not put us to the trial of
frequenting rulers and disregarding ourselves in pursuit of wealth" or "We seek
refuge with Allah from the lack of shyness, and ask Him to protect us from it",
just with die intention to refer to the shortcoming to the one in issue. He might
first praise such of people as he likes to backbite saying: "How excellent his state
is! He never fell short of doing the acts of worship, but nowadays he has become
somewhat lukewarm, and been put to the same trial to which the majority of us
are sometimes put, i.e. the lack of patience." Although he seems to remind
himself, his real purpose is to dispraise such a person and praise himself by
likening himself to the righteous. In this way, he is a backbiter, a hypocrite, and a
giver of prestige to himself, combining thereby three shameful deeds, thinking,
due to his ignorance, that he is among the righteous who abstain from backbiting.
For this reason, Satan plays with ignorant people when they engage in
worship without knowledge, pursues them, makes fruitless their deeds with his
intrigues and plots, and laughs at them. An example is to mention the defect of a
particular person, of which some attendants might not take heed, thereupon he
says: "Glory be to Allah! How astonishing this is!" but when he pays attention to
him and makes sense to what he says, he mentions Allah Almighty, and uses the
name as instrument to realize his cunning, regarding it a favor to mention the
Name of Allah, out of ignorance and haughtiness. In another context, he might
say: "I have grieved for what happened to our friend; and we ask Allah to relieve
him of it." Of a surety, his intention is not to supplicate to good effect to him, for
were it would be his real purpose, he would have invoked good on him in secrecy
and privacy after his prayer.
He also might say: "That poor man has been tested by a great evil: may
Allah Almighty turn to him and us in repentance." In all of that, he
demonstrates supplication, and Allah Almighty is well-acquainted with his
cunning inside and conscience; and he, being ignorant, does not know that he
has been exposed to displeasure much greater than that to which the ignorant
is exposed when they backbite publicly. Included in it also is to pay attention
to the backbiter by way of wondering, in order to make him more eager to do
it, as if he extracts backbiting from him. He says in this respect: "How
astonishing! I have not learnt that he is so! Until now, I have not known but
that he is good. May Allah Almighty save us from that slip." On that he gives
trust to the backbiter, and of a surety, to give trust to a backbiter is in itself a
backbiting.
Therefore, the silent also shares the backbiter in his backbiting. The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The listener
(to backbiting) is one of the two backbiters." (This narration is reported by AtTabarani on the authority of Ibn Umar). It is further narrated on the authority of

Book four: evil of tongue

241

both Abu Bakr and Umar "Allah be pleased with her" that one of them said to
the other that 'So and so is in the habit of sleeping so much'. Later they asked the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" for condiment
thereupon he said to them: "You have taken your condiment." They said: "We do
not learn that we have done so." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: "Nay! You have eaten of the flesh of your brother
(about whom you have talked)." (This narration is reported by Abu Al-Abbas AdDu'ali on the authority of Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Abu Laila).
See then how backbidng included them both although it was one of them
who talked and the other just listened. Similarly, when a man said to his
friend: "No doubt, this man (Ma'iz) has been lying just as a dog lies" the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to them:
"Tweak (and eat) thereof!" the listener then is not far from the sin of
backbiting unless he disapproves of it with his tongue, or with his heart in the
event of fear; and if he is able to stand or at least interrupt the speech of
backbiting by talking in another theme and he does not do, the sin becomes
due upon him. If he asks him to keep silent and, at the same time, he is willing
to listen with his heart, he then is a hypocrite. Nothing keeps him far from sin
unless he dislikes it also with his heart.
Furthermore, it is not sufficient for him to beckon with his hand or nod with
his head or eyebrows to the backbiter to keep silent out of slightness with which
he regards it: on the contrary, he should aggravate it, and avert from the
backbitten explicidy. In that respect, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: "He, in whose presence a believer is humiliated
(through backbiting him) and he has the power to defend him, and he does not
do, he will be put to humiliation by Allah Almighty in the presence of people on
the Day of Judgement." (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the
authority of Sahl Ibn Hunaif). Abu Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased with him" said:
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "He who
defends the honour of his brother in his absence, it becomes due upon Allah
Almighty to defend his honour on the Day of Judgement." (This narration is
reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and At-Tabarani). The Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "He, who averts evil from
the honour of his brother in his absence, it becomes incumbent upon Allah
Almighty to release him from the fire (of Hell)." (This narration is reported by
At-Tabarani on the authority of Asma' Bint Yazid).

Exposition Of Motives Of Backbiting
It should be known that the motives of backbiting are numerous, but they
may be summed up in eleven, eight of which are unique to the laymen, and the
remaining three to the private and men of religion. As for the eight that pertain to
the laymen they are:
The first is to quench one's anger, once his anger is provoked for a certain
reason, which leads him to extinguish it by making a mention of the

The quarter of the destructives
242
shortcomings and defects of the anger-rouser. This happens always in the
absence of deep faith and true religion. Furthermore, if one fails to slake himself
during his anger, it might be congested and turn into firm resentment, and
become a permanent cause of making mention of his defects and shortcomings.
Both anger and resentment then are among the strong motives of backbiting.
The second is to agree with the companions, adulate the fellows and help
them continue their speech. If they are making fun of backbiting and making
a mention of the honours of people, he might think that if he disapproves of
their conduct, they would regard him boring, and drive him away from their
gathering. This leads him to help them seeing it to be out of the good
treatment and company adulation, his fellows might become angry, thereupon
he becomes in need of growing angry just for the sake of their anger, in
demonstration of sharing them the times of adversity and ease. Thus, he
engages with them in conversation about the shortcomings and defects of
people.
The third is that one feels a would-be attack or expected harm or witness
against him from another, which motivates him to take the initiative to slander
him before the other attacks him, making fruitless his attack or witness. He might
mention first what he really has in truth, in order that when he tells lies about him
later, his lies would be trusted publicly depending upon his first truthfulness,
quoting: "Telling lies is not my habit; and I told you such and such about him in
which I was truthful, and it came true as I have told you."
The fourth is that something he dislikes is attributed to him, from which he
wants to set himself free. In doing so, he mentions the one who has done it. It is
true that he has the right to set himself free from what he likes, but he has no
right to involve in it anyone else, and attribute to him something he dislikes, or at
least mention that someone else has taken part with him in it, only to justify his
situation.
The fifth is to have the will to be ostentatious and proud (over others), by
raising his own rank on the exclusion of depreciating others. He might say, for
instance: "So and so is ignorant, of weak understanding, and his speech is
enervate", just with the intention to show himself superior and higher than him.
He might also slander him for fear the people would exalt another one with the
same exaltation he receives from them.
The sixth is the envy. If one is praiseworthy, lovable and honoured among
the people, he will be exposed to envy of those who hope that such of favors and
privileges as he has would vanish from him. The envier might find no way to do
so but to slander him and depreciate his rank in the sight of people, in order to
desist from giving thanks to him and singing his praises, which it is difficult upon
him to hear. This is evident envy and it differs from anger and resentment. Anger
is provoked by a certain act against somebody, whereas envy might be against
one's fellow and friend.
The seventh is to make fun, play, joke, and enjoy of the leisure time in
laughter. He might make a mention of the defects of others just to cause the

243
Book four: evil of tongue ------------------------------------------------ —-----attendants to laugh. However, its origination is arrogance and haughtiness.
The eighth is to ridicule and mock at another, out of showing contempt for
him. This might happen in the presence or in the absence of those whom he
mocks at or scorns. Its origination also is arrogance and haughtiness.
As for the three causes that are unique to the private people, they are more
abstruse and complicated, for they are no more than evils stored by Satan in the
form of good things. Although good might lie in them, they are contaminated by
evil.
The first is that, out of faith, one might be led by the desire to disapprove of
the evildoings and faults in religion, to wonder saying: "How astonishing that is
which I have seen from so and so!" he might be true to his wonder at the
evildoing. But in order to be really so, he should have wondered at the evildoing
itself, with no reference to its perpetrator. But unfortunately, Satan makes it easy
upon him to mention the name of the perpetrator during his wonder, thereby he
becomes a backbiter and sinful even though he knows not. A typical example is
the statement of a man: "I wonder at so and so how he loves his slave-girl
although she is ugly!" or "I wonder at so and so, how he sits in front of so and so
although he is ignorant!"
The second is to show mercy, i.e. to show grief in sigh for the trial to
which somebody else has been put, saying: "How poor so and so is! His
disaster has really aggrieved me!" he might be true to his grief, and his anxiety
might also divert him from take heed not to mention is name, and once he
mentions his name, he becomes a backbiter. Thus, although his grief, anxiety
and mercy he shows for the afflicted one are good, Satan leads him to
backbiting which is evil from where he knows not. Although there is
possibility to show mercy and grief for a particular person with no need to
make a mention of his name, Satan always prompts him to make a mention of
his name in order to make fruitless his deed, and cause him to lose the reward
for it.
The third is to grow angry for the Sake of Allah Almighty. One might
grow angry for an evildoing or sin committed by another he has seen or heard
of, and while showing his anger, he might make a mention of the name of the
perpetrator, although it is incumbent upon him to show anger towards him in
the form of enjoining good upon him and forbidding him to do evil, with no
need to announce his name publicly.
Those three are abstruse upon the religious scholars, let alone the laymen!
They think, though falsely, that showing wonder, anger and mercy for the
Sake of Allah Almighty justifies the mention of the name, there is no need at
all to make the mention of anyone with evil in his absence. However, the
concession thereof will be discussed later.
It is narrated on the authority of Amir Ibn Wathilah "Allah be pleased
with him" that a man came upon a people during the lifetime of the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and greeted
them and they returned the greeting to him. When he surpassed them, a man

The quarter of the destructives
244
from the sitting people said: "I dislike that man in (the religion of) Allah
Almighty." The sitting people said: "How bad that is which you have said! By
Allah, we will inform him." They told a man from them to stand up, catch
him, and tell him about that. Their messenger caught him and told him. He
went to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and
told him the story and asked him to invite that man and inquire from him why
he had said so.
He invited and asked him and the man confessed. The Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" asked him: "Then, why do you
dislike him?" he said: "I am his neighbour and I know him well, by Allah, I
have never seen him performing but the (obligatory) written prayer." He said:
"Ask him O Messenger of Allah: has he ever seen me delaying it from its due
time, or performing ablution for it imperfecdy, or falling short of its bowings
and prostrations?" he asked him and the man answered in the negative. He
said: "By Allah, I have never seen him fasting but that month (of Ramadan)
which both the righteous and wicked fast." He said: "Ask him, O Messenger
of Allah: has he ever seen me leaving fast in it, or falling short of fulfilling
what is due in it?" he asked him and the man answered in the negative. He
further said: "By Allah, I have never seen him giving a beggar or a needy or an
indigent, or even spending in the Cause of Allah anything other than the
obligatory charity which is given by both the righteous and the wicked
equally." He said: "Ask him, O Messenger of Allah: has he ever seen me
decreasing it than what is due, or withholding it from its proper recipient?" he
asked him and he answered in the negative. On that the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to the man: "Stand up (and
leave), perchance he is better than you!" (This narration is reported by
Ahmad).
Exposition Of Remedy That Impedes Tongue From Backbiting
It should be known to you that all bad manners are susceptible to remedy by
a mixture of knowledge and deed, and the remedy of every disease is to
contradict its cause. So, the right way is to search for its real cause. There are two
ways to remedy tongue and impede it from backbiting: general and detailed. In
general, one has to know, from the many narrations and traditions we have
already transmitted, that by his backbiting, he exposes himself to the anger and
wrath of Allah Almighty, and that backbiting shall render fruitless all of his good
deeds on the Day of Judgement. That is for his good deeds will be transferred to
him whom he backbitten in the world, out of compensation for dishonouring
him, and in case he has no good deeds, the evil deeds of him whom he backbitten
will be transferred to him.
Besides, he is vulnerable to Allah's anger and displeasure, as he is likened to
an eater of the flesh of a dead body. It is known that a man enters the fire (of
Hell) when the scale of his evil deeds overweighs that of his good deeds, and only
a single evil deed to be transferred to him from him whom he backbitten, is

Book four: evil of tongue

245

sufficient to make his evil deeds overweigh his good deeds, thereby he enters the
fire (of Hell). But at the least, it will decrease the reward of his good deeds, after
settling disputes, deciding the cases, questioning and answering, and reckoning,
and giving everyone his due in full. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: "Backbiting is swifter to devour the deeds of the
servant than the fire is to eat up the dry things." It is reported that a man said to
Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him": "I have been reported that you
backbite me." On that he said: "Which esteem do you have with me in order to
invest you with the authority over my good deeds?"
Once a servant has faith in the narrations we have transmitted, of a surety, he
would hardly unleash his tongue to backbite and dishonour people for fear of its
evil consequences. Of benefit to him also is to consider his own affair: if he finds
a defect in himself, let him engage in repairing it, putting in mind the statement of
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "Blessed be he
who engages by his own defect from the defects of others." (This narration is
reported by Al-Bazzar on the authority of Anas). If he detects a shortcoming in
himself, he should feel shy to engage in criticizing others on the exclusion of
criticizing himself or his own shortcoming. He should verify that the other's
failure to free himself from his defect is just like his own failure to set himself
free from his shortcoming.
This is in relation to the defects and shortcomings which are subject to
human's act and choice (i.e. the moral character and manners). But if it pertain.1
to a physical fault, then, to criticize him for it is to criticize the Creator Himsell
However, whoever criticizes an artifact has indeed criticized its maker. A man
said to a sage: "O ugly man!" on that he said: "The matter of creating my face was
not up to me to beautify it." furthermore, if one finds no defect in himself, let
him engage in giving thanks to Allah Almighty, and not pollute himself with the
greatest defect, i.e. dishonouring people and eating their flesh (through
backbiting). If one is just and fair, he shall know that thinking of himself as purely
free from all defects is out of his ignorance, which is one of the greatest defects.
He also should learn that the pain caused to anyone by his backbiting him is like
the pain caused to him if anyone else backbites him. If he does not accept to be
backbitten by anyone, he should not accept to anyone but what he accepts to
himself.
In regard with the detailed remedy, he should look for the motive of
backbiting. The remedy of each disease is to contradict its cause. We have
already presented the causes. As for anger, let him treat it by saying to himself:
"If I grow angry with him, Allah Almighty might become angry with me
because of backbiting, which He forbade me to do, and I dared to do it, and
Thus, regarded slightly the forbiddance and deterrence of Allah Almighty."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said in this
respect: "The (fire of) Hell has a gate which none shall enter but him who
dares to extinguish his anger by disobeying Allah Almighty." (This narration is
reported by Al-Bazzar, Ibn Adi, Al-Baihaqi and An-Nasa'i on the authority of
Ibn Abbas).

The quarter of the destructives
The Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "He who safeguards himself against (the punishment of) his Lord, let him
hold back his tongue and cease to quench his anger." fThis narration is reported
by Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of Sahl Ibn Sa'd). the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" also said: "He who has control
over his anger although he has the power to carry on it, on the Day of
Judgement, Allah Almighty will invite him in front of the people, and give him
the freedom to choose such of beautiful women with big lustrious eyes as he
likes." (This narration is reported by Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah on
the authority of Mu'adh Ibn Anas). According to one of the Scriptures revealed
unto one of the Prophets, Allah Almighty says: "O son of Adam! Remember me
when you grow angry (with anyone), perchance I remember you when I grow
angry (with you), and Thus, does not obliterate you among those whom I
obliterate."
As for adulation and agreement (with your fellows in their backbiting), its
remedy is to learn that Allah Almighty grows angry with you if you endeavor to
displease Him through pleasing His creatures. How should you accept to revere
the creatures and regard slightly your Creator, by displeasing Him in the way of
pleasing them? And even, if your anger is for the Sake of Allah Almighty, there is
no need to mention with evil the one with whom you are angry for the Sake of
Allah. You should grow angry for the Sake of Allah with your fellows if they
mention him with evil, for by doing so, they have disobeyed their Lord by
backbiting, one of the most shameful sins.
In relation to ascribing others to treachery in the way of freeing yourself from
it, where there is no point of it, the remedy thereof is to learn that to expose
yourself to the displeasure of the Creator is more severe than to expose you to
the displeasure of the creatures, and by backbiting, you certainly expose yourself
to the displeasure of Allah Almighty, without knowing that your hope to set
yourself free in this world from the hatred and wrath of the people will lead you
to destruction in the hereafter, and the loss of your good deeds. However, you
will gain the criticism of Allah on the spot, in expectation for averting from you
the criticism of people on credit; and this is the peak of ignorance and weakness.
As for your justifying excuse: "Were I to eat the unlawful, so and so has
eaten it; and were I to accept money from the ruler, so and so has accepted
it", this is evident ignorance, for by so doing, you excuse by imitating such as
disobeys Allah Almighty., following whom is impermissible. One should not
imitate such of people as opposes the command of Allah Almighty. Should
anyone enter the fire and you have power to enter it not, you then has not to
agree with him; and should you agree with him you would be foolish and
weak-minded. What is then the point of making a mention of him by way of
backbiting, thereby you add a sin to your one for which you have apologized?
Therefore, if you do so, you will combine both sins due to your ignorance and
stupidity.
In relation to your purpose of showing pride and justifying yourself by
246

Book four: evi] of tongue

247

demonstrating your superiority and preeminence to others, through slandering
them, you should learn that by the evil with which you mention others, you
cancel out your superiority and preeminence in the Sight of Allah Almighty.
Moreover, danger lies in the people's thinking of your superiority, for it might
decrease once they know your inclination to depreciate others. In this way, you
will sell what is certainly with the Creator for what is falsely with the creatures.
More precisely, if the creatures are to think of your superiority, in no way would
they avail you against Allah Almighty.
Concerning backbiting for the purpose of envy, it is to combine two kinds of
punishment That is because you envy him for a favor in this worid, with the
result that you live in the punishment of envy in this world; and you are not
satisfied only with that, but also (by backbiting) you add to it the punishment of
the hereafter. Thus, you lose in the world and the hereafter. Although you aim at
your envied, you harm yourself and present your good deeds to him as a gift You
are then his friend by the time you are the enemy of yourself. Your backbiting
him harms him not in so much as it harms you, but it benefits him, by
transferring your good deeds to him or transferring his evil deeds to you. To the
wickedness of envy, you add the ignorance of foolishness. Therefore, your envy
and slander might be a main cause of spreading the superiority and preeminence
of your envied, as it is said (in the form of a poetic verse): "If Allah wills to make
public a forgotten virtue, He assigns to it the tongue of an envier (to spread i
among the people)."
In relation to mockery, its purpose is to put to shame the one at whom you
mock, but in fact, you put yourself to shame before Allah Almighty, the angels
and the Prophets. If you consider your crime, misdeed, and sigh, and the evil
deeds you will carry on the Day of Judgement of him whom you mock at in this
world, with the result that you would be driven to the fire (of Hell), of a surety,
you would cease to ridicule him. If you know in truth your own state, you would
find it preferable to laugh at yourself. That is because you have mocked at him
before a few number of people in this world, thereby exposing yourself to be
taken in the presence of a big assembly of creatures in the hereafter by him to
give you of his own misdeeds just as a donkey is driven to the fire, mocking at
you, rejoicing at your disappointment, and happy at the victory given to him by
Allah Almighty.
As for showing mercy and sympathy towards one for his sins and misdeeds, it
is good in its nature, but Ibiis here deceives you, and prompts you to speak in a
way that moves much of your good deeds to the other more than the mercy and
sympathy you have showed towards him. Thus, you will turn from being an
invoker of mercy to being worthy of it That is because your reward will become
ffuidess, and your good deeds would decrease.
The same is true of showing anger for the Sake of Allah Almighty, which in
itself does not require backbiting. But it is Satan who endears backbiting to you in
order to render fruidess the reward of your anger, and expose you by backbiting
to the wrath of Allah Almighty.

The quarter of the destructives
Concerning wonder, if it is to lead you to backbiting, you should first wonder
at your own self, how you have ruined yourself and your faith by the faith and
world of another. At the same time, you could hardly be safe from the
punishment in this world, which might be in the form of Allah's tearing your
curtain (of defects and shameful deeds) just as you have done the same with your
brother by wondering at his state.
In brief, the total remedy of all of that is first the knowledge, and verification
of those matters which are among the keys to faith, for he whose faith is strong
in all of that, his tongue disdains from backbiting in all of its different forms.
248

Exposition Of Prohibition Of Backbiting With Heart
It should be known to you that negative assumption about your brother is
forbidden just like negative speaking about him. As well as it is unlawful for you
to talk to anyone about the defects of another in his absence, it is equally
unlawful to talk in yourself about his shortcomings, and think ill about him. I
mean by it the heart decision and judging him as evil. But as for self talks and
passing thoughts that occur to the mind, they are forgiven, and the same also is
true of suspicion. What is really forbidden is negative assumption, i.e. that on
which the soul relies and to which the heart inclines (in passing judges). Allah
Almighty says in that respect: "O you who have believed, avoid much [negative]
assumption. Indeed, some assumption is sin." (Al-Hujurat 12)

vJ <k ¥
As to why it is forbidden, it is because the mysteries of hearts are unknown
but to Allah, the Knower of the unseen. So, you should not think ill about
anyone unless it is revealed to you clearly and outspokenly, in which case you
come to think only of what you really have known and seen with your eye and
heard with your ear. But what you have not seen with your eye, nor heard with
your ear, and, at the same time, it has occurred to your mind, it is Satan who
dictates it into your mind, to whom you should give lie, for he is the most wicked
of those who are wicked. Allah Almighty says: "O you who have believed, if there
comes to you a disobedient one with information, investigate, lest you harm a
people out of ignorance and become, over what you have done, regretful." (AlHujurat 6)
^ C|S CW-^l*3 1*
O' 'jdf*3 (3*?^
^ o!
jjT
^
This is why it is impermissible to give trust to Iblis.
If there is suspicion about his corruption and otherwise is probably possible,
it is impermissible for you to give trust to that suspicion. However, if the smell of
wine is detected in anyone, it is impermissible to execute the legal punishment on
him for it is possible to say that this smell resulted only from rinsing his mouth
with wine, and that he did not drink it. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said: "Allah has made sacred from a Muslim his blood
and property, and to have negative assumption about him." (This narration is
reported by Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Ibn Abbas; and Ibn Majah on the

Book four: evil of tongue

249

authority of Ibn Umar). Thus, the negative assumption is subject to the same
ruling of blood and property in this respect, i.e. there should be witnessed with
the eye, or there should be a just evidence. But if it only occurs to your mind
because of suspicion, it should be averted.
But, you may ask about the criterion according to which the negadve
assumption is disdnguished. In reply to it, let's say that from among the
portents of the negadve assumption you might have of anyone is that your
heart changes, and turns from the state in which it was (before that), in such a
way that causes you to disdain from him, and heed not about his affair.
However, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "Three things befall a believer, and there is a way out of them: his way out
of the negadve assumption is to give no trust to it." (This narration is reported
by At-Tabarani on the authority of Harithah Ibn An-Nu'man). He means that
you should not put such negadve assumption to practice, whether by heart or
by organs.
By the least degree of fancy, Satan might give your heart the impression that
such assumption is sound, due to your good intelligence and swift perception,
depending upon the claim that the faithful believer always sees with the light of
Allah Almighty. But in this state, Satan causes you to see with the eye of
deception and conceit. If it is a just man who instills in you such suspicion, anc
you give trust to it, you will have excuse, for were you to give lie to him, yoi
would Thus, be unfair to that just man by giving lie to him, which is out of
negative assumption. It is not justice then to have a good expectation of one and
have a negative assumption of another. The right course is to inspect whether
there is an enmity between both before making your decision. The religious law
rejects the witness of a just father to his son for fear of charge (of prejudice) just
as it also rejects the witness of an enemy (according to the narration of AtTirmidhi on the authority of A'ishah). Thus, you have to stop.
But even, if the teller is a just man, you should neither give lie nor give trust
to him. But rather, you'd say: "The state of the aforementioned is screened from
me, and the teller might seem just, and there is no enmity between him and the
aforementioned, but at the same time, he might be in the habit of conversing
about the people, and mentioning their defects, and Thus, he is not really a just
man." Of a surety, the backbiter is wicked, and his witness is cancelled under
religious law. But the people, being increasingly accustomed to it, have come to
indulge in backbiting, and be careless about conversing about the honors of
people. However, whenever an evil thought occurs to your mind about a Muslim,
you should hasten to have a good expectation of him, and supplicate to a good
effect for him. Therefore, this averts Satan from you, and impedes him from
inspiring any evil idea about that man, for fear of your engagement in
supplication.
If you learn a flaw about a Muslim, you should advise him in secret, and do
not let Satan deceive you and lead you to backbite him. If you admonish him, do
not seem to him joyful of having acquaintance with his flaw, which causes you to

The quarter of the destructives
250
regard him with slightness, and him to appreciate you for your being in the
position of his counselor. But rather let your purpose be to deliver him from his
sin while you are as sad as you might be for your own self in case you are in the
same position of sinfulness. It should be much dearer to you if he gives sin
without your advice. If you do so, you will combine the rewards of admonition,
grief for his disaster, and aiding him maintain his religion.
Spying is one of the fruits of negative assumption. The heart is not satisfied
with suspicion, and in quest for verification, it engages itself in spying, although it
is forbidden. Allah Almighty says: "O you who have believed, avoid much
[negative] assumption. Indeed, some assumption is sin. And do not spy or
backbite each other." (Al-Hujurat 12)

b>JKk >
To spy is not to leave the servants of Allah under the screen of Allah, and
seek to know and remove the screen until he knows that which, being veiled
from him, would be safer for his heart and religion. We have already mentioned
the definition and ruling of spying in the book of Enjoining Right and
Forbidding Evil.

Exposition Of Excuses That justify Backbiting
It should be known to you that the mention of evils and defects of others in
their absence is justifiable only in case the purpose is valid under religious law,
and that purpose could be achieved only by that mention, which, in turn, would
avert the sin of backbiting. They are six:
The first is grievance: the one who ascribes a particular judge to wrongdoing,
treachery, and accepting bribe is a sin and backbiting unless he himself is
wronged. The one who is wronged by the judge has the right to make a
complaint to the ruler and ascribe wrongdoing to that judge, since this is the only
way for him to take back his right. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: "Indeed, the one who has a right is more enrided to
speak (to demand his right)." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on the
authority of Abu Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" further said: "No doubt, the wealthy's procrastination (to repay his
debt) is injustice." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on the same
previous authority). It is narrated on the authority of Amr Ibn Ash-Sharid from
his father that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “The procrastination of such as is able (to fulfill his debt) makes lawful both
his honour and punishment” Ibn Al-Mubarak says: He means by making lawful
his honour that he leads him to be put to shame; and his punishment is that he
should be sentenced to prison. (This narration is reported by Abu Dawud, AnNasa'i and Ibn Majah).
The second is to seek the aid of changing evildoing, and reverting the
disobedient to righteousness. It is narrated that once Umar "Allah be pleased

251

Book four: evil of tongue

with him” came upon Talhah or Uthman "Allah be pleased with him" and
greeted him, but he did not return the greeting. He went to Abu Bakr "Allah
be pleased with him" and told him about that, thereupon Abu Bakr went to
him to mend the relation between them; and of a surety, this was not
backbiting. Similarly, when the news reached Umar "Allah be pleased with
him" that Abu Jandal drank alcohol in Sham, he sent to him the following
letter: "In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful: "Ha-Mim. The
revelation of this Book is from Allah, Exalted in Power, Full of Knowledge,
Who forgives Sin, accepts Repentance, is Strict in Punishment, and has a
Long Reach (in all things). There is no god but He: to Him is the Final Goal."
(Ghafir 1-3)

i

> *5j idj ? v&wt

The result was that he repented and gave up drinking. The point here is that
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" did not regard it backbiting from him who
reported that news to him, for his purpose was to change his bad conduct, and let
him benefit from the advice of Umar better than he could from anyone else. It
was then the right purpose which made it permissible. But in case there is no
right purpose as such, it is evidendy unlawful
The third pertains to seeking fatwa (Islamic legal opinion) from the Mufti
(Interpreter of Islamic Law), like one's saying to him: "My
father/wife/brother/mother/son/etc, has wronged me." But here, it is safer for
such to make an indirect reference saying for instance: "What do you say about a
man whose father/brother, etc, has wronged him?" but any way, the explicit
designation to that effect is permissible, as confirmed by the narration that Hind
Bint Utbah said to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him": "Abu Sufyan is a miser and he does not give me what suffices me and his
dependents: could I take from his wealth without his knowledge?" the Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Take what suffices you
and your children but fairly and reasonably." ^This narration is reported by both
sheikhs on the authority of A'ishah). Here she made a mention of his miserliness
and unfairness to her and her children, and the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" did not deter her, for her purpose was to seek
his fatwa.
The fourth is to warn a Muslim of eviL If you see a religious jurisprudent, for
example, frequenting a religious innovator or a wicked, and you fear his
innovation or wickedness should overtake him, you have the right to draw his
attention and uncover to him such innovation or wickedness, as long as your
purpose is the fear for him of the evil effects of innovation and wickedness. But
the origination of this might be deception since it is envy, for instance, which
might motivate one to do so, and Satan dissembles that by showing sympathy for
the creatures. Similarly, if a man bought a slave whom you know to be

The quarter of the destructives
252
characterized by theft or wickedness or any other defect, you have the right to
highlight it. Although your silence causes harm to the purchaser, your mention
causes harm to the slave; and the purchaser has more right to be observed in this
respect.
The same is true of the one who seeks consultation in the matters of
marriage, in which case you have the right to mention what you know about him,
only by way of advising and not by way of making enmity between them. If he is
thought to be deterred only by explicit disclosure of his defects, then, you have
the right to reveal it, as confirmed by the statement of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "Reveal the screen from the wicked so
that the people would know his wickedness, and make a mendon of his defects
so that the people would take heed of him." (This narration is reported by AtTabarani, Ibn Hibban, and Ibn Adi on the authority of Bahz Ibn Hakim from his
father from his grandfather). They used to say: "(If you make a mention of) three
persons (even in their absence), it will not be regarded as backbiting: the wrongful
ruler, the religious innovator, and the wicked who makes public his wickedness."
The fifth is that a man is famous for a nickname that expresses his defect,
like Al-A'raj (the lame), Al-A'mash (the blind). Thus, there is no sin on him who
says: "It is reported on the authority of Abu Az-Zinad from Al-A'raj, or Salman
from Al-A'mash" etc. this is necessary for recognition on the one hand, and such
nickname turned to be familiar to the extent that its carrier would not hate it in
case he heard it, given that he became famous for it. It is true that if there is
another statement for recognition, it will be preferable.
The sixth pertains to the person who makes public his wickedness, like the
effeminate, the one who drinks alcohol publicly, or the one who confiscates the
property of people illegally, of which he is so much proud that if it is mentioned
to him, he would not be perturbed; and in this way, there is no sin on him who
mentions such a person. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "He, who lifts the veil of modesty from his face, then,
(mentioning him in his absence) is not regarded as backbiting." (This narration is
reported by Ibn Adi and Abu Ash-Shaikh on the authority of Anas). According
to Umar "Allah be pleased with him": "There is no sanctity for a wicked." By the
wicked he means such of people who makes public his wickedness, unlike him
who conceals his wickedness, whose sanctity should be observed. As-Salt Ibn
Tarif said: I asked Al-Hassan: "If a wicked who makes public his wickedness is
mentioned in his absence with what he really has, is it regarded as backbiting?" he
answered in the negative.
Al-Hassan said: "There are three persons, whose mention (even in their
absence) is not regarded as backbiting: the whimsical, the wicked who makes
public his wickedness, and the wrongful ruler." Those three always blow their
own horn because of what they do, so, how should they disliked to be mentioned
with it given that their purpose is to demonstrate it? Awf said: Once, I visited Ibn
Sirin, and spoke ill about Al-Hajjaj, thereupon he said: "No doubt, Allah is a Just
Ruler, and He exacts retribution on behalf of Al-Hajjaj from such of people as

253
Book four: evil of tongue
backbites him, in the same way as He exacts retribution from Al-Hajjaj on behalf
of such of people as he wrongs. If you are to meet Allah tomorrow (by death),
the least sin you have committed will be more grievous on you than the greatest
sin Al-Hajjaj has committed."
Exposition Of Expiation To Be Made For Backbiting
It should be known that a backbiter should show regrets and sorrow, and
repent from what he has done in order to fulfill the right of Allah Almighty on
him in this matter. Therefore, he has to ask him whom he has backbitten to set
him free from that sin, showing sorrow, regret and grief for what he has done
with him. However, such of people as wants to be seen of men might ask him
who he has backbitten to set him free from that sin just to show his piety, while
within himself he is not regretful or sorry for the harm he ahs caused to him. In
this way, he will have committed a further sin (of showing off to be added to that
of his backbiting). According to Al-Hassan: "It suffices him to ask for forgiveness
(of Allah), with no need to ask your brother to set you free from that sin."
Perhaps, he took evidence for that from the narration on the authority of Anas
Ibn Malik "Allah be pleased with him" that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The expiation of such of people as you
have backbitten is to ask for (Allah's) forgiveness for him." ^This narration is
reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
According to Mujahid "may Allah have mercy upon him": "The expiation of
your eating the flesh of your brother is to praise him and supplicate to a good
effect for him." When Ata' Ibn Abu Rabah "may Allah have mercy upon him"
was asked about the expiation for backbiting he said: "It is to go to your brother
(whom you have backbitten) and said to him: "I have told a lie about you,
wronged you and done evil to you: take then back your right from me if you so
like, or pardon me if you so like." However, this is the most right. It is of no
value the statement of him who says that there is no compensation for the
honour, and Thus, asking for release from the sin is not binding., that is because
the legal punishment for launching a false charge is incumbent. The Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said in an authentic Hadith: "If
one has a complaint against his brother pertaining to honour or property, let the
latter ask him to release him of it in this world before the coming of a day on
which there will be neither a Dinar nor a Dirham, but it will be taken from his
good deeds, and if he has no good deeds, it will be taken from the evil deeds of
his companion to be added to his evil deeds." (This is reported by both sheikhs
on the authority of Abu Hurairah). A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" said to a
woman who described another woman as of long tail: "No doubt, you have
backbitten her. So, you should ask her to release you from that sin." Thus, asking
for release from the sin of backbiting is necessary as much as is it possible. But in
case he is absent or dead, he then should ask for forgiveness and supplication to a
good effect for him more often, and do much good deeds (to remove his evil
ones).

254

The quarter of the destructives

If you ask whether or not giving him release is binding, let me answer in the
negative for it is given as a gift, and the gift is voluntary and not obligatory. The
only way is that the backbiter should do his best to apologize to him, and praise
him so much and continue to do so until he gets pleased; and if he does not get
pleased, his apology and praise would be a good deed to be reckoned for him
therewith to counteract his evil deed of backbiting on the Day of Judgement.
However, some righteous predecessors were in the habit of giving no release to
their backbiters. Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab ’’may Allah have mercy upon him" said:
"1 never release from sin such of people as has wronged me." According to Ibn
Sirin "may Allah have mercy upon him": "It is not I who has forbidden it to him
in order to make it lawful for him. It is Allah Almighty Who has made it
unlawful, and I am not to make lawful what Allah Almighty has made unlawful."
You may ask: "What is the significance of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him": "He should ask his brother to release him from
that sin", given that making lawful what Allah Almighty made unlawful is
impermissible?" in reply to that let's say that what is intended is to ask him to
pardon him for that grievance and not to turn the unlawful into lawful. The
statement of Ibn Sirin is good for it is impermissible for him to make lawful the
backbiting for anyone whatsoever.
You may further ask: "What is the significance of the statement of the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "Does anyone
of you fail to be like Abu Damdam who used to say whenever he comes out
of his house: 'O Allah! I have given in charity (the sin of harming) my honour
to the people'?" (This narration is reported by Al-Bazzar and Al-Aqili on the
authority of Anas). How should one give in charity (the harm of) his honour?
And if one gives it in charity, should it be permissible to violate it through
speech? And if the charity here is not effective, what is the significance of
exhortation to it?"
In reply to that, let's say that he intended to have no complaint against him on
the Day of Judgement because of harming his honour, otherwise, by no means
would backbiting become lawful with it, nor would the complaint lapse from the
criminal. But since he promised to forgive for it, he has the right to fulfill it if he
so likes, or retract from it if he so likes. Therefore, the religious jurisprudents
state that even the pardon of the falsely charged does not cancel the execution of
the legal punishment on the charger in this world; and the complaint in the
hereafter is like the complaint in this world.
In short, pardon is favorable. Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon
him" said: "When it will be the Day of Judgement, and the peoples will kneel
down before Allah Almighty, a caller will cal: "Let those stand who have their
reward incumbent upon Allah Almighty." Only whose who used to pardon
the people in the world will stand." Allah Almighty says in this respect: "Hold
to forgiveness; command what is right; but turn away from the ignorant." (AlA'raf 199)

255

Book four: evil of tongue

i. ©

o* C/°f *3

S' '3

t

the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" asked: "O
Gabriel! What is that forgiveness (which Allah Almighty commands me to hold
to)?" he said: "Allah Almighty commands you to forgive such of people as
wrongs you, keep relation with such of them as severs relation with you, and give
such of them as withholds from you." It is reported that it was said to Al-Hassan
"may Allah have mercy upon him": "So and so has backbitten you." On that he
sent a gift of dates on a dish to him with the following message: "I was reported
that you have presented to me as a gift some of your good deeds, and I liked to
reward you for it. But excuse me for I could not recompense your reward in full."

The Sixteenth Evil: Talebearing
Allah Almighty says: "A slanderer, going about with calumnies, (Habitually)
hindering (all) good, transgressing beyond bounds, deep in sin, Violent (and
cruel), with all that, base-born." (Al-Qalam 11-13)
4
Jjkj JjlP {^T}}
I jiL*
((|J)
jLLa ^
According to Abdullah Ibn Al-Mubarak "may Allah have mercy upon him":
"The baseborn is he who is produced out of fornication, and does not conceal
secrets." His reference to the fact that such of people as does not conceal secrets
and rather goes about with calumnies should be produced out of fornication is
elicited from the statement of Allah Almighty: "Violent (and cruel), with all that,
base-born." Allah Almighty further says: "Woe to every (kind of) scandal-monger
and backbiter." (Al-Humazah 1)

The scandal-monger is said to be the one who goes about with calumnies. He
says (in description of the wife of Abu Lahab): "His wife shall carry the
(crackling) wood; As fuel!" (Al-Masad 4)
{c7}>

I

tL_>-

IjA IJ

She was said to have used to carry secrets and go about with calumnies.
He Almighty also says (about the wives of both Noah and Lut): "but they
were false to their (husbands), and they profited nothing before Allah on their
account, but were told: "Enter you the Fire along with (others) that enter!"
(At-Tahrim 10)

i0>£* 3^'

^

It was said that the wife of Lut used to tell her people about his guests, and
the wife of Noah used to tell her people that her husband was mad.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him’' said: "No
talebearer should enter the Garden." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs
on the authority of Hudhaifah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: “The dearest among you to Allah Almighty are those
who have affection (to the people) and put affection (in the hearts of people);

The quarter of the destructives
256
and the most hateful among you to Allah Almighty are those who go about with
calumnies among the people, who divide the brothers.” (This narration is
reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with
him"). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "Should I not tell you about the evil among you?" they said: "Yes O
Messenger of Allah." He said: "These among you who go about with calumnies,
who corrupt the relation between the lovers, and seek to ascribe defects to the
faultless." (This narration is reported by Ahmad on the authority of Abu Malik
Al-Ash'ari).
Abu Dharr "Allah be pleased with him" said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "He, who attributes to a Muslim a word of
evil and publicizes it among the people to defame him with it with no just cause,
Allah Almighty will defame him in the fire (of Hell) on the Day of Judgement."
(This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and At-Tabarani). Abu AdDarda' "Allah be pleased with him" said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said: "If anyone attributes an evil word to a Muslim of
which he is innocent, and publicizes it among the people to defame him with it in
this world, it is incumbent upon Allah Almighty to admit him to the fire (of Hell)
because of it on the Day of Judgement." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu
Ad-Dunya and At-Tabarani). Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him" said: the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "He, who
gives a witness against a Muslim which he does not deserve, let him occupy his
seat in the fire (of Hell)." (This narration is reported by Ahmad and Ibn Abu AdDunya).
It is said that one-third the punishment of the grave is caused by talebearing.
Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with him" narrated that the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "When Allah Almighty created the
Garden, He told it to speak, and it said: "Happy be he who shall enter me."
(Allah) the Irresistible Almighty said: "By My Honor and Majesty, eight persons
are forbidden to reside in you: an addict to wine, a persistent in adultery, a
talebearer, a cuckold, a (transgressing) policeman, an effeminate, a severer of
relation with kith and kin, and whoever says 'The pledge of Allah is due on me if
I do not do so and so', and breaks his vow."
It is reported on the authority of Ka'b Al-Ahbar that the children of Israel
were afflicted with draught, and Moses "Peace be upon him" prayed for rainfall
many times, but he received no answer. On that Allah Almighty revealed to him
that 'I shall never respond to you and to those with you and there is a talebearer
among you, who persists in talebearing'. Moses said: 'O Lord! Who is he? Guide
me to him so that I would dismiss him away from us'. He Almighty said: 'O
Moses! Should I forbid you talebearing and I become a talebearer?' on that all of
them repented and were provided with rainfall.
It is further reported that a man followed in the steps of a sage for seven
hundred Farsakhs just for the sake of seven words. When he met him he said: "I
have come to you to obtain from the knowledge that Allah Almighty has

257
Book four: evil of tongue
conferred upon you. Tell me about the heaven and what is heavier than it, about
the earth and what is more spacious than it, about rock and what is harder than it,
about fire and what is more sweltering than it, about chill and what is colder than
it, about the ocean and what is more abundant than it, and about the orphan and
what is more humiliated than him." The sage said to him: "No doubt, fabrication
of falsehood about an innocent is heavier than the heaven; the truth is more
spacious than the earth; the satisfied heart is more abundant than the ocean; both
envy and miserliness are more sweltering than the fire; the failure of one's need to
his kin is colder than chill; the disbeliever's heart is harder than the rock; and the
talebearer who is recognized for his talebearing is more humiliated than the
orphan."
Exposition Of Definition Of Talebearing And The Way To Repel It
It should be known that the term going with calumnies is given to him who
transmits the speech of somebody about another to him, like your saying, for
instance: "So and so said such and such about you." But even, talebearing is not
only unique to that: it refers to disclose what is disliked to be disclosed, whether it
is hateful in the sight of the one about whom the tale is transmitted, the one to
whom it is transmitted, or a third party, and whether the disclosure is done by
way of saying, writing, or hinting, whether the tale belongs to the words or deeds,
and whether the tale does or does not pertain to a defect of him about whom it is
transmitted.
Talebearing in its reality is then to disclose a secret and uncover a thing that
is disliked to be disclosed or uncovered. If one sees anything of the states of
people that is undesirable to be disclosed, he should keep silent from it, unless
telling it causes benefit to a Muslim or averts a sin. For instance, if one sees a
man usurping the property of another, he should witness to it in observation to
the right of the latter. But if he sees him hiding money for himself and he
discloses it, it belongs then to talebearing and disclosure of secrets. If the tale
which he bears carries a defect or a shortcoming of him about whom it is
transmitted, one then will have combined both sins of backbiting and
talebearing. The motive of talebearing might be to do evil to the one about
whom the tale is transmitted, to show love for him to whom it is transmitted, or
just to entertain others with conversation and engage in useless talk and
falsehood.
There are six Issues due upon everyone to whom a tale is transmitted and said
to him: "So and so says about you such and such, does such and such harm to
you, or makes a plot to harm you" etc:
The first is that he should give no trust to him for the talebearer is a wicked
whose witness is cancelled. Allah Almighty says in this respect: "O you who
believe! if a wicked person comes to you with any news, ascertain the truth, lest
you harm people unwittingly, and afterwards become full of repentance for what
you have done." (Al-Hujurat 6)

The quarter of the destructives
The second is that he should forbid him to be a talebearer, advise him to
leave it, and deface that behavior to him. Allah Almighty says: "enjoin what is
just, and forbid what is wrong." (Luqman 17)

258

i ©J* ^134f
The third is that he should hate him for the Sake of and in the religion of
Allah Almighty, for he is hateful in the Sight of Allah Almighty, and such of
people as is hateful in die Sight of Allah Almighty should be disliked.
The fourth is that you should not have negadve assumption about your
absent brother, due to the statement of Allah Almighty: "O you who believe!
avoid suspicion as much (as possible): for suspicion in some cases is a sin." (AlHujurat 12)

iSs\ijdw-T

oyft}

The fifth is that what is reported to you should not lead you to spy in
inspection and verification of it, in compliance with the statement of Allah
Almighty: "and spy not on each other." (Al-Hujurat 12)

i \jlzl % »
The sixth is that you should accept to do what you forbid the talebearer to
do, and transmit his tale saying: "So and so has told me such and such", thereby
you will be both a talebearer and a backbiter. It is narrated that a man entered
upon Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz "may Allah have mercy upon him" and told him
something about another, thereupon he said to him: "If you like, let me consider
your case: if you are a liar, then, you will be from those about whom the
following Holy Verse tells: "O you who believe! if a wicked person comes to you
with any news, ascertain the truth, lest you harm people unwittingly, and
afterwards become full of repentance for what you have done." (Al-Hujurat 6)
4 (jfj) 0*?^ -*-1*3

Ot b'4:^ 44

4" Oj

(f-~$ ^rJ-4

If you are true to what you have told, then, you will be among those about
whom the following Holy Verse tells: "A slanderer, going about with calumnies."
(Al-Qalam 11)

But if you like, let's pardon you." He said: "Pardon me O Commander of
Believers! I shall never do it once again."
It is reported that a sage was visited by one of his brothers who told him
something about one of his friends, thereupon he said to him: "You have delayed
to visit me, and committed three crimes: you have sowed the seeds of aversion
towards my brother in my heart, engaged my heart that was empty (from any ties
with this world), and put your supposedly trustworthy soul to suspicion." It is
reported that Sulaiman Ibn Abd-Al-Malik was sitting and Az-Zuhri was sitting
with him when a man came to him, to whom Sulaiman said: "I have been
reported that you conversed about me and said such and such about me." The

259

Book four: evil of tongue

man said: "I have never done nor said anything about you." Sulaiman said: "But
the one who told me is truthful." On that Az-Zuhri said: "By no means would a
talebearer be truthful." Sulaiman said: "No doubt, you have told the truth." Then,
he addressed the man saying: "Go peacefully."
According to Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him": "He who
transmits a tale to you is the same who transmits tales about you" in reference
to the fact that a talebearer should be hateful, and not be reliable nor
trustworthy. Why should he not be disliked since he persists in telling lies,
backbidng, talebearing, treachery, betrayer, envy, rancor, hypocrisy, spoiling
relations between the people and deception? It is he who seeks "to sunder the
relations that Allah Almighty commanded to be kept, and do mischief in the
land." (Al-Baqarah 27)
'j* I L OjxUajj

4 <©

jlxj

(J

y>jjl ^

0‘

Allah Almighty says: "The blame is only against those who oppress men with
wrong-doing and insolently transgress beyond bounds through the land, defying
right and justice: for such there will be a Penalty grievous." (Ash-Shura 42)

4

3

'
’

:

:

ji

^

Of a surety, the talebearer belongs to those. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "From the evil ones among the people is
he whom the people safeguard themselves from because of his evil." (This
narration is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of A'ishah). No doubt, the
talebearer is one of them. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" further said: "No cutter shall enter the Garden." It was said: "Who is
the cutter?" he said: "It is he who sunders relations between the people." (This
narration is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Jubair Ibn Mut'im).
Such sunderer is the talebearer.
It is reported that a man told something evil to Ali "Allah be pleased with
him" about another, thereupon he said to him: "O man! Let's verify of what you
have said: if you are truthful, we will dislike you (for you are a talebearer); and if
you are a liar, we will punish you. But if you like that we should excuse you, we
shall excuse you." On that he said: "No, excuse me O Commander of Believers."
Muhammad Ibn Ka'b Al-Qarzi was asked: "Which characteristics are to lower the
rank of a believer?" he said: "To talk so much, to disclose secrets, and accept the
tale of everyone." A man said to Abdullah Ibn Amir and at that time he was a
governor: "I have been reported that so and so told you that I had said
something evil about you." He said: "Yes it was so." He said: "Then, inform me
of what he had told you perchance I would prove his falsehood before you." He
said: "But I do not like to abuse myself with my own tongue, and it suffices me
that I have not given trust to what he had said, nor have I severed relations with
you."
Going about with calumnies was mentioned in the presence of a man who

The quarter of the destructives
260
said: "What do you think about a people who are given no thanks for their
credibility apart from anyone else?" according to Mus'ab Ibn Az-Zubair: "We see
that accepting calumnies is worse than going about with calumnies, for to go
about with calumnies is to guide (to something), whereas to accept it is to
sanction it, and in no way is he who guides to anything and tells about it like him
who accepts and sanctions it. So, safeguard yourselves from those who go about
with calumnies for if such is truthful to his tale, he will be cunning, for he does
not observe a sanctity nor does he screen what should be screened."
Going about with calumnies belongs to talebearing, but it is unique to the
transmission of stories to those from whose power it is feared. The Messenger
of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" said: "He who goes about
with calumnies among the people belongs to an illegal origin." (This narration is
reported by Al-Hakim on the authority of Abu Musa). Once, a man entered
upon Sulaiman Ibn Abd-Al-Malik and sought his permission to speak and said:
"O Commander of Believers! I am going to tell you something so, endure it if
you dislike it, and if you accept it, then, it will lead you to what you like." He
said: "Speak." He said: "O Commander of Believers! There surrounded you
men who have sold their religion for your world, and the displeasure of their
Lord for your pleasure. They have feared you instead of Allah, although they
have not feared Allah instead of you. So, do not trust them to what Allah
Almighty has trusted you to, and do not give your attention to their counsel
concerning what Allah has entrusted to you, for they never cease to ruin the
nation, waste the trust, and cut and violate honors. Their highest acts of
adoration are transgression and talebearing, and their best means are backbiting
and going about with calumnies among the people; and you will be questioned
about their crimes, although they themselves will not be responsible for your
crimes., so, do not reform their world by the corruption of your hereafter, for
the greatest loser among the people is he who has sold his hereafter for his
world."
In another context, a man went about with calumnies to Sulaiman Ibn AbdAl-Malik against Ziyad Al-A'jam, and when Sulaiman gathered them to make
peace between them, Ziyad turned his face to the man and said: "You were
either a man whom I have trusted with a private speech and you have proved
treacherous, or you have said something without knowledge, thereby you have
been sinful. Thus, you are either a betrayer or a sinner." A man said to Amr Ibn
Ubaid: "Al-Aswari still makes an evil mention of you in his stories." On that
Amr said to him: "O man! You have not observed the right of sitting with him,
as you transmitted to us his speech, nor have you fulfilled my right as you
informed me of something about my brother which I dislike., but anyway,
inform him that death encompass us all, the grave includes us, the Day of
Judgement will gather us, and Allah Almighty will judge between us, and He is
the best to judge."
A man raised a notification to As-Sahib Ibn Abbad in which he brought his
attention to the property of an orphan, and asked him to take it because of its

261
Book four: evil of tongue
abundance, thereupon he signed on the back of the paper: "The notification is
odious, although it seems true. However, if you do it by way of advising, you will
lose more than you will profit; and Allah forbids us to accept to uncover what is
screened. Had it not been for the fact that you are in the protection of your old
age, we would have punished you severely. So, safeguard yourself (against
punishment) O defective man, for it is Allah Alone Who is well-acquainted with
the unseen. May Allah have mercy upon the dead, mend the affairs of the orphan,
invest the property, and send His Curse upon he one who goes about with
calumnies."
Luqman said to his son (by way of counseling him): "O son! I recommend
you to adhere to many characteristics, and if you adhere to them, you will remain
a chief (among your people): lower your wing to the close to and far from you;
withhold your ignorance from the generous and the cunning; preserve your
brothers; keep good relation with your kith and kin, and let them safe from the
statement of such of people as goes about with calumnies, or hear a transgressor
who likes to corrupt and deceive you; and choose your brother of those who, in
case of your departure, you would not try to find fault with them, nor would they
do with you."
According to a man: "Talebearing is based on falsehood, envy, deception,
hypocrisy, and it is the stone trivet of humiliation." According to another man
"Were the tale that is transmitted to you by the talebearer to be true, then, it is h<
who has dared to abuse you, and him about whom it is transmitted is more fitting
for your forbearance, for he has not abused you in your face."
In short, the talebearer is of great evil which should be warded off. It is
reported on the authority of Hammad Ibn Salamah "may Allah have mercy upon
him": "A man sold a slave to another and said to him: "I find no fault in him
except that he is a talebearer." The purchaser accepted and bought it. After a few
days the slave said to the wife of his master: "My master does not love you and
he likes to have a slave-girl besides you. So, when he is asleep, cut some hair from
his nape so that I would make a magic on him to love you more." He further said
to her husband: "Your wife has taken a companion and she likes to kill you, so,
pretend you are asleep in order to detect it." He pretended to have fallen asleep,
and his wife brought the razor, and he thought she liked to kill him, thereupon he
stood up and killed her. The woman's family came and killed the husband (in
retaliation), which resulted in fighting between both tribes (of the man and the
woman)." We ask Allah to help us.

The Seventeenth Evil: The Speech Of Two-Faced
It is he who talks to two adversaries each with what befits and pleases him;
and this is evident hypocrisy. Ammar Ibn Yasir "Allah be pleased with him" said:
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "He who
has a double faces in this world, will have two tongues of fire on the Day of
Judgement." (This narration is reported by Al-Bukhari in his Adab and Abu
Dawud). Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him" said: the Messenger of Allah

The quarter of the destructives
262
"Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" said: "On the Day of Judgement, you
will find among the evil ones of the people the two-faced, who brings to each
people of speech that pleases them." (This narration is reported by Al-Bukhari,
Muslim and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya). According to Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased
with him": "It is not fitting for a two-faced to be a trustworthy in the Sight of
Allah Almighty."
Malik Ibn Dinar said: I read in the Torah: "Trust has become idle since there
existed a man who lives among his companions with two different lips, and on
the Day of Judgement, Allah Almighty will bring to destruction everyone of two
different lips." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "The most hateful to Allah Almighty from among His creatures on the Day
of Judgement will be the liars and arrogant, who instill hatred in the breasts of
their brothers; and if they meet them, they flatter them: it is those who, being
invited to Allah and His Messenger, will be too slow to respond, and, being
invited to Satan and his command, would be quick to respond." Ibn Mas'ud
"Allah be pleased with him" said: "None of you should be of those who run with
every current."
They agree that one's meeting two persons each with a face different from the
other belongs to hypocrisy. Hypocrisy has man signs, and this is one of them. It
is reported that a man from among the companions of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" died, and Hudhaifah did not offer
funeral prayer on him. Umar "Allah be pleased with him" asked him: "Should one
of the companions of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" die and you do not offer funeral prayer on him?" he said: "O
Commander of Believers! He was of those (hypocrites)." He asked him: "I
beseech you by Allah: am I of them?" he said: "No, by Allah, and I shall give no
safety from it to anyone after you."
You may ask: "How man become of two tongues? And what is the limit of
that?" let me say in reply to it that if he visits two adversaries and flatters each in
which he is true, he would not be a hypocrite, nor of two tongues. However, one
might be a friend of two adversaries, but very soon such friendship comes to end,
for the real friendship requires to become enemy to your friend's enemies as we
have mentioned in the Book of Etiquettes of Company and Brotherhood. But if
he transmits the speech of each of them to the other, he will be of two tongues,
and this is worse than talebearing, for a talebearer transmits the speech from one
side to the other, while a two-faced transmits speech from both sides to both
sides, thereby he becomes worse than the talebearer. Similarly, if he does not
transmit speech, but at the same time, adorns to each one his enmity towards the
other, he will be of two tongues. The same is true of his promising each to
support him against the other, his praising each in his enmity towards the other,
his praising each in his presence, and criticizing him in his absence, in which case
he should keep silent, or at least praise such of the adversaries as is on the right,
and praise him in his presence, in his absence, and in front of his enemy.
It was said to Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with him": "We sometimes enter

263
Book four: evil of tongue
upon our rulers and say to them something and when we come out we say about
them something different." He said: "We regarded it hypocrisy during the lifetime
of the Messenger of Allah "Ailah's blessing and peace be upon him"." Without
doubt, this is hypocrisy. It is better for such not to enter upon rulers as long as he
fears their evil in case he praises them not, pardcularly if there is no compelling
need for him to visit them. If it is his need of property and majesty that forces
him to enter upon them and praise them, his behaviour will belong to hypocrisy,
and this is the significance of the statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him": "Love for property and majesty plants
hypocrisy in the heart, just as water plants grains." (This narration is reported by
Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of Abu Hurairah). But if he is forced
by necessity to enter upon rulers, and Thus, he has to praise them otherwise he
would be punished, then, it is permissible for him to safeguard himself from evil.
In this respect, Abu Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased with him" said: "Sometimes we
smile in the faces of people whom we curse by heart." A'ishah “Allah be pleased
with her” reported: A person asked for the permission of The Messenger of Allah
“Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” to be admitted. He said: “Grant him
permission, what a bad son of his tribe or what a bad person of his tribe he is!”
When he came in he (The Prophet) spoke to him kindly. A'ishah reported that
she said: “O Messenger of Allah! You said about him what you had said, and then
you treated him kindly.” He said: “O A'ishah! No doubt, the worst person from
among the people in the sight of Allah on the Day of Judgement is the one
whom the people abandoned in order to avoid his bad manners.” (This narration
is reported by both sheikhs).
This is applicable to smiling, rejoicing, but not to praising, for it is evident lie,
which is impermissible unless one is forced by necessity or under compulsion.
Thus, it is impermissible to praise, or give trust, or move the head affirmatively in
response to falsehood. If one does so, he will be a hypocrite. He has to
disapprove of it, and if he has no power to disapprove of it with his tongue, let
him keep silent and disapprove of it with his heart.
The Eighteenth Evil: Praise
It is forbidden in many cases. Dispraising belongs to backbiting and going
about with calumnies among the people whose ruling we have already mentioned.
There are six evil in praise, four of which pertain to the praiser, and two to the
praised.
In relation to those pertaining to the praiser:
The first is that a praiser might make too much of the praised which leads
him to falsehood. According to Khalid Ibn Ma'dan: "He, who praises a ruler or a
man with what he has not in the presence of people, on the Day of Judgement,
Allah Almighty will resurrect him as having aphasia."
The second is that it might mix with showing off. However, by praising one
demonstrates his love for the praised, and in case the praiser does not really love
the praised, nor does he have faith in all that he says, he would become a
hypocrite.

The quarter of the destructives
The third is that he might say something with which he is not wellacquainted, and there is no way for him to learn it about him. In this respect, Abd
Ar-Rahman Ibn Abu Bakrah reported on the authority of his father that a person
praised another in the presence of The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him", whereupon he said: "Woe to you, you have decollated the
neck of your friend, you have decollated the neck of your friend; and were he to
hear it, he would not prosper. If one of you has to praise his friend at all, he
should say: ’I think (him to be) so and Allah knows it well and I do not know the
secret of the heart and Allah knows the destined end, and I cannot testify his
purity against Allah but (he appears) to be so and so." (This narradon is reported
by both sheikhs).
This evil includes praising with such general and absolute qualities as piety,
god-fearingness, abstinence, etc. but in case of praising with particular verifiable
qualities, such as: "I have seen him observing fasts by day and standing at night
(for supererogatory prayers)", there is no harm. Once, Umar "Allah be pleased
with him" heard a man praising another thereupon he asked him: "Have you ever
accompanied him on journey?" he answered in the negative. He further asked:
"Have you ever dealt with him in transaction and the like of it?" he answered in
the negative. He asked: "Then, are you his neighbour all the time?" he answered
in the negative. On that he said: "By Allah other than Whom there is none
worthy of worship, I do not think that you recognize him well."
The fourth is to please the praised, although he is wrongful or wicked, and it
is impermissible. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "Allah Almighty grows angry when a wicked is praised." (This
narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of
Anas). According to Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him": "He, who
supplicates for a wrongdoer to have a long life likes that Allah Almighty be
disobeyed in His land." A wicked wrongdoer should be dispraised to grow
aggrieved and not to be praised to be pleased.
As far as the praised is concerned, praise harms him from two perspectives:
The first is that it develops arrogance and haughtiness within him, which are
destructives. It is reported on the authority of Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy
upon him" that once Umar "Allah be pleased with him" was sitting having his
stick and the people were sitting round him, when Al-Jarud Ibn Al-Mundhir
came thereupon a man said: "This is the chief of Rabie'ah." Umar "Allah be
pleased with him" heard it, and so did Al-Jarud. When he came close to him, he
beat him with the stick. Al-Jarud said: "What is wrong with me O Commander of
Believers?" he said: "Have you not heard it?" he said: "I heard it: what is the
matter?" Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: "I was afraid a portion thereof
might mix with your heart, and I liked to lower your rank a bit."
The other is that when he is praised with good, the praised grows pleased
with it, satisfied with himself as he is, and becomes less active and operative. It
is well-known that it is him who sees himself running short that endeavors and
does his best in work. But if he is praised, he would think he has hit the mark,

264

!

Book four: evil of tongue

265

and nothing extra is required from him. This is why the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said (to the one who praised his
companion): "You have decollated the neck of your companion, and were he to
hear it (your praise), he would not prosper." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "If you praise your brother in his
face, you seem as though you have passed a razor over his throat." (This
narration is reported by Ibn Al-Mubarak on the authority of Yahya Ibn Jabir).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said
to a man who praised another: "You have hamstrung the man, may Allah
hamstring you!"
according to Mutarrif: "I have never heard a praise or thanks in my favor but
that I would regard myself too litde." Ziyad Ibn Abu Muslim said: "None hears
praise or thanks in his favor but that Satan seems to him, but it is the faithful
believer who should avert it." In his comment of both statements, Ibn AlMubarak "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "Both have told the truth. The
statement of Ziyad tells about the hearts of laymen, and that of Mutarrif tells
about the heart of the private among the people."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Were
a man to walk to another carrying a sharp knife against him, it would be better
than to praise him in his face." According to Umar "Allah be pleased with him":
"To praise a man is to slay him", for the slain is he who ceases to work, and
praise leads him to do so, or develops in him both arrogance and haughtiness,
and both are destructive.
If praise is safe from all of those six evils, there will be no harm in it: on the
contrary, it might be favored. It is within this framework that the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" praised his companions saying:
"If the faith of Abu Bakr to be balanced with the faith of all the people in the
worlds, it would overweigh it." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: "Were a Prophet to be sent after me, it would have
been Umar Ibn Al-Khattab." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the
authority of Uqbah Ibn Amir). Which praise is better than that! But the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said so in truth
and out of deep insight. Furthermore, the companions, "Allah be pleased with
them" were too dignified to let praise develop in them arrogance, haughtiness
and idleness.
On the other hand, it is odious that a man praises himself, for it summons
arrogance and pride. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "I am the chief of the sons of Adam, because of which I never show
ride." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah on the authority
of Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri; and Al-Hakim on the authority of Jabir). i.e. "I do not
say so out of boasting because of it", like others who might intend by praising
themselves. If the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
to be proud of anything, it was of Allah Almighty and of his closeness to Allah
Almighty, and not of being superior to all sons of Adam. It is like the one who is

The quarter of the destructives
266
acceptable to a particular king, of which he is proud and not of being superior to
anyone else.
It is within the details of those evils that you could be able to know where to
reject praise and where to encourage it. When some companions praised a
deceased, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"It (Paradise) has become assured to him." But when they dispraised another he
said: "It (fire) has become assured to him." QThis narration is reported by both
sheikhs on the authority of Anas). According to Mujahid "may Allah have mercy
upon him": "Everyone has sitters from amongst the angels. If a Muslim makes a
mention of his Muslim brother with good, they say: "And the like of it is assured
to you", and when he makes a mention of him with evil they say: "O son of
Adam whose defect is screen! Care about yourself, and praise Allah Almighty
Who has screened your defect."
Exposition Of Duties Of Praised
It should be known to you that a praised has to be extremely eager to avoid
arrogance, haughtiness, idleness, a thing from which he is not saved until he
recognizes himself very well, considers the danger of the end of journey, and the
risk that lies in the subtleties of showing off, and the conclusion of deeds.
However, he knows about himself what a praiser knows not; and were all of his
secrets and passing thoughts that occur to his mind to be uncovered to the
praiser, he would cease to praise him.
He also has to show his aversion to praise. In this issue, the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Throw dust in the faces of
praisers." (This narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Al-Miqdad).
According to Sufyan Ibn Uyainah "may Allah have mercy upon him": "The praise
causes no harm to him who recognizes himself well." Once, a man from the
righteous was praised, thereupon he said: "O Allah! Those do not recognize me,
and You recognize me well." When another was praised he said: "O Allah! This
slave of You (who praised me) has come close to me by displeasing You, and I
make You witness that I dislike him." When Ali "Allah be pleased with him" was
praised he said: "O Allah! Forgive for me what they know not, and blame me not
for what they say (about me), and make me better than what they assume of me."
A man praised Umar "Allah be pleased with him" thereupon he said: "Are you
going to ruin me and yourself?" a man praised Ali "Allah be pleased with him" in
his face, and the news had reached him that he spoke ill about him in his absence,
thereupon he said: "I'm below what you say, and beyond what you think in
yourself about me."
The Nineteenth Evil: Heedlessness Of Tongue Slips
It pertains to mistakes in speech, particularly about Allah Almighty and His
attributes, and the religious matters. Only eloquent religious scholars could
evaluate each word in the religious matters. If a religious scholar is short of
eloquence in speech or the knowledge of any science, he might err, but Allah
Almighty forgives for him in view of his ignorance. A typical example is the

267
Book four: evil of tongue
statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" on
the authority of Hudhaifah, "Allah be pleased with him": "None of you should
say: 'As Allah and you (O Messenger of Allah) will; but rather say: 'As Allah
Almighty wills and you (O Muhammad) will accordingly." (This narradon is
reported by An-Nasa'i and Abu Dawud). That is because the first phrase gives
the impression of ascribing others to Allah in worship. Ibn Abbas "Allah be
pleased with him" said: A man came to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" and talked to him about some matters in the religion
and then said: "As Ail and you will." On that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Do you set me a rival to Allah Almighty?
You'd rather say: 'As Allah Alone wills." (This narradon is reported by An-Nasa'i
and Ibn Majah).
On another occasion, a man delivered a sermon in the presence of the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" in which he said:
"Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger has been guided aright, and whoever
disobeys them has gone astray." On that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said: "No, but say: 'and whoever disobeys Allah and His
Messenger has gone astray'." (This narradon is reported by Muslim on the
authority of Adi Ibn Hatim). However, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" disliked his phrase for it revealed equality anc
combinadon.
Ibrahim disliked that a man should say: "I seek refuge with Allah and you",
and preferred that it be subsdtuted by: "I seek refuge with Allah and then with
you", and "But for Allah and so and so" by "But for Allah and then so and so".
One of the people disliked to supplicate: "O Allah! Release us from fire", under
pretext that release always ensues from detendon in the fire, from which they
used to seek shelter and refuge with Allah. Once, a man said: "O Allah! Let the
intercession of Muhammad "Peace be upon him" grasp me." On that Hudhaifah
"Allah be pleased with him" said: "No doubt, Allah Almighty causes the sinless
among believers to dispense with the intercession of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" which is due to the sinful among
Muslims."
Ibrahim said: If one says to another: "O donkey! O pig!" on the Day of
Judgement, it will be said to him: "Have you seen that I created him as a donkey?
Have you seen that I created him as a pig?" Umar "Allah be pleased with him"
said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Allah Almighty forbids you to swear by your fathers. If anyone of you is to
swear, let him swear by Allah or keep silent." (This narradon is reported by both
sheikhs). Umar "Allah be pleased with him" commented: "By Allah, since I heard
it, I have never sworn by it (my fathers)." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Do not give the name of Karm to vine
for Karm refers to a Muslim person." (This narradon is reported by both sheikhs
on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him" said: the Messenger of Allah

The quarter of the destructives
268
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "None of you should say 'O
my slave, O my slave-girl!' for all of you are slaves of Allah Almighty, and all
of your women are slave-girls of Allah Almighty. But rather say: 'O my boy, O
my maid!' therefore, no slave should say: 'O my Lord, O my female Lord!' but
rather let him say: 'O my master, O my mistress!' all of you are slaves of Allah
Almighty, and the Only Lord is Allah Almighty." The Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "Say not to the wicked:
'O our master!' for if you do so, you will displease Allah Almighty." (This
narration is reported by Abu Dawud on the authority of Buraidah). The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "He who
says 'I am free from Islam', he will be so in case he is true to his word, and in
case he is false, he will not return to the same state in which he previously
was." (This narration is reported by An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah on the authority
of Buraidah).
If one considers all evils of tongue we have mentioned, he comes to know
that if he unleashes his tongue he could hardly be safe from anyone of them; and
this is the significance of the statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him": "He, who keeps silent is saved." (This narration
is reported by At-Tirmidhi). However, those evils are destructives and they lie on
the way of the speaker: if he keeps silent, he will be saved from all of them; and if
he speaks, he will run the risk of committing one of them. But an exception is
made for such of people as has an eloquent tongue, abundant knowledge,
protecting piety and abiding observance, provided that he speaks very little,
perchance he might be safe. But even, he could hardly be free from risk. If you
could not be of those who speak and gain, at least be of those who keep silent
thereby they are safe, since safety is one of both spoils.

The Twentieth Evil: Laymen's Asking About Attributes
And Speech Of Allah
They ask about the speech of Allah and letters, and whether they are primal
or created, although it is due upon them to engage in acting upon what is in the
Qur'an. But unfortunately, that engagement is heavy on the souls, whereas
curiosity is very light and easy on the heart. A layman rejoices at delving into
knowledge for Satan gives him the false impression that he is from the religious
scholars and men of excellence, and he continues to endear that o him until he
speaks in knowledge in a way that renders him a disbeliever although he knows
not. However, every major sin committed by a layman is safer to him than to talk
in knowledge in general, and in what pertains to attributes of Allah Almighty in
particular.
The main occupation of laymen is to engage in acts of worship and have faith
in what is mentioned in the Qur'an and admit what is brought by the Messenger
without further search. But it is impolite of them to ask about things that do not
pertain to the acts of worship, for which they deserve the displeasure of Allah
Almighty, and expose themselves to the risk of disbelief. It is like the animal

Book four: evil of tongue

269

drivers' asking about the secrets of kings, which enjoins punishment upon them.
It is blameworthy to ask about an abstruse knowledge that is beyond one's
limited understanding and perception.
For this reason, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “Just (stick to my orders and) abandon (asking) me so long as I left
you (and did not order you to do a certain thing). However, those who were
before you were destroyed for their excessive questions, and their disputes with
their Prophets. So when I order you to do anything, do it as much as is within
your power, and when I forbid you to do anything, then leave it.” (This narration
is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
Anas Ibn Malik "Allah be pleased with him" said: “One day The Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” came out (before the people)
who disturbed him with much questions until he grew angry. Then, he ascended
the pulpit and said: "Ask me as you like and you do not ask me any question
but that I will give you answer to it." Abdullah Ibn Hudhafah stood up and
asked (him): "Who is my father?" The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” replied: “Your father is Hudhafah." The Prophet “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” told him repeatedly (in anger) to ask him anything they
liked. Two men asked him about their fathers, and he told them that their
fathers were those to whom they claimed themselves. A man stood to him and
said: "O Messenger of Allah! Will be in the Garden or in the fire?" he said: "In
the fire." When people saw that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" grew angry, they desisted. Umar "Allah be pleased with
him" knelt down before The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
and said : "We accept Allah as (our) Lord, Islam as (our) religion and
Mohammad as (our) Prophet." The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said: "Sit down O Umar, may Allah have mercy upon you, for you,
to the best of my knowledge, are prosperous." (This narration is reported by
both sheikhs).
In another context, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" forbade useless talk, wasting money and asking much questions.
(This is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Al-Mughirah Ibn
Shu'bah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: “The people would keep on asking (about creation) until it would be said:
“Allah has created the creatures; then, who has created Allah?” so, when you
reach such a point, say: “Say: He is Allah, the One and Only, Allah: Absolute
and Eternal; He begets not, nor is He begotten, and there is none like to Him."
Then, let him spit on his left side thrice, and seek refuge with Allah from Satan
the stoned." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Abu
Hurairah).
According to Jabir "Allah be pleased with him": "Allah Almighty revealed the
Holy Verse of invoking curse upon the liar of both couples (when a husband
launches charge against his wife of committing adultery), but in response to
asking much questions in that matter." (This is reported by Al-Bazzar).

The quarter of the destructives
270
Furthermore, die story of Moses and Al-Kliadir "Peace be upon them" highlights
the prevendon of asking any quesdon before its due time. Al-Khadir said to
Moses: "Then if you follow me, do not ask me about anything until I make to
you about it mention." (Al-Kahf 70)

< © !£? <4iU

SJ. Je J&Z.j & jpM LR5

But when he asked him about the ark, he said to him: "Did I not say that with
me you would never be able to have patience?" [Moses] said, "Do not blame me
for what I forgot and do not cover me in my matter with difficulty." (72-73)
J.U35\y* V

4 ^2^

(C^iX>\ 1)31 ^Jl Jli ^

lQ*'

^3

But Moses "Peace be upon him" did not endure to keep more patient, and
asked him again and again, thereupon Al-Khadir said to him: "This is parting
between me and you. I will inform you of the interpretation of that about which
you could not have patience." (78)
(:|p) iyL^>

Lis j*j l* jJjjIxj jJjjj \lu

i}\y* i wA_la jjii ^

Thus, the laymen's asking about the abstruse religious matters is one of the
greatest evils, and it brings about affliction. For this reason, they should be
suppressed and prevented from that. However, their delving into the letters of
die Qur'an is like the case of one to whom the king sent a letter in which he
commanded him to do many things. But he carried out nothing thereof, and
rather wasted his time in asking whether the parchment was new or old, which,
inevitably made punishment due upon him. Similarly, this is the case of a layman
who indulges in acting upon the principles and teachings of the Qur'an, and
engages himself in asking whether its letters are primal or invented. The same is
true of all attributes of Allah Almighty; and Allah knows best.

Bottl
/ij'rryTv

^_--

it is the fifth book of the third quarter of destructives
in the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
praise be to Allah, on Whose forgiveness and mercy rely only these who have
hope in Him, and of the evil consequence of Whose anger and onslaught only the
fearful beware, Who gradually visited with punishment His servants, in ways they
perceive not; made them subject to their desires, commanded them to leave what
they desire for, and tested them with anger, and obligated them to have control
over their anger. He Almighty further surrounded them with pleasures and
adversities, and gave them respite to see what they would do, and checked their
love for those in order to know whether or not they are true to their claim. He let
them know that nothing of what they do in public or in secret is hidden from
Him, and warned them of seizing them suddenly while they feel not. He says:
"They do not await except one blast which will seize them while they are
disputing. And they will not be able [to give] any instruction, nor to their people
can they return." (Ya Sin 49-50)

((.Jj

„

f

^

\

i

■»

2

(PfrP*1 Dl y5
^
m
Blessing and peace of Allah be upon Muhammad, His Prophet and
Messenger, under whose flag all Prophets and Messengers walk, as well as upon
his family and companions, the rightly-guided imams and pleased chiefs, blessing
as much as is equal to the number of Allah’s creatures to the Day of Judgement,
whose good grasps all the foremost and the last generation.
Coming to the point: anger is a flame that is taken from the eternally fueled
fire of Allah Almighty, Which mounts directed at the hearts. It is lurking within
the heart just as pieces of fire are lurking under ashes, and it is extracted only by
arrogance and haughtiness buried in the soul of every obstinate tyrant, in the
same way as fire is extracted by stone from iron.
It is obvious to the beholders who consider by the light of certainty that man,
by nature, is partially inclined to Satan the accursed: thus, whoever is irritated by
the fire of anger comes much closer to Satan as confirmed by his statement to
Allah Almighty: "You created me from fire whereas You created him (Adam)
from clay." Clay is characterized by calmness and tranquillity, whereas fire by
blazing, flaming, burning and moving. Anger always results in rancor and envy
with which those were ruined were destroyed, and those who were corrupt were
spoiled. Furthermore, their source (i.e. the heart) is no more than a morsel which,
if it is upright, all parts of the body will be upright.
271

The quarter of the destructives

272

As anger, rancor and envy lead the servant to damage, how needy he is to
know their evils and defects, in order to ward them off, safeguard himself from
them, remove and remedy them in case they reside in his heart and soul.
However, he, who knows not the evil should inevitably fall in it; and even
whoever knows it, knowledge alone is not sufficient unless he knows the way to
avert it. In this book, we are going to discuss the condemnation of anger, rancor
and envy, under many topics including:
Exposition of condemnation of anger
Exposition of the real nature of anger and die possibility of removing it by
self-discipline
Exposition of motives of anger
Exposition of treating anger after provocation
Exposition of having control over anger; and the virtue of forbearance
Exposition of the extent to which it is permissible to quench one's anger
with speech
The concept, definition and consequences of rancor
Virtue of forgiveness and kindness
Condemnation of envy, its real nature, causes, remedy, and such of envy as
whose removal is binding
Exposition of the reason for prevalence of envy among peers, fellows,
brothers, cousins and relatives, and whether it is stronger or weaker among
others than them
Exposition of the medicine that removes the envy disease from the heart
Exposition of how much envy whose removal from the heart is obligatory
May Allah Almighty help us

CHAPTER ONE: ANGER
Exposition Of Condemnation Of Anger
Allah Almighty says: "When those who disbelieved had put into their hearts
chauvinism - the chauvinism of the time of ignorance. But Allah sent down His
tranquillity upon His Messenger and upon the believers and imposed upon them
the word of righteousness, and they were more deserving of it and worthy of it.
And ever is Allah, of all things, Knowing." (Al-Fath 26)

'J*

<4

^

4© ^4^
Allah Almighty here condemned the disbelievers for their ostentatious
chauvinism falsely springing from anger, whereas He praised the faithful believers
for the tranquillity that He sent down upon them.
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
that a man said to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him": "O Messenger of Allah! Guide me to a deed to do and let it be simple (but
of great benefits)." He said: "Do not grow angry." The man repeated the same
demand, and the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"

Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy

273

gave the same reply. (This narration is reported by Al-Bukhari). Ibn Umar "Allah
be pleased with him" said: I said to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him": "Tell me of a statement to say, and let it be simple in order
for me to be able to retain." He said: "Do not grow angry." I repeated the same
request to him twice or thrice, and in each time he gave the same reply: "Do not
grow angry." (This narration is reported by Abu Ya'Ii).
It is further narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr "Allah be pleased
with him" that he said: I asked the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him": "Which thing should save me from the anger of Allah Almighty?"
he said: "Do not grow angry." (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani and Ibn
Abd-AJ-Barr). Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud "Allah be pleased with him" said: the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Who is the
strong in your sight?" we said: "Such of men as none could overpower him." On
that he said: "No, it is not so. But it is he who has control over himself when his
anger is provoked." (This narration is reported by Muslim). Abu Hurairah said:
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The
strong is not he who overpowers others, but the strong is he who has control
over himself when his anger is provoked." (This narration is reported by both
sheikhs).
Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "He who holds back his anger, Allah
Almighty screens his defects." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
Solomon, son of David "Peace be upon them" said: "O my son! Beware of
becoming angry more often, for becoming angry more often deprives a
forbearing of solemnity." In his comment on the statement of Allah Almighty:
"honorable, abstaining [from women], and a prophet from among the righteous."
(A1 Imran 39)

Ikrimah "may Allah have mercy upon him" Said: "The honorable is him
whom anger never overpowers."
Abu Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased with him" said: I said: "O Messenger of
Allah! Guide me to a deed that admits me to the Garden." The Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Do not grow angry." (This
narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and At-Tabarani). Yehia said to Jesus
"Peace be upon them": "Do not grow angry." He said: "But I could not help
growing angry for I am no more than a human being." He said to him: "Do not
save money." He said: "This is possibly expected." The Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "No doubt, anger spoils faith in
the same way as bitterness spoils honey." (This narration is reported by AtTabarani and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Bahz Ibn Hakim from his father
from his grandfather). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be

The quarter of the destructives
274
upon him" said: "No one grows angry but that he becomes on the verge of Hell."
(TTiis narration is reported by Al-Bazzar and Ibn Adi on the authority of Ibn
Abbas). In another narration, a man said to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him": "Which from Allah is the hardest on me?" he
said: "The anger of Allah Almighty." He asked: "Then, what should keep me
away from the anger of Allah?" he said: "Do not grow angry." (This is reported
by Ahmad on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Ami).
Of the traditions, a mention may be made of the following:
According to Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him": "O son of Adam!
Every time you grow angry, you jump, until one time you are about to jump and
fall in the fire (of Hell)." It is reported from Dhul-Qarnain "Peace be upon him"
that he met one of the angels and said: "Guide me to a knowledge therewith I
advance in faith and certainty." He said: "Do not grow angry, for Satan becomes
the ablest to overpower man at the time of his anger. So, avert anger with
restraining it, and calm it with quietness; and beware of haste, for when you make
haste, you become more ready to err; and be easy and lenient to the close and far
from you, and be not an obstinate tyrant."
It is reported from Wahb Ibn Munabbih "may Allah have mercy upon him"
that a monk was in his hermitage when Satan tried to misguide him, but he failed.
He came to him and called him to open the gate, but he gave him no reply. He
said: "Open the gate for should I go away, you would be regretful." He did not
turn to him. He said to him: "I am the Christ." The monk said: "Should you be
the Christ, what would I do with you? Did you not command us to worship and
endeavor with the promise of good on the Day of Resurrection? If you come to
us now with anything different, we would not accept it from you." He said:
"Indeed, I am Satan, and I liked to misguide you but I failed. So I came to you in
order for you to ask me about what you like and I would tell you." The monk
said: "I do not want to ask you about anything." Thus, he turned back in retreat.
The monk then said to him: "Do you not hear?" he said: "Yes." He said: "Tell
me: which of people's manners helps you more against them?" he said: "The
temper for if man is bad-tempered, we turn him just as a boy turns the ball."
According to Khaithamah: Satan says: "How could mankind overpower me
given that if he is pleased, I come till I be within his heart, and when he is angry, I
fly till I be in his head?" according to Ja'far Ibn Muhammad: "Anger is the key to
every kind of evil." According to one of the Ansar: "Temper is the head of
silliness, and anger is its guide; and whoever is pleased with ignorance dispenses
with forbearance, although forbearance is a means of honour and benefit, and
ignorance is a cause of disgrace and harm, and the best answer to the foolish is to
keep silent." Mujahid "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: Iblis says: "Were
sons of Adam to render me helpless, by no means would they incapacitate me
when they are in three states: when anyone of them is drunk, we take hold of his
rein and lead him wherever we like, and he does for us what we like him to do;
and when he is angry, he says what he knows not, and does what he regrets for,
and we cause him to withhold what he has in hand, and instill in him the hope for
what is beyond his reach."

275
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
It was said to a sage: "How able that man is to have control over himself!" he
said: "Then, no desire could humiliate him, and no whim could overpower him,
and no anger could overcome him." One said: "Beware of anger for it lets you fall
in the ignominy of apology." The Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him" said: "No doubt, anger spoils faith in the same way as bitterness
spoils honey." (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani and Al-Baihaqi on the
authority of Bahz Ibn Hakim from his father from his grandfather). According to
Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud "Allah be pleased with him": "Try to detect man's
forbearance whenever anger afflicts him, and his trustworthiness whenever covet
grasps him; and how do you come to know that he is forbearing unless he grows
angry, and that he is trustworthy unless he covets?" Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz "may
Allah have mercy upon him" sent a message to one of his appointed officers
saying: "Do not punish anyone at the time of your anger; and if you grow angry
with anyone, detain him until you are quiet, and when you are quiet take him out
and punish him just as much as is in proportion to his sin, and do not your
punishment over fifteen lashes."
According to Ali Ibn Zaid "may Allah have mercy upon him": A man from
the Quraish was very harsh in his speech to Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz "may Allah
have mercy upon him", thereupon he lowered his head and waited for a long
time after which he said: "You liked Satan to irritate me with the power of
authority in order to punish you today with what you are going to punish me
with tomorrow (in the hereafter)." A man said to his son: "O my son! Mind
does not keep firm at the time of anger just as a living spirit does not keep firm
in an oven kindled with fire. The most rational among the people are the least
angry among them. If one's angry is for the sake of this world, it is no more
than cunning and sneakiness, and if it is for the sake of the hereafter, it is
adorned with forbearance and knowledge, for it is said that anger is the enemy
of mind."
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" used to sermon: "Prosperous from among
you is he who is kept from covet, inclination and anger." One of the wise men
said: "He, who submits to his desire and anger, they lead him to the fire (of
Hell)." Al-Hassan Ibn Ali "Allah be pleased with him" said: "Among the signs of
a Muslim is strength in faith, decisiveness with lenience, faith with certainty,
knowledge with forbearance, intelligence with kindness, giving with right cause,
moderation with richness, tolerance with destitution, kindness with power,
endurance with companionship, and patience in difficulty: it is he whom anger
does not overpower, nor does zeal cause to deviate, nor does his appetence
overcome, nor does his abdomen disgrace, nor do his guards regard with
slightness, nor does his intention run short: it has he who helps the oppressed,
shows mercy towards the weak, never proves stingy nor extravagant: it is he who
forgives whenever he is dispraised, and pardons the ignorant. He suffers much
from himself, whereas the people are at ease from him."
It was said to Ibn Al-Mubarak "may Allah have mercy upon him":
"Encapsulate in a single statement to us the good moral character." He said:

The quarter of the destructives
276
"Leave anger." One of he Prophets said to those who followed him: "Who could
ensure to me not to grow angry, perchance he will be with me, have the same
rank as mine, and become my successor after my death?" a young man from
among the people said: "I could." He repeated the same question, and the young
man said once again: "I could fulfill it." When the Prophet died, that young man
took the same rank of him, and he was Dhul-Kifl (Man of surety), a name given
to him for he ensured not to grow angry and fulfilled his surety. According to
Wahb Ibn Munabbih "may Allah have mercy upon him": "Disbelief has four
pillars: anger, appetence, stupidity and covet."

Exposition Of Real Nature Of Anger
It should be known to you that when Allah Almighty created the animal as
being vulnerable to damage and death as a result of internal and external causes,
He endowed it with things therewith to protect itself from damage and
destruction for a specific term appointed in the Book of Allah. In relation to the
internal causes, he composed it from a mixture of moisture and heat, and there is
opposition between both: heat continues to dissolve, dry and evaporate moisture,
until it vanishes, and had it not been for the provision it gets from food to
compensate what is lost of it, of a surety, the animal would damage. Thus, Allah
Almighty created food that befits the animal's body, and created in the animal an
appetence thereby it is prompted to have food, in order to preserve it from
destruction.
As for the external causes that might damage it, they are like sword, lance,
spear, and the other destructives that are meant to ruin it. As it is lacking of
power and zeal to emanate from within itself to protect it from those
destructives, Allah Almighty created the real nature of anger from fire and
instilled it in man. Whenever he is kept off any of his goals or hindered from
achieving any of his objectives, the fire of anger then is kindled and erupts in a
way that boils the heart's blood, which extends to circulate across the different
veins and rise up to the highest top of the body, just as fire or boiling water rises
up; and this is why face, eye and complexion turn red, in imitation of the color of
the blood.
But blood extends as such whenever a man grows angry with whom is
inferior and he feels he has power over him, unlike the one who grows angry with
him who is above him, and he has no hope of exacting retribution from him, in
which case the blood deflates from the external surface of the skin to the inside
of the heart, with the result that he would grow sad; and this is why his
complexion turns yellow. If one grows angry with him who is equal or rival to
him, and he is in doubt as to whether he has or has not power over him, blood
then turns red in part and yellow in part.
In short, the heart is the place where the power of anger resides, and it means
that the blood gets boiled whenever revenge is needed. When this power is
irritated, it is directed to avert harm before it occurs, and to exact retribution and
revenge after it occurs. However, revenge is the fuel that sustains that power, in

Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy

Ill

which it gets its pleasure, and without which it could not calm. In relation to that
power, people are of three degrees: indulgence, extremism and moderation.
Indulgence results from the loss or weakness of that power, and it is
blameworthy, and such is described as has no passion. Imam Ash-Shafi'i "may
Allah have mercy upon him" said in this respect: "He, whose anger is provoked
and he does not grow angry, is then like a donkey." It is out of imperfection and
deficiency in man to lose the power of anger and passion. Allah Almighty
described the companions of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” as being strong and hard (against the enemies) although kind and
lenient to the believers as shown from His statement: “and those who are with
him (the Prophet) are strong against Unbelievers, (but) compassionate amongst
each other” (Al-Fath 29)
4

jlisdt

cIjJlI

QijiIj ^

He Almighty said to His Prophet “peace be upon him”: "O Prophet, fight
against the disbelievers and the hypocrites and be harsh upon them. And their
refuge is Hell, and wretched is the destination." (At-Tawbah 73)
Harshness and forcefulness result from the power of anger and passion.
Extremism is that this power exceedingly prevails until it become,
beyond the control of mind and religion, to the extent that man comes to
have no sound insight, nor good reasoning nor ability or freedom of choice:
on the contrary, he becomes like him who is compelled by necessity. The
reasons for which this power prevails might be instinctive or customary. From
among people, there is a man who is, by nature and disposition, more
responsive to anger. This is motivated by the bad temper of the heart, for
indeed the heart of the anger stems from the fire (of Hell) as the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said (according to the
narration of At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu Sa'id). It is extinguished and
broken by the good temper.
Among the customary reasons is that he mixes with a people who dare to
respond to anger and exact retribution, giving it the name of courage and
manhood. One of them says: "It is I who could not keep patient on cunning and
slyness, and I could endure nothing from anyone." He means that he has neither
mind to think therewith nor forbearance to endure therewith. Out of his
ignorance, he mentions it by way of boasting so that whoever hears it, the love
for anger would be made alluring to his heart, and he would like to do the same,
and his anger would become stronger. Whenever the fire of anger becomes more
intense and flaming, it causes one to be blind and deaf from paying attention to
any kind of admonition. If he is admonished, he would pay no attention: on the
contrary, he would grow more angry. If he seeks the light of his mind in order to
review his situation, he would fail to do so, since the light of mind is extinguished
and removed immediately by the smoke of anger.

The quarter of the destructives
To be sure, the brain is the source of thinking, and when anger is intensified,
a smoke rises from die boiling blood of the heart up to the mind, which prevails
over the source and origin of thinking and goes beyond it to the source of senses,
thereupon the eye darkens, so that he would not see the truth with his eye, and
the whole world seems black to him. His brain Thus, is like a dark cave in which
fire is kindled, and Thus, its sides and atmosphere are black and gloomy, out of
overwhelming smoke, but it has a weak lamp by which none could see well.
Moreover, none could extinguish the fire therein whether from inside or from
outside it, and there is no solution but to wait until all that is susceptible to
burning should get burnt. This is just the same as anger does with both the heart
and mind. Perhaps, the fire of anger is intensified to the point of burning and
drying the moisture therewith the heart lives, with the result that man dies out of
rage, just as the fire is intensified in the cave and divides it and causes it to
collapse. This is the state of the heart with anger.
The apparent traces of anger include the change of color of complexion,
disorder of acts and behaviours, quiver of limbs, trouble of movement and
speech, so that bubbles appear on both corners of the mouth, and eyes turn red,
nostrils turn over, and features change. If an angry man is seen at the time of
severe anger, his face seems ugly to the beholders. But even, his inside is much
more ugly than his outside, since the outside is no more than a portent of the
inside, and the inside becomes ugly first, and then spreads its ugliness to the
outside. Thus, the change of the outside is nothing but a fruit of the change of
the inside. This is its trace in the body.
In relation to its traces in the tongue and speech, it results in the unleashing
of tongue to use foul language, obscene speech, profane words, harmful abuses,
disgracing insults, and the like of that of which not only the mindful, but also the
one himself who says it feels shy when his anger calms. Its traces on organs and
parts of body represent in attacking, beating, tearing clothes, killing and
wounding when it is possible. When, due to some reason, he fails to exact
retribution or quench his anger, his anger then returns to him and he comes to
tear his own clothes, slap his body, strike the ground with his hand, and run like a
drunk who is under the influence of intoxication. In brief, the anger might lead
him to behave like a mad, and do the same acts a mad does.
Its trace in the heart of him because of whom anger is provoked, it represents
in rancor, envy, rejoicing at the misfortunes of him who grows angry with him,
determination to divulge his secrets and unveil his defects and all that should be
screened, mockery, and the like of those. Those are the traces of the radical
anger.
The fruit of lack of passion represents in the weakness of refraining from
such of things as from which an ordinary man should refrain, like dishonoring
sanctities, wife and mother, tolerating humility from the baseborn, vileness and
cuckoldry, which is blameworthy, for it results in lack of jealousy and loss of selfrespect. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Indeed, Sa'd (Ibn Ubadah) is jealous and has self-respect (for his women), and I

278

279

Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy

have self-respect for mine much more than Sa'd; and Allah Almighty has selfrespect much more than me." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on the
authority of Al-Mughirah). However, jealousy is created to help preserve
ancestries, and without it, the ancestries of people would be unknown. For this
reason, it is said that every people whose men are jealous and self-respected have
their women protected.
One aspect of the weakness of anger is to be helpless and keep silent on
witnessing evildoings. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said in this respect: "The best of my people are those of strong
temper (when Allah's sanctities are violated), who, when they grow angry, would
return to their state" i.e. of faith. (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani on
the authority of Ali Ibn Abu Talib). In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty says:
"and do not be taken by pity for them in the religion of Allah, if you should
believe in Allah and the Last Day. And let a group of the believers witness their
punishment." (An-Nur 2)
Oy?y

Oj

Ailj

y

We could say that whoever loses anger endrely fails to discipline himself, for
self-discipline is achieved only when one invests his anger with authority over his
desires, that he grows angry with himself when he finds himself inclined to
despicable desires.
Thus, loss of anger is blameworthy (just as severity of anger is dispraised).
What is praiseworthy is the amount of anger that is under the disposal of mind
and religion that it erupts when passion and zeal are needed, and extinguished
when forbearance and patience are required. To keep it at the point of
moderation is the uprightness enjoined by Allah Almighty upon His servants, as
well as it is the moderateness described by the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” in his statement: "The moderate is the best in
all matters." (This narration is reported by Al-Baihaqi).
If one is given to loss of anger to the point of baseness, despicability, lack of
jealousy and self-respect, and readiness to endure humiliation and disgrace, he
should treat himself, until it is strengthened; and if one is given to excessive angry
that leads him to behave recklessly and commit what is shameful and disgraceful,
he should treat himself until his anger decreases. In short, he should stand in the
middle between both extremes of excess and indulgence, for this is the straight
path which is thinner than a hair and sharper than a sword. If one fails to attain it,
let him seek to achieve it even approximately as much as lies within his capacity.
Allah Almighty says in that issue: "And you will never be able to be equal [in
feeling] between wives, even if you should strive [to do so]. So do not incline
completely [toward one] and leave another hanging. And if you amend [your
affairs] and fear Allah - then indeed, Allah is ever Forgiving and Merciful." (AnNisa 129)

The quarter of the destructives

280
0[3

LajjJu3 jlUT J-^=»
4 2|p)

^

jfj

bj-^ 0^1 ^ • ->b

CM

O1 'jJj y

i_pti^oj

It is not fitting for a man who fails to do good in entirety to do evil in
entirety, for indeed some evils are easier than others, as well as some good things
are higher than others. This is the real nature of anger, we ask Allah Almighty to
help us do what pleases him: He has power over all things.
Exposition Of Whether Or Not It Is Possible To Remove Anger
Through Self-Discipline
It should be known that some think that anger is susceptible to be entirely
removed by self-discipline, and others on the opposite extreme adopt the opinion
that it is a fundament which could hardly be treated or removed, like one's moral
character and features. But even, both opinions are weak. The truth is what we
are going to mention. As man continues to like things and dislike others, he
should have anger and rage, and as there is such of things as agrees with him, and
such of things as disagrees with him, he then likes what agrees with him, and
dislikes what disagrees with him. Anger follows the same course: when that
which he loves is taken from him, he grows angry, and when anything he dislikes
affects him, he also grows angry.
But indeed, the objects of love in relation to man are of three divisions: the
first is necessarily common to all the people, like sustenance, clothes, residence
and soundness of body. If one's body is beaten and wounded, he should
inevitably grow angry. The same is applicable if he is deprived of his garment
which screens his private parts, or is driven out of his house in which he resides,
or the water that quenches his thirst is spilled over. Those are essential
necessities, and man is hardly able not to dislike that they be removed, nor to
grow angry when he is afflicted in terms of any of them.
The second division pertains to such of things as are unnecessary for anyone
of the people in general, like majesty, much property, slaves and riding mounts.
Men came to love those things by custom, and ignorance of the right purposes of
things that he came to like gold and silver in themselves (and not for their
benefit), and be eager to hoard them, to the extent that he grows angry with
anyone who steals them although he is not in direct need of them. Being so, man
is imagined to be able not to grow angry about that kind of things. If he, for
instance, has a further home besides that in which he lives, and it is ruined by a
wrongdoer, he might not possibly grow angry, for it may be that he is insightful
of the real nature of this world, which causes him to abstain in what is beyond his
need, and do not grow angry if it is taken from him for indeed, he does not like it
to exist with him, and were he to like it, surely, he would grow angry because of
it.
But unfortunately, people grow angry most frequently because of what is not
necessary, like majesty, wealth and taking the lead in gatherings and knowledge,
etc. it is those bad customs that increased the number of things which man likes

281
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
and dislikes, and Thus, made him more ready to grow angry. As a matter of fact,
the more desires and lusts are, the more man becomes degraded and defective,
for need is an aspect of shortage in man, and the more they are, the more one
falls short. The ignorant does his best to increase his needs and desires, without
knowing that by so doing, he increases the means of anxiety and grief. Some
ignorant, being overwhelmed by such evil habits and bad customs, is responsive
to anger even if it is said to him: "You are not good at playing with birds, or you
are not good at chess, or you have no power to drink much wine, or eat much
food" and the like of that. However, it is not necessary to grow angry because of
that kind of things, for loving them is not necessary for men in general.
The third division pertains to what is of necessity and importance for some
on the exclusion of others, like the book for a scholar, which he is forced to
possess, and Thus, he grows angry with him who damages it; and the equipment
for the worker, without which he could not get his earnings. The means to what
is necessary and beloved becomes necessary and beloved. This differs with the
difference of people. The necessary love is that referred to by the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” in his statement: "He, upon
whom morning has come while he is secure in his garment (and house), in good
health, and has the sustenance of his day, seems as if the whole world is in his
possession." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah on the
authority of Ubaidullah Ibn Mihsin). Now, let's mention the aim of self-discipline
in relation to each division of those three.
As for the first division, the discipline is not intended to remove anger
entirely from the heart in so much as to be governed to be under the disposal of
mind, and to be used only in a way that is acceptable to religious law and mind;
and this is possible by way of self-mortification, and adhering to forbearance and
tolerance for a specific period of time until they become deep-rooted in the heart.
But it is impossible to uproot anger from the heart, for it is in opposition to
nature. It is true that it is possible to restrain it, break its form and weaken it so
much until it comes to have no visible traces on the face, but this is too difficult
to achieve. The same is true of the third division.
In relation to the second division, it is possible to remove the anger therein
through self-discipline, by getting rid of the love of such things, when one knows
for certain that his home is the grave and his eternal abode is the hereafter and
not this world, which is no more than a crossing point on which he comes and
passes just to take provisions necessary for the hereafter, and what is beyond that
is of evil consequence on him in which he then has to abstain. In this way, he
comes to remove the love of this world from his heart. Accordingly, if man has a
dog which he does not like, he will not grow angry if it is beaten by anyone else.
That is because anger adheres to love; and in this respect, self-discipline leads to
restrain the origin of anger, even though it happens in very rare cases. But in
more cases, it might lead to reduce anger and not to use it nor act upon it.
But even, you may say: The necessary thing pertaining to the first division is
to feel pain without growing angry on losing what is needed. If one, for instance,

The quarter of the destructives
282
has a sheep which he gets his daily sustenance from and then dies, he will feel
pain, but wall not grow angry with anyone. It is not that every kind of pain should
lead to anger. To be sure, one feels pain by bloodletting and cupping, although he
does not grow angry because of that, nor does he gnash his teeth at the
bloodletter or cupper (although pain seems to be caused to him by them). That is
because people has faith in monotheism believes that all things come from Allah,
and Thus, he never grows angry with anyone of His servants, whom he sees to be
subjugated by Him, under His disposal and power, just like a pen in a writer's
hand.
If a king signs a decree of sentencing somebody to death, he does not grow
angry at the pen itself with which the decree is signed. Such does not also grow
angry at slaughtering or even the death of his sheep, for he sees all things from
Allah Almighty. Anger is repelled by the power of monotheism, as well as by the
good expectation and confidence of Allah Almighty, which causes him to see that
all things come from Allah Almighty Who, in turn, does not decree but what is
for his benefit. His benefit might lie in his being exposed to hunger, injury, killing
and death. He does not grow angry with any of those just as he does not grow
angry with the cupper or bloodletter, seeing good in it.
But unfortunately, the prevalence of faith in monotheism to such a degree is
like a swift lightning, which never survive, and very soon the heart returns to its
normal state of paying attention to intermediaries. Had it been imagined to
survive forever with any human being, it would have been expected from the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”, who was exposed
to anger to the extent that sometimes his cheeks turned red (according to the
narration of Muslim on the authority of Jabir). This explains the following
narration: Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” reported that he heard The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” saying: “O Allah,
Muhammad is a human being. I get angry as human beings become angry. So, I
made a pledge with You which You would not break: Any believer to whom I
cause trouble or upon whom I invoke curse or whom I beat, make that an
expiation (for his sins) and a source of closeness to You on the Day of
Judgement.” (It is reported by Muslim).
It is narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr “Allah be pleased with
him” that he said: I used to write (and record) everything I heard from the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him", with the intention
to memorize it, but the Quraish people forbade me saying: “Should you write
(and record) everything you hear from the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him", and the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" is but a human being, who speaks while being in the state of anger
as well as he speaks while being in the state of pleasure?” I desisted from writing,
and I made a mention of that to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him", who beckoned with his finger to his mouth and said: “Write
(what you hear from me), for by Him, in Whose Hand is my soul: nothing but
the truth comes out of it, for I am a Prophet sent by Allah with the truth.” (It is

Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy

283

reported by Abu Dawud) However, he did not reject anger from himself, but he
stated that anger would not turn him from the truth.
One night, A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her” grew angry, thereupon the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said to her: "What
is wrong with you O A'ishah? Is it your devil that had come to you?" She said: "O
Allah's Messenger! Is there along with me a devil?" He said: "Yes." She said: "Is
devil attached to everyone?" He said: "Yes." She said: "O Messenger of Allah! Is
it with you also?" He said: "Yes, but my Lord helped me against him until he
embraced Islam (and Thus, I am absolutely safe from his mischief)." (This is
reported by Muslim). Here also he did not say that no devil was with him, and of
a surety he meant the devil of anger, but he stated that such devil was not to
force him to do evil.
It is narrated on the authority of Ali “Allah be pleased with him” that he said:
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” was not to
grow angry for the sake of this world, and if his anger was provoked, it was only
for the sake of the truth; and once he grew angry for the sake of the truth, he
would change that none would recognize him, and nothing could break his anger
but to support the truth." fThis is reported by At-Tirmidhi). Thus, he used to
grow angry only with the violation of the truth, for the sake of Allah Almighty.
There is here no turning to intermediaries, for such of people who grows angry
for being deprived of his religious sustenance and requirements, his anger is for
the sake of Allah Almighty.
But in some cases, one might not become angry for a necessary thing, and
that is because of his being engaged in what is more necessary. The heart's being
involved in a particular task hinders it from turning to another. Consider, for
instance, the statement of Salman (Al-Farisi) “Allah be pleased with him” in reply
to him who insulted him: "If my scale (of good deeds on the Day of Judgement)
is light, then, I will be careless for in this case I will be worse than your insult; and
if my scale is heavy, then, no harm will befall me because of what you say about
me." That is because he was mainly concerned with the hereafter and that is why
he was not influenced by the insult. Similarly, when Ar-Rabie Ibn Khaitham was
insulted by a man he said to him: "O man! No doubt, Allah Almighty heard your
word. There is an obstacle before the Garden, which, if I am able to cross, no
harm will befall me because of what you say, and if I fail to cross, then, I will be
careless for in this case I will be worse than what you say about me." Once, a
man insulted Abu Bakr “Allah be pleased with him” thereupon he said: "What
Allah Almighty has screened from you (of my faults) is more (than you know)."
He seemed to be more concerned with his indulgence in his fearing of Allah
Almighty as He should be feared, and knowing Him as He should be known
than to turn to anyone ascribing him to deficiency, for he regarded himself
defective (although he was not so); and this is out of his glorious esteem and
high rank, “Allah be pleased with him”. A woman said to Malik Ibn Dinar "may
Allah have mercy upon him": "O showy man!" on that he said to her: "No
doubt, none other than you has recognized me." Indeed, he was engaged in

The quarter of the destructives
284
removing from himself the evil of showing off, and Thus, he did not grow
angry. On another occasion, a man insulted Ash-Sha'bi, thereupon he said to
him: "If you are true to your statement, may Allah forgive me; and if you are a
liar, may Allah forgive you." All of those situations give impression that they
did not grow angry for they were engaged in the matters and affairs of their
religion which were more important to them.
Thus, to engage in what is important does not hinder one from becoming
angry when he loses something he likes. The absence of rage is expected then
either by engagement in what is more important, or by prevalence of faith in
monotheism, or by knowing that Allah Almighty does not like him to be angry,
and Thus, his great love for Allah Almighty extinguishes the heat of his anger,
but it happens in very rare cases. You now have come to know that the way to
get rid of the fire of anger is to remove the love for this world from your heart,
by knowing the evils of the world, as will be discussed in the Book of
Condemning the World. If one is able to remove the love for the unnecessary
things, he could manage to get rid of most causes of anger. However, what is too
difficult to remove could be broken and weakened: we ask Allah to help us attain
success, for He has power over all things.

Exposition Of Causes Of Anger
You have come to know that the treatment of every evil is by removing its
causes. So, it is necessary to learn the causes of anger. Yahya asked Jesus “peace
be upon them”: "Which thing is most severe?" he said: "The anger of Allah
Almighty." He asked: "Then, what is next to the anger of Allah?" he said: "To
grow angry." He said: "Then, what are the causes of anger?" he said: "Vanity,
arrogance, self-conceit, and zeal." The causes of anger are haughtiness, arrogance,
joking, humor, mockery, satire, putting to shame, disputation, opposition,
treachery, and severe keenness on surplus wealth and majesty. All of those are
bad manners and condemned by religious law. There is no salvation from anger
with the continued existence of those causes. So, they should be removed by
their opposites.
You have to kill vanity by humbleness, and arrogance by estimating yourself
with due estimate as will be discussed later in the Book of arrogance, and remove
pride by believing that you belong to the same race to which your servant
belongs, since all the people belong to the same father and mother. But they
regard themselves different by their superiority over each other. Pride, vanity and
arrogance are among the most vicious things. We do not exaggerate if we say that
they are the fountainheads of all vices and unless you get rid of them, you will
have no superiority to anyone else. You will have nothing to boast of, given that
you belong to the same race to which your servant belongs, in terms of body
structure, organs, ancestry, etc.
In order to remove joking, you have to engage in the serious religious and
hereafter affairs, in which lifetime is consumed. In order to remove humor, you
have to endeavor to obtain the good manners and virtues, and the religious

285
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
sciences that help you attain felicity and happiness of the hereafter. In order to
remove mockery, you have to disdain to harm others, and saving yourself far
from being mocked at by anyone else. In order to avoid putting others to shame,
you have to give up bad words and protect yourself against the shameless and
bitter replies. In order to give up the severe keen on the luxuries of living, you
have to satisfy yourself only with the necessary requirements, in pursuit of the
honor of freedom of want and need, and abstinence of the humiliation of need.
To treat each of those manners, you are in need to practice self-discipline
and endure difficulties. The first step of discipline is to know the evil of each
manner in order for the soul to refrain from it. The next step is to do its
opposite regularly for a particular time, until the soul becomes, by custom,
familiar with it. Once they are removed from the soul, it gets purified and
cleansed from those vices, which helps it get rid of the anger that is caused by
them. One of the strongest causes that provokes anger in the sight of most
ignorant men is their giving it such names as courage, manhood, gallantry, selfhonour, and the like of those thereby they regard it praiseworthy, just out of
their stupidity and ignorance. The result is that the soul inclines to it and sees it
nice. What confirms it is describing the severe anger of the chiefs among men
as courage, and the laymen are fond of imitating and copying the behaviours of
the chiefs.
It is out of ignorance, heart disease, mental deficiency and weak-mindedness
to name such anger with the names of courage and self-honour. The sign of its
being out of self-weakness is that the weak always is more responsive to anger
than the sound one, woman more responsive to anger than man, the child more
responsive to anger than the mature, the old man more responsive to anger than
the middle-aged man, and so on. The bad-tempered vicious man is more
responsive to anger than the good-tempered virtuous man. That is because the
vicious one grows anger for the sake of his appetite if he misses a morsel of food,
for the sake of his stinginess if he misses even a grain to the extent that he grows
angry with his wife, children and companions. But only the strong one has
control over himself when his anger is provoked, according to the statement of
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "The strong
one is not he who overpowers others. But the strong one is he who has control
over himself when his anger is provoked."
The treatment of such ignorant is to listen to the tales of the good virtuous
men of forbearance and forgiveness, and how they were able to restrain their
anger. This is handed down from the Prophets, saints and devotees of Allah,
religious scholars, sages, and the virtuous kings, whereas the opposite of those is
handed down from the lowly stupid and ignorant among men, whose minds are
weak, and there is no good in them.
Exposition Of Treating Anger After Being Provoked
All we have mentioned pertains to how to prevent and cut off the means and
causes of anger in order not provoke it. But once it is provoked due to a

The quarter of the destructives
286
particular cause, the angry one should keep firm in order not to behave in
opposition to what is acceptable. Once anger is provoked, it should be treated by
a mixture of both knowledge and deed. Knowledge includes six things:
The first is to reflect the stories and news we are going to state about the
excellence of restraining anger, tolerance and forgiveness, and have desire for its
reward. In this way, his severe desire for the reward of restraining anger prevents
him from seeking to exact retribution, and his anger is extinguished and removed
from him. It is reported that Malik Ibn Aws Ibn Al-Hadthan "may Allah have
mercy upon him" said: Umar “Allah be pleased with him” grew angry with a man
and commanded that he would be beaten. I said to him: "O Commander of
Believers! "Take what is given freely, enjoin what is good, and turn away from the
ignorant."" (Al-A'raf 199)

Umar “Allah be pleased with him" repeated it: "Take what is given freely,
enjoin what is good, and turn away from the ignorant." He was reflecting on it
while reciting it for he was in the habit of acting upon the Book of Allah
whenever it was recited to him. He reflected on it and released the man. On
another occasion, Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz "may Allah have mercy upon him"
ordered that a man be beaten, and then he recited the statement of Allah
Almighty: "and who restrain anger and who pardon the people - and Allah loves
the doers of good." (Al Imran 134)

i

:
;

^^b o*hjt J*

-iMl!

^

Thereupon he released him from his anger.
The second is to frighten himself by the punishment of Allah Almighty,
saying that 'the power of Allah over me is greater than mine over that man, and
were I to conduct my anger on him, I would not be safe from the anger of Allah
Almighty on the Day of Judgement, when I will be the neediest of forgiveness
and pardon'. Allah Almighty said in one of His previous scriptures: "O son of
Adam! Remember me when you grow angry so that I would remember you when
I become angry and Thus, would not obliterate you among those whom I
obliterate." Once, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” sent a servant to fulfill a need for him and he delayed to do it. When he
returned he said to him: "Had it not been for the retaliation (on the Day of
Judgement), I would have punished you painfully." (This narration is reported by
Abu Ya'li on the authority of Umm Salamah). It was said that there was no king
in the children of Israel but that a sage was with him so that whenever he grew
angry, he would give him a scroll reading: "Be merciful to the needy, fear death,
and remember the hereafter." He used to read it continuously until his anger
should calm.
The third is to warn himself of the evil consequence of enmity and
retribution, his enemy's seeking to harm him, and rejoice at his misfortunes,
from which almost none is free. Let him frighten himself by the evil

287
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
consequence of anger in this world if he does not fear the hereafter. This is due
when an appetence is invested with authority over anger, and one shall receive
no reward for it for it does not belong to the deeds of the hereafter: but it
pertains to the transient fortunes of this world and giving priority to some over
others. Therefore, if his anger is provoked for distraction of his devotion to
knowledge and deed which help him for the hereafter, then, he shall be
rewarded.
The fourth is to remember how ugly he seems at the time of anger, by
recalling to his mind the ugliness of anyone else when he is angry, and how ugly
the anger is in itself, and how the angry is like a rabid dog or a wild animal, and
how the forbearing who gives up anger is like Prophets, devotees of Allah, sages,
scholars and the like of those, giving himself the freedom to choose whether to
imitate dogs and wild animals and the lowly among the people or to imitate the
Prophets, sages and scholars. And of a surety, his soul will incline to imitate the
latter if he is of sound mind.
The fifth is to consider the cause of his anger that prompts him to exact
retribution, and hinders him from restraining rage, and there should be a
particular cause, like, for instance, Satan's saying to him: "If you do not exact
retribution, you will prove failing, humiliated, despicable and slight in the sight of
people." Being so, let him say to himself in reply to that: "How astonishing you
are! Do you disdain to endure harm in this world, and will not disdain to endure
punishment on the Day of Judgement, when that man will catch hold of your
hand and take back his right from you? Do you disdain to be put to humiliadon
in this world and will not disdain to be disgraced and put to shame on the Day of
Judgement? Do you disdain to seem slight in the sight of people today and will
not disdain to seem despicable in the sight of Allah, angels and Prophets on the
Day of Judgement?"
If he is to restrain anger, he should do so just for the Sake of Allah Almighty,
for it will raise him in rank with Allah Almighty. What should he have to do with
the people since the disgrace he receives on the Day of Judgement from him
whom he wrongs today will be more severe and grievous than the disgrace he
causes to him in this world in case he exacts retribution at present? Does he not
like to be of those who will stand whenever they are called on the Day of
Judgement, to have his reward due upon Allah Almighty, for none but these who
forgive who will be stand in response to the call (of Allah Almighty)? he should
then repeat the like of those thoughts of faith perchance he would calm and
restrain his anger.
The sixth is to learn that his anger is caused by things that happen
according to the will and in ordinance of Allah Almighty: how then should be
apply his will and ordinance in opposition to the will and ordinance of Allah
Almighty?
As for the deed, it is to say with your tongue at the time of anger: "I seek
refuge with Allah from Satan the stoned" in response to the command of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” (according to the

The quarter of the destructives
288
narration of both sheikhs on the authority of Sulaiman Ibn Surd). Whenever
A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her” grew angry, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” would take hold of her nose and said to her: "O
A'ishah! Say: 'O Allah, Lord of the Prophet Muhammad, forgive for me my sin,
remove my anger and deliver me from the humiliating afflictions." (This
narration is reported by Ibn As-Sunni on her authority). It is then desirable to
utter that statement at the time of anger.
If anger does not vanish, then, sit down if you are standing, and lie on your
back or side if you are sitting, and come close to the earth from which you have
been created in order to know how despicable you are, and calm down yourself
by sitting or lying for anger stems from the heat that is caused by movement. The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Anger is a
piece of fire that is kindled in the heart." (This narration is reported by AtTirmidhi on the authority of Abu Sa'id). Do you not see how his jugular veins get
swollen, and his eyes turn red? If anyone of you detects that in him, let him sit
down in case he is standing, or lie in case he is sitting. But if that state is not over,
let him perform ablution or take bath with the cold water, for the fire is
extinguished only by water.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "If
anyone of you grows angry, let him perform ablution with water for anger stems
from fire." fThis narration is reported by Abu Dawud on the authority of Atiyyah
As-Sa'di). According to another version, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” said: "No doubt, anger is caused by Satan and Satan is
created from fire, and fire is extinguished only by water. So, if anyone of you
grows angry, let him perform ablution." It is narrated on the authority of Ibn
Abbas “Allah be pleased with him” that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” said: "If you grow angry, then, keep silent." (This
narration is reported by Ahmad, At-Tabarani, Al-Baihaqi and Ibn Abu AdDunya).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him”
that he said: It was the habit of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” that whenever he grew angry, he would sit down if he was
standing, or lie if he was sitting, with the result that his anger would be over."
(This narration is reported by Ahmad and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya). It is further
narrated on the authority of Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri “Allah be pleased with him”
that he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: "Behold! Anger is a piece of fire (that is kindled) in the heart of the son of
Adam." Do you not see how his jugular veins get swollen and his eyes turn red?
If anyone of you detects that in himself, let him get his cheek stuck to the earth,
in reference to prostration, and lowering the dearest of man's parts of body to the
most humiliating places, perchance the soul would feel how disgraced it is,
therewith its vanity and pride which cause anger would vanish.
It is reported that one day Umar “Allah be pleased with him” grew angry,
thereupon he asked for water which he snuffed and said: "No doubt, anger is

289
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
caused by Satan and this removes anger.” It is reported that Urwah Ibn
Muhammad "may Allah have mercy upon him” said: When I was appointed as
the governor of Yemen my father said to me: "Have you been appointed as
governor?" I answered in the affirmative, thereupon he said: "If you grow angry,
look at the sky over you and the earth beneath you, and exalt (Allah Almighty)
their Creator."
It is reported that once Abu Dharr “Allah be pleased with him” abused a man
while quarrelling with him, saying: "O son of the red-complexioned woman!" the
man went and made a complaint against him to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” who said: "O Abu Dharr! I have been reported
that you abused your brother by his mother." He said: "Yes." Abu Dharr “Allah
be pleased with him” went to please his companion, who, in turn, hasten to greet
him with peace first. When he made a mention of that to the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” he said: "O Abu Dharr! Raise your
head and behold! Then, put in mind that you are not superior to anyone (on the
earth) be he black or red, unless you doo a deed better than his." Then he
resumed: "If you grow angry, then, sit down in case you are standing, recline in
case you are sitting, and lie in case you are reclining." (This narration is reported
by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya, Ahmad and both sheikhs in their Sahihs).
Al-Mu'tamir Ibn Sulaiman said: A man from those who were before you used
to grow angry more often, thereupon he wrote many scrolls and gave it to some
people and said to the first: "When I grow angry, give me the scroll I have given
to you." He said to the second: "When I calm partially, give me your scroll." He
said to the third: "When my anger is entirely over, give me your scroll." One day
he grew very angry, thereupon the first man gave him his scroll, and behold! It
had the following: "Why do you grow angry as such? You are not a god. But you
are no more than a human being who is about to (die and) your parts devour
each other." On that he became quiet a bit. Then, he was given the second scroll
and behold! It had the following: "Be merciful to those on the earth, perchance
those in the heaven might have mercy upon you." Then, he was given the third
scroll in which it was written: "Deal with the people according to the right of
AJlah Almighty, for it is only that which benefits them", i.e. do not make idle the
legal punishments of Allah Almighty.
One day Al-Mahdi grew angry at a man thereupon Shabib said to him: "Do
not grow angry for the Sake of Allah more than He becomes angry for His Own
Sake." On that he ordered that he would be released.

Exposition Of Excellence Of Restraining Anger
Allah Almighty says in His praising the faithful believers: "Who spend [in the
cause of Allah] during ease and hardship and who restrain anger and who pardon
the people - and Allah loves the doers of good." (A1 Imran 134)

i(S)

<Ls--^

<j

^

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "He
who holds back his anger, Allah Almighty withholds His punishment from him;

The quarter of the destructives
290
and he who apologizes to his Lord from his sin, Allah Almighty accepts his
apology; and he who keeps his tongue (from speaking ill about others) Allah
Almighty screens his privates." (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani and AlBaihaqi on the authority of Anas). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” further said: "The strongest among you is he, who has
control over himself at the time of anger; and the most forbearing among you is
he who forgives at the time he has power (over his wrongdoer)." (This narration
is reported by Al-Baihaqi and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Ali). The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” also said: "He who
restrains his anger although he has the power to enforce it if he so likes, Allah
Almighty will fill his heart with satisfaction (or safety and faith according to
another version) on the Day of Judgement." (This narration is reported by Ibn
Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Ibn Umar).
It is further narrated on the authority of Ibn Umar “Allah be pleased with
him” that he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "No servant sips a gulp more rewardable than a gulp of anger he
restrains for the Sake of the Countenance of Allah Almighty." (This narration is
reported by Ibn Majah). It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas “Allah be
pleased with him” that he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: "The Hell has a gate which none will enter through
except him who satifies his anger by disobeying Allah Almighty." The Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "No gulp is dearer to
Allah Almighty than a gulp of anger which a servant restrains and no servant
restrains his anger that Allah Almighty fills his heart with faith." (This is reported
by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Ibn Abbas). The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Whoever restrains his anger
although he has the power to enforce it, Allah Almighty will call him before all
the people (on the Day of Judgement) and make him choose such of beautiful
women of big lustrious eyes as he likes."
As far as traditions are concerned, a mention may be made of the following:
Umar “Allah be pleased with him” said: "Whoever safeguards himself from
the punishment of Allah Almighty never seeks to slake his anger; and whoever
fears Allah never does what he wills; and had it not been for the Day of
Judgement, you would have seen things different from what you see them now."
Luqman said to his son: "O son! Do not remove your modesty by begging others;
and do not slake your anger by disgrace; and estimate your own self with due
estimate, perchance you would get benefit from your living." Ayyub said: "To
show forbearance for an hour averts much evil." Sufyan Ath-Thawri, Abu
Khuzaimah Al-Yarbu'i and Al-Fudail Ibn Iyad met together and discussed
asceticism, and agreed on the fact that the best of deeds is to show forbearance at
the time of anger, to keep patience at the time of calamity.
A man said to Umar “Allah be pleased with him”: "By Allah, you never
decide the cases with justice, nor do you give in abundance." Umar “Allah be
pleased with him” grew angry so much that (the traces of anger were) visible

291
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
on his face. Another man said to him: "O Commander of Believers! Do you
not take heed of the statement of Allah Almighty in which He says: “Hold to
forgiveness; command what is right; but turn away from the ignorant”?" (AlA’raf 199)
4 ©)

dJJllA Ij-li3 ^

Umar “Allah be pleased with him” said: "You have told the truth." It seemed
as though his anger was fire which was extinguished. According to Muhammad
Ibn Ka'b "may Allah have mercy upon him": "There are three characteristics,
which if one has, he will complete his faith in Allah Almighty: if he is pleased, his
pleasure will not lead him to falsehood; if he grows angry, his anger will not turn
him out of the truth; and if he has power, he will not usurp what is not for him."
A man came to Salman “Allah be pleased with him” and said: "O slave of Allah!
Advise me." He said: "Do not grow angry." He said: "I could not do so." He said:
"Then, if it is necessary for you to grow angry, hold back your tongue and hand."

Exposition Of Excellence Of Forbearance

|

It should be known that forbearance is better than restraining anger, for the
latter is just to force oneself to forbear, and only he whose anger is provoked
needs to restrain anger, in which he is forced to exert great effort. But by long
pracdce, he gets accustomed to it, and he becomes too difficult to irritate, and
even if his anger is provoked, it will be easier upon him to restrain it; and this is
the natural forbearance. It is the portent of perfect and prevailing mind ir
opposition to the weak and broken power of anger in submission to mind. But a
first, one should force himself to forbear in order to get familiar with forbearance
in the end.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Behold! Knowledge is obtained through learning, and forbearance is acquired by
forcing oneself to forbear; and whoever seeks to good is given it, and whoever
wards off evil is safeguarded against it." (This narration is reported by AtTabarani and Ad-Daraqatni on the authority of Abu Ad-Darda1). It is narrated on
the authority of Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” that he said: the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Seek after
knowledge, and seek with it tranquillity and forbearance. Be lenient to those
whom you teach, and those whom you learn from, and be not among the
repressive scholars lest your forbearance would be overpowered by your
ignorance." (This narration is reported by Ibn As-Sunni). With this Hadith, he
“peace be upon him” Referred to the fact that both repression and arrogance
provoke anger, and keep off lenience and forbearance.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” used to
supplicate with the following supplication: "O Allah! Make me independent (and
rich) with knowledge, adorn me with forbearance, honor me with piety and
beautify me with wellbeing." It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah
“Allah be pleased with him” that he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Seek highness of rank in the Sight of

The quarter of the destructives
292
Allah." They asked: "How is that O Messenger of Allah?" he said: "To keep good
relation with whoever severs relation with you, give whoever withholds from you,
and show forbearance on whoever behaves ignorantly to you." (This narration is
reported by Al-Hakim and Al-Baihaqi).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "The following five are among the usages and practices of Prophets:
modesty, forbearance, cupping, applying Siwak and perfume." (This narration is
reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Malih Ibn Abdullah Al-Khatmi from
his father from his grandfather). It is narrated on the authority of Ali “Allah be
pleased with him” that he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: "A Muslim attains, by virtue of his forbearance, the
rank of the one who observes fasts and stand at night (for supererogatory
prayers); and he might be enlisted as obstinate oppressor although he has none
but his family." (This is reported by At-Tabarani).
Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” reported that a person said: “O
The Messenger of Allah! I have relatives with whom I try to keep good
relationship, but they sever (this reladon). I treat them well, but they treat me ill. I
am sweet to them but they are harsh to me.” Upon this he (The Prophet) said: “If
it is so as you say, then it is as if you throw hot ashes (upon their faces) and there
would always remain with you on behalf of Allah (an Angel to support you and)
keep you dominant over them so long as you stick to this (course of good
behaviour).” (This narration is reported by Muslim).
One of Muslims said: "O Allah! I have nothing to give in charity. So, please, if
anyone harms my honor, let it be an object of charity from me to him." Allah
Almighty revealed to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” that ’I forgave for him his sins." (This narration is reported by Abu Na'im
and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Abd-Al-Majid Ibn Abu Abs Ibn Jabr from his
father from his grandfather), the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him": "Does anyone of you fail to be like Abu Damdam who used to say
whenever he comes out of his house: 'O Allah! I have given in charity (the sin of
harming) my honour to the people'?" (This narration is reported by Al-Bazzar
and Al-Aqili on the authority of Anas).
In comment on the statement of Allah Almighty: "Be pious scholars of the
Lord because of what you have taught of the Scripture and because of what you
have studied." (A1 Imran 79)
4,
Oyj
oy+lx3
lL>
*y£
^
It is said that it refers to the forbearing and religious scholars. In his comment
on the following statement of Allah Almighty: "And the servants of the Most
Merciful are those who walk upon the earth easily, and when the ignorant address
them [harshly], they say [words of] peace" (Al-Furqan 63)
(Jgj Ud— IjJ 13

^ L]3

(Js- Oy*-i

^

Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "It refers to the forbearing

293
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
who, if the ignorant behaves ignorantly towards them, they would not react
ignorandy to them." The same is confirmed by Ata' Ibn Abu Rabah "may Allah
have mercy upon him".
In his comment on the statement of Allah Almighty: "and in maturity and will
be of the righteous." (A1 Imran 46)

i©

oti ^4^=3

<4 J-bjT^

Ibn Abu Habib "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "Maturity refers to
the utmost of forbearance." In his comment on the following statement of Allah
Almighty: "and when they pass near ill speech, they pass by with majesty." (AlFurqan 72)

Mujahid "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "If they are harmed, they
will forgive." It is reported that once Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him”
passed by people who were engaged in ill speech and falsehood, and he turned
away from them. On that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” said: "Indeed, Morning and evening have come upon Ibn
Mas'ud while being dignified." (This narradon is reported by Ibn AlMubarak). Then, Ibrahim Ibn Maisarah, the narrator of the Hadith recited the
statement of Allah Almighty: "and when they pass near ill speech, they pass by
with majesty."
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "O
Allah! Let not me join a time in which the people will not follow the
knowledgeable nor feel shy of the forbearing, having hearts like those of nonArabs, and tongues like those of Arabs." (This narradon is reported by Ahmad on
the authority of Sahl Ibn Sa'd). It is narrated on the authority of Abu Mas’ud that
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “Let such
as have good forbearance and sound minds among you stand next to me (in
prayer), and then such as follow them (in position) and such as follow them, and
do not differ (in your position of standing from one another) lest you would
become at odds, and beware of the noisy disputes and afflictions of markets.”
(This is reported by Muslim and Abu Dawud).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri that he said: We were
sitting in the house of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” when he said: “The delegates of Banu Abd Al-Qais has come to you.”
None of us had seen that until they came and halted, and then they went to the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”, and Al-Ashajj AlAsri remained behind (for some time). Later on, he came and descended at a
certain place, and made his mount kneel down, and put aside his garment. Then,
he went to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”,
thereupon the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said
to him: “O Ashajj! You have two good characteristics which Allah loves: both
forbearance and deliberateness.” He asked: “O Messenger of Allah! Is it

I

The quarter of the destructives
294
something on which I’ve been created (by nature), or is it something Fve
acquired?” the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: “Well, it is something on which Allah Almighty has created you.” On that he
said: "Praise be to Allah Who has created me on two characteristics which Allah
and His Messenger love." (This narration is reported by Ibn Majah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Indeed, Allah Almighty likes the forbearing, shy, pious, who is free of want,
and refrains from begging, and has dependents; and dislikes the shameless, foul­
speaking stupid, who begs others importunately." (This narration is reported by
At-Tabarani on the authority of Sa'd). it is narrated on the authority of Ibn
Abbas “Allah be pleased with him” that he said: the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Man should get three things,
and in case of missing anyone of them, then, be careless about all of his
remaining deeds: piety to keep him from committing sins thereby he disobeys
Allah Almighty; forbearance therewith to treat the weak-minded foolish; and
moral character therewith to live among the people." (This narration is reported
by Abu Na'im; and At-Tabarani on the authority of Umm Salamah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "If
Allah Almighty gathers the people on the Day of Judgement, a caller will call:
"Where are the people of superiority?" a few of people will stand and rush
swiftly to the Garden, whereupon the angels will receive them and say to them:
"We see that you rush towards the Garden (what is the reason?)" they will say:
"We are the people of superiority." They will ask them: "With which thing you
have attained your superiority?" they will say: "It was our habit that whenever
we were wronged, we would keep patient, and whenever we were harmed, we
would forgive, and whenever people behaved ignorantly towards us, we would
show forbearance." On that it will be said to them: "Enter then the Garden, for
excellent is the reward of the [righteous] workers!" (This narration is reported
by Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Amr Ibn Shu’aib from his father from his
grandfather).
From among the traditions and sayings, a mention may be made of the
following:
Umar “Allah be pleased with him” said: "Seek after knowledge, and seek with
it tranquillity and forbearance." Ali “Allah be pleased with him” said: "Good does
not lie in your much property and children in so much as it lies in your much
knowledge and forbearance and avoidance of vying in glory with others because
of your worship of Allah Almighty; and whenever you do good, praise Allah
Almighty, and whenever you do evil, ask for forgiveness of Allah Almighty." AlHassan "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "Seek after knowledge, and
adorn it with veneration and forbearance." According to Aktham Ibn Saifi "may
Allah have mercy upon him": "Forbearance is the support of mind, and patience
is the prop of all matters."
According to Abu Ad-Darda' “Allah be pleased with him”: "I joined the
people when they were like papers in which there were no thorns; and now they

295
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
have become like thorns without paper: if you recognize them, they would
criticize you, and if you leave them, they would not leave you." According to Ali
“Allah be pleased with him”: "The first thing therewith the forbearing is
recompensed for his forbearance is that all the people become his assistants
against the ignorant." According to Mu'awiyah: "None shall attain the rank of
giving sound opinions until his forbearance overpowers his ignorance, his
patience overcomes his desire; and none shall obtain that except by the power of
knowledge." Mu'awiyah asked Amr Ibn Al-Ah tarn: "Which of men is the most
courageous?" he said: "He who removes his ignorance with his forbearance." He
further asked: "Which of men is the most generous?" he said: "He, who spends
what he has in this world for the benefit of his religion."
In comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: "Nor can
Goodness and Evil be equal. Repel (Evil) with what is better: then will he
between whom and you was hatred become as it were your friend and
intimate! And no one will be granted such goodness except those who
exercise patience and self-restraint, none but persons of the greatest good
fortune." (Fussilat 34-35)
Anas “Allah be pleased with him” said: "It refers to a man whom his
brother insults, thereupon he says to him: "If you are a liar, then, may Allah
forgive you; and if you are truthful, then, may Allah forgive me." One of the
people said: "I insulted a man from the inhabitants of Basrah thereupon he
was forbearing on me, with which I came to be under obligation to him for a
long time."
Mu'awiyah said to Urabah Ibn Aws: "O Urabah! With which thing have you
attained sovereignty over your people?" he said: "I used to stick to forbearance
on the ignorant against them, give the beggar among them, and seek to fulfill the
need of the needy among them. So, whoever does like my doing becomes equal
to me, and whoever does more than my doing is better than me, and whoever
does less than my doing I then am better than him." Once a man insulted Ibn
Abbas “Allah be pleased with him” and when he finished he said: "O Ikrimah!
Does the man have any need to fulfill for him?" the man lowered his head out of
shyness. A man said to Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz "may Allah have mercy upon
him": "I bear witness that you are among the wicked." He said to him: "Your
testimony is not acceptable."
It is reported on the authority of Ali Ibn Al-Hussain Ibn All “Allah be pleased
with them” that one insulted him, thereupon he gave him a square garment of
wool he was wearing and one thousand Dirhams. In comment on his deed they
said that by so doing, he did to the man five good things: forbearance, abrogation
of harm, delivering the man from what keeps him from the mercy of Allah
Almighty, forcing him to show regret and repent, and having him return to praise
him after he had blamed him. However, he bought all of that by a little thing
from this world.

The quarter of the destructives
A man said to Ja'far Ibn Muhammad "may Allah have mercy upon him":
"There was a dispute between me and some of my people over a thing and I like
to leave it, but at the same time, I fear it might be said that leaving it is
humiliation." On that Ja'far said to him: "Indeed, the humiliated is the
wrongdoer." Al-Khalil lbn Ahmad said: "It was said that he who did evil and
then good was done to him (in reply to his evil), his heart would become like a
barrier to deter him from doing the like of his evil." Al-Ahnaf Ibn Qais said: "I
am not forbearing, but I force myself to be forbearing on others."
Wahb Ibn Munabbih "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "Whoever
shows mercy to others, they become merciful to him, and whoever keeps silent
becomes safe, and whoever behaves ignorandy is overpowered, and whoever
makes haste errs, and whoever is keen on evil does not become safe, and
whoever does not avoid argumentation exposes himself to abuse, and whoever
does not dislike evil commits sin, and whoever dislikes evil is protected against
sin, and whoever follows the counsel of Allah is saved against evil, and whoever
safeguards himself against the punishment of Allah becomes secure, and whoever
takes Allah as friend and protector is kept from evil, and whoever does not ask
Allah become destitute, and whoever feels safe from the plot of Allah is
disappointed, and whoever seeks the aid of Allah attains felicity."
A man said to Malik Ibn Dinar "may Allah have mercy upon him": "I was
informed that you spoke ill about me." On that he said: "You are then more
honorable in my sight than myself, for were I to do so, I would give you my good
deeds as a gift." One of the scholars said: "Forbearance is higher than mind, for
Allah Almighty is named by it (as one of His most beautiful Names)." A man said
to one of the sages: "By Allah, I am going to insult you with an insult that would
enter the grave with you (i.e. its effect would last long after your death)." On that
he said: "No, it would enter with you (in your grave)." Jesus “peace be upon him”
passed by some Jews who spoke ill to him, and he spoke good to them. It was
said to him: "They speak ill to you and you speak good to them!" He said: "Each
spends from what he has."
According to Luqman “Allah be pleased with him”: "Three kinds of men are
not recognizable but in three situations: the forbearing is not recognizable but at
the time of anger, nor the brave but at the time of war, nor the brother but at the
time of need." One of the sages was visited by his friend whom he served with
food. Then, the sage's wife, who was of bad manners, came out and lifted the
table and went on insulting the sage (her husband). His friend came out angrily
and the sage followed him and said to him: "Do you remember the day on which
we were having food in your house, and a hen fell on the table and spoilt the
food but none of us grew angry?" he answered in the affirmative. He said to him:
"Then, regard that (woman) like the hen." Thus, the anger was over and he
turned away saying: "The sage has told the truth. Forbearance is cure from every
kind of pain."
A man painfully struck the foot of a sage who did not grow angry. When he
was asked about the reason why he did not grow angry he said: "I regarded him

296

Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
297
like a stone by which I stumbled and Thus, I removed anger from me." Mahmud
Al-Warraq said (in a form of poetic verses): "I will restrain myself to forgive such
of people as is sinful to me regardless of the number of his. crimes
cri
against me.
People are but one of three: an honorable, a humiliated and an equal unto me. As
for him who is beyond me, I know well his esteem, and follow the truth in my
dealing with him, and truth is binding. As for him who is inferior to me, if he
speaks ill about me, I will save my honor from answering him. As for him who is
equal to me, if he says something in which he slips, I will forgive him out of
bounty, for bounty helps forbearance."

Exposition Of The Extent To Which It Is Permissible To Slake One's
Anger With Speech
It should be known that it is impermissible to counter every kind of
wrongness: it is impermissible to counter backbidng, spying, talebearing, etc, with
their likes. But exacting retribudon should be in accordance to what is
permissible under religious law.
It is impermissible to offset insults with insults like them. The Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said in this respect: "If a man
insults you with what you have, do not insult him with what he has (which you
know about him)." (This narrauon is reported by Ahmad on the authority of Jabir
Ibn Sulaim). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
further said: "If two are involved in abusing each other, the sin of that is on the
one who abuses first until the wronged transgresses the due limits (of reply)."
(This narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah). The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "The
two who are involved in abusing each other is like two quarrelsome devils."
It is narrated on the authority of Sa’id Ibn Al-Musayyab that he said: While
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was sitting
among his companions, a man abused Abu Bakr and caused harm to him, but
Abu Bakr kept silent (and gave no reply) to him. He harmed him once again
but Abu Bakr kept silent (and gave no reply). When he harmed him for the
third time, Abu Bakr exacted retribution from him (acting upon the
concession of returning back the harm). When Abu Bakr exacted retribution
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" stood (and
turned away). On that Abu Bakr said: “Have you grown angry with me O
Messenger of Allah?” on that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: “An angel came down from the heaven to give lie to
him for what he has said to you (while you were keeping silent), and when you
exacted retribution Satan stood (between you and replaced the angel), and I
was not to sit in a place where Satan was standing.” (This narration is reported
by Abu Dawud).
But according to some people, it is permissible to fend off abuses with that in
which there is no lie. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” forbade to counter abuses with the like of them out of piety, although

The quarter of the destructives
298
one who does so will not be sinful by it. But it is better to leave it (in compliance
with the forbiddance of the Prophet). What is permissible therein is to say: "And
who are you? Are you but one who belongs to sons of so and so?" This is like the
statement of Sa'd to lbn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with them”: "Are you but one
who belongs to sons of Hudhail?" Ibn Mas'ud replied to him: "And are you not
but one who belongs to the sons of Umayyah?" it is also permissible to say: "O
foolish!" according to Mutarrif: "Everyone is foolish in what is between him and
his Lord Almighty, but some are less foolish than others." The same is true of
saying: "O ignorant!" for there is none but that he has a portion of ignorance.
Similarly, such sayings as: "O bad-tempered man! O barefaced man! If you feel
shy even a bit, you would not say such and such! How despicable you are in my
sight for what you have done! May Allah frustrate you and exact retribution from
you!"
But as for talebearing, backbiting, telling lies and insulting parents, they are
unlawful by consensus. It is narrated that there was a clash between Khalid Ibn
Al-Walid and Sa'd, and a man spoke ill about Khalid in the presence of Sa'd,
thereupon he said to him: "Shut your mouth! What is between us has not reached
the point of violating our religion." He meant that the clash that was between
them was not to lead them to commit sins by abusing each other. Thus, he
rejected to hear evil: how then is it permissible for him to say it?
The evidence for the permissibility of saying that in which there is no lie, nor
is it unlawful is taken from the narration on the authority of A'ishah “Allah be
pleased with her” in which she said: The wives of The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” sent Fatima, the daughter of The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”, to The Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”. She asked for permission to
be admitted, as he had been lying with me in my mantle. He gave her permission
and she said: “O Messenger of Allah! Your wives have sent me to you in order to
ask you to be just in case of the daughter of Abu Quhafah.” She (A'ishah) said: I
kept silent. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said to her (Fatima): “O daughter! Do you not love whomever I love?” She
answered in the affirmative. He said: ‘Then, I love this (A'ishah)." Fatima stood up
when she heard this from The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” and went to the wives of The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” and informed them of what she had said to him and
what The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” had said
to her. They said to her: “We think you were of no benefit to us. You may again
go to The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and tell
him that his wives seek for his justice in case of the daughter of Abu Quhafah.”
Fatima said: “By Allah, I will never talk to him about this matter.” A'ishah added:
The wives of The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
then sent Zainab Bint Jahsh, the wife of The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him”, who was fairly equal in rank with me in the sight of
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”. However, I

299
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
have never seen a woman, more advanced in religious piety, more Allah­
conscious, more truthful, more keeping of the blood relations, more generous,
having more sense of self-sacrifice in practical life and having more charitable
disposition and Thus, more close to Allah ALMIGHTY than Zainab. But, she
used to loose temper very soon, but immediately, she would be calm. The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” permitted her to
enter, while she ( A'ishah) was still with The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” in her mantle, in the same very state when
Fatima had come. She said: “O Messenger of Allah! Your wives have sent me to
you, seeking for your equity in case of the daughter of Abu Quhafah. She then
came to me and was harsh to me. Meanwhile, I was looking at the eyes of The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” whether he
would permit me (to reply to her). Zainab went on until I knew that The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” would not dislike
that I should reply (in the same way to her). Then I aimed at her with hot words
until I caused her to be silent. On that, The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” smiled and said: “She is really the daughter of
Abu Baler.” (This is reported by Muslim). She did not intend, by saying that she
had insulted her, to be foul-speaking or shameless, but to fend off her speech
with the truth. The Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him" further said: "If two are involved in abusing each other, the sin of that is
on the one who abuses first until the wronged transgresses the due limits (of
reply)." (This narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Abu
Hurairah).
This is just the extent to which it is permissible to fend of oneself. Although
there is concession for harming to such extent in retaliation for previous harm, it
is better to leave it out of piety, for it is easy to lead one to what is beyond it; and
it is easier to keep silent from reply than to set off answer and stop at the limit
that is set by law. From among the people, there are such as could not practice
self-control at the time their anger is provoked, but soon they return to the truth,
and such of them as holds back from reply, but always feels resentment towards
others. However, people are of four kinds in relation to anger: some are like dry
grass which is swift to be kindled and swift to be extinguished, others like wet
grass which is slow to be kindled and slow to be extinguished, others slow to be
ldndled and swift to be extinguished, and those are the most praiseworthy as long
as it does not lead them to lack of zeal and passion, and others swift; to be kindled
and slow to be extinguished, and those are the worst among them all.
According to the narration: "The believer is swift to grow angry and swift to
be pleased." According to Ash-Shafi'i "may Allah have mercy upon him":
"Whoever is provoked and does not become angry is like a donkey; and whoever
is besought to be pleased and does not become pleased is like a devil." Abu Sa'id
Al-Khudri “Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: “Behold! Men have been created on
different kinds: from among them, there is such as too slow to grow angry, too

' :

The quarter of the destructives
300
swift to return (to tranquility); such as too swift to grow angry, too swift to return
(to tranquility); such as too slow to grow angry and too slow to return (to
tranquility); and this (who is too swift to grow angry, too swift to return (to
tranquility)) vis-a-vis that (who is too slow to grow angry and too slow to return
(to tranquility)); and behold! From among them, there is such as too slow to
return (to tranquility)and too swift to grow angry; and this is vis-a-vis that (who is
too slow to grow angry, and too swift to return (to tranquility). Behold! The best
of them is die one who is too slow to grow angry and too swift to return (to
tranquility); and the worst of them is the one who is too swift to grow angry and
too slow to return (to tranquility)."
Since anger is provoked and has a remarkable effect on every man, it is
incumbent upon the ruler to avoid punishing anyone at the time of anger, for he
might exceed the due bounds and go beyond the required sentence. Furthermore,
he might be motivated only by his anger at him, and if he punishes him, he might
do so just to quench his anger and exact retribution from him, although his
defense and retribution should be for the Sake of, and in the religion of Allah
Almighty, and not for anything or anyone else. Once, Umar “Allah be pleased
with him” saw a drunk and when he wanted to arrest and punish him, he insulted
him thereupon he left him. He was asked: "O Commander of Believers! Do you
leave him although he has insulted you?" on that he said: "I left him because he
provoked my anger, and were I to punish him, it would be only for the sake of
my anger, and not for the Sake of Allah Almighty; and I do not like to beat a
Muslim out of zeal for myself." Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz "may Allah have mercy
upon him" said to a man who provoked his anger: "Had it not been for the fact
that you have provoked my anger, I would have punished you."

CHAPTER TWO
MEANING AND CONSEQUENCES OF RANCOR; AND EXCELLENCE OF
FORGIVENESS AND KINDNESS
It should be known that if it is necessary to restrain anger immediately due to
failure to slake it or exact retribution, it lurks in the soul and is congested therein
in order to turn into rancor. The meaning of rancor is to have in one's heart longlasting aversion and hatred towards another. The Messenger of Allah “Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "The faithful believer is not rancorous."
Rancor then is the fruit of anger; and it yields eight things:
The first is the envy, i.e. to hope the removal of blessing and favor of him
whom you envy. This means that you grieve at his good fortunes and rejoices at
his misfortunes. This is the conduct of the hypocrites, and it will be condemned
later, Allah willing.
The second is to go beyond the lurking envy to glee at one's distresses and
disasters.
The third is to desert him, sever relation with him, detach from him, even if
he asks for you, and turns towards you (with kindness).
The fourth is to turn your back to him, out of regarding him slighdy, and

Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy

301

considering him inferior and insignificant.
The fifth is to speak ill about him with what is unlawful, as to tell lies about
him, backbite him, divulge his secrets.
The sixth is to mimic him out of mocking at and making fun of him.
The seventh is to beat him painfully.
The eighth is to deprive him of his right, concerning debt, kinship, giving
back to him his illegally usurped right, etc.
To be sure, all of this is unlawful, and the least degree is rancor is to avoid
those eight evils, and not to do, because of rancor, what leads to disobeying Allah
Almighty. But if it is necessary, do not let the aversion you have towards him in
your heart appear on your face whenever you happen to meet him, or forbid you
to take care of him, fulfill his needs, be kind to him, gather with him to celebrate
(worship) Allah Almighty, help him do good, praise him, supplicate to a good
effect for him, and console him when he is stricken, lest your faith would
decrease, and much reward would be lost from you, though you would receive no
punishment because of it.
When Abu Bakr “Allah be pleased with him” swore to withhold the gift he
used to give to Mistah, and he was his relative, for he was involved in the false
speech about A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her”, Allah Almighty revealed His
statement: "Let not those among you who are endued with grace and amplitude
of means resolve by oath against helping their kinsmen, those in need, and those
who have left their homes in Allah's cause: let them forgive and overlook: do yoi
not wish that Allah should forgive you? For Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful." (An-Nur 22)

<4

J31 iyyi o» «-*^J'3 ^

^3 ?

On that Abu Bakr “Allah be pleased with him” said: "Yes, by Allah, we like
that (Allah would forgive for us our sins)." He then returned his gift to him.
If one could do more good to him towards whom he feels rancor, out of self­
mortification and humiliation of Satan, let him do; and this is the rank of the
sincere lovers of truth. That is because this is one of the virtuous deeds of these
near to Allah Almighty. Thus, the one who represents the object of rancor has
three ways to be treated therewith: the first is to take his due right with neither
addition nor reduction; and the second is to receive kindness by forgiveness and
good relation, and this is the bounty; and the third is to be wronged and deprived
of his right illegally, and this is the evident wrongness and injustice. The third is
the preference of the lowly among men, the second is the preference of the
sincere lovers of truth, and the first is the highest rank of the righteous. Now,
let's talk about the virtue of forgiveness and kindness.

Virtue Of Forgiveness And Kindness
It should be known to you that forgiveness means that one has a right which
he remits and gives up, whatever it might be. It differs from forbearance and

The quarter of the destructives
300
swift to return (to tranquility); such as too swift to grow angry, too swift to return
(to tranquility); such as too slow to grow angry and too slow to return (to
tranquility); and this (who is too swift to grow angry, too swift to return (to
tranquility)) vis-a-vis that (who is too slow to grow angry and too slow to return
(to tranquility)); and behold! From among them, there is such as too slow to
return (to tranquility)and too swift to grow angry; and this is vis-a-vis that (who is
too slow to grow angry, and too swift to return (to tranquility). Behold! The best
of them is the one who is too slow to grow angry and too swift to return (to
tranquility); and the worst of them is the one who is too swift to grow angry and
too slow to return (to tranquility)."
Since anger is provoked and has a remarkable effect on every man, it is
incumbent upon the ruler to avoid punishing anyone at the time of anger, for he
might exceed the due bounds and go beyond the required sentence. Furthermore,
he might be motivated only by his anger at him, and if he punishes him, he might
do so just to quench his anger and exact retribution from him, although his
defense and retribution should be for the Sake of, and in the religion of Allah
Almighty, and not for anything or anyone else. Once, Umar “Allah be pleased
with him” saw a drunk and when he wanted to arrest and punish him, he insulted
him thereupon he left him. He was asked: "O Commander of Believers! Do you
leave him although he has insulted you?" on that he said: "I left him because he
provoked my anger, and were I to punish him, it would be only for the sake of
my anger, and not for the Sake of Allah Almighty; and I do not like to beat a
Muslim out of zeal for myself." Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz "may Allah have mercy
upon him" said to a man who provoked his anger: "Had it not been for the fact
that you have provoked my anger, I would have punished you."

CHAPTER TWO
MEANING AND CONSEQUENCES OF RANCOR; AND EXCELLENCE OF
FORGIVENESS AND KINDNESS
It should be known that if it is necessary to restrain anger immediately due to
failure to slake it or exact retribution, it lurks in the soul and is congested therein
in order to turn into rancor. The meaning of rancor is to have in one's heart longlasting aversion and hatred towards another. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "The faithful believer is not rancorous."
Rancor then is the fruit of anger; and it yields eight things:
The first is the envy, i.e. to hope the removal of blessing and favor of him
whom you envy. This means that you grieve at his good fortunes and rejoices at
his misfortunes. This is the conduct of the hypocrites, and it will be condemned
later, Allah willing.
The second is to go beyond the lurking envy to glee at one's distresses and
disasters.
The third is to desert him, sever relation with him, detach from him, even if
he asks for you, and turns towards you (with kindness).
The fourth is to turn your back to him, out of regarding him slightly, and

Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy

301

considering him inferior and insignificant.
The fifth is to speak ill about him with what is unlawful, as to tell lies about
him, backbite him, divulge his secrets.
The sixth is to mimic him out of mocking at and making fun of him.
The seventh is to beat him painfully.
The eighth is to deprive him of his right, concerning debt, kinship, giving
back to him his illegally usurped right, etc.
To be sure, all of this is unlawful, and the least degree is rancor is to avoid
those eight evils, and not to do, because of rancor, what leads to disobeying Allah
Almighty. But if it is necessary, do not let the aversion you have towards him in
your heart appear on your face whenever you happen to meet him, or forbid you
to take care of him, fulfill his needs, be kind to him, gather with him to celebrate
(worship) Allah Almighty, help him do good, praise him, supplicate to a good
effect for him, and console him when he is stricken, lest your faith would
decrease, and much reward would be lost from you, though you would receive no
punishment because of it.
When Abu Bakr “Allah be pleased with him” swore to withhold the gift he
used to give to Mistah, and he was his relative, for he was involved in the false
speech about A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her”, Allah Almighty revealed His
statement: "Let not those among you who are endued with grace and amplitude
of means resolve by oath against helping their kinsmen, those in need, and those
who have left their homes in Allah's cause: let them forgive and overlook: do you
not wish that Allah should forgive you? For Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful." (An-Nur 22)

4

J*^'3

4jjl j&j-i o'

*-/' *'

On that Abu Bakr “Allah be pleased with him” said: "Yes, by Allah, we like
that (Allah would forgive for us our sins)." He then returned his gift to him.
If one could do more good to him towards whom he feels rancor, out of selfmortificadon and humiliadon of Satan, let him do; and this is the rank of the
sincere lovers of truth. That is because this is one of the virtuous deeds of these
near to Allah Almighty. Thus, the one who represents the object of rancor has
three ways to be treated therewith: the first is to take his due right with neither
addition nor reducdon; and the second is to receive kindness by forgiveness and
good reladon, and this is the bounty; and the third is to be wronged and deprived
of his right illegally, and this is the evident wrongness and injusdce. The third is
the preference of the lowly among men, the second is the preference of the
sincere lovers of truth, and the first is the highest rank of the righteous. Now,
let's talk about the virtue of forgiveness and kindness.

Virtue Of Forgiveness And Kindness
It should be known to you that forgiveness means that one has a right which
he remits and gives up, whatever it might be. It differs from forbearance and

The quarter of the destructives
302
anger restraint, and this is why we singled it out. Allah Almighty says: “Hold to
forgiveness; command what is right; but turn away from the ignorant.” (Al-A’raf
199)

He further said: "and the remission (of the man's half) is the nearest to
righteousness and do not forget liberality between yourselves." (Al-Baqarah 237)
4

oI-*-*

o!

—:—’3^^ ij^*j o!3 ^

From among the Prophetic narrations, a mention may be made of the
following:
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "By
Him in Whose Hand is my soul, there are three things, and were I to swear, I
would swear on them: No charity decreases from property, so you should give in
charity (as much as possible); and no man forgives an injustice therewith he seeks
the Countenance of Allah Almighty, but that Allah Almighty advances him in
power and honour for it on the Day of Judgement; and no man opens on him a
gate of begging but that Allah Almighty opens on him a gate to poverty for it."
(This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu Kabshah AlAnmari).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "No doubt, humbleness does not but advances a servant in loftiness, so,
behave humbly perchance Allah would raise you in rank; and forgiveness does
not but advances a servant in honour, so, forgive perchance Allah would raise
you in honour; and charity does not but increases wealth, so, give in charity
perchance Allah would have mercy upon you." (This narration is reported by
Al-Asfahani and Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of Anas). A'ishah
"Allah be pleased with her” reported: The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” never beat anyone with his hand, neither a woman nor
a servant, except that when he had been fighting in the cause of Allah.
Moreover, he never was hurt by anyone on whom he took revenge (for his own
sake), except that when Allah's Legal limits were outraged; in this case, he
would take revenge for Allah's Sake. (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi
and Muslim).
Uqbah Ibn Amir “Allah be pleased with him” said: One day I met the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and either I took
hold of his hand first, or he took hold of mine first and then said to me: "O
Uqbah! Should I not tell you of the best manners of the inhabitants of the
world and the hereafter? To keep good relation with whoever severs relation
with you, to give whoever withholds from you, and forgive whoever wrongs
you." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya, At-Tabarani and AlBaihaqi). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
further said: "Moses said: "O Lord! Which of Your servants is the dearest and

303
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
the most honoured in Your Sight?" He Almighty said: "He who, whenever he
has power (to exact retribution from his wrongdoer) would stick to
forgiveness."" (This narration is reported by Al-Khara'iti on the authority of
Abu Hurairah).
Once, Abu Ad-Darda' “Allah be pleased with him” was asked about the
dearest and most honoured person, thereupon he said: "He, who, if he has power
(to exact retribution from his wrongdoer) would stick to forgiveness. So, stick to
forgiveness, perchance Allah would give you honour and power." A man came to
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and made a
complaint to him of an injustice committed against him. The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” told him to sit down in order to take
back his right, and said to him: "But, the wronged will be the prosperous on the
Day of Judgement." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the
authority of Abu Salih). In this way, he rejected to take back his right when he
heard the Hadith.
A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "He, who invokes evil upon his wrongdoer
has indeed exacted retribution from him." It is narrated on the authority of Anas
“Allah be pleased with him” that he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "When Allah Almighty raises the people
(from dead) on the Day of Judgement, a caller will make a public call from
underneath the Throne (of Majesty) thrice: "O assembly of monotheists! Allah
Almighty has pardoned you, so, pardon each other!" (This narration is reported
by Al-Maqri and At-Tabarani).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him”
that he said: When the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” conquered Mecca, he circumambulated the House and offered a two-rak'ah
prayer and then came to the Ka'bah and caught hold of its gate posts and
addressed the people saying: "What do you say?" they said: "We say that you are
forbearing merciful brother and cousin." They gave the same answer thrice
thereupon the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"I say the same as Yusuf “peace be upon him” said: "This day let no reproach be
(cast) on you: Allah will forgive you, and He is the Most Merciful of those who
show mercy!"" (Yusuf 92)

(This narration is reported by Ibn Al-Jawzi). They came out as if they were
resurrected from the graves and then embraced Islam.
It is narrated on the authority of Suhail Ibn Amr “Allah be pleased with
him,” that he said: When the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” entered Mecca he came to the House and placed his hands on
its gate and the people were standing round him. Then he said: "There is no
god (to be worshipped) but Allah Alone, Who has no partner: He was true to
His promise and made victorious His servant, and He Alone defeated the

The quarter of the destructives
304
confederates." Then he said: "O assembly of Quraish! What do you say? And
what do you expect (from me to do with you)?" Amr said: I said: "O
Messenger of Allah! We say good and expect good. You are but a generous
brother and merciful cousin and now you have power over us." On that, the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "I say the
same as my brother Yusuf “peace be upon him” said: "This day let no
reproach be (cast) on you: Allah will forgive you, and He is the Most Merciful
of those who show mercy! mi
It is further narrated on the authority of Anas “Allah be pleased with him”
that he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: "When the servants stand (in front of Allah on the Day of Judgement) a
caller will call: "Let those whose reward is due upon Allah stand up and enter the
Garden!" it was said: "Who are those whose reward is due upon Allah Almighty?"
he said: "Those who used to pardon people. Then, dozens of thousands will
stand and enter the Garden without reckoning." (This narration is reported by
At-Tabarani).
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him” that
he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"No one is brought to a guardian concerning anyone of the legal limits of Allah
but that he will implement it, and Allah Almighty is Most Forgiving, and He likes
forgiveness." Then, he recited the statement of Allah: "and let them pardon and
overlook. Would you not like that Allah should forgive you? And Allah is
Forgiving and Merciful." (An-Nur 22)

fThis narration is reported by Ahmad and Al-Hakim). It is further narrated on
the authority of Jabir “Allah be pleased with him” that he said: the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "If man has the following
three things, in addition to his faith (in Allah and His Messenger), he will enter
the Garden from whichever he likes of its gates, and get married to whomever he
likes of its beautiful women with big lustrious eyes: to fulfill a debt (of another) in
secret, to recite "Say, He is Allah, the One and Only" ten times following every
(obligatory) prayer, and to pardon his killer." Abu Bakr “Allah be pleased with
him” said: "And even if he does any of those things O Messenger of Allah?" the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him,” said: "Yes." (This
narration is reported by At-Tabarani).
From among the traditions and sayings, a mention may be made of the
following:
According to Ibrahim At-Taimi: "Whenever a man wrongs me, I show mercy
to him." This is out of faithfulness, which is beyond forgiveness, for his heart is
engaged in being exposed to disobeying Allah Almighty by wrongness, and when
it is the Day of Judgement, and he is asked to give reason for it, he will have no

Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy

305

answer to give. According to a righteous man: "If Allah Almighty wants to endow
blessing upon a man, He assigns to him such of people as wrongs him." A man
entered upon Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz "may Allah have mercy upon him" and
made a complaint to him of a man who wronged him, thereupon he said to him:
"Indeed, it is better for you to meet Allah with your injustice as it is than to meet
him when you have exacted retribution for it."
According to Yazid Ibn Maisarah: "If you continue to invoke Allah against
your wrongdoer, Allah Almighty then says to him: "So and so invokes Me against
you that you have wronged him: if you like, We would respond to the invocation,
and if you like, We would defer you both to the Day of Judgement, and by then
My pardon will extend over you both." Muslim Ibn Yasar said to a man who
invoked Allah against his wrongdoer: "Entrust the wrongdoer to his injustice, for
it is swifter in effect than your invocation against him, unless he saves it with a
good deed he does, which he might not do." It is narrated on the authority of Ibn
Umar from Abu Bakr that he said: We were reported that on the Day of
Judgement, Allah Almighty would order a caller to make a public call: "Let those
stand who have anything with Allah Almighty." Those of forgiveness then will
stand and be rewarded for their pardoning the people."
It is reported on the authority of Hisham Ibn Muhammad that two sinners
were brought to An-Nu'man Ibn Al-Mundhir, one of whom committed a
major sin and the other a trivial one. He excused him who committed the
major sin and punished him who committed the small sin and said: "Kings
always pardon, out of their bounty, the major among sins, and they might
punish for the small among sins, and this is not out of their ignorance, in so
much as it is that the people would know their forbearance, and fear their
severe power."
It is reported on the authority of Mubarak Ibn Fadalah that he said: "Siwar
Ibn Abdullah visited Abu Ja'far among a delegate from Basrah and I was with
him when a man was brought to him and he commanded that he should be
killed. I said (to myself): "Should he kill one of the Muslims in my presence?"
then I said to him: "O Commander of Believers! Should I not tell you a narration
I heard from Al-Hassan?" He said: "What is it?" I said: "I heard him saying:
When it is the Day of Judgement, Allah Almighty would gather all the people in
one plain valley, so that the voice of the caller would reach them all, and the sight
would grasp them all. Then, a caller will stand and make a public call: "Let those
stand, who do a favor (for which they have reward) with Allah." By then, none
will stand but those who used to stick to forgiveness." He asked me: "Tell me by
Allah, have you heard it from Al-Hassan?" I said: "By Allah I have heard him
from Al-Hassan." Thus, he pardoned the man.
Mu'awiyah said: "Stick to forbearance and tolerance until you have the
opportunity (to exact retribution), and if you seize the opportunity, stick then to
forgiveness and remitting." It is reported that a monk entered upon Hisham Ibn
Abd-Al-Malik who asked him: "Do you see that Dhul-Qarnain was a Prophet?"
he said: "No, but he was given the favor he had been given for four

-

The quarter of the destructives
306
characteristics he had: whenever he had power (to exact retribution), he would
forgive; whenever he made a promise, he would fulfill it; whenever he spoke, he
would prove truthful; and he never load the occupation of a day to the next day."
According to a wise man: "The forbearing is not he who is wronged and then
keeps patient until when he has power (to exact retribution) he takes revenge, but
the forbearing is he who is wronged and keeps patient until when he has power
(to take revenge), he pardons."
According to Ziyad: "Power removes rancor and anger." A man was brought
to Hisham and he was reported to have done something wrong, and when he was
made to stand in front of him, he went on offering his argument. Hisham said to
him: "Do you argue in front of me?" he said: "O Commander of Believers! Allah
Almighty said: "On the Day when every soul will come disputing for itself, and
ever)7 soul will be fully compensated for what it did, and they will not be
wronged." (An-Nahl 110)
c~Lp £

5^=*

ii^=> Jb fy * ^

Would we dispute for ourselves in front of Allah Almighty and not speak in
front of you?" he said to him: "Woe to you! Say what you like to say!"
It is reported that a thief entered the tent of Ammar Ibn Yasir “Allah be
pleased with him” at Siffin, and it was said to him: "Cut off his hand for he is
from our enemies." He said: "No, screen him perchance Allah would screen my
faults on the Day of Judgement." In another context, Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be
pleased with him” was sitting in the market to buy foodstuff and when he made
the transaction and looked for money to pay, and it was in his turban, he found
out that he had been loosened and the money missing. He said: "When I sat
down, the money was with me." The people went on invoking evil against the
thief saying: "O Allah! Cut off the hand of him who stole it! O Allah! Do with
him such and such (punishment)!" on that Abdullah “Allah be pleased with
him” said: "O Allah! If he took it for a certain need, then, bless in it for him;
and if he took it thereby he dared to commit sin, then, make it the last sin for
him to commit."
According to Al-Fudail: "I have never seen a man more devout than a man
from the people of Khurasan who was sitting with me in the Sacred Mosque, and
when he stood up to circumambulate the House, his Dinars were stolen from
him. On that, he went on weeping and I asked him: "Are you weeping for your
stolen Dinars?" he said: "No, but I imagined the thief and myself in front of
Allah Almighty (on the Day of Judgement), and I was about to refute his
argument, thereupon I wept out of mercy for him."
Malik Ibn Dinar said: One night, we came to the house of Al-Hakam Ibn
Ayyub, who was the governor of Basra, and Al-Hassan came and he was
frightened. We entered with him into the governor, and we were like moths in
relation to Al-Hassan. Al-Hassan related the story of the Prophet Yusuf “peace

Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
------------------------ 307
be upon him” and how his brother threw him in the spring and how he was
sold, and said: "They got rid of their brother, and aggrieved their father." He
also made a mendon what Yusuf received of the evil scheme of women and
imprisonment. Then he said: "O governor! What did Allah Almighty do to him?
He made him superior to them, raised his repute, made higher his word, and
caused him to be in charge of the depositories of the earth. Then, what did
Yusuf himself do when the favor was completed on him, and his family were
brought to him? He said to his brothers: "This day let no reproach be (cast) on
you: Allah will forgive you, and He is the Most Merciful of those who show
mercy!"" (Yusuf 92)

He thus, referred to Al-Hakam to pardon his companions. On that, AlHakam said: "This day let no reproach be (cast) on you; and were I to have
another garment than that I am wearing now, I would have screen you with it."
Ibn Al-Muqaffa' wrote the following statement to his companion, asking
him to pardon one of his brothers: "So and so has escaped from his sin to your
pardon, and taken refuge to your forgiveness from your punishment. It should
be known to you that the more the sin to be committed is great, the more the
forgiveness becomes meritorious." The captives of Ibn Al-Ash'ath were
brought to Abd-Al-Malik Ibn Marwan who asked Raja' Ibn Haiwah: "What do
you see?" he said: "O Commander of Believers! As Allah Almighty has given
you the victory you like, then, give Him the pardon He likes." On that, he
pardoned them. It is reported that Ziyad captured a man from the Khawarij and
he fled from him. He arrested one of Inis brothers, and said to him: "You
should bring your brother, otherwise I would chop off your head." He said:
"Tell me, if I bring to you a statement (of pardon) from the Commander of
Believers, should you release me?" he answered in the affirmative, thereupon he
said: "Then, I bring to you a statement from (Allah) Exalted in Power, Most
Wise, and make two witnesses to it, i.e. Abraham and Moses “peace be upon
them”." Then, he recited the following statement of Allah: "Nay, is he not
acquainted with what is in the books of Moses, And of Abraham who fulfilled
his engagements, Namely, that no bearer of burdens can bear the burden of
another?" (An-Najm 36-38)
i (vJS

jjj SjJlj !>y

((J)) 33

J

U-j liL

^1 ^

On that, Ziyad said: "Release him, for this man dictated his argument."
Finally, it is said that the following statement is written in the Gospel: "He, who
asks for forgiveness for his wrongdoer has indeed defeated Satan."
Virtue Of Kindness

It should be known that kindness is praiseworthy, and its opposite is
violence and severity, which result from anger and harshness, whereas kindness
and lenience result from good manners and safety. Severity might be caused by
anger, or extreme eagerness and greed, which hinder from thinking and taking

The quarter of the destructives
308
heed. Kindness then is the fruit of good manners, and the manners are good
only if the powers of anger and appetence are controlled and preserved at the
level of moderation.
For diis reason, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” praised kindness so much when he said to A'ishah “Allah be pleased with
her”: "O A'ishah! Whoever is given his pordon of kindness has indeed been
given his portion of the good of this world and the hereafter; and whoever is
deprived of his portion of kindness has indeed been deprived of his portion of
good in this world and the hereafter." (This narration is reported by Ahmad and
Al-Aqili). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
further said: "If Allah likes a family He gives them the privilege to adhere to
kindness." (This narration is reported by Ahmad and Al-Baihaqi on the
authority of A'ishah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Allah Almighty gives (rewards) for kindness much more than He gives for
violence; and if Allah Almighty likes a servant, He gives him the privilege to
adhere to kindness; and no family are deprived of kindness but that they will be
deprived of the love of Allah Almighty." (This narration is reported by AtTabarani on the authority of Jarir). A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her” said: the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "No doubt,
Allah Almighty is Kind, and He likes kindness, and He gives (rewards) for
kindness much more than He gives for violence." (This narration is reported by
Muslim on the authority of A'ishah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said to
A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her”: "O A'ishah! Be kind, for if Allah Almighty
likes to honour a family, He guides them to the gate of kindness." (This narration
is reported by Ahmad on the authority of A'ishah). The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "Whoever is deprived of
kindness is indeed deprived of all good." (This narration is reported by Muslim
and Abu Dawud on the authority of Jarir). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” also said: "Whoever among rulers is appointed
a ruler in which he proves kind and lenient (to his wards), Allah Almighty will be
kind and lenient to him on the Day of Judgement." (This narration is reported by
Muslim on the authority of A'ishah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Do
you know to whom the fire (of Hell) will be forbidden on the Day of Judgement?
Every lenient, easygoing, even-tempered tractable." fThis narration is reported by
At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "No doubt, kindness is a good omen,
whereas violence is an evil omen." QThis narration is reported by At-Tabarani on
the authority of Ibn Mas'ud; and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of A'ishah). The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said too: "Indeed,
carefulness is from Allah, whereas hastiness is from Satan." (This narration is
reported by Abu Ya'li on the authority of Anas; and At-Tirmidhi on the authority

309
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
ofSahl Ibn Sa'd).
It is narrated that a man came to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” and said: "O Messenger of Allah! Allah Almighty has blessed
all of the Muslims in you. So, please, give me a portion of good from you." He
said twice or thrice: "Praise be to Allah." Then he faced him and said to him
twice or thrice: "Are you going to seek and get benefit from the advice?" the man
answered in the affirmative. On that he said: "If you like to do a thing, then,
consider first its consequence: if it is right, then, carry it on, otherwise, desist
from it." ^This narration is reported by Ibn Al-Mubarak on the authority of Abu
Ja'far: Abdullah Ibn Miswar Al-Hashimi).
It is narrated on the authority of A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her” that
once she was on journey with the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” and she was riding a disobedient camel which she tried to turn
rightward and leftward violently. On that die Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said to her: “Never kindness is found in
anything but that it beautifies it, and never it is taken from anything but that it
distorts it.” (This narration is reported by Muslim).
From among the traditions and sayings, a mention may be made of the
following:
Umar “Allah be pleased with him” was informed about the complaints made
by some of his people against his appointed officers, thereupon he commander
that they should come to him; and they did accordingly. When they came h<
stood up, praised Allah and lauded Him, and then addressed them saying: "O
people! O wards! You have on us the right to advise you in absence, and help you
do good. O governors! Your people have right on you. It should be known to
you that nothing is dearer to Allah Almighty than the imam's forbearance and
kindness; and there is no kind of ignorance, more hateful in the Sight of Allah
Almighty and more painful than the imam's ignorance that leads to wrongness.
Furthermore, it should be known to you that whoever uses his power to take
back the rights of others from the strong will be bestowed with power from him
who is weaker than him."
According to Wahb Ibn Munabbih: "Kindness is to follow up forbearance."
According to a Prophetic narration: "Knowledge is the believer's companion,
forbearance his minister, mind his guide, work his caretaker, kindness his parent,
lenience his brother, and patience the leader of his army." (This narration is
reported by Abu Ash-Shaikh on the authority of Anas). One of the wise men
said: "How good faith is when it is adorned with knowledge; and how good
knowledge is when it is adorned with deed; and how good deed is when it is
adorned with kindness; and nothing is added to another better than forbearance
to knowledge." Amr Ibn AJ-As asked his son Abdullah “Allah be pleased with
him”: "What is kindness?" he said: "It is to be lenient and deal kindly with
governors." He further asked him: "What is violence?" he said: "To be hostile to
your imam and oppose such of people as is able to strike you."
Once, Sufyan "may Allah have mercy upon him" asked his companions: "Do

The quarter of the destructives
310
you know what kindness is?" they said: "Tell us O Abu Muhammad." He said: "It
is to place things in their proper positions: to be hard where hardness is required,
lenient where lenience is required; to use sword where sword is required, the
whip where whip is required." However, it refers to the necessity of mixing
kindness with hardness, lenience with harshness. That is because the
praiseworthy thing is to be moderate, and stand in the middle between harshness
and lenience. But since natures and dispositions are more inclined to violence and
harshness, it has become incumbent to exhort them to take the side of kindness
and lenience more and more. This is why religious law praises lenience and
kindness more than violence, although violence is good when it is used properly,
i.e. when it is required, just as lenience is good when it is used properly, i.e. when
it is required.
Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: It is
reported that Amr Ibn Al-As sent to Mu'awiyah a letter in which he blamed him
for carefulness, thereupon Mu'awiyah replied with the following: "Coming to
the point: to seek to understand good is to be more guided to the right, and the
rightly-guided is he whose guidance averts him from hastiness; and the loser is
he who fails to be careful. To be sure, the careful always does, or at least is
about to do right, whereas the hasty does, or at least is about to do mistake.
Furthermore, he, whom kindness does not benefit, without doubt violence
harms him, and he, whom experience does not benefit, does not attain
loftiness."
It is narrated that Abu Awn Al-Ansari said: "No harsh word people speak
with but that there is another word easier than it, and of the same effect."
According to Abu Hamzah Al-Kufi: "Take no servants but that for whom there
is severe necessity, for there is none but that he has a devil with him. Moreover, it
should be remarkable that there is nothing which they give you by harshness but
that they could give you better than it by kindness and lenience." According to
Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him": "The believer is always thoughtful,
careful and not hasty."
This is the praise of the men of knowledge for kindness, because it is more
often praiseworthy and beneficial. On the other hand, violence might be needed,
but in very rare cases. However, the perfect one is he who has the power to
distinguish the contexts of violence from those of kindness, and use each
properly. But if he is short of insight, or unable to give the right judgement, let
him be more inclined to kindness and lenience, for more often success is
achieved with it.

CHAPTER THREE
CONDEMNATION OF ENVY; ITS REAL NATURE AND CAUSES; ITS
TREATMENT; AND THE EXTENT TO WHICH IT SHOULD BE REMOVED
Exposition Of Condemnation Of Envy
It should be known that envy is the outcome of rancor, and rancor is the
outcome of anger. The blameworthy branches that offshoot from envy are

Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy--------------------

311

beyond calculation. There are many narrations in condemnation of envy.
From among the Prophetic narrations, we can mention the following:
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Envy devours good deeds in the same way as fire consumes wood." (This
narration is reported by Abu Dawud on the authority of Abu Hurairah; and Ibn
Majah on the authority of Anas). In his forbiddance of envy, the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "Envy not each
other, abandon not each other, dislike not each other, desert not each other, and
be, O servants of Allah, brothers (in the religion of Allah)." (This narration is
reported by both sheikhs).
It is narrated on the authority' of Anas “Allah be pleased with him” that he
said: We were sitting with the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” when he said to us: "Now there will appear to you from that side a
man from the inhabitants of the Garden." A man from the Ansar appeared and
he was shaking his beard off the water of ablution, hanging his sandals in his left
hand, and then he paid salutation. When it was the next day, the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said the same, and the same man
appeared. On the third day, he said the same, and the same man appeared. When
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” stood up,
Abdullah Ibn Amr Ibn Al-As followed that man and said to him: "I quarreled
with my father and took oath not to enter the house for three days. So, if you see
to host me in your house until those three days elapse, you then might do." The
man welcomed him. He spent three nights with him during which he did not see
that he stood at night (for supererogatory prayers), but whenever he went to bed,
he would celebrate the Praises of Allah Almighty. He also observed that the man
did not stand specifically to offer Fajr prayer. He (Abdullah) said: "But at the
same time, I did not hear him saying but good. At the conclusion of the three
days, and when I was about to despise his deed, I said to him: "O slave of Allah! I
have not quarreled with my father, nor have I deserted him. But I heard the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” saying such and
such, and Thus, I liked to know your deed, and I did not see you doing much
deed. So, with which have you attained that rank?" he said: "Nothing different
from what you have seen." When I turned away he invited me and said: "It is
nothing other than you have seen. But I never cheat nor envy anyone of the
Muslims for good bestowed upon him by Allah Almighty." Abdullah said to him:
"Then, it is that which raised you up to that high rank, and it is that which we
could not do persistently." ^This is reported by Ahmad and Al-Bazzar).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "There are three evils, from which none could hardly be saved: (negative)
assumption, bad omen and envy; and I am going to tell you about the way out of
them: if you have a (negative) assumption, do not act upon it; and if you have bad
omen, go on (your way without care); and if you envy, then, do not desire (what
you envy for)." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya). The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "The

!
:

i

k.

The quarter of the destructives
312
disease that afflicted the previous nations before you has attacked you: envy and
hatred. Hatred is that which shaves; and I do not mean that it shaves the head
and hair, but it shaves religion. By Him in Whose Hand is my soul, you will not
enter Paradise until you have faith; and you would not have faith until you love
each other. Should I not tell you about what realizes that for you? It is to make
peace widespread among you."(This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the
authority of Az-Zubair).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” also said:
"Poverty is about to cause disbelief, and envy is about to overpower fate." fThis
narration is reported by Al-Baihaqi and At-Tabarani on the authority of Anas).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Indeed,
the disease that afflicted the nations before you will strike my nation." They
asked: "What is the disease of the previous nations?" he said: "Arrogance,
rejection of the truth, proliferation and competition over the things of this world,
mutual desertion and envy, resulting in transgression and tumult." (This narration
is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu
Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: "Do not glee at the misfortune of your brother lest Allah might relieve him
and afflict you with the same." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the
authority of Wathilah Ibn Al-Asqa*).
It is narrated that when Moses “peace be upon him” hastened to the
appointment of his Lord Almighty, he saw a man in the shade of the Throne (of
Majesty), thereupon he envied him because of his position. It was said to him:
"This man is honourable in the Sight of his Lord." He asked his Lord about him,
and He Almighty did not tell him about his name but said: "Let me tell you about
three of his deeds: he never envied the people for the favor bestowed upon them
by Allah Almighty, nor did he prove disobedient or undutifiil to his parents, nor
did he go about with calumnies among the people." Zakariyya “peace be upon
him” said: Allah Almighty says: "The envier is an enemy of My favor, and hateful
of My fate, and displeased with the allotment I have made among My servants."
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "The
thing which I fear most for my nation is that the wealth will proliferate so much
among them that they would envy each other and kill each other (in competition
over it)." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of
Ibn Amir Al-Ash'ari). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” further said: "Seek the aid of secrecy to be able to fulfill your needs,
for indeed, everyone of good things is vulnerable to envy." (This narration is
reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and At-Tabarani on the authority of Mu'adh).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” also said: "No
doubt, there are enemies to the favors of Allah." It was said: "Who are those?"
He said: "They are those who envy the people for what they are given by Allah
Almighty out of His bounty." (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the
authority of Ibn Abbas). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said: "Six (of people) will enter the fire (of Hell) a year before

313

Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy

reckoning." It was said: "Who are those O Messenger of Allah?" He said: "The
rulers because of their injustice and wrongness, the Arabs for their Fanaticism,
the governors for their arrogance, the traders and merchants for their treachery,
the laymen for their ignorance, and religious scholars for their envy (of each
other)." (This is reported by Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority' of both
Ibn Umar and Anas).
From among the traditions and sayings,
mention may be made of the
following:
According to one of the righteous predecessors: "The first sin to be
committed is the envy: Iblis envied Adam “peace be upon him” for his rank in
the Sight of Allah Almighty, and Thus, rejected to fall in prostration to him (as
commanded by Allah). The result was that he turned to be disobedient."
It is reported that one day Awn Ibn Abdullah entered upon Al-Fadl Ibn
Al-Muhallab who was at that time the governor of Wasit. He said to him: "I
like to give you an admonition." He said: "What is it?" he said: "Beware of
arrogance, for it is the first sin with which Allah Almighty was disobeyed (by
Iblis)." He then recited to him the following statement of Allah Almighty:
"And behold, We said to the angels: "Bow down to Adam:" and they bowed
down: not so Iblis: he refused and was haughty: he was of those who reject
Faith." (Al-Baqarah 34)
He then said: "Beware of greediness, for it is that which turned Adam “peace
be upon him” from the Garden. Allah Almighty established him in a Garden,
whose breadth is like the breadth of the heavens and earth, to eat therefrom as he
liked barring one tree, which Allah Almighty forbade to him, but he ate from it,
thereupon Allah Almighty drove him out of the Garden, addressing him: "Get
you down, all (you people), with enmity between yourselves. On earth will be
your dwelling place and your means of livelihood for a time." (Al-Baqarah 36)

i©

J! (f*3

Beware also of envy, for the son of Adam killed his brother only when he
envied him." He then recited to him: "Recite to them the truth of the story of the
two sons of Adam. Behold! they each presented a sacrifice (to Allah): it was
accepted from one, but not from the other. Said the latter: "Be sure I will slay
you." "Surely," said the former, "Allah does accept of the sacrifice of those who
are righteous." (Al-Ma'idah 27)

'J&! jUj

i0

fSi;

$j*>

& 5S|T 3^ Loj Jvi

If a mention is made of the companions of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”, keep silent (from speaking ill about them), and
if a mention is made of the Divine Decree, then, speak not, and if a mention is

The quarter of the destructives
314------------------------------------------------made of stars (astrology), then, keep silent."
Bakr Ibn Abdullah said: "There was a man who used to frequent a king and
stand by his side and say: "Do good to the doer of good because of his good, for
you will be sufficed against the evil of the doer of evil." Another man envied him
because of his posidon from the king, and the good speech he used to say, and
Thus, he went about with calumnies against him to the king, saying: "That man
who stands by your side and says that good speech says that the king is a bad­
smelling." The king asked him: "How should I verify of your statement?" he said:
"Invite him to you, and when he comes close to you, he would put his hand over
his nose in order not to smell the bad smell of the breath." The king said to him:
"Go then until I think over the matter." He went out of the king's palace and
invited the man to a banquet in his house and served him with food containing
garlic. Then, the man went out from his house and stood by the side of the king,
as usual and said: "Do good to the doer of good because of his good, for you will
be sufficed against the evil of the doer of evil." The king then asked him to come
close to him, and he did accordingly, and put his hand over his mouth for fear
the king would detect in him the smell of garlic. The king said to himself: "I think
but that so and so has told me the truth." The king never wrote documents with
his handwriting but that it should contain a gift or a present (to be given to
anyone of his wards). He gave him a letter with his handwriting to give to one of
his appointed officers, in which he said: "If this carrier of my letter comes to you,
then, slay him, remove his hide and stuff it with straw and then send it to me."
The man then took the letter and came out where he met the man who envied
him and went about with calumnies against him to the king, and asked him about
the letter, and he said: "The king has commanded with his handwriting that a gift
be given to me." He asked him to grant it to him, and he did. He took it and went
to the officer who said: "Your letter reads that I should slay and remove your
hide." He said: "But this letter is not mine. Defer my matter until you return to
the king." He said: "The king's letter could not be changed." He then slew him,
removed his hide and stuffed it with straw and sent it to the king. The good man
returned to the king as usual and said to him what he used to say. The king
wondered and said: "What about the letter I have given you?" he said: "So and so
met me and asked me to grant it to him, and I granted it to him." The king said:
"He told me that you pretended that I am a bad-smelling." He said: "I have never
said so." He asked him: "Then, why had you put your hand over your mouth?" he
said: "Because he served me with food containing garlic, and I disliked you to
detect in me the smell of garlic." On that the king said: "You have told the truth.
Return to your place, for we have been sufficed against the evil of the doer of
evil."
Ibn Sirin "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "I have envied anyone
because of anything belonging to this world for, if he is from among the
inhabitants of the Garden, then, how should I envy him because of anything
belonging to this world, given that this world is no more than a small ditch in the
Garden? If he is from the denizens of the fire of Hell, then, how should I envy

315
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
him because of anything belonging to this world given that the end of his journey
is the fire of Hell?" a man asked Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him":
"Does a believer envy?" he said: "Have you forgotten the sons of Jacob? But
conceal it in your breast, for it will bring about no harm to you so long as it is not
translated into deed or word."
According to Abu Ad-Darda' “Allah be pleased with him”: "No servant (of
Allah) remembers death more often but that he becomes less happy and less
ready to envy." According to Mu’awiyah: "I have the power to please all the
people except the envier of a favor, for nothing pleases him but the
disappearance of that favor." According to a sage: "The envy is an incurable
wound." According to a desert dweller: "I have never seen a wrongdoer who
resembles a wronged more than an envier for he sees your favor a disfavor for
himself." According to Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him": "O son of
Adam! By no means would you be able to envy your brother! If he is given what
he is given by Allah Almighty out of his honour in the Sight of Allah, of a surety,
you would not envy him who is honoured by Allah Almighty; otherwise, you
would not envy such of people as the end of whose journey is the fire of Hell."
According to another man: "The envier does not get from gatherings but blame
and humiliadon, from angels but curse and aversion, from the people but fright
and anxiety, at the time of death but suffering and terror, and at standing (on the
Day of Judgement) but scandal and disgrace."

Exposition Of The Real Nature Of Envy,
Its Ruling, Divisions And Levels
It should be known that there is no envy but because of a favor. If Allah
bestows a favor on your brother, you have two behaviours to do with him in
relation to it: you might dislike it, and like its removal; and this is the envy. The
envy then is to dislike a favor bestowed upon a particular man, and desire for it to
be removed from him. The second is that you might not like it to be removed,
nor dislike it to remain with him, but you desire it for yourself; and this is called
Ghibtah (harmless jealousy). However, Ghibtah might result from aspiration. But
even, there is confusion between both terms of envy and aspiration in the sense
that each of them might be replaced with the other in usage. The Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "The believer might have
harmless jealousy (longing for favor), unlike the hypocrite who always envies
because of it."
In relation to the first case, i.e. the envy, it is unlawful by all means, unless a
favor is given to a wicked or disbeliever, which he uses to kindle affliction and
cause cprruption: in this case, no harm befalls you if you dislike it and hope it to
be removed from him. That is because you do not like it to be removed as being
a favor in so much as being an instrument of corruption; and should you be safe
from his corruption, the favor itself will not concern you. The proof for
prohibition of envy is taken from the narrations and traditions we have
transmitted. Moreover, envy means to dislike the fate and decree of Allah in

The quarter of the destructives
316
giving some of His servants preference over others. There is no legal excuse nor
concession pertaining to that. Which sin is more grievous than your dislike for
the comfort and relief of a Muslim, so long as you receive no harm from it?
To that the Qur'an refers as shown from the following statement of Allah
Almighty: "If aught that is good befalls you, it grieves them; but if some
misfortune overtakes you, they rejoice at it. But if you are constant and do right,
not the least harm wall their cunning do to you; for Allah compasses round about
all that they do." (A1 Imran 120)
A*

aj 'il ‘lj.AS.jj

.

OJj Q_>
»

*

f

(j\j p-Aj—<1—^>^,. ,

„

i

1 #• '

^ (; w..la ^5- ^ • jjJu+-AJ La.j 4JJI Qj l

JSi

*

9

Oj ^

f + *

-L-5

This rejoicing is a kind of schadenfreude; and both envy and schadenfreude
are concomitant. Allah Almighty further says: "Quite a number of the People of
the Book wash they could turn you (people) back to infidelity after you have
believed. From selfish envy, after the Truth has become manifest unto them: but
forgive and overlook, till Allah accomplishes His purpose: for Allah has power
over all things." (Al-Baqarah 109)
L. JjU ^jA

4

iJA

1jUT

J-^3

^JA ^iij5jJ_

^ Oj ^V1 V ^

!s*~

^ * jA

2>J

&S\

He Almighty tells that their longing for the removal of the favor of faith is
envy. He also says in this respect: "They but wish that you should reject Faith, as
they do, and Thus, be on the same footing (as they)." (An-Nisa 89)
^i

[SS (jjji&j yJ \jzj y

He Almighty mentioned how the brother of Yusuf “peace be upon him"
envied him, saying on their tongue: "Truly Joseph and his brother are loved more
by our father than we: but we are a goodly body! really our father is obviously
wandering (in his mind)! Slay you Joseph or cast him out to some (unknown)
land, that so the favour of your father may be given to you alone: (there will be
time enough) for you to be righteous after that!" (Yusuf 8-9)
j\<^Jsl^jj \jk/\ (£p(rhU» ^ bbl oj

b? bad elj

jJ \jili ij $

^ $5
bjCr? 'y^3 ^v* ^3
Thus, when they disliked his father's love for him, and were aggrieved by it,
for which they envied him, and desired to remove that love, they took Yusuf
“peace be upon him” away from him.
In another context, Allah Almighty says about the faithful believers: "and
entertain no desire in their hearts for things given to the (latter), but give them
preference over themselves, even though poverty was their (own lot). And those
saved from the covetousness of their own souls; they are the ones that achieve
prosperity." (Al-Hashr 9)

317

Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
i_^ji

a.*;, ^

'Sj i^yj>Licr-

cr**P$ jUTjJj-s oi^l3 ^

4O
* p-*
--5-5^
cr*3
L^“ J^r- O*^ 3J3
1 u£
He Almighty Thus, praised them for their being non-envious. He Almighty
says also in rejection of the behaviours of the enviers: "Or do they envy mankind
for what Allah has given them of His bounty?" (An-Nisa 54)
4

<U)T

IC Xa 'Js>

l^

Allah Almighty further says: "Mankind was one single nation, and Allah sent
Messengers with glad tidings and warnings; and with them He sent the Book in
truth, to judge between people in matters wherein they differed; but the People
of the Book, after the Clear Signs came to them, did not differ among
themselves, except through selfish contumacy. Allah by His Grace guided the
Believers to the Truth, concerning that wherein they differed. For Allah guides
whom He will to a path that is straight." (Al-Baqarah 213)

(_£wL£3 ^ij LJu

s>

I

L* Jj»j ^^4

(Ji-ijl ^/J

1 LtJ 4-j IL».3

till

'

He Almighty also says: "And they became divided only after knowledge
reached them, through selfish envy as between themselves." (Ash-Shura 14)
4 Cfj) fr-H ^ (*4*jT

^^

Cr? X!

^3 ^

Allah Almighty then sent knowledge in order to gather them in love to obey
Him, and commanded them to join to each other in love through knowledge,
thereupon they envied each other, and were divided among themselves, for each
of them liked to have the authority to give the final say and decision, and this is
why they refuted the claims of each other.
Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with him” said: Before the emergence of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” whenever the Jews
were engaged in fighting with a people, they would supplicate Allah saying: "O
Allah! We beseech You with the Prophet You promised to send to us, and the
Book You revealed on us, to endow us with victory." (This is reported by Ibn
Ishaq in his Sirah). Thus, they were given victory. But when the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” came and he was from among
the descendants of Ishmael “peace be upon him” they recognized him, and at the
same time, they gave lie to him, and rejected his Prophethood. In confirmation of
that Allah Almighty says: "And when there comes to them a Book from Allah,
confirming what is with them - although from of old they had prayed for victory
against those without Faith - when there comes to them that which they (should)
have recognized. They refused to believe in it but the curse of Allah is on those
without Faith. Miserty is the price for which they have sold their souls, in that

The quarter of the destructives
318
they deny (the revelation) which Allah has sent down, in insolent envy that Allah
of His Grace should send it to any of His servants He pleases: Thus, have they
drawn on themselves Wrath upon Wrath, and humiliating is the punishment of
those who reject Faith." (AJ-Baqarah 89-90)
oiAhd*
aj
J f ill

ct5erf
I LLlij (j^^) ^

1

^

(3u-y-a-4 Aii11

auI ajjcLs

«_aj *1jjJl£=3 IL* jv-A t L>- L*JLd IjjjiS"

f Lio jj-4 ([JlP *-Aj_*a_5 ^ 4JJI ^JjrO

i © CM-

I LJo AJJI

^ cfLixS*p-**^

I L*j

OI

^

iLi

CrL/^dJj y*** 'J* '?

It is reported that Safiyyah Bint Huyai “Allah be pleased with her” said to the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: One day, my
father and paternal uncle came from you and my father said to my uncle: "What
do you say about him?" he said: "I say that he is the Prophet of whom Moses
“peace be upon him” had given the glad tidings." He asked him: "Then, what do
you think (we should do with him)?" he said: "I think we should be enemies to
him as long as we live." (This narration is reported by Ibn Ishaq in his Sirah).
This is the ruling of prohibition of envy.
On the opposite is the aspiration which is not unlawful: it might be
obligatory, favored or just permissible. We have already referred that both terms
of envy and aspiration are replaceable in usage. Qutham and Al-Fadl intended to
go to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and ask
him to appoint them in charge of alms, and when they consulted Ali “Allah be
pleased with him” about that he said to them: "Go not, for he would not appoint
you." Qutham said to him: "This opinion of you expresses nothing but your
aspiration for what we would get; and by Allah, we have never aspired for your
favor when you got married to his daughter Fatimah." (This narration is reported
by Muslim, and Qutham is wrong and the right is Al-Muttalib Ibn Rabie'ah). By
aspiration, they intend envy, i.e. we have never envied you for your getting
married to Fatimah.
The evidence for the fact that aspiration is permissible is taken from the
statement of Allah Almighty: "and for this let those aspire, who have aspirations."
(Al-MutaffiBn 26)

i^4} )
Allah Almighty further says: "Hasten as in race for Forgiveness from your
Lord, and a Garden (of Bliss), the width whereof is as the width of heaven and
earth." (Al-Hadid 21)

One hastens to precede another for fear he might be preceded, like two
servants who race each other in service of their master, for each of them is scared

319
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
that he might be preceded by the other who, in turn, would have a higher
position with his master. Why not since the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” himself put it clearly in his statement: "There is no
(acceptable) envy except in two: a person whom Allah has given wealth and
caused him to spend it in the right way, and a person whom Allah has given
wisdom (religious knowledge) according to which he gives his decisions and
which he teaches to the others.” (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on
the authority of Ibn Umar).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Kabshah Al-Anmari that he said: The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “The example
of (the people of) this nation is like the example of four persons: a man whom
Allah gives both property and knowledge, upon which he acts in his property,
which he spends on what is right; and a man whom Allah gives knowledge but
He gives him no property, thereupon he says: “Had I been given the like of what
so and so had been given, surely, I would have done in it (the property) the same
as he does.”” The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: “Both are equal in the reward; and a man whom Allah gives property, but
He gives him no knowledge, and he misuses his property, which he spends on
what is wrong; and a man whom Allah gives neither knowledge nor property,
thereupon he says: “Had I been given the like of what so and so had been given,
The
surely, I would have done in it (the property) the same as he does.
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “Both are
equal in the sin.” (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah). In
the first two similes, he likes to have the same as his property to do like his doing,
without longing for the favor to be removed from him. As for the fourth one, the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” dispraised him in
terms of his desire for sin and not in terms of his longing for the like of the
property.
Thus, there is no harm on him who aspires for the like of a favor another is
given, , so long as he does not dislike it to be removed from him, or to remain
with him. It is true that in case that favor is religious, like prayer, almsgiving and
fasting, then, aspiration for it becomes incumbent upon him for he wishes to be
like him; and of a surety, if he does not wish to be like him concerning faith, he
will then be contented with disobedience which is evidently unlawful. If the
favor is meritorious like spending money on charity, alms, and good deeds,
then, aspiration for it is encouraged and exhorted. If it is permissible, then,
aspiration for it is only permissible. That is because the matter in the end
returns to the aspiration to be like the one upon whom the favor is bestowed,
provided that the favor itself is not undesirable. The favor then brings about
two things: the first is the comfort of him upon whom it is bestowed; and the
other is the inferiority and retardation of the aspirer from him. The latter then
dislikes one of both things, i.e. his retardation from him, and at the same time,
likes to attain equality with him. However, there is no harm on him who dislikes
his inferiority and retardation from others as long as it pertains to what is

The quarter of the destructives
320
permissible, even though this decreases his excellence, contradicts asceticism,
reliance on Allah Almighty, and satisfaction (with one's portion), and hinders
from attainment of high stations, but at the same time, it does not lead to
disobedience.
But even, an abstruse subdety arises in this issue. If one loses hope to be like
him upon whom favor is bestowed, and at the same time, he dislikes his being
inferior to him, of a surety, he likes to remove that inferiority. This is removed
either by attaining the like of die favor of the envied, or by the disappearance of
the favor from him upon whom it is bestowed. By the disappearance of favor
from the envied, his superiority and advancement over him would subsequendy
be over. No heart could be free from that feeling. But if he is to endeavor to
remove the favor by himself willingly once it lies within his power to do so, he
will be a blameworthy envier. But he will be not an envier if his piety prevents
him from removing the favor, given his aversion for it in himself. It seems that
this is the significance of the statement of The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”: "There are three evils, from which none could
hardly be saved: (negative) assumption, bad omen and envy; and I am going to
tell you about the way out of them: if you have a (negative) assumption, do not
act upon it; and if you have bad omen, go on (your way without care); and if you
envy, then, do not transgress the due limits." (This narration is reported by Ibn
Abu Ad-Dunya).
It is impossible for a man who aspires to attain equality with his brother and
fails to do so, and at the same time, he does not incline to like the disappearance
of the favor from him upon whom it is bestowed. This limit of aspiration is close
to envy, which is unlawful. For this reason, one should be cautious of it, since
danger lies in it. There is no man but that he sees others from among his
acquaintances and fellows superior to him, and he likes to be equal to them. If
one is not of strong faith and good piety, that might lead him to forbidden envy.
If he is prompted by fear of distinction and the emergence of his inferiority to
others, it might lead him to blameworthy envy, according to which he is inclined,
by nature, to have the favor removed from his brother until he falls down to be
equal to him, since he fails to rise up to be equal to him by getting the like of his
favor.
There is no concession in that, for it is unlawful whether it pertains to worldly
or even religious affairs. But so long as he does not act upon it, he might be
pardoned, Allah willing, and his aversion for it within himself becomes expiation
for him. This is, indeed, the real nature and rulings of envy.
As for its levels, they are four: the first is that the envier likes the favor to be
removed from his brother at all; and this is the worst kind of malice. The second
is that he wishes the favor that is in the hand of his brother for he has a desire for
it, like his desire for a good house, a beautiful woman, a power of authority, or
abundance of living that is attained by another: he likes such favor to be with
him, and does not like it to be removed from his brother. What he really dislikes
is his loss of the favor and not his brother's being blessed in it. The third is that

321
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
he desires not the favor itself but the like of it, and if he fails to attain the like of
it, he then will like it to be removed from his brother, in order for no distinction
to appear between them. The fourth is that he desires for himself the like of it;
and if he fails to get it, he will not like it to be removed from his brother.
It is this last division which is pardoned in case it pertains to worldly affairs,
and encouraged in case it belongs to religious matters. The third level is divided
into blameworthy and not blameworthy. The second is somewhat lesser than the
third. But the first is the worst of them all; and it is evident envy. There is
somewhat laxity in giving that (second) level the name of envy, although it is
blameworthy in view of the statement of Allah Almighty: " And in no wise covet
those things in which Allah has bestowed His gifts more freely on some of you
than on others." (An-Nisa' 32)
But one's desire for the like of it is not blameworthy, whereas his desire for it
in itself is blameworthy.
Exposition Of Causes Of Envy And Harmless Jealousy
The main cause of harmless jealousy is to love the object of jealousy. If it
pertains to religious matters, then, its cause might be the love for Allah Almighty,
the desire for obeying Him. If it pertains to the worldly affairs, its cause might be
the love for what is permissible in this world, and for being blessed in it. But
now, let's consider the motives of the blameworthy envy whose approaches are
numerous. But they might be summed up in seven: enmity, exaltation, vanity,
wonder, fear of failure to attain desired goals, love for authority, self-wickedness
and greed.
One might dislike the favor to be in the hand of another because he is his
enemy, and thus, he likes no good for him. This is not limited to the fellows: the
lowly might envy the king and likes any favor to be removed from him in view of
his aversion for him, because of his causing harm to him or to such as he likes.
One also might dislike the favor to be given to another for he knows that by
virtue of it, he will become haughty* and behave arrogantly towards him, a thing
which he never endures. But the envier himself might be, by nature, inclined to
behave arrogandy towards the envied, and due to the favor that is bestowed upon
him, he will not be able to do so; and this is what is intended by exaltadon. In
many cases, the favor might be great, to the extent of raising the wonder of the
envier about how such a man gets such a favor. The envier also might fear of his
failure to attain his desired goal if the envied competes him over it because of the
favor that is bestowed upon him. He also might like the authority that is based
upon a particular favor. But even, envy might not be due to any of those causes
in so much as to the self-malice and greed. Those causes then are to be explained
in some detail.
The first motive: enmity and hatred
It is the strongest motive of envy. If one causes harm to another or disagrees
with him due to any reason, he would dislike him and grow angry with him,

The quarter of the destructives
322
which would, in turn, bring about rancor and hatred towards him. Rancor of
course requires vengeance and retribution, and if he fails to exact retribution
from him by himself, he wishes that time would exact retribution from him.
Furthermore, he might refer any misfortune that afflicts the envied to his honour
and majesty in the Sight of Allah Almighty. If a calamity befalls his enemy, he
would rejoice at it, and think it to be a reward for him from Allah Almighty in
return for his hatred and aversion for his enemy. On the contrary, if any favor
touches him, he would grieve for it would be in opposition to his desires and
wishes; and it might occur to his mind that he is not dignified or dear in the Sight
of Allah Almighty for He has not taken revenge on his enemy who caused harm
to him.
In short, envy always is related with hatred and enmity and does not leave
them. The piety here is not to transgress in his aversion and to restrict his dislike
to be within his heart. But it is impossible to have aversion for a particular man
and at the same time to be careless about his misfortunes as well as good
fortunes. It is This kind of (envy caused by enmity and hatred) that Allah
Almighty describes in His statements: " when they meet you, they say, "We
believe": but when they are alone, they bite off the very tips of their fingers at you
in their rage. Say: "Perish in your rage; Allah knows well all the secrets of the
heart" If aught that is good befalls you, it grieves them; but if some misfortune
overtakes you, they rejoice at it. But if you are constant and do right, not the least
harm will their cunning do to you; for Allah compasses round about all that they
do." (A1 Imran 119-120)
\^as- ij!U-1313

ijJii

o]3 y*}—31 —>-

wC (jj (£|pi) JJ JjjgjI cul J_j Jrdp <Udl (jJ

4

*^3 ''yvy^~ 5Vy
\yy

^ o!

I

o!3 ^

f

l5I

^

He further says: " they will not fail to corrupt you. They only desire your ruin:
rank hatred has already appeared from their mouths: what their hearts conceal is
far worse. We have made plain to you the Signs, if you have wisdom." (A1 Imran
118)
Laj -13

I

Cj

f l yO J I iS->Ju -13

L* 3S3

4 (Jjs
0! 9-dS/i ^
Envy caused by hatred might result in disputing and fighting, and spending
the whole lifetime in repeated attempts to remove the favor from the envied, go
about with calumnies to do evil to him, and unveiling his negatives.
The second motive: exaltation
It is that he feels it too heavy and difficult upon himself to see others superior
to him. If anyone of his fellows is granted an office, knowledge or property, he
fears that by such favor, he might behave arrogandy towards him, a thing which
he does not endure. However, it is not the purpose of the envier to make himself
superior but only to avert the probable arrogance of the envied. That is because if

'

323
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
he has accepted to be equal with him, in no way would he accept to see him
superior to him.
The third motive: vanity
It is that the envier is predisposed to behave arrogandy towards him, despise
him, and expect him to submit to and comply with his purposes. However, if he
gets a favor, the envier fears that he might not come to submit to him as he was
before it. It was out of vanity that the envy of most disbelievers and pagans was
against the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”. They
wondered how an orphan man should be given superiority to them, and how they
would lower their heads to him, as shown from the Holy statement of Allah
Almighty: " Also, they say: "Why is not this Qur’an sent down to some leading
man in either of the two (chief) cities?"" (Az-Zukhruf 31)
(This narration is reported by Ibn Ishaq in his Sirah). He Almighty further
said in description of the statement of Quraish: ""Is it these then that Allah has
favoured from amongst us?" Does not Allah know best those who are grateful?"
(Al-An'am 53)
L

I llri-) [y*

4jjl

jjk

yLb 1 IjJjjjSJ tlAi vll^

The fourth motive: wonder
It is like what Allah Almighty told about the previous nations in their sayings:
"Ah! you are no more than human, like ourselves!" (Ibrahim 10)
And: "Shall we believe in two men like ourselves? And their people are
subject to us!" (Al-Mu'minun 47)

4 (@) bj V is!

&J* gi&l

>

And: "If you obey a man like yourselves, behold, it is certain you will be lost."
(Al-Mu'minun 34)

crj) }
They exclaimed how men like them should win the honor of carrying the
message and revelation and nearness to Allah Almighty, with the result that they
envied them, and liked the removal of Prophethood from them, out of dislike
that men like them should be given superiority to them. They also said out of
exclamation: "Has Allah sent a man (like us) to be (His) Messenger?" (Al-Isra* 94)

And: ""Why are not the angels sent down to us, or (why) do we not see our
Lord?" Indeed they have an arrogant conceit of themselves, and mighty is the
insolence of their impiety!" (Al-Furqan 21)

The quarter of the destructives

324

-J \3*j&1za jjl}\2j csy

liJi Jjjt V>J Lai) ^^ ^ oyfr Jiij o >
^ (^5

1

3^3

1

And: "Do you wonder that there has come to you a message from your Lord,
through a man of your own People, to warn you, so that you may fear Allah and
haply receive His Mercy?" (Al-A'raf 63)
^

Cr?

* j£*£ O'

^

The fifth motive: fear of attaining the desired goals
This motive is pardcular to more than a competitor over one thing, according
to which each one envies his fellow for any favor that might help him attain that
goal. That kind includes the mutual envy of fellow-wives in their competition to
attain the desires of marriage, and the mutual envy of brothers in competition to
attain the high rank and love in the heart of their father, thereby they might attain
honour, property and wealth, the mutual envy of two pupils in competition to get
the love and esteem of their mister, the mutual envy of the king's sitters and
attendants to get the best rank and appreciation in his heart thereby they would
get property and majesty, the mutual envy of many preachers in their competition
to polarize the people of a particular town, the mutual envy of scholars in
competition to attract a limited number of jurisprudence seekers, and so on.
The sixth motive: seeking after authority and majesty
It is to seek after authority with no other purpose. The typical example is a
man who likes to be matchless in a particular science or art if he is inclined to be
praised and appreciated by others: if he hears about an equivalent or peer to him
in that art or science even in the farthest end of the world, he would grieve, and
hope for his death, or at least the removal of that favor by which he shares him
that rank. The cause is not enmity, nor arrogance, nor vanity, nor fear of attaining
the desired goals other than the authority under pretext of matchlessness and
uniqueness. However, this type is particular for the most part to scholars. The
Jewish learned and rabbis rejected to recognize the Prophethood of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” Or to have faith in
him for fear their authority and majesty would be lost.
The seventh motive: seif-wickcdness and greed
It is that one does not like good for the servants of Allah Almighty. If a
mention is made to such enviers of some one of good state and favor, it would
become difficult upon them to know that; and if a mention is made to them of
people's misfortunes and loss of favor, they would rejoice at it. Such envier
likes people's misfortunes and dislikes that Allah's favor be bestowed upon
anyone of His servants, as if it is taken from his own. It is said that the niggard
is he who withholds his own property from people, whereas the greedy is he
who likes the property of others to be withheld from people. Such envier then
likes to withhold the favor of Allah Almighty from His servants, although he
might not have enmity with them or be related to them by any kinship or
connection. There is no clear reason for that other than self-wickedness and

!

325
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
greed to which one is predisposed by nature; and it is difficult to remedy it, for
the envy that is caused by anyone of the other modves are accidental, and
imaginable to be removed, and thus their remedy is expected, unlike the self­
wickedness that is established in the soul and thus its removal is impossible.
Those are the motives of envy. However, men are different in the degree of
envy in terms of strength and weakness due to their difference in the number of
motives they have for envy: one might have all or some of them, and another
might have more or less and so on. But the point is that if all motives of envy is
combined in a man, his envy reaches a culminating peak with which it becomes
too difficult to conceal or hide, regardless of the adulation or flattery he might
seem to show to the envied: on the contrary, the veil of adulation and flattery is
removed, and enmity and hatred appear by disclosure.

Exposition Of Reasons For Ciraaiation Of Envy Among Fellows,
Peers, Matches, Brothers And Consins In Contrast To Others
It should be known that the more the motives of envy we have already
mentioned are available among a people, the more envy spreads among them. A
single man might envy because he rejects arrogance of others over him, or for he
himself is arrogant, or for he has an enemy of him whom he envies, and so on.
Those reasons increase among a people in proportion to the number of links that
connect them, because of which they meet in gatherings, or share the same
purposes. If one of them competes with his companion over a particular
purpose, the latter would refrain from him and have rancor towards him; and at
that point, he would incline to despise him, behave arrogantly towards him in
reward for his competition with him, and further dislike the favor that might
enable him to achieve his own purposes.
But there is concomitance between a set of those reasons. No doubt, there
might probably be no envy between two persons from two different towns so
long as there is no connection between them. But in case they are neighbours in
the residence, market, school, etc, they might share purposes in which their
means are contradictory, which results in opposition and mutual hatred, from
which the remaining causes of envy originate. For this reason, it is not
surprising that a scholar envies a similar scholar and not a worshipper, whereas
a worshipper envies a similar worshipper and not a scholar, and a trader envies
a similar trader and not anyone else, and so on. A man is more inclined to envy
his brother and paternal cousin than anyone else, the woman her fellow-wife
and slave-girl of her husband more than her mother-in-law (i.e. her husband's
mother).
The point is that the envy between men belonging to the same craft and
profession or doing the same things is more than it is between men belonging to
different crafts or doing different things. Moreover, the more the fellows are
close to each other, the more envy grows between them, and vice versa: the more
they are far from each other, the less envy becomes between them. That is
because the origin of those kinds of envy is the enmity, and the origin of enmity

The quarter of the destructives
326
is the competition over the same purpose, which hardly gathers two persons far
from or belonging to different fields in so much as it gathers two persons
between whom there is relevance, and this is why envy grows much between
them. But it is true that he who likes to be matchless in his power of authority in
the world envies anyone expected to share him in that privilege, no matter how
far from him he might be.
The origin of all of this is the love for this world, which is too narrow for the
competitors to compete over it, unlike the hereafter, which is a wide field fitting
for all competitors. The favor of knowledge is a typical example of the love for
the hereafter. Undoubtedly, he, who likes to know about Allah Almighty, His
attributes, Names, His angels, Prophets, His dominion in the heaven and earth,
and the like of those does not envy anyone who shares him in that. That is
because such knowledge is not limited to the knowers: on the contrary, the given
specifics might be learnt by one million scholars, each of whom rejoices at and is
pleased with learning it, and the pleasure of anyone does not decrease by the
knowledge of knowers: On the contrary, sociability, affability, in addition of the
fruits and benefits of learning more often increase by the increasing number of
knowers.
For this reason, there is no envy between the real learned of religion who seek
for the hereafter, for their purpose is to know about Allah Almighty, and it is a
large ocean fitting for all the competitors to seek for it; and their purpose is to
attain the high rank in the Sight of Allah Almighty, and what is with Allah
Almighty is not limited to anyone, for the reward to be given by Allah Almighty
is the pleasure of meeting Him, from which none (of the believers) would be
hindered (in the hereafter), nor would anyone of them cause trouble to the other
while seeing Him. But the ruling is different when scholars intend by their
knowledge property and majesty, in which case they envy each other, for
property in the end is a limited and concrete thing, and if it falls in the hand of
anyone, it would be lost from the other; and the same is true of majesty, for if
one attracts the hearts of a people, they would be diverted from another person.
In this way, it becomes a reason for envy.
To be sure, if one is filled with joy of knowledge of Allah Almighty, no
harm shall he receive when anyone else is filled with joy of knowledge about
Allah Almighty. The difference between property and knowledge is that
property does not fall in the hand of anyone unless it first is lost from another
hand, whereas knowledge resides in the heart of the learned, and it could be in
the heart of anyone else with no need of being lost from the heart of the
former. Another difference is that property in the end is limited bodies, in such
a way that if only one man has in his possession the whole property on earth,
there will remain nothing for anyone to possess, whereas knowledge is endless
and it is beyond grasp. If one gets himself accustomed to meditation on the
Glory and Majesty of Allah, His dominion in the heavens and earth, his
Magnificence and Grandeur, it would become in his sight more pleasant than
any favor else, from which he would not be hindered, and in which he would
not compete anyone.

i

327
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
So, he would have no envy in his heart for anyone, for if anyone knows the
like of his knowledge, it would, by no means, decrease his pleasure and delight:
on the contrary, his pleasure would increase by the increase of sociability an
affability. Reflecting on the wonders of the dominion of Allah Almighty regularly
then becomes for those more pleasant than looking at the trees and gardens of
Paradise with the eye. That is because the pleasure and Garden of the Gnostic is
his knowledge which is characteristic of him and he feels safe of being removed
from him. He always plucks its fruits, for he, with his soul and heart, is always
nourished by the fruits of his knowledge, which is ceaseless and endless. Even if
he shuts up his concrete eye, his spirit remains grazing in a high garden and
flourishing meadows.
Many are the Gnostics who have never entertained envy among themselves:
on the contrary, they have been the same as Allah Almighty described them in
His Holy Book: " And We shall remove from their hearts any lurking sense of
injury: (they will be) brothers (joyfully) facing each other on thrones (of
majesty).” (Al-Hijr 47)
4©
j_ror?
4^
^
As such their state is in this world, what do you think them to be in the
hereafter? However, no envy is imagined to be in the hereafter among the
inhabitants of the Garden, as well as there is no envy among the inhabitants of
this world who share the Garden, for Garden is too wide to befit all who seek foi
it, and it is not attained but by the knowledge of Allah Almighty, in which there is
no competition between the inhabitants of this world. In this way, the inhabitants
of the Garden are necessarily free from envy in this world as well as in the
hereafter. Envy is the attribute of him who is driven away from the immensity of
Iiliyyin to the narrowness of Sijjin. For this reason, envy is attributed to Satan
because he envied Adam for the favor bestowed by Allah Almighty upon him,
and when he was invited to fall in prostration to him, he rejected, regarded
himself too arrogant to prostrate to him, rebelled and disobeyed the command of
Allah Almighty.
You now have come to know that there is no envy but between a people who
share a purpose too narrow to suffice them all at the same time. For this reason,
they do not envy each other for looking at the adornment of the sky, although
they envy each other for looking at the gardens which represent only a very few
among the things of the earth, which is, in itself, no more than a trivial thing in
relation to the sky. But the sky, being too wide and spacious to befit the sights of
all the inhabitants at the same time, brings about no envy nor competition
between the people.
So, it is incumbent upon you, if you are insightful, and have sympathy for
yourself, to seek after a favor because of which there is no envy nor competition,
and to demand a pleasure that brings about no arrogance. But this is not available
in this world except in the knowledge of Allah Almighty, His attributes and acts,
and the wonders of the dominion of the heavens and the earth. This will not be

The quarter of the destructives
328
attained in the hereafter except through that knowledge. But even, if you have no
longing for the knowledge of Allah Almighty, and your desire is too weak to
entertain it, then, you are excusable, for by no means does the sexually impotent
have longing for the pleasure of sexual relation, nor does a boy have longing for
the pleasure of sovereignty.
That is because those pleasures are particular to men and effeminate on the
exclusion of boys. Similarly, the pleasure of knowledge (of Allah Almighty) is
particular to men, i.e. men whom no trade nor transaction entertain from the
remembrance of Allah Almighty. None else have such longing, for longing is
experience after tasting, and whoever does not taste does not know, and whoever
does not know has no longing, and whoever has no longing does not seek, and
whoever does not seek does not attain, and whoever does not attain remains with
the depraved in the lowest bottom; and " If anyone withdraws himself from
remembrance of (Allah) Most Gracious, We appoint for him an evil one, to be an
intimate companion to him." (Az-Zukhruf 36)

i ©So3
/-Jo*
o*5 ►
Exposition Of Medicine That Removes Envy From Heart
It should be known that envy is among the chronic heart diseases, which
could not be treated but by knowledge and work. The beneficial knowledge
regarding the disease of envy is to know for certain that the envy is harmful to
you in religion and world, and it causes no harm to the envied in the world
and religion: on the contrary, the envied gets benefit from it (i.e. receives
reward for it). Having known this fact for certain, and with deep insight, and
having been no enemy to yourself, nor a friend of your enemy, you should,
inevitably leave envy.
That it is harmful to you in religion is because by so doing, you are displeased
with the decree of AUah Almighty, and dislike His favor that He allotted among
His servants, and His justice which He established in His dominion with His
wisdom which none knows but He. . without doubt, it is a crime against the
eyeball of monotheism, and dust in the eye of faith, and sufficient are them for
crime against religion. Additionally, by envy, you cheat one of the faithful
believers, and abandon counseling him with sincerity, and leave the devotees and
Prophets of Allah in their loving good for the servants of Allah Almighty, and
join Iblis and all the disbelievers in their loving misfortunes and disasters for the
faithful believers. Of a surety, those are vices in the heart that devour the good
deeds just as fire consumes wood, and remove them in the same way as night
dissipates daylight.
That it is harmful to you in this world is because you entertain pain in
yourself by your envy and continue to be in anxiety and grief, for Allah removes
not the favor that He has bestowed upon your enemies (as you like). Thus, you
continue to entertain pain because of every favor you see having bestowed upon
them, and for every distress and misfortune you see having removed from them,
with the result that you come to be in continuous grief, distress, anxiety, and

329
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
narrowness, just the same as your enemies desire for you. Although you desire
affliction for your enemy, it is you who now is being afflicted. Nevertheless, the
favor is not removed from the envied because of your envy. If you have no faith
in resurrecdon and reckoning in the hereafter, it would be out of prudence and
intelligence to entertain no envy, given its being harmful and painful to your
heart, and useless to you at all: then, what would it be, seeing that you have faith
in resurrecdon and reckoning in the hereafter, and have knowledge of the
punishment and torment caused by envy in the hereafter? How astonishing is the
radonal man who exposes himself to the displeasure and wrath of Allah Almighty
with no benefit he gets but rather with harm and pain he suffers, and thereby
destroys his religion and world with no advantage he might obtain!
That it is not harmful to the envied in his religion and world is obvious, for
by no means would the favor be removed from him as a result of your envy.
That is because the favor and bounty doomed to be by Allah should survive to
an unspecific term as Allah decrees it to be. Thus, there is no way to avert it, for
everything is done by Him in due propordon, and everything has a term
appointed by Allah Almighty. For this reason, one of the Prophets of Allah
made a complaint to him of a wrongful woman who oppressed the people,
thereupon Allah Almighty revealed to him to flee from her undl her days would
elapse, i.e. 'There is no way to change what we have decreed from the
beginning, so keep padent until the term preordained to be by Allah Almighty
would pass safely.
As long as the favor is not removed from the envied, then, he will entertain
no harm in his world nor there will be sin due upon him in the hereafter. Perhaps
you say: "Would that the favor is removed from the envied because of my envy!"
to be sure, this is the utmost ignorance. That is because it is a disaster which you
first desire for yourself, for you could hardly be free from an enemy to envy you
(in the same way as you have an enemy to envy); and were the favor to be
removed because of envy, surely, no favor from Allah would have remained with
you or with anyone of the creatures, including even the favor of faith, for the
disbelievers envy the believers for the favor of faith, as shown from the statement
of Allah Almighty: " Quite a number of the People of the Book wish they could
turn you (people) back to infidelity after you have believed. From selfish envy,
after the Truth has become manifest unto them: but forgive and overlook, till
Allah accomplishes His purpose: for Allah has power over all things." (AlBaqarah 109)
& jJkj ^

-Uf

luJs>- IjUT

]jA

Jcj^STl Jil

^

4. ©Oj
That is because what the envier wills does not come true. It is true that he
himself strays by his will that the envied should go astray, and whenever he wills
that the envied be a disbeliever, he himself becomes a disbeliever, and so on.
Hence, whoever likes that a favor be removed from the envied because of envy,

The quarter of the destructives
330
seems to like to have the favor of faith removed from him because of the envy of
the disbelievers; and the same is true of all favors. Therefore, that you desire to
have the favor removed from your envied because of your envy, and removed
not from yourself because of the envy of others for you, is the utmost ignorance
and stupidity. Every foolish envier likes to be favored by that privilege, and of a
surety, you are not preferable to anyone else. If the favor of Allah upon you is
not removed because of envy, you are more fitting to give thanks to Allah for
that, but unfortunately, you dislike it.
The benefit of the envied in this world and religion is clear. In relation to
religion, he is wronged by you particularly if your envy leads you to do and act in
opposition to him, by backbiting, slandering and criticizing him, and unveiling his
defects and secrets, and all of those are gifts you present to him, i.e. that by so
doing, you give him as gifts from your good deeds until when it is the Day of
judgement, you will meet him as insolvent and deprived of favor just as you have
been deprived of it in the world. Although you liked to have his favor removed
from him, it was not removed. Furthermore, Allah Almighty increased him in
favor, for when He Almighty helped you do good and gain good deeds, you
transferred those good deeds of you to him, and thus added to his account favor
after favor, and added to yours disfavor after disfavor.
As for his benefit in this world, it is that the most important purpose of
the people is to harm their enemies and make them miserable and wretched,
and no torment befalls you more severe than the pain you entertain because
of your envy. The utmost hope of your enemies is to be in favor whereas you
be in disfavor and grief because of them, and by your envy, you do to yourself
the same as they like. This is why your enemy has no desire for your death: on
the contrary, he always desires for your life to be longer, provided that you
spend it in punishment and torment of envy, in order to see the favor of Allah
upon him, thereby your heart would fret in envy for it. For this reason, it is
said (in a form of poetic verses): "Let your enemies entertain no death until
they see in you what aggrieves them. You continue to be envied for the favor
that is bestowed upon you for indeed, it is the perfect among men who is
vulnerable to envy.”
However, the joy of your enemy with your grief and disaster is more than
his joy with his favor, and were he to know that you have got rid of the pain
and torment of envy, it would be then the most grievous affliction he might
receive. For the pain of envy you experience fulfills the desire of your enemy. If
you consider that, you will come to know that you are but the enemy of
yourself in this world, and the friend of your enemy, for indeed, you do what
harms you in the world and the hereafter, and at the same time benefits your
enemy in the world and the hereafter. Moreover, you also become despised and
dispraised in the Sight of your Creator and the creatures, wretched and
miserable, given that the favor of your envied will remain as long as Allah wills,
whether or not you like it.
Furthermore, you do not only fulfill the desire of your enemy, but also please

331
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
and gratify Iblis, the despised and cursed, for when he sees you deprived of the
blessing of knowledge, piety, property and majesty with which your enemy is
favored, he fears you might love that for him, and thus share reward with him for
your love, for whoever loves good for Muslims shares it with them, and whoever
fails to join the rank of the dignitaries in this world, would not miss the reward of
loving that for them in the hereafter. Thus, when Iblis fears you might love the
favor bestowed by Allah upon anyone of His servants, in terms of the
uprightness of his world and religion, with the result that you would win the
reward of that love, he then causes you to dislike it for him, in order that you
would not join him with your love just as you have not joined him with your
deed.
It is reported that a desert dweller said to the Prophet “peace be upon him”:
"O Messenger of Allah! What about a man who loves a people and he does not
join them in rank?" on that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said: "The man will be gathered in the company of whomever he
loves." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Ibn
Mas'ud). In another context, a Bedouin stood for the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” while he was delivering a speech and said: "O
Messenger of Allah! When will the Hour (of Judgement) be?" he said: "What
have you prepared for it?" he said: "Indeed, I have prepared for it no muc)j
prayers, nor much fasts, but I love Allah and His Messenger." On that tl
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Then, yo
will be gathered in the company of whomever you love." (This narration is
reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Anas).
Anas “Allah be pleased with him” said: "The Muslims have never entertained
pleasure and happiness after their embracing Islam greater than theirs on that
day", in reference to the fact that their greatest aspiration is to love Allah and His
Messenger. Anas “Allah be pleased with him” resumed: "No doubt, we love the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”, Abu Bakr and
Umar “Allah be pleased with them” and hope to be with them, although our
deed is not like theirs."
Abu Musa “Allah be pleased with him” said: I said: "O Messenger of Allah! A
man might like praying people and not offer much prayers like them, and like
fasting people and not observe much fasts like them..." and he counted many
other things. On that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "The man will be in the company of whomever he loves." (This
narration is reported by both sheikhs with a slight variation of wording). A man
said to Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz "may Allah have mercy upon him": "It was said
that if you could become a scholar, then, become a scholar, and if you could not,
then, become a learner, and if you could not, then, love them, and if you could
not love them, then, do not dislike them." On that he said: "Glory be to Allah
Who has made to us a way out."
Consider then how Iblis envies you to the extent that he wastes your reward
of love. He also is not only satisfied with it, but also he causes you to dislike

The quarter of the destructives
332
your brother until you fall in sin. Why do you not become sinful given that you
envy a man of religious scholars, and likes him to err in the religion of Allah or
at least shut up his mouth, or fall ill in order to speak and learn or teach; and
which sin is more grievous than that? Would that when you fail to join him in
rank, because of which you grieve, you become safe from sin and punishment
of the hereafter! According to a certain Prophetic narradon: "Three kinds of
people constitute the inhabitants of the Garden: the doer of good, his lover and
he who holds back harm and evil from him." It refers to him who withholds his
harm, evil, envy, hatred and aversion, and the like of those vices. Consider how
Iblis drives you away from those three entrances. Indeed, it is the envy of Iblis
for you that is effective and not yours for your brother.
Moreover, if the real state is disclosed to the envier, he would find himself as
if throwing an arrow at his enemy in order to kill him, but it naught harms him: it
rather returns to his right eyeball and remove it, increasing thereby his anger. He
returns to throw another arrow, which harms his enemy not: but it returns to
remove his left eyeball, increasing his anger and rage more and more. In the third
time, his arrow returns to injure his head, and so on, whereas his enemy remains
safe and secure, and his other enemies round him rejoice at his misfortunes one
after the other. This is always the state of the envier and the ridicule of Satan at
him. But even, the state of envy is more odious for the end of arrows is to kill the
envier, whereas the envy returns with sin, and there is no end for sin by death, for
it leads to the anger and wrath of Allah Almighty, and the punishment of the fire
of Hell. To have his eyes removed in this world is better for him to have one of
his eyes remain to the hereafter for the blaze of fire to remove it.
Consider how Allah Almighty exacts retribution from the envier in retaliation
for his will that the favor should be removed from the envied. It indeed is not
removed from the envied in so much as it is removed from the envier, for safety
from sin is a favor, and safety from grief and anxiety is a favor, and both are
removed from the envied. In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty says: " But the
plotting of Evil will hem in only the authors thereof." (Fatir 43)

Therefore, the envier might be afflicted with the same as he desires for his
enemy. One rarely glees at the misfortunes of another but that he is stricken with
the like of it. A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her” said: "I did not wish anything
for Uthman but that it afflicted me, to the extent that were I to wish him to be
killed, I would have been killed." This is the sin of envy: what about its results of
dissention, rejection of truth, unleashing of tongues and hands with shameful
deeds and words while taking revenge on the enemies. It is the chronic disease by
which the previous nations were put to destruction.
Those are then the concrete medicines of envy. If one reflects on them with
pure mind and present heart, the fire of envy might be extinguished from him,

Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy

333

and he comes to know that by envy, he would destroy himself, please his enemy,
displease his Lord, and embitter his living. The beneficial remedy then is to have
control over envy: he has to force himself to do the opposite of all words and
deeds that are required by and ensue from envy. If envy leads him to slander his
envied, he has to force his tongue to celebrate him with praise; and if it leads him
to behave arrogandy towards him, he has to force himself to show humbleness to
him; and if it prompts him to withhold beneficence from him, he has to force
himself to increase his beneficence to him; and so on.
Once he does so even ostentatiously, and the envied knows it from him, he is
pleased with him, and loves him; and once he loves him, and shows that love to
him, the envier himself comes to love him accordingly. There ensues from that
the harmony and agreement that break the substance of envy. That is because
humbleness, praise, and showing pleasure with favor always attract the heart of
the beneficiary, and lead him to reward that with kindness. That kindness returns
to please the heart of the envier and shifts his ostentation into spontaneity and
nature. He should not be kept off by the statement of Satan to him: "If you show
humbleness to him and praise him, your enemy might construe it to be out of
your failure, hypocrisy or even fear, and this is the utmost humiliation and
disgrace." However, this is a kind of deception and one of the evil plots made by
Satan against him. That is because adulation, whatever it might be, breaks the
enmity between both enemies, relieves the hearts from the pain of envy and
anxiety of hatred.
Those are the medicines of envy; and although they are very beneficial, their
bitterness is, at the same time, severe on the hearts. But to be sure, benefit
always results from the bitter medicine. Whoever does not keep patient on the
bitter medicine will not taste the sweetness of cure. The bitterness of such
medicines of showing humbleness to the enemies, praising and giving thanks to
them are diluted by the power of knowledge of the concepts we have already
explained, and the strong desire for the reward of satisfaction with the decree
and fate of Allah Almighty, and having love for what He loves, in addition to
self-honour, and refraining from feeling that there is anything in the world in
opposition to what one wills and likes, for in this case, one will like what is not
to be, since there is no hope that what he likes should be; and of a surety, to
loose what one wills is a means of humiliation and baseness. There is no way of
salvation from that humiliation except by one of two: either what you will
should be, or you will what really is. The former is not up to you, and there is
no way to get it. But the latter is possible and it is attainable through selfmortification; and here discipline plays a great role. Every rational person has to
attain it.
This is the universal medicine. As for the detailed medicine, it is to follow the
motives of envy one by one, such as arrogance, self-honour and the like of those,
as will be discussed in detail later, Allah willing. Those motives represent the
substance of that ailment, which is not curbed except by curbing its substance.
But if the substance is not curbed, envy will remain lurking to appear from one

The quarter of the destructives
time to another. If one continues to have love for majesty and authority, of a
surety, he will envy such of men as have majesty and authority in the hearts of
people, because of which he will grieve; and the remedy is to diminish that grief
within himself since it is impossible for him to remove it entirely from him; and
Allah Almighty helps us all.

334

Exposition Of The Extent To Which It Becomes Incumbent To
Remove Envy From Heart
It should be known that such of men as causes harm is hateful by nature,
and of a surety, you dislike anyone who harms you, and if a favor is bestowed
upon him, you could but dislike it for him, and thus, it becomes the same to
you the good state and bad state of your enemy. But Satan forces you to envy
him for that. If this prompts you to show envy to your enemy by act or word,
you are disobedient envious. But if you withhold that outwardly, and become
inwardly in the state of disliking the favor for him, and hoping for its removal
from him, you are also a disobedient envious, for envy is characterisdc of the
heart and not the tongue. Allah Almighty says in this respect: " and entertain
no desire in their hearts for things given to the (latter), but give them
preference over themselves, even though poverty was their (own lot)." (AlHashr 9)

40
He also says: If aught that is good befalls you, it grieves them; but if some
misfortune overtakes you, they rejoice at it. But if you are constant and do right,
not the least harm will their cunning do to you; for Allah compasses round about
all that they do." (A1 Imran 120)
^=a)vaj ^

Oj3 ^
^ • jjLLju

o!3 (*-*3^

>■

\2~~c oj ^

4jjl £)l

But in relation to act or word, it is backbiting and lying, and it is a result of
envy and not envy itself, for the destination of envy is the heart and not the
organs. It is true that envy is not an injustice from which you should seek
freedom, but it is a sin in between you and Allah Almighty. What one has to be
free from is the outward acts and words that result from it. If you withhold
your outward acts and words resulting from envy but continue to have aversion
for your wish that the favor be removed from whomever you envy, making
such aversion counter to your inclination of your disposition to the desire for
the removal of the favor, you will have fulfilled what is due on you in this
respect, and nothing more is required from you. But it is impossible to change
your disposition in such a way that it becomes the same to you the good or
affliction of whomever you envy, so long as you are engaged in the love for the
fortunes of this world and its vanities. But it is possible for him who entirely
devotes himself to the love for Allah AJmighty: in this case, he pays no
attention to the detailed affairs and states of people, but rather looks at all of

335
Book five: condemnation of anger, rancor and envy
them with one eye, i.e. the eye of mercy, seeing all of them slaves of Allah
Almighty, whose acts, behaviours and deeds are for Allah Almighty. But
unfortunately, if this is possible, it is like a swift lightning, which does not
persist but for short moments after which the heart returns to its original state
and disposition, and his enemy, i.e. Satan returns to force him to entertain envy.
According to some learned, one is not sinful so long as envy does not appear
on his outward appearance. This is confirmed by the narration on the authority
of Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him" that he was asked about envy,
thereupon he said: "Conceal it for no harm befalls you so long as you do not
show it outwardly." It is further narrated that The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” that he said: "There are three evils, from which
none could hardly be saved: (negative) assumption, bad omen and envy; and I am
going to tell you about the way out of them: if you have a (negative) assumption,
do not act upon it; and if you have bad omen, go on (your way without care); and
if you envy, then, do not transgress the due limits." (This narration is reported by
Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya). It is preferable to construe that to refer to the aversion,
under religion and mind, in contrast to the inclination of the disposition to the
desire for the removal of the favor, for it is this aversion which prevents him
from transgression and harming.
However, all narrations that are reported about envy confirm that the envier
is sinful by all means. Envy is characteristic of heart and not of the organs and
their external acts. Whoever likes that a Muslim be harmed is sinful. It is unlikely
to pardon a servant whenever he has a wish that evil or harm should afflict a
Muslim, without having aversion for that wish.
From all of that, you have come to know that you have three states in relation
to your enemy: the first is to love their harm by nature, and dislike that inclination
of you with your mind and under your religion, and rather wish to have any
means to remove that inclination from you; and this is pardonable for it is
beyond free choice. The second is to like it and rejoice at the harm of your
enemy, either by act or word; and this is the forbidden envy. The third which
stands in the middle between both extremes, is to envy only with the heart
without aversion for your envy, but with the difference that you keep your organs
from complying with your envy; and this is debatable among the learned. But
what seems is that it is sinful which varies in degree in proportion to the power
and weakness of that envy; and Allah Almighty knows best; and praise be to
Allah; and Allah suffices us for the best disposer of affairs.

■

sTfcc-: *10 VtU-^ ■ 11 ■>-> ^co. ■

wroth I

It is the sixth book of the quarter of destructives
In die Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Praise be to Allah Who let His devotees and saints know the evils and vices of
this world, and uncovered to them its defects and shortcomings until they were
able to reflect on die witnesses and signs, and balanced its evil deeds with its
good deeds, thereby they came to know that the evildoings in it are more than its
good things, diat what is expected from it is more than what is feared, and that its
rising could not cancel out its eclipse. But it takes the form of a beaudful woman
who attracts people with its pretdness. But at the same dme, she has many secret
aspects of ugliness, by which it ruins those who desire for connection with her.
Therefore, she always flees away from her seekers, and she rarely turns towards
them, and even in case she turns towards them, people are not secure from her
evil and danger.
If it proves good for an hour, it will prove evil for a whole year. In short, it
rarely turns towards its adherents with good, and their traffic therein are always
lost, and its evils are to come consecutively one after the other. Everyone who is
deceived by it is led to humiliation, as well as sigh and grief are the portion of every
arrogant because of it. It always flees from its seeker, and turns towards its
runaway. It escapes such of men as serves it, and if one turns away from it and it
turns towards him, its pureness will not be void of impurity, nor will its pleasure be
free from embitterment. Its safety brings about sickness, and its youth leads to
decrepitude, and its bliss has no fruits but sigh and regret.
It is deceptive, cunning, flying and fleeing. It continues to get itself adorned
to its seekers until when they love it, it soon uncovers its canine, and distracts
upon them its seemingly associated causes, and reveals to them its mysteries, with
the result that it lets them taste its fatal poisons and shoots them with its deadly
arrows. At the same time, its adherents are pleased and happy with it: if it turns
from them, it seems to them as if it were confused medley of dreams, and of a
sudden, it comes to contaminate their atmosphere with its calamities and disasters
and crush them like harvest and bury them in their shrouds underneath its earth.
If it causes anyone of its inhabitants to have in his possession all things on which
the sun rises, it in the end turns him into something like a harvest clean-mown, as
if he had not flourished only the day before. It always gives its adherents hopes of
pleasure, and promises them by way of deception, until they have long hopes and
build huge castles, which turn to be graves for them, and their gathering is given
to perdition, their endeavor becomes in vain and their supplications are but woes.
Those are its attributes; and the command of Allah is a decree preordained.
Allah's blessing and peace be upon Muhammad, His slave and Messenger,
who was sent to the world as a carrier of glad tidings and a warner, and as a
336

337
Book six: Condemnation of world
luminous lamp, as well as upon his family and companions, who supported and
backed him in religion.
Coming to the point: the world is an enemy of Allah, to the devotees and
allies of Allah as well as to the enemies of Allah Almighty. Its enmity to Allah
Almighty is shown from distracting the way on the slaves of Allah, and this is
why Allah Almighty has not looked at it since He created it. Its enmity to the
devotees and saints of Allah Almighty is shown from the fact that it has got
adorned to them, and covered them with its splendor until they came to taste
the bitterness of patience over boycotting it. Its enmity to the enemies of Allah
Almighty is attested from the fact that it draws them gradually with its cunning
and sneakiness and catches them with its net until when they have confidence
of it and rely on it, it disappoints them at the time they are the neediest for it,
thereupon they pluck from it sigh and grief, and are deprived of happiness
forever. They regret for their departure from it, and seek for relief of its
intrigues although they receive no relief. On the contrary, it is said to them: "Be
you driven into it (with ignominy)! and speak you not to Me!" (Al-Mu'minun
108)

4 ^2^ oV3\Jii ^
"These are the people who buy the life of this world at the price of the
Hereafter: their penalty shall not be lightened nor shall they be helped." (AlBaqarah 86)
^ £|p) 0j*-* ^3

lull

Sli

l^4)T lyJ>S\

jijjl

^

If the evils and vices of this world are great, we first have to know its real
nature, and the wisdom that lies behind its creation in spite of its enmity; the
approach to its deception and evils, for indeed, whoever does not know evil is
unable to safeguard himself from it, and is about to fall in it. So, we are going,
Allah willing, to discuss here the condemnation of this world, its parables, its real
nature, its detailed concepts, the kinds of occupation related to it, the point of
need for its necessary things, and the reason for which the creatures turn away
from Allah because of engagement in its unnecessary things. . He is to help us do
what He wills.

CHAPTER ONE
EXPOSmON OF CONDEMNATION OF WORLD
There are many Holy Verses in condemnation of this world, and the greater
portion of the Qur'an condemns world and commands the people to turn away
from it, and rather invites them to the hereafter. Moreover, this is the purpose of
all the Prophets “peace be upon him” and we could say that they were not sent
but for that purpose. So, there is no need to quote the Holy Verses for they are
very clear in showing the significance. But let's be satisfied with many narrations
pertaining to that.
Once, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
passed by a dead sheep and he said to his companions: "Do you see that this

The quarter of the destructives
338
sheep is trivial in the sight of its owners?" they said: "They have thrown it away
for it is very trivial in their sight." On that he said: "By Him in Whose Hand is my
soul, the world is more trivial in the Sight of Allah Almighty than this sheep in
the sight of its owners, and had this world been equal to a mosquito's wing in the
Sight of Allah, He would not have provided a disbeliever with even a sip of water
therefrom." ^This narration is reported by Ibn Majah and Al-Hakim on the
authority of Sahl Ibn Sa'd; and At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Al-Mustawrid
Ibn Shaddad).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "This world is the believer's prison and the disbeliever's garden." (This
narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah). The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "This world is
cursed, and all that it has is cursed, except what is taken from it (in regard with
the celebration of Allah)." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn
Majah on the authority of Abu Hurairah). Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari “Allah be pleased
with him” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: "Whoever loves his world causes damage to his hereafter, and whoever
loves his hereafter causes damage to his world. So, give preference to what abides
over what perishes." (This narration is reported by Ahmad, At-Tabarani, AlBazzar, Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "The
love for this world is the cause of every sin." (This narration is reported by Ibn
Abu Ad-Dunya and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Al-Hassan). Zaid Ibn Arqam
“Allah be pleased with him” said: We were in the company of Abu Bakr AsSiddiq “Allah be pleased with him” when he asked for drink and water and
honey were brought to him. When he brought it close to his mouth he wept and
caused his companions to weep. They stopped from weeping, but he did not. He
wept once again that they thought they were unable to ask him about the reason.
But when he dried his eyes they asked him: "O successor of the Messenger of
Allah! What has led you to weep?" he said: "I was with the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” when I saw him averting something
from himself, although I saw none with him. I asked him: 'O Messenger of Allah!
What is that which you avert from yourself?' he said: 'It is this world which is
represented to me and I said to it: "Keep away from me!" then, it returned and
said to me: "Indeed, if you are able to flee away from me, those to come after you
will never flee away from me."' (This narration is reported by Al-Bazzar, AlHakim, Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and Al-Baihaqi).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "I wonder at him who seeks after the home of deception although he has
trust in the abode of eternity." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya
on the authority of Abu Jarir). It is further narrated that the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” stopped at a trash and said: "Come to
that world!" then, he picked up a torn shabby cloth and a piece of decomposed
bone therefrom and said: "Those represent the world." (This narration is

339
Book six: Condemnation of world
reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Ibn Maimun
Al-Lakhmi). It refers to the fact that the adornment of this world will inevitably
be torn like that shabby cloth, and that the bodies it contains will be decomposed
like those bones. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” further said: "This world is sweet and green, and Allah so going to make
you vicegerents in it and consider what you would do in it. When the world was
expanded and made easy for the children of Israel, they were lost in its
adornments, women, perfume and clothes." (This narradon is reported by Ibn
Majah and At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu Sa'id).
According to Jesus “peace be upon him”: "Take not the world as Lord lest it
would take you as its servants. Keep your treasures with Him who never wastes
it, for indeed the owner of the treasure of this world fears evil for it, whereas the
owner of the treasure of Allah Almighty fears nothing for it." He “peace be upon
him” further said: "O assembly of disciples! I have overturned the world prone
on its face for you, so, do not refresh it after me. However, this world is
malicious for Allah Almighty is disobeyed in it; and it is malicious for the
hereafter is unattainable unless by leaving it. Behold! cross this world, and do not
incline to inhabit it forever. It should be known to you that the foundadon of
every sin is the love for this world. How many a desire for even an hour that has
brought about long term sadness."
He “peace be upon him” said: "The world has been made plain for you
you have sat on its back. So, let not kings or women dispute with you over it.
not dispute with kings, for they will not harm you so long as you leave them \
their world. As for women, safeguard yourselves from them by prayer and fasti
He “peace be upon him” further said: "This world is a peddoner and a sought
for. The seeker for the hereafter is pursued by the world until he completes the
sustenance doomed to him in it; and the seeker after the world is pursued by the
hereafter until death approaches him and leads him by the neck to it."
It is narrated on the authority of Musa Ibn Yasar that he said: the Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Allah Almighty has
never created a thing more hateful to Him than this world; and since He created
it, He has never looked at it." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya
and Al-Baihaqi). It is narrated that Solomon, son of David “peace be upon
them” was in his procession under the shade of birds and jinns and men on his
right and left, came on his way upon a worshipper from the children of Israel
who said to him: "By Allah, O son of David! Indeed, Allah Almighty has given
you an enormous dominion!" Solomon “peace be upon him” heard it and said:
"Verily, a believer's glorification to be written down in his record is much better
than what the son of David has been given, for what has been given to the son
of David would perish, whereas the glorification abides forever."
Mutarrif reported from his father: I came to The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” as he was reciting:" Abundance diverts you."
He said: "The son of Adam claims: 'My wealth, my wealth.' O son of Adam, is
there anything as your belonging except that which you consumed, which you

The quarter of the destructives
340
utilized, or which you wore and then it was worn out or you gave as charity and
sent it forward?" (This narration is reported by Muslim). The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "This world is the home
of him who has no home, and the property of him whom has no property, for
which only one who has no mind gathers (wealth), over which only he who has
no knowledge disputes with others, for which only he who has no religious
understanding envies others, and after which only he who has no certainty of
faith seeks." (This narration is reported by Ahmad, Al-Baihaqi and Ibn Abu AdDunya on the authority of A'ishah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "He, upon whom morning comes while the world constitutes his main
concern, Allah Almighty is careless about him, and He further causes his heart to
be engaged in four things which he never leaves: an anxiety which never ceases to
relieve him; occupation from which he never is disengaged; a destitution from
which he never becomes rich; and a hope which he never realizes." (This
narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu Dharr; Ibn Abu AdDunya on the authority of Anas; and Al-Hakim on the authority of Hudhaifah).
Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him" said: the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to me: "Should I not show you the
entire world with what it contains?" I said: "Yes O Messenger of Allah." He took
hold of my hand and went with me to one of the valleys of Medina and behold! It
had a trash containing skulls, pieces of dung, bones, and pieces of shabby torn
cloth. Then he said: "O Abu Hurairah! Those heads were of a people who had
the same miserliness and hopes as you have now, and they turned to be bones
without skin, which are going to become no more than ashes. Those pieces of
dung were the different kinds of food which they earned from wherever they had
earned, and then threw them into their bellies, and now they turned into dirty
things from which people safeguard themselves. Those shabby torn pieces of
cloth were their garments and clothes, and now they turned to be as you see in
the face of wind. Those bones were the bones of their riding mounts on which
they used to travel from one place to another. So, let him weep, who is to weep
in sigh for this world." He (Abu Hurairah) said: We did not leave before we went
on weeping so much."
It is reported that when Allah Almighty caused Adam "Peace be upon him"
to descend to the earth, he said to him: "Build, but what you build will be
destruction; and proliferate in offspring, but the end will be annihilation."
According to Dawud Ibn Hilal, the following is written in the documents of
Abraham "Peace be upon him": "O world! How easy is you upon the pious
dutiful, to whom you gets adorned. I cast into their hearts aversion for, and
keeping off you; and I have never created a thing slighter in My Sight than you.
Your affair is trivial and its end will be annihilation. On the very day I created
you, I decreed that you would never abide to anyone, nor would anyone abide to
you even though he is niggard and too stingy to give out of your things. Blessed
be the pious dutiful who let me know the satisfaction and pleasure of their hearts,

Book six: Condemnation of world

341

and truthfulness and uprightness of their conscience: blessed be them. Their
reward when they come to me from their graves will be the light running forward
before them, and the angels surrounding them, until I give them My mercy that
they expect."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The
world is pending between the heaven and the earth, and since Allah Almighty
created it, He has never looked at it. On the Day of Judgement, it will say: "O
Lord! Make me the portion of he least of Your devotees." Allah Almighty will
say: "Keep silent O nothing! I did not accept you for them earlier, how should I
accept for them now?" it is further narrated that when Adam “peace be upon
him” ate from the tree he was forbidden to eat therefrom, he was moved to
excrete, a thing he had not whenever he ate from any food else in the Garden;
and this is why he and Eve were forbidden to eat therefrom. Thus, he started to
revolve in the Garden, Allah Almighty told an angel to ask him: "What do you
like?" he said: "I like to excrete." The angel was required to ask him: "Where do
you like to excrete? Do you like to excrete on the thrones, on the beds, on the
rivers or under the shadows of trees? Do you see here any place fitting for that?
Descent then to the earth."
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "A
people will come on the Day of Judgement, with deeds like mountains of
Tihamah, but they will be commanded to be taken to the fire (of Hell)." They
asked: "O Messenger of Allah! Do they pray?" He said: "Yes, they pray, fast, and
further stand for parts of the night (to offer supererogatory prayers); but
whenever anything of the vanities of this world seems to them, they would jump
towards it (and leave their worships)." (This narration is reported by Abu Nairn
on the authority of Salim, the freed slave of Abu Hudhaifah; and Abu Mansur
Ad-Dailami on the authority of Anas).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said in
one of his sermons: "The believer is between two fears: a term that has elapsed
and he does not know what Allah would do with it, and a term to come, and he
does not know also what Allah Almighty is going to decree regarding him. So,
let one take provisions from himself for himself, from his world to his
hereafter, from his life to his death, and from his youth to his decrepitude.
Although the world has been created for you, you have been created for the
hereafter. By Him in Whose Hand is my soul! There is no blame after death,
nor is there any abode after this world but the Garden of the fire (of Hell)."
(This narration is reported by Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Al-Hassan from
one of the companions of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him”).
According to Jesus “peace be upon him”: "In no way could the love for this
world and the love for the hereafter gather together within a believer, just as fire
and water could not gather together in the same utensil." It is reported that
Gabriel “peace be upon him” said to Noah “peace be upon him”: "O one who
has the longest life among the Prophets! How have you found the world?" he

The quarter of the destructives
342
said: "Like a house having two doors: I entered from one and came out from the
other." Our Prophet “peace be upon him” said: "Beware of this world, for its
charm is the result of the magic of both Harut and Marut." (This is reported by
Al-Baihaqi and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Abu Ad-Darda' ArRahawi, and not Abu Ad-Darda', the companion often Prophet).
It is reported on the authority of Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon
him" that he said: "One day, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” came out to his companions and said: "Is there anyone of you
who likes that Allah Almighty should remove blindness from him and make
him sighted? Behold! he, who desires for the vanities of this world, and has his
hope long in it, Allah makes blind his heart in proportion to that; and whoever
abstains in this world and shortens his hope in it, Allah AJmighty gives him
knowledge without learning, and guidance without seeking guidance. Behold!
after you, there will be a people whose dominion will not be established without
killing and tyranny, nor will their wealth will be without pride and niggardliness,
nor love will be without following their own desires and whims. Behold! he
among you who joins that time and he keeps padent on poverty although he
has the power to become rich, keeps padent on hatred and he has the power to
be involved in love, and keeps padent on humiliation and he is able to attain
honour and power, seeking thereby nothing but the Countenance of Allah
Almighty, Allah Almighty gives him the reward of fifty sincere lovers of truth."
(This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and Al-Baihaqi).
It is reported that one day Jesus “peace be upon him" came under heavy rains
and strong thunder and lightning, and he sought a shelter and his eyes fell on a
far tent and when he came to it, behold! there was a woman, thereupon he turned
aside from it. Then, he came to a cave in a mountain, and behold! there was a lion
therein. He placed his hand over it and said: "My God! You have given shelter to
everything barring me." Allah Almighty revealed to him the following: "Your
shelter is in the residence of My mercy. On the Day of Judgement, I shall marry
you from one hundred beautiful women with big lustrious eyes of My Own
Handiwork, and on the occasion of your bridal celebration, I shall make a
banquet to last for four thousand years, each day of which will be as long as the
whole lifetime of your world, and I shall command a caller to make the public
. announcement: 'Where are the ascetics? Come to attend the bridal celebration of
Jesus son of Mary, the ascetic of this world."'
Jesus, son of Mary “peace be upon him” said: "Woe to him who desires for
this world! How should he die and leave it with what it contains? How should it
deceive him and he has trust in it and it disappoints him and he has confidence of
it? Woe to those who are deceived! How it shows them what they dislike and they
leave what they like, and receive what they feel enmity for? Woe to him for
whom the world is the main concern, the mistakes his deeds! How should he be
put to shame tomorrow because of his sin?"
It is reported that it was revealed to Moses “peace be upon him”: "O
Moses! What do you have to do with the home of the wrongdoers? It is not

Book six: Condemnation of world

343

your home. Make it not your main concern, and leave it with your mind, for
how evil it is for home except for him who works good in it. I watch over the
wrongdoer therein until I take back from him the right of the wronged." It is
narrated on the authority of Amr Ibn Awf Al-Badri that he said: “The
Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” sent Abu
Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarrah to Bahrain to bring the Jizyah taxation from its people,
for The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” had
made a peace treaty with the people of Bahrain and appointed Al-Ala' Ibn AlHadrami as their ruler. So, Abu Ubaidah arrived with the money from Bahrain.
When the Ansar heard of the arrival of Abu Ubaidah (on the next day) they
offered the morning prayer with The Prophet “Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him” and when the morning prayer had finished, they presented
themselves before him. On seeing the Ansar, The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” smiled and said: “I think you have heard that
Abu Ubaidah has brought something?" They replied: “Indeed, it is so, O Allah's
Aposde!" He said: “Be happy, and hope for what will please you. By Allah, I am
not afraid that you will be poor, but I fear that worldly wealth will be bestowed
upon you as it was bestowed upon those who lived before you. So you will
compete amongst yourselves for it, as they competed for it and it will destroy
you as it destroyed them." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs).
Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri “Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "What I fear for you most is
the blessings of the land that will be brought out to you by Allah Almighty." They
asked: "What are the blessings of the land?" he said: "The splendor of this
world." fThis narration is reported by both sheikhs). The Messenger of Allah
“Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "Engage not your hearts
in the remembrance of the world." (This narration is reported by Al-Baihaqi on
the authority of Muhammad Ibn An-Nadr Al-Harithi). Here, he forbade people
to remember it.
Ammar Ibn Sa'id said: Once, Jesus “peace be upon him” came upon a
village whose dwellers were dead across courtyards and streets, thereupon he
said to the disciples: "O assembly of disciples! Those died out of displeasure (of
Allah with them), and had they died for any reason other than that, they would
have buried each other." They said: "O Spirit of Allah! Would that we know
their story!" he asked Allah Almighty and He revealed to him that when it is
night, call them, and they would respond to you. When it was night, he
ascended a high land and said: "O dwellers of the village!" one of them
responded: "Here we are, responding to your call O Spirit of Allah!" he asked:
"What is your story?" he said: "We spent the night in wellbeing and when
morning came upon us, we became in a pitfall." He asked him: "How was
that?" he said: "Because of our love for the world and obedience of the
sinners." He said: "How was your love for this world?" he said: "Like the love
of the child for his mother: whenever it turned towards us, we rejoiced at it, and
whenever it turned back, we grieved and wept for it." He asked: "But why have

The quarter of the destructives
344
your companions not responded to me (like you)?" he said: "Because they are
reined by reins of fire in the hands of strong harsh angels." He asked: "Then,
why have you responded to me from among them?" he said: "Because I lived
among them although did not belong to them. When punishment struck them,
I was included in them and now I am hanging on the verge of Hell, without
knowing whether I would be saved from it or be thrown prone on my face in
it." On that the Messiah “peace be upon him” said to the disciples: "It is better
then to be satisfied with eating the parley bread with crushed salt, put on coarse
wool, lie on trashes and keep the wellbeing of the world and the hereafter."
Anas “Allah be pleased with him” said: The she-camel of the Messenger of
Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” Al-Adba' was hardly excelled (in
a race). Once, a Bedouin came with a camel which preceded it. When that was
difficult upon the Muslims, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said: "It is the law of Allah to lower such of things as rises up in this
world." fThis narration is reported by Al-Bukhari). Jesus “peace be upon him”
said: "Who is that who could build a house on the waves of the sea? This is the
example of this world. So, take it not as residence." It was said to Jesus “peace be
upon him”: "Teach us something thereby Allah loves us." He said: "Dislike this
world, perchance Allah Almighty would love you."
Abu Ad-Darda' “Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Were you to know what I know,
surely, you would laugh little and weep much, and the world would become much
easy in your sight, and you would give preference to the hereafter over the
world." (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani; At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah
on the authority of Abu Dharr, with a slight change of wording). Then, Abu AdDarda' “Allah be pleased with him” said in comment on that: "(Were you to
know that) you would further come out to the mountains invoking and weeping
for yourselves, leaving your property with no guard, save what you necessarily
need of them. But unfortunately, the remembrance of the hereafter is absent
from your hearts, which are engaged in the long hope (in this world). Thus, the
world has become your main concern, and you have turned to be like those who
know nothing. Some of them are worse than the beasts which never leave their
desires for fear of the consequences. Why do you not love and advise each other
with sincerity, given that you are brothers in the religion of Allah Almighty?
Nothing divided your desires but your malicious intentions, and were you to
gather on the land, you would not love each other. Why do you advise each other
about the worldly matters and not do the same regarding the matters of the
hereafter? Does anyone of you fail to advise whomever he loves to help him
attain the good of his hereafter? This is due to the lack of faith in your hearts. If
you are certain that the good and evil will be effective in the hereafter just as you
are certain of this world, of a surety, you would seek after it more than you seek
after this world for it is more beneficial to you.
If you claim that the love for the transitory things is prevalent, let's say that
we see that you leave the transitory things for the deferred things of this world.

345
Book six: Condemnation of world
You trouble yourselves with difficulty in pursue of a pardcular thing you may not
attain: how evil people you are! You have never achieved your faith as it should
be. If you are in doubt about what was brought by Muhammad “peace be upon
him” then, come to us, so that we would show you of the light what illuminates
your hearts. By Allah, you are not of weak minds so that we would excuse you:
on the contrary, you are able to distinguish the right from falsehood. Why do you
rejoice at the little you get from this world and at the same time grieve for the
little that escapes you in it, until the traces of that become visible on your faces
and tongues, calling it calamities? Although the majority of you have left much of
their religion, the traces of that are not visible on your faces, nor do you change
for it. I think but that Allah Almighty has dissociated from you. You meet each
other with joy and everyone of you rejects to receive his companion with what he
dislikes, for fear that his companion might receive him with the same. In this
way, your company has been based on spite, and grazed on dunghill, and agreed
on rejecting death, and I wish that Allah Almighty would relieve me of you, and
join me with those whom I like to see, and were he to be still alive, he would not
have persevered you more. If there is good in you, then, I have caused you to
hear (good), and if you seek after what is with Allah AJmighty, surely, you would
find it too easy to obtain; and I seek the aid of Allah against myself and you.”
Jesus “peace be upon him” said: “O assembly of disciples! Satisfy yourselves
with the little in this world along with the perfection of their religion, and do not
be like the lovers of this world who satisfy themselves with the little in their
religion along with the perfection of their world.” Jesus “peace be upon him” said
once again: “O seeker after this world to be dutiful! To leave the world is more
dutiful.” The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
“After my death, you will encounter a world which will eat up your faith in the
same way as fire consumes fire wood.”
Allah Almighty revealed to Moses “peace be upon him”: “O Moses! Do not
rely on the love for this world, for you will not come to Me with a major sin
more grievous than it.” Once, Moses “peace be upon him” came upon a man
who was weeping, and when he returned, he was still weeping, thereupon he said
to Allah: “O Lord! Your servant is weeping for fear of You.” On that Allah
Almighty said: “O son of Imran! Even if his brain becomes like a liquid to flow
with his eyes and if he raises his hands so much high until they fall down, I would
not forgive for him for his love for this world.”
From among the traditions and sayings, a mention may be made of the
following:
According to Ali “Allah be pleased with him”: “He, who has the following
six characteristics, he will spare no way to the Garden, nor a shelter to take
refuge to from the fire (of Hell): the first is to know Allah and obey Him, to
know Satan and disobey him, to know the truth and follow it, to know
falsehood and safeguard himself against it, to know the world and reject it,
and to know the hereafter and seek after it.” According to Al-Hassan: “Allah’s
mercy be upon a people with whom the world was no more than a deposit

The quarter of the destructives
346
which they gave back to Him ‘Who entrusted them with it and then went
away without burden.” He further said: “Whoever competes you over your
religion, then, compete him; and whoever competes you over your world,
then, throw it at his face.”
Luqman said to his son: “O my son! The world is like a deep ocean, and a lot
of people sank in it. So, let your ship in it your fear of Allah Almighty, its
contents the faith in Allah Almighty, and its mast the reliance on Allah Almighty,
perchance you would be saved, even though I think you would not be saved.” AlFudail said: I have deeply reflected on the following Holy Verse: “That which is
on earth We have made but as a glittering show for the earth, in order that We
may test them, as to which of them are best in conduct. Verily what is on earth
We shall make but as dust and dry soil (without growth or herbage).” (Al-Kahf 78)

<2fj>

bj
4 © C>>?-

£ ob]3

According to a sage: “There is nothing you possess in this world but that it
was in the possession of another one before you, and would be in the
possession of another one after you. However, from this world you really
have nothing more than the meals of your evening and morning. So, do not
ruin yourself in eating them. Make your fast from this world, and break your
fast on the hereafter, for indeed, the capital of this world is the desire, and its
profit is the fire (of Hell).”
One of the monks was asked about his opinion regarding the time, thereupon
he said: “It damages bodies, renews hopes, draws death closer, and brings far the
wish.” He was asked about the state of his people, and he said: “Whoever attains
it suffers, and whomever it escapes wearies.” According to a sage: “The world
was and I was not in it, and it would go, and I would not in it. I never reside in it
for its living is gloomy, its clearness is mixed with impurity, and its adherents are
fearful of it, either because of a perishing favor, coming affliction, or ruining
death.” According to another one: “Among the defects of this world is that it
never gives anyone what he really deserves: but it gives either more or less than
the due.”
According to Sufyan: “Do you not see how favors seem as if wrath falls on
it since they are given to their improper men?” according to Abu Sulaiman
Ad-Darani: “Whoever seeks after the world out of love for it, he is given
nothing from it but that he likes more; and whoever seeks after the hereafter
out of love for it, he is given nothing thereof but that he likes more; and there
is no ending limit for that.” A man said to Abu Hazim: “I complain to you my
love for this world, although it is not my abode.” On that he said to him:
“Regard what Allah Almighty has given you and take thereof only what is
lawful, and spend it only in what is right, and after that, no harm shall befall
you from the love for the world.” He gave him that advice because if he stuck

Book six: Condemnation of world

- 347

to it he would be troubled so much until he would get bored by the world
entirely and seek to come out of it.
According to Yahya Ibn Mu’adh: “The world is the store of Satan, so, do not
steal anything from the store of Satan, lest he would come to take it back and
take you with it.” According to Al-Fudail: “Were the world to be of perishable
gold, and the hereafter of abiding pottery, we have to give preference to the
abiding pottery over the perishable gold: how then should it be seeing that we
have given preference to perishable pottery (this world) over abiding gold (the
hereafter)?” according to Abu Hazim: “Beware of this world! Indeed, I have been
reported that on the Day of Judgement, the slave who exalted the world would
be made to stand referred to as The slave who exalted what Allah Almighty has
despised\”
According to Ibn Mas’ud “Allah be pleased with him”: “The morning has not
come upon anyone of the people without being a guest, and his property a loan:
the guest should inevitably leave, and the property be given back to its owner.” A
similar meaning is given by the following poetic verse: “Verily, the property and
families are but deposits, and one day, the deposits should be given back to their
owners.” Once, the companions of Rabi’ah Al-Adawiyyah paid visit to her and
they made a mention of this world and went on condemning it so much. On that
she said to them: “Keep silent from it, for had it not been for its position in your
hearts, you would not have remembered it more often. Behold! Whoever likes a
thing remembers it more often.”
When Ibrahim Ibn Adham was asked about his state he said: “We patch uj
our world by pieces we tear from our religion, and thus neither our religion not
what we patch up survive. Blessed be a servant who devotes himself
wholeheartedly to Allah Almighty, and dispenses with his world entirely in
expectation for death.” It was said in a similar context: “I see the world seeker,
no matter how long he lives, and how many favors and delights he attains from
this world, like a builder who has built his building and established it well, and
when it stood straight, it collapsed.” The same is given in the following two
poetic verses: “Suppose the world with its things has been driven to you freely:
is it not doomed to move from you (sooner or later)? That is because your
world is but like a shade that has shaded you and then it is time for it to decline
from you.”
Luqman said to his son: “O my son! Sell your world for your hereafter
perchance you would gain both of them, and do not sell your hereafter for your
world lest you would loose both of them.” According to Mutarrif Ibn AshShakhir: “Do not be concerned about the luxurious living of kings, but rather
about their swift departure and evil return.” According to Ibn Abbas “Allah be
pleased with them”: “Allah Almighty has made the world three parts: a part for
the believer, another for the disbeliever, and a third for the hypocrite. The
believer takes therefrom provisions, the hypocrite gets adorned, and the
disbeliever enjoys.” One of the wise men said: “The world is like a carcass: so,
whoever likes anything from it, let him keep patient on co-living with dogs.”

The quarter of the destructives
Abu Ad-Darda’ “Allah be pleased with him” said: “One of the signs that
shows how despicable this world is in the Sight of Allah Almighty is that He is
not disobeyed but in it, and what he has is not attained but by leaving it.” It is
said: “If a man of sound mind tests the world, its real nature will be uncovered to
him as an enemy putting on the garment of a friend.” According to Abu
Umamah Al-Bahili “Allah be pleased with him”: “When Muhammad “peace be
upon him” was sent as a Messenger, Iblis was visited by his assisting soldiers and
said to him: “A Prophet has been sent and a nation has been produced.” He
asked: “Do they love the world?” they answered in the affirmative, thereupon he
said: “If they really love the world then, I do not mind whether or not they
worship idols. But visit them every morning and evening with three things: to
take money with no just cause, to spend it improperly, and withhold it from being
spend rightfully.” However, it is from those that evil stemmed.
A man said to Ali “Allah be pleased with him”: “O Commander of Believers!
Describe the world to us.” He said: “Which should I describe to you in it: it is a
home in which the sound gets ill, the secure regrets, the destitute grieves,
whoever dispenses with it is tempted, its lawful leads to reckoning, and its
unlawful brings about punishment, and its suspicious things incur reproach.” The
same request was given to him once again and he said: “Should I be long or short
in describing it?” he was asked to be short thereupon he said: “Its lawful leads to
reckoning, and its unlawful brings about punishment.” Malik Ibn Dinar said:
“Safeguard yourselves against the sorcerer for it bewitches the hearts of the
learned.” Of course, he means the world.
Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani said: “If the hereafter lies in the heart, the world
comes to compete it; and if the world lies in the heart, the hereafter never
comes to compete it. That is because the hereafter is honourable, whereas the
world is malicious.” But even, this is a severe aggravation. What is said by
Sayyar Ibn Al-Hakam is expected to be more right: “Both world and hereafter
gather together in the heart, and whoever of them prevails over the other, it
becomes subservient to it.” According to Malik Ibn Dinar: “As much as you
grieve for the sake of this world, the interest in the hereafter vanishes from
your heart; and as much as you grieve fro the sake of the hereafter, the interest
in the world vanishes from your heart.” He seemed to have adapted the
statement of Ali “Allah be pleased with him”: “Both this world and the
hereafter are like two fellow-wives: as much as one of them is pleased, the other
is displeased.”
Al-Hassan said: “By Allah, I have joined a people in whose sight the world
was slighter than the earth on which you walk, and they had no care whether it
rose upon or set from them, whether it was possessed by them or by anyone
else.” It was said to Al-Hassan: “What do you say about a man whom Allah
Almighty has given property from which he gives in charity and strengthens good
relation with his kith and kin: is it better for him to enjoy luxurious living by it?”
he said: “No. if the entire world is in his possession, he should have therefrom no
more than the minimum requirements of his living, and save what is beyond that
348

9

349
Book six: Condemnation of world
(i.e. by spending it in charity) to benefit him on the day he will be needy (i.e. the
Day of judgement).”
According to Al-Fudail: “Were the world to be offered to me in entirety as
lawful, for which I would not be reckoned (in the hereafter), I would detest it in
the same way as anyone of you detests the dead body whenever he passes by it
for fear it might affect his garment.” It is reported that when Umar “Allah be
pleased with him” came to Sham, Abu Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarrah “Allah be pleased
with him” received him on a she-camel reined with a nose-string. He greeted him
and asked him (about the affairs), and when he came to his house, he found in it
only his sword, shield and luggage. He asked him: “Would that be your
furniture!” on that he said: “O Commander of Believers! This also is enough to
reach one the place of his repose.”
Sufyan said: “Take from this world what nourishes your body, and from the
hereafter what nourishes your heart.” According to Al-Hassan: “The children of
Israel worshipped idols after they had worshipped Allah Most Gracious; and that
is because they were engaged in love for this world.” Wahb said: “I read in a
certain book: ‘The world is the game of the intelligent; and the heedless among
ignorant have made no sense to it until when they came out of it, they asked to
return once again, but they did not return.” Luqman said to his son: “O my son!
From the very day you were born, you have turned your back to the world, and
faced the hereafter; and verily, you should love the abode to which you are
coming closer than a home from which you are moving away.”
According to Sa’id Ibn Mas’ud: “If you see a man having his world
increasing and his hereafter decreasing, and he is well-pleased with that, then,
you should know that this is the absent-minded who plays with his
countenance unfeelingly.” Amr Ibn Al-As said while being on the pulpit: “By
Allah, I have never seen a people more desirous for the things from which the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” abstained than
you. By Allah, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” never spent three days but that what is due to him is more than what is
due upon him.” (This narration is reported by Al-Hakim, Ibn Hibban and
Ahmad).
After he had recited the statement of Allah Almighty: “let not then this
present life deceive you, nor let the Chief Deceiver deceive you about Allah.”
(Luqman 33)

AI-Hassan said: “He, who said so is its Creator Who has better knowledge of
it. Beware of the concerns of this world, for its concerns are so much. None
opens to him a gate of concern in it but that it is about to open ten further gates
of concern to him.” He further said: “Poor is the son of Adam! He has been
satisfied with an abode whose lawful leads to reckoning, and its unlawful leads to

The quarter of the destructives
350
punishment. If he takes its lawful, he would be reckoned for it, and if he takes the
unlawful, he would be punished for it. The son of Adam regards as little his
property, and does not regard as little his deed. He rejoices at his affliction in his
religion, and is scared about his affliction regarding his world.”
Al-Hassan sent the following letter to Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz: “Peace be
upon you! You seem as if you are the last to be doomed to death, but even you
have died.” In reply to him, Umar sent to him the following: “Peace be upon you!
You seem as if you are in the world, although you have not been engaged in it,
and rather you are still engaged in the hereafter.” According to Al-Fudail Ibn
Iyad: “It is easy to enter the world, but it is very difficult to come out of it.”
Another one said: “I wonder at him who knows that death is a fact, how he
rejoices; and I further wonder at him who knows that the fire is a fact, how he
laughs; and I wonder at him who sees the turning of the world with its adherents,
how he rests assured of it; and I wonder at him who is sure that the Divine
decree is a fact, how he grieves.”
Mu’awiyah received a man of two hundred years old and asked about his
opinion in this world, thereupon he said: “It consists of years of affliction and
years of luxury. Night after night, and day after day, it receives new births and
loses many deaths. Had it not been for the newborn, the creatures would have
perished; and had it not been for the death, the world would have become too
narrow to suffice all the inhabitants.” He said to him: “Then, ask for what you
like (you would be given it).” He replied: “Restore the lifetime that has passed, or
avert the death that is about to come.” He said: “I have no power to do so.” He
said: “Then, I have no need for you.”
Dawud At-Ta'i said: “O mankind! You rejoice at the fulfillment of your
hope, which you do not fulfill but with the termination of your life; and
procrastinate your deed whose benefit thus returns to others than you.”
According to Bishr: “Whoever asks Allah to give him of this world seems as
though he asks him to have a long standing in front of him (for reckoning in
the hereafter).” According to Abu Hazim: “There is in this world nothing to
please you but that Allah has joined with it a thing to aggrieve you. According
to Al-Hassan: “The soul of mankind does not come out from this world but
with three sighs: he has never been satisfied with what he gathered; he has not
attained what he hoped for; and he has not made good his provisions for his
journey (to the hereafter).”
It was said to a worshipper: “Verily, you have attained richness.” On that he
said: “It is he who is released from the chains of this world that attains
richness.” According to Abu Sulaiman: “None could keep patient on the desires
and lusts of this world but he, who has in his heart what engages him in the
hereafter.” According to Malik Ibn Dinar: “We have agreed on the love for this
world, thereby, we do not enjoin good upon each other, nor forbid each other
to do evil, nor will Allah Almighty leave us in that state: which of Allah’s
punishment would be sent upon us?” according to Abu Hazim: “The little of
this world occupies from the much of the hereafter.” According to Al-Hassan:

351
Book six: Condemnation of world
“Despise this world, for by Allah, it is not pleasant to anyone more than it is to
him who despises it.” According to him once again: “If Allah Almighty intends
good for anyone of His servants, He gives him something of this world, and
then withholds from him until when it is consumed, He gives him once again
(and so on); and on the contrary, if He Almighty regards with slightness anyone
of His servants, He extends the world to him so much (to take therefrom as he
likes).”
In confirmadon of that, one of the righteous used to say in his supplication:
“O (Allah) Who withholds the sky to fall down on the earth except by Your
permission: withhold the world from me.” Muhammad Ibn Al-Munkadir said:
“What do you think of a man who observes fasts perpetually, stands at night (for
supererogatory prayers) regularly without sleep, spends his entire property in
charity, strives in the Way of Allah, and avoids what is forbidden by Allah
Almighty, but on the Day of Judgement, he will be brought and it will be said:
‘This man has exalted what was despicable in the Sight of Allah Almighty, and
despised what Allah Almighty exalted? what do you think his state will be? Who
among us is not so like him? The world seems great in the eyes of us, let alone
what we commit of sins and mistakes.”
Abu Hazim said: “The supplies of the world and hereafter are more. But
there is a difference between them: you could find no helpers to help you on the
supplies of the hereafter, unlike those of the world which, once you stretch your
hand to any of them, you find that a wicked has preceded you to it.” Abu
Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” said: “The world remains bending between
the earth and the heaven, like a torn water-skin, calling its Lord from the very
day it was created to the day of annihilation: “O Lord! O Lord! Why do You
dislike me?” He says to it: “Keep silent O nothing!” according to Abdullah Ibn
Al-Mubarak: “The love for this world causes sins to inhabit the heart, then, when
should it receive good?” according to Wahb Ibn Munabbih: “Whoever rejoices at
anything of this world errs; and whoever makes his desires underneath his feet
causes Satan to fear even of his shade; and he, whose knowledge overpowers his
inclination is indeed the winner.”
It was said to Bishr: “So and so died.” He said: “He collected the things of
this world, and then went to the hereafter: of a surety, he has wasted himself.” It
was said to him: “But he used to do such and such good.” On that he said: “But,
what is the benefit of that given that he used to gather the things of this world?”
a wise man said: “Although the world makes itself hateful to us, we like it: then,
how it will be if it endears itself to us?” another sage was asked: “Whose is the
world?” he said: “He, who leaves it.” He was further asked: “Then, whose is the
hereafter?” he said: “He who pursues it.”
One of the wise men said: “The world is a home of devastation, and more
devastated is the heart of him who constructs it; whereas the Garden is an abode
of construction, and more constructive is the heart of him who seeks after it.” AlJunaid said: Ash-Shafi'i was a novice who used to speak the truth. Once, he
admonished one of his brothers in the religion of Allah, and frightened him with

The quarter of the destructives
352
Allah, saying: “O my brother! This world is a land of slippery and an abode of
humiliation: its construction will be destroyed, and its inhabitants will go to the
graves (by death). Its gathering will be divided, and the richness therein will turn
to destitution. The more you get much of it, the more you will become insolvent,
and the more you abstain from it, the more you will become solvent. So, turn to
Allah, and be satisfied with the sustenance of Allah. Do not take from the abode
of your eternity for the sake of the abode of your annihilation. Indeed, your living
is like a setting shade, and a bowed wall. Make much your deed, and shorten your
hope.”
Once, Ibrahim Ibn Adham asked a man: “Which is dearer to you: a Dirham
you see in a dream or a dinar you have in your wakefulness?” he said: “Of a
surety, a Dinar I have in my wakefulness.” On that he said to him: “You have
told a lie, for what you like in this world is the same which you like in your
dream, and what you do not like in the hereafter is the same as you do not like
in your wakefulness.” According to Isma’il Ibn Ayyash: “Our companions gave
this world the name of pig, and they used to address it saying: “Leave us O
pig!” had they found names more odious than that, surely, they would have
given it to this world.” According to Ka’b: “This world will be endeared to you
until you adore it and its adherents.” According to Yahya Ar-Razi: “These of
sound mind are three: whoever leaves this world before it leaves him; whoever
builds his grave by himself before he enters it; and pleased his Creator before
He meets Him.” He further said: “The world is so much evil that it hopes you
with what diverts you from the obedience to Allah Almighty: how then should
you fall in it?”
According to Bakr Ibn Abdullah: “He, who likes to dispense with this world
by the world is like him who likes to extinguish fire with straw.” According to
Bandar: “If you see the adherents to this world speak about abstinence, you
should know that they are under the subjugation of Satan.” He further said: “He,
who devotes himself to this world, its fire burns him (and of course, he refers
here to miserliness) until he turns into ashes; and he who devotes himself to the
hereafter, its fire purifies him until he turns into a golden bullion of use; and he,
who devotes himself to Allah Almighty, the fire of monotheism burns him until
he turns into a gem of limitless value.”
Ali “Allah be pleased with him” said: “The world is of six things: food, drink,
clothes, vehicle, marriage and smell. The noblest of food is honey, although it
attracts flies; and the noblest of drink is water, in which both the obedient and
disobedient are equal; and the noblest of clothes is silk though it is produced by a
worm; and the noblest of vehicles is the horse though on which men are killed
(during fighting); and the noblest of marriage is to marry a woman though what is
sought in her is the urethra, and although she adorns the best parts of her body,
what is wanted in her is the worst of it; and the noblest of smell is musk, though
it is the product of blood.”

Book six: Condemnation of world

353

Exposition Of Admonitions Pertaining To Condemnation Of World
A wise man said: “O people! Work at ease, and be fearful of Allah Almighty,
and do not be deceived by hopes and forget your death. Do not rely on this
world for it is treacherous and deceptive: it has got adorned for you with its
decepdon, tempted you with its wishes and desires, and adorned itself for its
suitors and has become like the clean bride: all eyes look forward to it, and all
hearts are attached to it, and all souls adore it. How many a lover it killed and
ruined! So, you should look at it with the eye of the fact. It is an abode of much
dirty remnants. Its Creator has condemned it. Its new things turn old and
shabby, and its dominion perishes. The honoured in it is given to humiliation,
and the much in it decreases. Its good is lost. So, wake up from your
heedlessness, and get up from your sleep, before you become fatally ill and your
cure is hopeless. Do that before you become at the threshold of death, and the
others weep for you, and it is said to you: “This is your son so and so, and this
is your brother so and so”, but you do not speak for you are hindered from
speech. Then, your soul is brought out of your body and raised up to the sky,
and your dead body is washed by your brothers, and shrouded in your shroud
and buried in your grave, with the result that your visitors cease to visit you,
your enviers are relieved of you, and your family leave you and rather go to take
possession of your property, and you remain alone in pledge of your deeds.”
One of the righteous said to a king: “The most entitled to condemn thi'
world are those to whom it is expanded and who are given their need from L
in full. That is because anyone of those always expects a blight to damage his
property, to divide his gathering, to undermine his dominion, to harm his
body with ailment, or to afflict him with any calamity. Thus, the world is more
entitled to be condemned, for it always takes what it gives, withdraws what it
grants; and while it causes anyone to laugh, it causes another to laugh at him,
and while it weeps for him, it causes another to weep from him, and while it
gives anyone with one hand, it takes back from him with the other hand: it
places a crown on the head of one today, and on the coming day, it covers it
with dust.”
Al-Hassan Al-Basri wrote the following admonition to Umar Ibn Abd-AlAziz: “Coming to the point: Verily, the world is an abode or travel and not an
abode of residence. Adam “peace be upon him” was sent down from the Garden
to the earth in fulfillment of a punishment which you should beware O
Commander of Believers. The provisions thereof is to leave it, and the richness
thereof is to remain in destitution. Those who are killed by it are numerous. It
always humiliates him who honours it, and impoverishes him who gathers things
in it. It is like poison which is eaten by him who recognizes it not, and it results in
his death. So, you should be in it like him who treats his injuries, who has only
little thereof for fear of the much he dislikes, and keeps patient over the severity
and bitterness of medicine for fear of the disease to last long. Beware this
treacherous, deceptive and cunning abode, which has got adorned with its

The quarter of the destructives
354
deception, and tempted the people with its vanity, and become like the clean
bride: all eyes look forward to it, and all hearts are attached to it, and all souls
adore it. How many lover for it whom it killed and ruined! The present does not
learn from the past, nor does the last get benefit from the foremost, nor does the
Gnostic of Allah Almighty remember how Allah has told him about it. How
many a lover of it who has got from it his need in full, thereupon he has been
deceived and has transgressed the due limits and forgotten the place of return! He
has engaged his mind in it until his foot slipped. The result is much regrets, sighs,
and grief, and severe pain of death agonies. On the other hand, how many lover
for it who has not got his need as he liked from it, thereupon he came out of it
with no provisions! So, you should beware it O Commander of Believers, and the
more you beware it, the more you grow pleased with it. That is because the more
one rests assured of pleasure in this world which he likes, the more it leads him to
disaster which he dislikes. Its wishes are false, its hopes are invalid, its cleanness is
impure, and its living is depressing. The son of Adam therein is in danger: if he
has mind therewith he reflects things and signs, he will become at the risk of
luxury, and be cautious of disaster. If the Creator has not told about this world,
or even warned the people of it, it would have awakened the sleeping and
stimulated the heedless. Then, what do you think given that Allah Almighty has
warned people of it, and deterred them of its evil? It is insignificant in the Sight
of Allah Almighty and He has never looked at it since He created it. It was
offered to your Prophet “peace be upon him” with its treasures, depositories and
keys in entirety, but he rejected it (according to the narration of Ibn Abu AdDunya, Ahmad and At-Tabarani), for he was afraid he might disagree with the
command of Allah, or like what the Creator dislikes, or raise high what He
Almighty has lowered. Allah Almighty has kept it away from the righteous in
order to put them to trial, and expanded to His enemies in order to be deceived
by it. The one who is deceived by it, and seems to put it under his disposal thinks
he is honoured by it, forgetting what Allah Almighty made with Muhammad
“peace be upon him” when he caused him to straighten the stone on his belly
(out of severe hunger) (according to the narration so Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya; and AlBukhari on the authority of Anas). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” related from his Lord Almighty that He said to Moses
“peace be upon him”: “If you see richness coming, say about it: This is a sin
whose punishment has been hastened on for me’, and if you see poverty coming
say about it: 'Welcome to the slogan of the righteous’.” If you so like, follow the
guidance of the Holy Spirit, Jesus, son of Mary “peace be upon him”, who used
to say: “Hunger is my condiment and fear is my slogan, and wool is my clothes,
the rising of the sun is my warmth, my lamp is the moonlight, my feet is my
riding mount, what the earth produces is my food and fruits. The night comes
upon me while having nothing, and morning comes upon me while having
nothing, but even none on the surface of the earth is richer and wealthier than
me.
It is reported on the authority of Wahb Ibn Munabbih that he said: When

355
Book six: Condemnation of world
Allah Almighty sent Moses and Aaron “peace be upon them” to Pharaoh, He
said to them: “Do not be deceived by his clothes 1 have given from this world,
for indeed, his forelock is in My Hand, and he neither speaks, nor winks nor
breathes but by My Permission. You also should not be deceived by what he
enjoyed of it, for it is only the splendor of the life of world, and the adornment of
these made wealthy among its inhabitants. If you so like, I could adorn you from
this world with adornment which shows his inability. But I like to turn you from
that, and keep such things away from you; and so do I with My devotees. I avert
them from its luxuries in the same way as a kind shepherd averts his sheep from
the destructive pastures; and I drive them away from its pleasures and delights in
the same way as a merciful shepherd drives his camels from the deceptive
kneeling places. However, this is not because of their insignificance in My Sight,
but rather in order to complete their portion of My Honour upon them in full
perfection. My devotees get adorned for me with their humiliation, fear,
submissiveness; and thus piety grows in their hearts and seems visible upon their
bodies. It is their dress which they put on, their outer garment which they adorn
themselves with, their conscience which they feel with, their salvation which they
attain, their expectation which they hope for, their glory which they are proud of,
and their sign which they are recognized by. If you meet them, then, lower your
wing to them, and make submissive your heart and tongue to them. You should
know that whoever frightens anyone of My devotees has indeed waged war
against Me, and it is I Who will take retaliation on behalf of him on the Day of
Judgement.”
One day, Ali “Allah be pleased with him” delivered an impressive speech in
which he said: “Coming to the point: it should be known to you that you are to
die and then be resurrected after death and suspended on your deeds, therewith
you will be rewarded. So, let not the life of this world deceive you, for it is
surrounded with afflictions and recognized for annihilation, and described by
treachery; and everything in it should inevitably perish. It is given to its men in
turns, and it never survives with anyone on the exclusion of others, and its
adherents are not safe from its evil. By the time its inhabitants are pleased and
luxurious, they are given to trials and deception. Its states are vulnerable to
variation and vicissitude. Living in it is blameworthy, and luxury in it never
abides. Its inhabitants are like targets which it throws with its arrows, and hardens
with its disasters and calamities, and everyone in it is doomed to death in the end,
and receives his fortune in it according to what is due to him. It should be known
to you, O servants of Allah, that you, in relation to the states in which you are in
this world, but follow the ways of those who were before you, who had been
given longer lives, stronger power, more numerous homes and monuments than
yours. But in the end, their voices became still and silent, their bodies were
decomposed, their homes hollow tumbled down on their roofs, and their
monuments obliterated. Their well-built castles, and smooth beds, thrones and
cushions were replaced with rocks and stones probed in graves. The destination
to which they are to go is very near, and they live in this world but as aliens. They
are to travel from it, and there is no way for them to return once again: how far!

The quarter of the destructives
356
How far! “(In Falsehood will they be) until, when death comes to one of them,
he says: "O my Lord! send me back (to life), in order that I may work
righteousness in the things I neglected" - "By no means! It is but a word he says."
- Before them is a Partition till the Day they are raised up.” (Al-Mu’minun 99100)
Ldif L^jJ *95"

LLs

l -J*j

'“-o

'

4 Cf!)

'

ojjD I ^ ji-1 f L- I5J

^

A*

sy. J! tyy.

In this way, you will have the same destiny. How would you do when you
see the matters, the graves are scattered, what is in the breasts is taken out,
and you are made to stand for reckoning in front of Allah the Glorious King?
At that time, the hearts will fly for fear of the previous sins, and the curtains
and veils will be removed form you in order for what is concealed to be
disclosed: at that time, every soul will be rewarded with what it has earned.
Allah Almighty says in this issue: “so that He rewards those who do evil,
according to their deeds, and He rewards those who do good, with what is
best.” (An-Najm 31)
_

V

.

, f^

,

•»-

.

f '

,

I ,

,

He further says: “And the Book (of Deeds) will be placed (before you); and
you will see the sinful in great terror because of what is (recorded) therein; they
will say, "Ah! woe to us! what a Book is this! it leaves out nothing small or great,
but takes account thereof!" they will find all that they did, placed before them:
and not one will your Lord treat with injustice.” (Al-Kahf 49)
^ iw...1:,1 IjLiA JL

iT.; I

1 wlLj JLUaj

(JjJjJLjj

UL*

1yv^> \o- IL»

I A-ypjj

I Sfj ©

May Allah Almighty help us and you act upon the Book of Allah, follow His
devotees until He brings us to the abode of eternal residence, out of His bounty:
He is All-Praiseworthy, All-Glorious.”
According to a sage: “Days are like arrows, and people are targets, and time
throws you everyday with its arrows and affects you with its nights and days until
it consumes all parts of your body. Then, how should you ensure safety and
peace in it given that its days and nights might inflict harm upon you soon? If the
defect inflicted upon you by days are uncovered to you, you will dislike everyday
to come upon you, and have aversion for those which elapsed on you. But the
ordinance of Allah is above the ordinance of consideration, and the taste of its
pleasures and delights is detected by consoling you from its evils, although it is, in
reality, more bitter than colocynth. However, in view of its apparent defects and
acts, it is beyond description; and any preacher could not encompass all of its
wonders: O Allah, guide us to the right.”
When one of the wise men was asked to describe the world and estimate it,
he said: “The world is only the time during which your twinkle returns to you, for
you have lost what elapsed on you, and you have no knowledge of what has not
come yet. The time is but what is to come, with its nights, days, events, incidents

357
Book six: Condemnation of world
which occur upon man with change and reduction. Time also is entrusted to
divide gatherings and turn the states; and the hope is long but the lifetime is
short; and to Allah the end of all matters returns.”
Once, Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz “may Allah have mercy upon him” delivered a
sermon in which he said: “O people! You have been created for a thing which, if
you have trust in it, you then are foolish, and if you give lie to it, you then are to
be ruined. You have been created for eternity, but in reality, you are, O servants
of Allah, moved from one abode to another. You are in an abode in which your
food might be bitter for you, your drink might choke you, and there is no bliss
with which you are pleased but that you are displeased with leaving another. So,
work for that to which you are going to abide forever.” Then, he could not help
weeping and dismounted from the pulpit.
Ali “Allah be pleased with him” said in one of his sermons: “1 advise you to
fear Allah Almighty and leave the world which is to leave you inevitably, even
though you dislike to leave it, and consume your bodies which you endeavor to
refresh and renew. The example of you and it is like a people who followed a way
and thought they have come to its end, or got knowledge and thought they have
attained it endrely; and how long should one spend in this world until he reaches
the final end, and how many days should remain for one in this world while death
awaits him until he leaves it! So, do not be scared by its adversity and distress, for
they should inevitably cease, and do not be pleased with its delight and enjoyment
for they should inevitably vanish. I wonder at the pen doner of this world
although death awaits him, and at the heedless, although (his Creator) is not
heedless of him.”
Muhammad Ibn Al-Hussain said: “When the people of bounty, knowledge
and literature know that Allah Almighty has regarded slighdy this world, and not
accepted it for His devotees, and that it is insignificant and trivial in His Sight,
and that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
abstained in it and warned his companions of its temptadon, they ate from it
moderately, and gave what is beyond their needs, and took from it only what
sufficed them, and left what diverted them, . they wore of clothes only what
screened the privates, and ate of food only what sadsfied hunger. They regarded
the world to be perishing and the hereafter to be abiding forever, thereupon they
took from the world the provisions of the rider. In this way, they were careless
about inhabiting the world for the sake of inhabiting the hereafter. Furthermore,
they looked at the hereafter with their hearts, and learnt that they would see it
with their eyes, thereupon they travelled to it with their hearts when they learnt
that they would inevitably travel to it with their bodies. They troubled themselves
for a short time in order to enjoy for a long time. All of that is by virtue of the
help of their Bountiful Lord: they liked what He liked for them, and disliked what
He disliked for them.”

CHAPTER TWO: EXPOSITION OF ATTRIBUTES OF WORLD THROUGH
MANY OF ITS EXAMPLES
It should be known that the world is to swiftly perish and shortly terminate,.
it gives false hopes of survival,and even though it breaks its promise. If you look

I

The quarter of the destructives
358
at it you will see it still and stable, even though it is moving and turning from one
state to another. But since the beholder of it might not sense its movement, he
feels rest at it. But he only senses when it terminates. Its example is like the shade
which seems still although it is in reality moving. But its modon is not visible by
the apparent sight in so much as it is by the internal insight. When a mendon of
this world is made to Al-Hassan Al-Basri “may Allah have mercy upon him”, he
said: “It is like dreams of sleep and perishable shade, and it is not fitting for the
smart to be deceived by the like of it.”
More often, Al-Hassan Ibn Ali “Allah be pleased with him” quoted the
following poetic verse as example for this world: “O adherents to the pleasures of
a world which is perishable, it is out of foolishness to be deceived by a vanishing
shade.” It is reported that a desert dweller came as a guest upon a people who
served him with food and after he had eaten he stood and slept in the shade of
their tent. Later on, they tore down the tent and sun affected him severely. He
woke up while saying: “Behold! This world is like a temporary shade, and one
day, your shade should inevitably perish.” It is said: “Behold! The one whose
main concern is the world sticks in reality to a deceptive rope.”
Another example for this world is like the dream fancies in terms of giving
false impressions , which vanish at the time it terminates. The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “This world is like a dream for
which its adherents are either rewarded or punished.” According to Yunus Ibn
Ubaid: “The example of myself in this world is but like one who sleeps and sees
in his dream what he likes and what he dislikes. Such being the case, he wakes up.
So are the people sleeping, and they wake up only when they die, for they find in
their possession nothing of what they rely on or rejoice at.” One of the wise men
was asked about the thing that resembles this world most, thereupon he said:
“The dreams of the sleeping person.”
A further example for this world in terms of its enmity to its adherents and
causing destruction to its dwellers: it should be known to you that the real nature
of world is to gradually draw with gentility at first, and lead to destruction in the
end. It is like a woman who gets adorned for suitors until when it marries them, it
soon slays them. It is reported that the reel image of this world was disclosed to
Jesus “peace be upon him” and he saw it in the form of a toothless old lady,
having various colours of adornment and ornament, and he asked her: “How
many have you married?” she said: “I could not count them.” He further asked:
“Have all of them died because of you or has anyone of them divorced you?” she
said: “No, I have slain all of them.” On that Jesus “peace be upon him” said:
“How evil your living husbands are! How do they not take from your perishing
husbands lessons to learn? How do you ruin them one after another without
being careful of you?”
A further example for this world pertaining to the fact that its outward
contradicts its inward: It should be known that this world is outwardly adorned,
and inwardly ugly. It is like an old woman who deceives beholders with its
appearance. But once they uncover its inward, and the veil is removed from its
face, its ugliness is revealed to them, thereupon they regret for following it, and

359
Book six: Condemnation of world
feel shy of their weak minds, which are deceived by its appearance. Al-Ala’ Ibn
Ziyad said: “I saw in a dream an old lady dressed in skin, and having from all
colours of adornment, and the people were attached to her in awe, and looking at
her. I came close to her and looked and wondered at their looking at her and
devotion to it in such admiration. I then asked her: “Woe to you! Who are you?”
she said: “Do you not know me?” I answered in the negative, thereupon she said:
“I’m the world.” I said: ‘Then, I seek refuge with Allah from your evil!” she said:
“If you like to be given refuge from my evil, then, you should have aversion for
the Dirham.”
According to Abu Bakr Ibn Ayyash: “I saw the world in a dream like an old
ugly defaced woman clapping with her hands, and behind her there were a lot of
people following her with clapping and dancing. When she came alongside me,
she turned to me and said to me: “Should I get you, I would do with you the like
of what I have done with those people.” Then, Abu Bakr went on weeping and
said: “I saw it before I arrived in Baghdad.” According to Al-Fudail Ibn Iyad, Ibn
Abbas “Allah be pleased with him” said: “On the Day of Judgement, the world
will be brought in the form of an old ugly defaced woman of blue canine teeth
and when it will look at the people they will asked: “Do you know this?” they will
say: “We seek refuge with Allah from her!” it will be said: “This is the world over
which you competed, and by which you severed relation with kith and kin, you
envied each other, and had hatred towards each other and be deceived.” Then, it
will be thrown in Hell. It will call: “O Lord! Where are my followers and
adherents?” Allah Almighty will say: “Join to it its followers and adherents.”
Al-Fudail further said: I was reported that the soul of a man was made to
ascent (to the sky), and behold! On the main road there was a woman having
from all colours of adornment, clothes and ornaments, and she injured all who
passed by her. When she turned away, she seemed the most beautiful and the
prettiest thing to be seen by the people, and when she turned her face towards
them, it seemed the ugliest thing to be seen by the people, an old toothless
blind blue-complexioned woman. I said: “I seek refuge with Allah from you!”
she said: “No, by Allah, Allah never gives you refuge from me until you have
aversion for the Dirham.” I asked her: “Who are you?” she said: “I’m the
world.”
A further example for this world and how man crosses it (to the hereafter): it
should be known to you that you have three states: the first state in which you
were nothing, i.e. before your existence; and the second state is that in which you
will not see the world, i.e. the period after your death up to the Day of
Judgement; and the third state lies in the middle between both extremes, i.e. the
duration of the world in proportion to your lifetime in it. If you compare that
state with both extremes, you learn that it is no more than a short station in a
long journey. For this reason, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” said: “What should I have to do with this world? My example and
the example of this world are like a rider who proceeded on during a summery
day and when he found a tree, he took a nap under its shade for a short while
after which he got up, went away and left it.” (This narration is reported by At-

The quarter of the destructives
360
Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah and Al-Hakim on the authority of Ibn Mas’ud; and Ahmad
on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
Whoever sees the world with that eye never relies on it, nor care about
whether he spends his days in it in adversity or in ease, in affliction or in pleasure,
nor place a brick over another. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” died and did not place a brick over another nor a pipe over
another. (This narration is reported by Ibn Hibban and At-Tabarani on the
authority of A’ishah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” further saw one of his companions building a house of gypsum,
thereupon he said: “I see that the matter (of death which leads to hereafter) will
come sooner than that.” (This narration is reported by Abu Dawud on the
authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr).
To that meaning, Jesus “peace be upon him” referred in his statement: “The
world is but a bridge which you cross and not inhabit.” This is a clear example,
for the life of this world is a crossing point to the hereafter. The cradle is the first
slope of the bridge, whereas the grave is the other slope, and between both there
is a limited distance. Some of people cover half the bridge, others one-third,
others two-thirds, and others have only a step to its end and they are still
heedless. Whatever it might be, one has to cross the bridge. But if he builds on it,
and adorns it with various colours of adornment, although he is only to cross it,
he will be disappointed and frustrated.
A further example for this world in terms of the easy coming to and difficult
departure from it. It should be known to you that this world seems easy and
lenient in its beginning to the extent that the one who plunges in it thinks it to be
entirely sweet and lenient. But how far! It is easy to plunge in this world, but it is
difficult to come out of it with safety and peace. Ali Ibn Abu Talib “Allah be
pleased with him” sent the following message to Salman Al-Farisi “Allah be
pleased with him”: “The example of this world is like a female-snake: its skin is
smooth but its poison is fatal. So, turn away from what pleases you in it, for what
will accompany you of it is very little, and leave your interest and concern with it
by your certainty of your departure form it, and the more you are cautious of it,
the more you become pleased in it, for the more its adherents rely on any source
of pleasure and delight therein, die more it is removed from him by a disaster
which he dislikes. And peace be upon you.”
A further example for this world in relation to the difficulty of getting rid of
its consequences after plunging in it. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” said: “The example of die adherent to this world is like
him who is walking on water: could he, who is walking on water, avoid wetting
his feet?” (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and Al-Baihaqi on
the authority of Al-Hassan from Anas). This example lets you learn how ignorant
are those who think they will abide forever in the pleasures and delights of this
world with their bodies whereas their hearts are purified from it, and their
relations are cut off from it. This notion is one of the intrigues of Satan, for
should they be taken out of what they are in they would be the most stricken. As
well as walking on water requires that the feet should be wetted with water, living

361
Book six: Condemnation of world
in this world results in relation with it, and darkness in the heart because of it.
Moreover, the relation of the heart with the world deprives worship of its
sweetness.
Jesus “peace be upon him” said: “I tell you the truth: as well as the padent
looks at food and feels no pleasure in it because of his severe pain, similarly, the
adherent to this world does not feel the pleasure of worship because of the love
for this world he has. I tell you the truth: as well as unless the riding mount is
ridden and trained, its character changes, similarly, unless hearts are made smooth
by remembrance of death and suffering of worship, they are hardened and
become harsh. I tell you the truth: as well as unless the water-skin has holes and
openings, it is about to become a container for honey, similarly, unless hearts are
torn by desires and lusts, contaminated by covet, and hardened by pleasures, they
are about to be containers for wisdom.” The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” said: “It is only the affliction and trial that remain of this
world, and the example of the deed of anyone of you is like a container: if its
upper portion is good, its lower portion will be good, and vice versa, if the upper
portion of it is malicious, its lower portion will be malicious.” (This narration is
reported by Ibn Majah on the authority of Mu’awiyah).
A further example for the little that has remained of this world in comparison
to the much that has passed. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” said: “The example of this world is like a garment that has been
split from its beginning to its end, and what has remained is only a thread in its
end which is about to be cut off.” (This narration is reported by Ibn Hibban, Abu
Na’im and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Anas).
Another example for the association between the relations of this world as
leading to each other until death. Jesus “peace be upon him” said: “The example
of the seeker after that world is like one who drinks from the water of the ocean:
the more he drinks, the more he becomes thirsty, until he is killed.”
A further example for the fact that the end of this world contradicts its
beginning, and although its beginning is green an fresh, its consequences are
malicious. It should be known to you that the lusts and desires of this world are
pleasant in the heart, just as the appetite of food is delicious in the stomach, and
at the moment of one’s death such pleasant desires and lusts turn to be hateful
and loathsome in the same way as the delicious food turns to be nasty and
stinking once it fulfills its objective and is to be excreted. As well as the more the
food is delicious, sweet and fat, the more its product is nasty, stinking, similarly,
the more a desire is pleasant and delightful in the heart, the more it becomes
hateful, loathsome and harmful at the moment of death.
This example is visible in this world, the more one likes and is keen on a
particular thing, such as his family, property and house, the more he is afflicted
and stricken once this is taken from him. However, there is no significance for
death but that therewith one looses what he has in this world. It is narrated that
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said to AdDahhak Ibn Sufyan: “Do you not get your food as salty and tasty and then drink
water and milk over it?” he said: “Yes O Messenger of Allah.” He further asked:

f

I
i

i

ii

I

1

The quarter of the destructives
362
“Then, what does it turn to be?” he said: “To (excretion) as you learn O
Messenger of Allah.” On that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” said: “Verily, Allah Almighty has set forth an example the state to
which the food of mankind turns to be for this world.” (This narration is
reported by Ahmad and At-Tabarani).
Ubai Ibn Ka’b “Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “The world is set forth as an
example for mankind: consider such of salty and tasty food as he eats and how it
turns to be when he excretes.” (This narradon is reported by both At-Tabarani
and Ibn Hibban). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” further said: “Allah Almighty set forth as an example the world for the food
of mankind and his food for the world.” According to Al-Hassan: “I saw them
making food tasty with all kinds of pleasant things and then they eject it (in the
form of excretion) as you see.” In his comment on the following statement of
Allah Almighty: “Then let mankind look at his food” (Abasa 24), Ibn Abbas
“Allah be pleased with them” said: “It refers to excretion.”
A man said to Ibn Umar “Allah be pleased with them”: “I like to ask you a
question but I feel shy.” He said to him: “Ask and do not feel shy.” He said:
“When anyone of us answers the call of nature and then gets up to look at
what he excretes!” He said: “Well. An angel says to him: “Look at that which
you withhold (from others)! See how it turned to be!” It was the habit of
Bishr Ibn Ka’b to say to his companions: “Go with me so that I would show
you the world.” He then would go with them to the dumps (of any people)
and say: “Look at their fruits, chicken, honey, and cooking butter (how they
have turned to be)!”
A further example for this world in relation to the hereafter. The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “The
world in relation to the hereafter is but like anyone of you as he places his
finger in the spring: let anyone of you consider then with what it shall return
to him.” (This narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of AlMustawrid Ibn Shaddad).
A further example for this world and its inhabitants in their occupation by the
delights and pleasures of this world, and heedlessness of the hereafter, and great
loss because of that. It should be known to you that the example of this world in
relation to its inhabitants is like a people riding a ship which has conveyed them
to an island and the navigator commanded them to come out in order to answer
the call of nature, and warned them of having long stay there, and frightened
them of the departure of the ship and asked them to hasten to come back. But
they scattered about across the different parts of the island. One of them
answered the call of nature quickly and hastened to go back to the ship where he
found the place empty and thus took the largest and fittest seats; and one of them
stopped in the island in order to look at its wonderful lights, thriving flours and
flourishing roses, its intense trees of abundant branches and the sweet voices of
its birds, and their consonant tones, and consider its precious stones, jewels and
metals of different colours, which attract the eyes of the beholders with their

363
Book six: Condemnation of world
wonderful aquamarine and forms, and suddenly, he became attendve to the
danger of missing the ship, thereupon he returned and found but a narrow
constricted place wherein he resided; and one of them turned over those shells
and precious stones as being astonished by their wonder and brilliance, and did
not reject to leave them: but rather took with him some of them, but found in the
ship only a narrow constricted place fitting for him only, thereupon what he
carried with him became a heavy burden and a means of regret and sorrow for
him, and although he regretted for taking those, he could not throw them, nor
found a place to put them in. the result is that he carried them on his shoulder
while being sorry and regretful for taking them, but it was of no profit to him to
regret for that. One of them entered the clusters of trees and forgot the vehicle,
and went as far as he could not hear the call of the navigator, for he was engaged
in eating the fruits, smelling the pleasant smell of the flours, and watching the
beauty of trees and gardens, and at the same time, he was afraid of wild animals
and was not free from thorns that might tear his garment or injure his body, and
hinder him from departure once he intended to depart; and even when the call of
departure made by the navigator reached him, he left for the ship where he found
no place, and remained in the shore until he died out of hunger. Some of them
did not receive the call of departure, thereupon they remained in the island after
the ship had left. Some of those who remained were eaten by the wild animals,
and others lost the right way and wandered prone on their faces until they were
ruined, others died in the mud, others were bitten by female snakes and scattered
about like putrefied dead bodies.
As to him who reached the ship with his burden of flours and stones, he was
occupied by them, and diverted by storing them and fear of missing them, and at
the same time, they made the place narrow upon him. A short while later, these
flours withered and the brilliant colours of the stones vanished, and there
remained only their nasty smell, therewith they harmed him, besides their
narrowing the place upon him, and he had no way but to throw them in the sea
in order to get rid of them. Furthermore, what he ate from the island affected
him and by the time he reached his homeland, he had been befallen by diseases
and ailments. As for he who was disturbed only by the narrow place in the ship,
he was harmed a bit by the constriction of the place, but no sooner had he
reached the homeland than he took rest and recovered. In relation to him who
came back first to the ship and took the largest seat therein, he returned home
safely and with no damage.
This is the example of the world in relation to its inhabitants, and their
occupation by their transitory fortunes, and forgetfulness of how they come and
depart, and their heedlessness of the consequence of what they do. How ugly is
he who alleges to be insightful and intelligent, and at the same time, is deceived
by the stones of this land, i.e. gold and silver and precious stones, and the
vestiges of its plant, which is the adornment of this world, for nothing of those
goes with him after his death: on the contrary, they become a heavy burden and
an evil weight upon him to carry. This is, therefore, the state of all the people
except for those protected by Allah Almighty.

The quarter of the destructives
A further example for people’s being deceived by this world and their weak
faith. Al-Hassan “may Allah have mercy upon him” said: I was reported that the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “Verily, my
example, your example and the example of this world is like a people who went
through a gloomy desert, until when they reached a point at which they did not
know whether or not they had covered the greater pordon, and whether or not
there remained the shorter distance, they consumed their provisions and used up
their riding mounts, and remained in the desert with neither provisions nor riding
mounts, and were sure of their destruction. Such being the case, a man came out
to them, wearing a good suite and his head was dribbling water, thereupon they
said: “This man has just left the greenery, and he has just come to you.” When he
reached them, he said to them: “O people!” they said: “O man!” he asked them:
“What are you going to do?” they said: “We are going to do what you command
us to do.” He said: “Tell me: if I lead you to a pure water and green gardens: what
are you going to do?” they said: tcWe will not disobey you even in the least.” He
asked them to give him their pledges and covenants by Allah, and they did
accordingly. He brought them to a pure water and green gardens, therein they
remained as long as Allah willed. Then he said to them: “O those people!” they
said: “O man!” he said: “Let’s depart.” They asked: “Where?” He said: “To a
water that is better than yours and gardens that are better than yours.” Most of
them said: “By Allah, we have not found that until we lost hope of finding
anything like it; an d we are not in need of a living better than this.” A sect of
them, and they are a few among them, said: “Have you not given this man your
pledges and covenants by Allah not to disobey him even in the least? As he was
true to you in the first part of his speech, by Allah, he will be true to you in the
last part of his speech.” He then departed among the few who followed him and
the greater part of them remained behind. Then, an enemy attacked those who
remained behind and killed many and captured many of them.” (This narration is
reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya; and Ahmad and Al-Bazzar as abridged on the
authority of Ibn Abbas).
A further example for people’s blessed in the delights of this world and
their grief for leaving it. It should be known to you that the example of the
people and the delights and pleasures they have been given from this world is
like a man who has prepared a house and invited a people to it. One entered his
house to whom he offered a golden dish having cense and different colours of
perfume to smell and leave it for the one to come next, and not to have
possession of it. But this one, being ignorant of the host’s plan, thought he had
granted it to him, thereupon his heart got attached to it, and when it was taken
back from him, he was disgusted and bored to tears. Another one, being
informed of his plan, got benefit from it, thanked him, and gave it back to him
with pleasure and expansion of breast. This is the state of him who knows the
way of Allah on earth, for he learns that this world is a hosting abode available
to the wayfarers and not to the residents, to take therefrom their provisions and
get benefit from what it contains just in the same way as travelers get benefit
from the things on the way, without giving their entire attention to them, lest
their affliction would become grievous when they leave them.

364

Book six: Condemnation of world

365

Those are the example for this world, its evils and vices: we ask Allah
Almighty, the Knower of all mysteries, Full of Knowledge, to help us with His
Bounty and Forbearance.

CHAPTER THREE
EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE AND ESSENCE OF WORLD
It should be known to you that it is of no significance to condemn the world
before you know what this world is which you are to condemn, what should be
avoided, and what should be kept thereof. We then should clarify the condemned
world which one is commanded to avoid due to its being an enemy that cuts off
the way to Allah Almighty.
Let's say that your world and hereafter are two states of your heart. The
nearest is called the world, which includes all things before death; and what is
deferred of it is called the hereafter, and it includes all things to come after death.
The world then includes your portion of transitory desires, lusts, pleasures and
delights before death. But it is not that all your desires, delights and pleasures are
condemned: they are divided into three divisions:
The first division pertains to what goes with you in the hereafter, whose
fruit remains with you after death. This division includes two main things, i.e.
knowledge and deed. By knowledge I mean the knowledge of Allah, His
attributes, acts, angels, Books, Messengers, His dominion in the heavens and on
earth; the knowledge of His ordinance and the Sharia given by His Prophet
“peace be upon him”. By deed I mean the sincere worship for the Countenanct
of Allah Almighty. The learnt might get socialized with knowledge until it
becomes the most pleasant and enjoyable thing to him, for the sake of which he
abandons sleep and food, for it is more pleasant to him than all such things.
Although it might seem to be a transitory fortune belonging to this world, but if
we mention the condemned world, we should not regard such knowledge to
belong to it in so much as it belongs to the hereafter. Similarly, a worshipper
might get affable to his worship and take pleasure from it in such a way that if it
is forbidden to him, it will be his most grievous punishment. One of the
worshippers said: “I never fear death but that it will hinder me form standing at
night (for supererogatory prayers).” Another said: “O Allah! Bestow upon me a
power of prayer, bowing and prostration in the grave.” The prayer to this person
seems to be one of the transitory fortunes, but it does not belong to the
condemned world.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said:
“Three things of your world are made lovable to me: women, perfume, and
prayer is the delight of my eye.” (This narradon is reported by An-Nasa'i and AlHakim on the authority of Anas). By saying so, he made prayer one of the
pleasures of this world. Those include also all sensibles and percepdbles, that
belong to the world of visibles, i.e. this world in which we live. To get pleasure
from moving the parts of body through bowing and prostration in prayer occurs
in the world (and not in the hereafter). This is why prayer is included in the things
that belong to the world. But since we are discussing now the condemned world,
let’s say that it does not belong to such world.

The quarter of the destructives
The second division lies in the other extreme that is opposite to it, i.e. the
transitory fortunes of this world which have no fruit in the hereafter, such as
taking pleasure from all sinful things, and from the permissible things that are
beyond the need, that belong to luxury and lavishness, like enjoyment of great
quantities of hoarded gold and silver, horses, cattle, farms, slaves, slave-girls,
palaces, expensive homes and garments, and delicious kinds of food. The fortune
of mankind from such things belongs to the condemned world. But as to what
those things are that are beyond the need, it is debatable. It is reported that once
Umar “Allah be pleased with him” appointed Abu Ad-Darda’ “Allah be pleased
with him” as the governor of Hims wherein he had a privy which cost him two
Dirhams. On that Umar “Allah be pleased with him” sent to him the following
letter: “From Umar Ibn Al-Khattab, the Commander of Believers, to Uwaimir:
the construction of Persia and Rome should have been sufficed you to build
anything in this world when Allah Almighty intended to ruin it. Once this letter
of mine reaches you, you and your family should soon leave for Damascus.” He
went and stayed there until he died. However, Umar “Allah be pleased with him”
considered such a trivial thing to be beyond the necessary needs of this world.
366

The third division lies in the middle between both extremes: it includes such
of transitories as help one do the deeds of the hereafter, like the amount of food
that is sufficient to sustain life, the rough coarse single garment, etc. in short, it
includes all that is necessary to sustain man’s life and good health that ensure to
him knowledge and work. It does not belong to this world, for indeed, it helps
one do those things that belong to the first division. If one gets anything of those
with the intention to be helped maintain knowledge and work, he will not be
regarded to take anything belonging to this world, nor will he become one of its
adherents. But if he is motivated only by one of the transitories, and not to seek
aid to adhere to piety and devoutness of worship, he then will join the second
division, and become one of the world’s adherents.
At death, only three attributes remain with the servant: the purity of the heart,
i.e. from all filth and dirt, socialization with the remembrance of Allah Almighty,
and love for Allah Almighty. Of a surety, purity of heart results only from
avoiding the desires and lusts of this world; socialization results only from regular
and permanent remembrance of Allah Almighty more often; and love for Allah
results only from having knowledge of Him, and knowledge of Ailah Almighty is
achieved only by continuous meditation. It is those three attributes that are the
assistants after death. The purity of the heart from all desires and lusts is one of
the saviors, for it represents a protective shield to safeguard one from the
punishment of Allah Almighty. According to a particular narration: “The deeds
of the servant defends him: if punishment comes to him from the direction of his
feet, standing at night (for supererogatory prayers) averts it from him, and if it
comes from the direction of his hands, his charity averts it from him.” (This
narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn
Samurah).
Both socialization and love are assistants’, and they bring forth the pleasure of
meeting and contemplation. This happiness comes soon after death until it is

Book six: Condemnation of world

367

time for seeing Allah Almighty in Paradise, thereby the grave becomes a garden
from the gardens of Paradise. And why should the grave not be a garden of the
gardens of Paradise given that the heart had no beloved but One, i.e. Allah
Almighty? Although there were many obstruction to hinder him from regular
socialization by regular remembrance of Allah, and thinking about His beauty, his
soul got rid of those obstructions and he was left alone with his Beloved,
thereupon he came to Him pleased and delighted, safe from obstructions and
impediments. On the contrary, how should the lover of this world not be
punished at death given that he had no beloved but the world? Moreover, the
way to Allah was constricted if not closed upon him, and he was impeded from
returning to Him once again.
For this reason, it is said: “What do you think of him who has only one
beloved when he is absent from him?” to be sure, death is not merely
nonexistence in so much as it is a departure from the things loved in this world
and arrival to the presence of Allah Almighty. The followers of the way to the
hereafter then is he who has those three attributes, i.e. celebration (of Allah
Almighty), meditation (of His Signs), and work (i.e. worship in accordance with
Sharia) which wean him from the desires and lusts of this world, instill in him the
aversion for its pleasures and delights, and cause him to sever all relations and ties
with it. All of that is achieved only when the body is healthy, and the health is not
obtained without food, clothes and residence.
If one takes from those three to the extent that sustains him for the sake o
the hereafter, he will not be of the world adherents: on the contrary, the worl
will turn with him to be a farm for the hereafter. But if he takes from those jus
for the sake of his own self, and with the intention to be blessed in it, he will be
of the world adherents who desire for its transitory fortunes. But the desire for
the transitory fortunes of this world is divided to that which exposes one to the
punishment of the hereafter, and this is the unlawful, and what impedes him
from attainment of high ranks and exposes him to long reckoning, and this is the
permissible. The insightful learns that the long standing in the plain ground on
the Day of Resurrection for reckoning is a kind of punishment, for he who is
called to account will inevitably be punished (according to the narration of both
sheikhs on the authority of A’ishah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” said: “Its (the world’s) lawful leads to reckoning,
whereas its unlawful to punishment.” (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu AdDunya and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Ali Ibn Abu Talib). The Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said in another version that ‘Its
lawful also might lead to punishment’.
But its punishment is lesser than that caused by the unlawful. And even, in
the absence of the concrete punishment, the loss of high ranks in the Garden and
grief for that because of despicable perishable fortunes should be also a kind of
punishment. Consider your state in this world while your fellows have preceded
you in worldly fortunes and pleasures: how should you fret yourself in sigh for
that given that they are but perishable pleasures? What will your state be then
when you loose permanent abiding pleasures that are beyond description and
calculation?

The quarter of the destructives
Whoever is blessed in anything of this world, like hearing the pleasant voice
of a bird, watching the wonderful beauty of a flour, or even drinking a sip of cold
water, as much as many times of it will be reduced from his portion in the
hereafter. This is the significance of the statement of the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” to Umar “Allah be pleased with him”:
“This is from the bliss about which you will be questioned.” By that statement,
he referred to drinking cold water, and while one is answering that question, he
exposes himself to humiliation, fear, suffering and difficulty, and this indicates to
the reduction of one’s portion and fortune in the hereafter. When Umar “Allah
be pleased with him” was given to severe thirst and he asked for water, a cold
water mixed with honey was brought to him, thereupon he turned the utensil in
his hand and said: “Remove from me the reckoning fro it (perchance I would
drink from it).” Then he rejected to drink it.
368

The world entirely, with its little and much, its lawful and unlawful, is cursed,
except the extent to which one is helped ward off evil and safeguard himself
against the punishment of Allah Almighty, for indeed, that extent does not
belong to the world (that is condemned). The more one is knowledgeable and
perfect, the more he is cautious of the blessing of this world. This is why Jesus
“peace be upon him”, after placing his head on a stone and fell asleep, threw it
away when Iblis appeared to him and said: “You have desired for this world.”
Solomon “peace be upon him” used to serve the people in his kingdom with the
delicious kinds of food, and he limited himself to the parley bread. By so doing,
he exposed himself to self-mortification in spite of his great dominion. That is
because it is more difficult to keep patient on refraining from the delicious kinds
of food in spite of their availability on the one hand, and one’s power to get them
on the other hand.
For this reason, it is reported that Allah Almighty kept the world far from our
Prophet “peace be upon him” who used to remain in severe hunger for many
consecutive days. (This narration is reported by Muhammad Ibn Khafif on the
authority of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab). He further used to tie a stone over his belly
out of hunger. This is also why Allah Almighty made the Prophets and Saints the
most vulnerable to trials and affliction, and then those who follow them in
power, in order to regard them with the eye of mercy, and keep for them their
portion in the hereafter in full and entirety, just as a merciful father prevents his
child from the pleasure of fruits, and get him endure the pain of bloodletting and
cupping, out of sympathy and love for him, and not because of niggardliness and
stinginess on him.
In this way, you have come to know that what is done for the Sake of Allah
does not belong to this world, and what is done not for the Sake of Allah
belongs to this world. You may ask: “What is that which is to be considered for
the Sake of Allah Almighty?” in reply to it, let me say that things are divided
into three divisions: one pertains to those not thought to be for the Sake of
Allah Almighty, and they include sins and crimes, forbidden things and
enjoyment of what is permissible in this world. This is the condemned world in
form and content. The second includes those things whose form seems to be

369
Book six: Condemnation of world
for the Sake of Allah, although the content might be for the sake of anything
else, like remembrance, thought and refraining from desires and lusts: if the
motive that lies behind those three is only the fear of Allah Almighty, and the
faith in the Last Day, they are done for the Sake of Allah Almighty, and do not
belong to this world. If the purpose of thought is to seek for knowledge to
honour oneself with it, and acquire acceptability among the people, or if the
purpose of refraining from desires and lusts is to save property or to protect the
health of the body, or to be famous for asceticism, they then belong to this
world in content, although their form reveal that they are done for the Sake of
Allah Almighty. The third division pertains to those things whose form is
thought to be for the sake of one’s own self, although their content might be
for the Sake of Allah Almighty, like eating and marriage, and all such things
which sustain mankind on earth: if the purpose is the portion of mankind, it
then belongs to the world, and if it is to seek its aid for piety, then, it is for the
Sake of Allah Almighty in content, although its form seems to be for the sake
of this world.
In this context, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: “He, who seeks after this world lawfully, but out of seeking
abundance, and showing pride and arrogance, he will meet Allah Almighty on the
Day of Judgement Who will be angry with him, and whoever seeks after it in
order to make himself refrain from begging others, and maintain himself, he will
come on the Day of Judgement with his face as shining as the moon on a night
of full moon.” (This narradon is reported by both Abu Na’im and Al-Baihaqi on
the authority of Abu Hurairah). Consider then the difference between both in
accordance with the difference of intendon. That is because in the former case,
the world turns to be your transitory pordon of which you have no need for the
hereafter. This is referred to by ‘lower desires’, to which Allah Almighty refers in
His statement: “And for such as had entertained the fear of standing before their
Lord's (tribunal) and had restrained (their) soul from lower Desires, Their Abode
will be the Garden.” (An-Nazi’at 40-41)
Cs?

Op Cj)

lf ^^*3 ^

The lower desires are five combined in the following statement of Allah:
“Know you (all), that the life of this world is but play and amusement, pomp and
mutual boasdng and muldplying, (in rivalry) among yourselves, riches and
children.” (Al-Hadid 20)
4

jJ}J’>Wi

^^3

3 >^3o^>J! iLi i>ipT ^

The resources of those five are seven things, combined in the following
statement of Allah Almighty: “Fair in the eyes of men is the love of things they
covet: women and sons; heaped-up hoards of gold and silver; horses branded (for
blood and excellence); and (wealth of) catde and well-tilled land. Such are the
possessions of this world's life; but in nearness to Allah is the best of the goals (to
return to).” (A1 Imran 14)

370

The quarter of the destructives
^ a*

^

I ^ *■

Lo jJ I

A

I

tiJJIj

IJ AjfyLu*J 1

Now, you have come to know that what is done for the Sake of Allah
Almighty does not belong to this world; and the necessary sustenance, residence
and clothes are for the Sake of Allah if only the Countenance of Allah is intended
therewith, and to get much of it is luxury, which is not for the Sake of Allah
Almighty, and between luxury and necessity, there is a degree referred to as
‘need’, which has two extremes and a middle: one of those extremes is close to
the limit of necessity, and it has no harm, and the other is close to the limit of
luxury, which one should beware. There are middle levels between both which
are suspicious; and of a surety, whoever hovers round the protected zone is about
to fall in it.
Determination requires to beware all of that, adhere to piety and come close
to the limit of necessity as much as possible, in imitation of the Prophets and
devotees of Allah Almighty, who restricted themselves to the limit of necessity.
The family of Uwais Al-Qarni thought him to be a mad because of his
constriction upon himself, thereupon they built for him an independent house
near theirs, and it happened that one, two or even three years passed without
seeing his face. He used to come out with the first call to prayer (i.e. Fajr
prayer), and return home after Isha’ prayer. He used to have food by picking up
kernels, and whenever he got a dry unripe date, he would keep it in order to
break his fast on it, and if he did not get anything, he would sell kernels for dry
unripe dates. His clothes comprised of pieces of torn cloth picked up from
dumps, which he would wash in the Euphrates and sew and war them. It
happened that children came upon him and threw him with stones describing
him as mad, and he said to them: “If it is necessary for you to throw me, then,
throw me with small pebbles, for I fear you might cause my feet to bleed and
when it is time for prayer, I would find no water to wash them.” This was his
conduct.
It is reported that when Umar Ibn Al-Khattab “Allah be pleased with him”
became the caliph, he addressed the people saying: “O people! Let those among
you who are from Iraq stand up!” they stood up and he said: “Sit down except
for those who are from Kufah.” They sat down and he said: “Sit down except
those who are from Murad.” They sat down and he said: “Sit down except those
who are from Qarn.” They sat except one man. Umar “Allah be pleased with
him” asked him: “Are you from Qarn?” He answered in the affirmative and he
further asked him: “Do you know Uwais Ibn Amir Al-Qarni?” he described him,
and then said: “What is that about whom you ask O Commander of Believers! By
Allah, none among us is more foolish, more crazy, more ugly and more lowly
than him.” On that Umar “AJlah be pleased with him” wept and said: “I have not
said what I said except that I heard the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” saying about him: “As many as is the number of Rabie’ah
and Mudar will enter the Garden because of his intercession.”
Haram Ibn Hayyan said: When I heard that statement from Umar “Allah be
pleased with him” I went to Kufah, with nothing in my mind but to find Uwais
Al-Qarni, and I kept asking about him until I found him sitting on the bank of

371
Book six: Condemnation of world
Euphrates at the middle of the day, performing abludon, and washing his
garment. I recognized him with the help of the description given to me, and
behold! He was a fleshy man of deep brown complexion and shaved head, beard
of copious hair, ugly face, and fearful appearance. I greeted him and he returned
the greeting to me. I said to him: “may Allah salute you!” he looked at me and I
stretched my hand to shake hands with him, but he did not shake hands with me,
thereupon I said: “May Allah bestow mercy upon you, and forgive for you O
Uwais! How are you, may Allah bestow mercy upon you?” then, my tears
throtded me because of my great love for him, and sympathy for the state in
which I saw him. I went on weeping and so did he. He said to me: “May Allah
salute you O Haram Ibn Hayyan! How are you O my brother? And who guided
you to me?” I said: “Allah.” On that he said: “There is none worthy of worship
but Allah; and glory be to Allah. Verily, the promise of our Lord is to be
accomplished!” I wondered at his recognizing me although I have never met him
before. I asked him: “How have you known my name and the name of my father
although we have never met before?” he said: “(Allah) the All-Knowing, Full of
Wisdom has told me.” Furthermore, my soul recognized yours when they
communicated. Indeed, souls are like bodies in their contact, and the faithful
believers recognize each other and love each other with the spirit of Allah
although they do not meet each other. They recognize and talk to each other no
matter how far in residence they might be from each other.
I said to him: “Relate to me, may Allah forgive mercy upon you, a narradon I
might hear from you about the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him”.” He said: “Unfortunately, I have not joined the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” nor have I had the privilege of his
company. But I saw men who have accompanied him, and I received from his
narradons the same as you have received. But I do not like to open upon me the
gate of being a narrator, a judge or a Mufti, for I have occupation which engages
me from all the people O Haram Ibn Hayyan.” I said to him: “O my brother!
Recite to me a Holy Verse from the Qur’an so that I would hear it from you,
supplicate to a good effect upon me, and give me an advice to act upon, for
indeed, I love you in (the religion of) Allah so much.” He stood up, took hold of
my hand on the bank of Euphrates and said: “I seek refuge with Allah, AllHearing, All-Knowing from Satan, the stoned.” Then, he went and said: “My
Lord says, and His saying is the truth, and the truest speech is that of Allah: “We
created not the heavens, the earth, and all between them, merely in (idle) sport;
We created them not except for just ends: but most of them do not understand.
Verily the Day of Sorting Out is the time appointed for all of them, The Day
when no protector can avail his client in aught, and no help can they receive,
Except such as receive Allah's Mercy: for He is Exalted in Might, Most Merciful.”
(Ad-Dukhan 38-42)
^

^SLJjX!
p-* % ull J> j* J>

^
^ fy (jfj)

i SU -iCr4

3o
ify O]

0

Lai>- Dj «>
by^-i

372

The quarter of the destructives

Then, he took a breath so strongly that I thought he had fallen unconscious.
Then he said: “O Ibn Hayyan! Your father died, and you are about to die and
go either to Paradise or to the fire (of Hell). Similarly, your father Adam, your
mother Eve, Noah, Ibrahim, the Intimate Friend of (Allah) Most Gracious,
Moses, who was saved by (Allah) Most Gracious, David, the vicegerent of
(Allah) Most Gracious, Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him”, Abu Bakr, the first successor of the Prophet, and
Umar Ibn Al-Khattab, my brother and intimate friend - all of them died.” Then
he said: “Alas for Umar! Alas for Umar!” I said: “May Allah bestow mercy upon
you! Umar “Allah be pleased with him” has not died yet.” He said: “But, my
Lord has announced to me the news of his and my death.” Then he said: “I and
you are in death” as if it were. Then, he invoked blessing and peace upon the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and supplicated
with supplications in a low tone and then said: “Here is my advice to you O
Haram Ibn Hayyan: stick to the Book of Allah Almighty and the right method
of the righteous believers. However, the news of my and your death has been
announced to me. So, you have to remember death regularly and let not it be
absent from your heart even as short as an eye-twinkle as long as you survive.
When you return to your people, warn them, and advise all of the people to do
good. Beware of leaving the established community even as short as a span, lest
you would leave your religion without knowing and thus enter the fire (of Hell)
on the Day of Judgement. Invoke good upon me and upon yourself.”
Then he said: “O Allah! This man claims he loves me in (the religion of) You,
and has come to visit me for Your Sake. So, please, make me recognize his face
in the Garden, and cause him to enter upon me in Your Abode, the abode of
peace, and keep him in this world as long as he survives, and wherever he lives,
and make easy for him what You have given him of this world, and make him
thankful and grateful to Your gifts and favors upon him, and reward him with the
best reward on my behalf.” Then, he said: “I entrust you with Allah O Haram
Ibn Hayyan, and peace be upon you, and let not me see you asking for after that
day, may Allah bestow mercy upon you, for indeed, I dislike fame and like
solitude and privacy. That is because the more man have much interests, the
more he becomes anxious and concerned. So, do not ask for me and know that
you are in my mind even if we do not see each other. But remember me and
supplicate Allah for me, for I will remember you and supplicate Allah for you,
Allah willing. Go then from that direction, for I shall go from the other
direction.” I was eager to walk in his company for an hour, but he rejected. Then,
he bade farewell to me and wept and caused me to weep. I remained looking at
him until he entered one of the streets. Afterwards I asked about him, and none
told me anything about him: may Allah bestow mercy upon him, and forgive
him.”
This was the conduct of these of the hereafter who refrained from this world
with its vanities. From the exposition of the real nature of this world on the one
hand, and from the conduct of the Prophets and devotees of Allah Almighty, you
have come to know that the world includes everything under the shade of the sky

373
Book six: Condemnation of world
and on the surface of the earth except that which is done for the Sake of Allah
Almighty, and the opposite of that is the hereafter, which includes all that with
which Allah Almighty is intended from what is done or taken from the world in
proportion to what is necessary for the Sake of obeying and compliance with the
command of Allah: this does not belong to the world. Let me explain that
through the following example:
If a pilgrim takes an oath that on his way to perform Hajj, he will not engage
in anything other than pilgrimage, to which he will devote himself entirely, and
then he engaged in reserving provisions, foddering his riding camel and sewing
the water-skin, and all that is necessary for Hajj, he will not have broken his oath,
for he will not have engaged in anything far from Hajj. Similarly, the body is the
vehicle of the soul which covers with it the distance of lifetime. If the body
pledges to spend the remaining portion of man’s power to follow the way
through knowledge and work, he will not belong to the world in so much as to
the hereafter. It is true that if the intention is to take pleasure from those things,
he will deviate from the way to the hereafter, and there is fear that his heart might
be hardened. At-Tanafisi “may Allah have mercy upon him” said: “I remained for
seven days at the gate of Shaibah in the Sacred Mosque in the state of severe
hunger; and on the eighth night, I heard the voice of a visitant while I was in a
state between wakefulness and sleep: “Behold! Whoever takes from this world
more than he needs, Allah blinds the insight of his heart.” This is the real nature
of this world. You should know that, perchance you would be guided aright,
Allah willing.

CHAPTER FOUR
EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE OF THIS WORLD IN ITSELF; AND ITS
OCCUPATION THAT DIVERTED PEOPLE FROM THEMSELVES, THEIR
CREATOR, THEIR COMING AND DEPARTURE
It should be known to you that the world is the existing concrete things
that it contains, and man has a portion in it, and he is occupied by reforming
it. Those are three elements of which the world consists. It is not restricted to
anyone of them on the exclusion of the other two. As to the first element, it
includes the earth and all that is in and on its surface. Allah Almighty says in
this respect: “That which is on earth We have made but as a glittering show
for the earth, in order that We may test them, as to which of them are best in
conduct.” (Al-Kahf 7)
4

* frJ

^

^ ^ blL>- 6j

The earth then is a couch, repose, and residence for mankind, and what is on
its surface is their food, drink, clothes, and marriage. What is on earth is divided
to three divisions: minerals, plant and animals. The plant is required by mankind
for sustenance and medicine, minerals for equipment, utensils and vessels like
copper and lead, money like gold and silver, etc.
As for animal it is divided into man and beasts. Beasts are required for their
meat to be eaten, and their backs to be ridden, and to be used as adornment. As
for mankind, man might require others to have them in his possession with the

The quarter of the destructives
intention to use and subjugate them like slaves, or take pleasure from them like
slave-girls. He also might require the hearts of people to fascinate them, through
instilling in them exaltation and honour, referred to as majesty. Those are the
concrete things that constitute this world. They are combined in the following
statement of Allah Almighty: “Fair in the eyes of men is the love of things they
covet: women and sons; heaped-up hoards of gold and silver; horses branded (for
blood and excellence); and (wealth of) cattle and well-tilled land. Such are the
possessions of this world's life; but in nearness to Allah is the best of the goals (to
return to).” (A1 Imran 14)

374

S'- j? Qjh-5 )Tj^a'xa\lj

4 igSylLjT

eLloJl ^j*

I

iLU

STj uiil! s_^JTJJU'S o>JTj

Mankind is attached to it through two kinds of relations: it has a relation with
the heart which is represented in his love for it, his portion form it, and his
devotion to it until the heart falls a slave of it. This relation includes all
characteristics of the heart which attach it to the world like arrogance, envy,
hatred, rancor, showing off, dissimilation, fame, evil assumption, flattery,
adulation, love of praise, love of proliferation, and boasting. This is the internal
world. The apparent world is the concrete things we have already mentioned. It
has another relation with the body, i.e. his occupation to reform those concrete
things to befit his interests and the interests of others, or in other words, all the
industries and crafts in which the people are engaged.
However, the people have forgotten themselves, their coming, departure and
turning in this world because of those two relations. Should man know himself,
his Lord, and the wisdom that lies behind the world, he would learn, with
certainty, that those concrete things have been created only to fodder his riding
mount with which he walks on his way to Allah Almighty. Of course, I mean by
the riding mount the body. The body does not survive without food, drink,
clothes and residence, just as the camel does not survive to continue the way to
Hajj without fodder, water and hide. The example of the man in this world who
forgets himself and his real purposes is like the pilgrim who halts at a particular
station on his way, and engages in foddering his she-camel, providing it with
water, cleaning it, covering it with different clothing, carrying to it various kinds
of grass, cooling water with ice for it, until the caravan escapes him while he is
heedless of Hajj and of missing the caravan and of his remaining alone in the
desert as an easy game for wild animals.
As for the insightful pilgrim it does not matter him from the camel but the
extent that sustains it to cover the journey, while his heart and soul remain
attached to the Ka’bah and Hajj. In this way, he turns to the she-camel in
proportion to what is necessary. The same is true of the insightful traveler to
the hereafter: he does not engage in maintaining his body unless it is necessary,
and does not enter the privy unless it is necessary. There is no difference
between getting food into the body, and emitting it out of it in terms of being
necessities of body. If one is interested in what enters his belly, he should be
concerned with what comes out of it. However, people have been diverted,

375
Book six: Condemnation of world
more often than not, by their bellies from Allah Almighty, for food is a
necessary sustenance, and the matter of clothes and residence is less necessary.
Should they know the cause of their need for those things, and restrict
themselves to it, surely, they would not be entirely involved in the occupations
of this world in the same way as they are. But they have been engaged in the
world in view of their ignorance of it, the wisdom that lies behind it, and their
portions of it. But they have been ignorant and heedless, and the occupation of
the world have contiguously accumulated upon them, and endlessly led to each
other. The result is that they were lost in the details of those occupation,
forgetting their real purposes let’s here mention the details of the occupation of
this world, and the people’s need for them, and how the people erred about
their real purposes, so that it would be clear to you how they diverted them
from Allah Almighty and caused them to forget the consequences resulting
from that.
Let’s say that the worldly occupations are the crafts, industries and works in
which mankind is engaged. Those occupation are much because man is in need
for three things: sustenance, clothes and residence. Sustenance is to maintain his
body and help him survive, clothes to protect him from cold and heat, and
residence to avert evil and harm of others from him and his family and property.
Indeed, Allah Almighty has never created food, clothes and residence to be
obtained easily in a way that makes man dispense with work in them, as He
Almighty has done so regarding beasts, for plants nourish animals without being
cooked, and both cold and heat do not affect their bodies thereupon they are not
in need of building, and rather satisfied with living in desert. Moreover, their
clothes are their hair and hide thereby they dispense with garments and dresses,
unlike human.
There ensued from that a need for five industries, which represent the
foundations of all worldly occupations: farming, pasturing, hunting, weaving and
building. Building is needed for residence. Weaving with its sub-works is
necessary for making clothes. Farming is necessary for sustenance. Pasturing
cattle and horses is needed for food, as well as transportation. Hunting is to
obtain what Allah Almighty has created of games, minerals, grass, fire wood, etc.
the farmer gets plants, the shepherd preserves animals and works for their
proliferation. The hunter gets what is produced by itself without being made or
worked, and extracts from the minerals of the land what is created by Allah
Almighty in it without being subject to human labour. Those industries need
different equipment and tools, like weaving, farming, building and hunting. Those
equipment and tools are taken either from plants like wood, from minerals like
iron and lead, etc, or from the hide of animals. That gave rise to the need of three
extra industries: carpentry, smithery, and drilling. Those works are related to
equipment and tools. Carpentry includes all workers who work on wood, whereas
smithery includes those who work with iron and all other metals like copper, lead,
etc, and drilling includes all who work with the hide of animals. Those are the
main industries.
On the other hand, man is created in order not to live alone, but to live in a

The quarter of the destructives
376
community with other men; and this is due to two reasons: the first is his need of
sexual reproduction for the survival of mankind on earth, and this occurs only by
the gathering of both male and female. The other is to co-operate to prepare the
means of sustenance, residence and clothes, and educate children. Gathering (of
male and female) results in children, and one alone could not be engaged in
preparing means of sustenance, residence and clothes, and educating children at
the same time. Furthermore, one could not continue to live with his family in the
house all the time: but a large number of people are required to gather together in
order that each one should do his work. How should one alone undertake
farming, given that farming needs equipment, and equipment, in turn, need such
workers as a smith, a carpenter, and the food needs a grinder and a baker.
Similarly, how should one alone get clothes, given that he is in need of guarding
cotton, equipment of weaving and sewing, etc? for this reason, man could not
live alone, but he should live in a community.
If men gather in an uncovered desert, they would be harmed by cold, heat
and rain, in addition to thieves. From this, there has been a need for tightened
buildings and houses in order for each family to live independendy. But even,
those houses might become targets for thieves, which has given rise to a need for
mutual co-operadon and helping each other, and building up a fence to enclose
all houses of a particular community, and in this way, cities and town have been
established. If people gather together and enter into dealings, disputes start to
appear among them. Those disputes originate, for the most part, from
guardianship of people over each other, like the guardianship of a husband over
his wife, and of the parents over their children, unlike the man’s guardianship
over animals which brings about no dispute between them. Dealings also
between people in regard to their needs bring about disputes among them over
those needs, and should they be left with themselves, they certainly would engage
in killing each other. Shepherds and farmers come to the same land, pastures,
meadows, and resources of water, which might not be sufficient to satisfy all of
their needs, which would inevitably result in disputes among them over those
things.
Therefore, one of them might fail to do his work because of a particular
disease, old age, or any of those major forces, and should he be left, surely, he
would be given to destruction. If his matter is entrusted to all the people, they
would be lukewarm to do it in view of the fact that each of them would rely on
another to do it; and should his matter be entrusted to a particular man without a
just cause, he might not comply. From those incidents of gathering, further
industries and works have been born, like gauge, with which land is measured in
order to facilitate its division among them; soldiery in order to defend the city or
town with missiles, and protect inhabitants from thieves; judging in order to
decide the cases and settle disputes among people; and engagement in
jurisprudence, i.e. the knowledge of law that regulates the conduct of people, in
order to limit their disputes: it is to know the limits and conditions prescribed by
Allah Almighty in dealings.
Those political things are necessary, and they need certain men of particular

377
Book six: Condemnation of world
characteristics of knowledge, guidance, and discernment; and should they engage
n them, they would not be able to devote themselves to any work else. At the
same time, they need sustenance, and the inhabitants of the city or town are in
need of them. Should the inhabitants of a town engage in fighting with their
enemies, almost all works and industries would cease; and should the people of
war and weapons engage in work to seek sustenance, surely, the town would
loose protection, and its inhabitants would become vulnerable to evil and harm.
Thus, there has been a dire need for income to be given to them for their
sustenance from the property which has no particular owner in case there is any,
or from the war booty in case there is enmity with disbelievers.
If they are characterized by contentment, they would be satisfied with the
little from the property specified to interests of Muslims, and if they seek for
enlargement, then, there will be a need to be provided from the property of the
people of their town, in order to undertake their tasks of guarding and judging,
and the like of them; and this is the significance of taxes. Tax in turn gives rise to
further jobs, for it needs men to administer it to distribute it with justice among
those who are eligible to it, men who collect it with compassion, men who store
it until it is time for it to be distributed. Unless those men of different industries
and jobs are not subject to a kind of organization to manage them properly, then,
chaos would prevail in the town; and this is the significance of rulers and
ministers.
The role of the minister is to assign to each job a particular man who is fitting
for it, to choose soldiers and supervise training them, to determine the directions
of war, to assign leaders and chiefs of soldiers, to undertake the distribution of
weapons and missiles among them, to observe justice in taking taxes, etc. from
this, a need is born for scribes and recorders to enlist the employees of the state,
storekeepers to store weapons and missiles, accountants to undertake the process
of reckoning and calculation - and all of those are in need of property to sustain
their living, since their jobs could not enable them to work by their hands to get
their earnings.
At that point, we could divide people in relation to their industries into
three sects: the first includes farmers, shepherds and craftsmen; and the
second includes soldiers and guards who work with their weapons to defend
the country; and the third includes those who lie in between both sects in
terms of taking from the first and giving to the other, i.e. workers and
collectors, and the like of them. Consider then how it starts from the
necessary need for sustenance, residence and clothes, and how it ends. This is
the world: no gate is opened from it but that it leads to the opening of other
gates, in an endless limitless series. In this respect, it seems as if it were a
bottomless pitfall, and if one falls into any direction of it, he will inevitably fall
in another and never return.
Those are the crafts and industries. But they are not achieved without
equipment and property, i.e. wealth and money. Property is the land and what is
on its surface, which is of benefit. The most wanted of those is foodstuff, then
the places to which man takes shelter, i.e. dwellings, then the places in which he

The quarter of the destructives
378
seeks to get his earnings, i.e. shops and stores, markets and farms, then the
clothes, then the house furniture and equipment, and then the tools. The tools
might be animals, like the dog which is the tool of hunting, the cow which is the
tool of tilting, and the horse which is the tool of riding during war.
This gives rise to the need of transaction which is a process of reciprocal
giving and taking. A farmer might live in a village in which the tools of farming
are missing, and the same is true of a smith and carpenter, who might live in a
village in which farming is missing. Thus, there is a reciprocal need between them
which is expressed by way of exchange of commodities. But the carpenter might
demand his food from the farmer for his tool, at a time the farmer does not need
it, and thus he would not sell it to him; and similarly, the farmer might demand
from the carpenter his tool for food, at a time the latter has food and needs no
more, with the result that he would not sell it to him. This problem has roused a
need of shops to contain the tools of each industry and craft in expectation for
such of people as need them to come and buy them, and stores for the farmer to
store his crops in expectation for such of people as need them to come and buy
them; and this is the significance of markets. The farmer brings grains, and in
case there is none to buy them, the storekeeper buys them for a cheap price and
store them in expectation for those who need them to come and buy them. By so
doing, he covets for profit. The same is true of all commodities and goods.
The commercial relations between people force them to go beyond the
borders of one village or town, whereas people make their journeys between
villages to buy foodstuff, and cities to buy equipment and tools, and transport
what they buy and live with from one place to another in order for their life to
suit them. To be sure, each village or city could not have all things it needs in
terms of food and equipment; and this is the significance of trade undertaken
by traders who transport commodities and goods from one place to another
with the intention to make profit. They tire themselves during night an day on
journeys in order to comfort others and collect money and wealth for
themselves. However, that money might go to others than them, like, for
example, a highwayman, or a wrongful governor, etc. but Allah Almighty has
made in their heedlessness and ignorance an organization of the state and a
benefit for the people. We can say that almost all worldly matters have been
based on ignorance, heedlessness and lowly endeavors of some people. Had all
the people become mindful and risen beyond the lowly endeavours, they would
have abstained in this world; and were they to do so, their living would have
become idle; and they were living to become idle, they would have been given
to destruction.
Those transported things are beyond the capacity of man to carry, and thus
there is a need for mounts to carry them. The owner of property might have no
mount to carry his property, and thus he is forced to hire a mount from him who
have mounts. In this way, hiring becomes a kind of getting earnings. The process
of transaction itself gives rise to a need for coins, i.e. money to be used in
exchange. If one likes to sell food for a garment, how should he come to know
that both are of equal value? Moreover, the transaction includes different kinds of

379
Book six: Condemnation of world
things, of different values. For this reason, there is a need for a just ruler to
establish justice between dealers and those involved in transaction. But in order
for just evaluation to be implemented well, there is a need for long-enduring
money; and since such metals as gold and silver have the longest life, they have
been taken as coins and money; and this has given rise to the industry of coinage
and its appurtenances.
In this way, occupations and works lead to each other endlessly and
limitlessly. The people’s occupations are their living. None of those crafts or
industries could be done without learning and fatigue at least in the beginning.
Some of people are heedless of this fact during their youth or at least are
hindered from learning a particular industry, with the result that when anyone of
them grows up he becomes unable to get his earnings. He needs then to eat of
what is earned by others. This gives rise to two vile jobs: theft and begging. Since
people beware of thieves and beggars and keep their property far from them,
they, therefore, do not trouble their minds to make tricks to use in hiding their
property. From among thieves, there are such as seek to collect assistants and
helpers until they become a considerable force cutting off the roads on the
people, like the desert Arabs and Kurds. But the weak among them is forced to
make tricks to fulfill his purposes.
In relation to beggars, if they seek to get what is earned by others, and at the
same time, they are required to work and leave idleness, and be like others whe
work and get their earnings form their labour, and they are given nothing, they
recourse to trickery and sneakiness in order to extract money from others, and let
their idleness seem justifiable in their sights. They might validate their failure to
work, either by reality, through making blind themselves or any of their children
by trickery in order to be excused for their blindness and thus given money by
others, or through pretending madness, disease, and any other defect that might
seem to hinder them from work. Others invent many words and acts to show
before the people to please them, and force them, being under the effect of
astonishment, to give them no matter how little it might be, and when the effect
of astonishment is over, they regret, but it is of no profit to them to regret. Of all
the things to be invented, the rhymed poetry in general, and that which carries
fanaticism in particular is the most influential, like the poetry that describes the
good merits of the companions and the virtues of the family of the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”. A mention may be made also of
the words and acts that stimulates in the people the causes and means of love and
adoration, the acts of astrologers, the preachers on pulpits whose purpose is not
to teach people their religion with sincerity in so much as just to attract the hearts
of laymen and usurp their property.
Those are the worldly occupations of people in which they engage, under the
necessity of their need of sustenance, clothes and residence. But during their
journey, they have forgotten themselves and their real purposes, turning and
returning (to Allah), with the result that they were lost and misguided. After their
minds had been contaminated with the competition over this world, they were
overpowered by false fancies, with the result that they were divided into different
sects and opinions.

The quarter of the destructives
Some of them are overpowered by ignorance and heedlessness, and their
minds are not opened to perceive the consequence of their matters, thereupon
they say: “The purpose is to live many days in this world, during which we work
to earn sustenance, and eat to be able to earn, and earn in order to eat.” Thus,
they eat to earn and earn to eat. This is the doctrine of farmers and craftsmen,
and such of people as have no luxury in this world, nor grounds in religion: they
work by day in order to eat what they earn at night, and eat at night in order to
work by day, and so on. Such a man remains in endless journey which does not
cease unless by death.
Others claim that they have perceived the real nature of the matter. They are
of the opinion that the real purpose is not to endeavor by work to lead a
comfortable and luxurious life, but the real happiness in their sight is to fulfill
their desires in this world, and of course, they intend the desires for food and sex.
Those have forgotten themselves, and rather given their entire attention to
women to have sexual relation with, and different kinds of food to eat: they eat in
the same way as cattle eat, thinking that by so doing, they have attained
happiness. Thus, they were diverted from Allah and the Last Day.
A third sect think that happiness lies in the abundant property which enables
them to become independent of anything else in this world. Thus, they spend
night and day in collecting wealth and property, and although they trouble
themselves and suffer heavy burdens in hard work in order to collect as much as
they can, they do not eat from what they earn but as little as is necessary, out of
their niggardliness and miserliness and for fear of reducing from what they
collect. This is their pleasure and conduct, until death overtakes them, thereupon
what they collect turns to be either under the ground or be taken by others who
spend it on their desires and lusts. In this way, the collector draws upon himself
its trouble and evil consequences, whereas its pleasure and delight become the
portion of the heir. Although the collectors see this fact with their own eyes
through others, they do not take from them as examples or lessons to learn.
A fourth sect think that happiness lies in good reputation, and praise of good
characteristics and manners. Those trouble themselves to earn their living, and
constrict upon themselves in food and drink, and rather spend all of their
property on expensive clothes and riding mounts and graceful adornment and
furniture, in order that when people's sights fall on the things of anyone of them,
they would describe him as rich and wealthy, thinking it to be the real happiness.
In this way, they endeavour during night and day just to attract the people's sights
and admiration.
A fifth sect think that happiness lies in majesty and honour in the sight of
people who, in turn, are inferior to them through veneration and reverence.
Thus, they divert their attention to seek authority and ruling, in order to practice
their power over a sect of people. They think that the more their ruling extends
and the people comply with their commands, the more they become happy and
pleased. They are diverted by the love of people's humbleness towards them
from their love of humbleness before Allah Almighty, their worship and
meditation of the hereafter.
380

381
Book six: Condemnation of world
There are as many as seventy-two sects like those, all of whom have
misguided others and deviated from the right path. They have been forced to
do so by their need for food, clothes and residence. But during their journey in
life, they have forgotten the real purposes of those three things and the extent
to which they are sufficient. However, the first causes have led them to such
evil consequences, thereby they have fallen into the bottomless pitfall, and
could not get up from it. Whoever knows the point of those causes and
occupation, and their real purposes, he should not get a craft, occupadon or
work unless he is well-aware of its real purposes, and his own pordon and
fortune from it. He should learn that the real purpose of it is just to maintain
his body with food and clothes from destruction. If he takes from that only
what is necessary for him, all occupadon would be averted from him, and his
heart would be disengaged and rather devoted to the remembrance of the
hereafter, and his attention would be diverted to get ready for it. But if he goes
beyond what is necessary for him, the occupations would increase, and invite
each other, leading him to an endless series. In this way, he would come to have
many concerns, and whoever have many concerns in the different fields of this
world, Allah Almighty never cares about whichever of them He would ruin him
in.

This is the state of those involved in the occupations of this world. Some of
people made sense to that, and turned away from the world, thereupon Satan
envied them, and did not leave them, and rather misguided them and let them
divide in their rejection of this world. Some of them think that this world is a
home of trial and affliction whereas the hereafter is the abode of happiness for
such of people as attains it, no matter whether or not he was of the worshippers
in this world. Thus, they think that the right is to kill themselves in order to get
rid of the affliction of this world. This is the conduct of some Indians, who
throw themselves into the fire, and burn themselves, thinking it to be their
salvation from the afflictions of this world.
Another sect think that killing alone is not sufficient: but they should kill in
themselves the human attributes and curb them entirely, since happiness lies in
curbing desire and anger. In order to achieve that, they came to mortify
themselves so much strictly, until some of them died because of severe selfdiscipline, others were given to madness, others to chronic diseases, with the way
of worship closed upon him. But some of them failed to curb human attributes
entirely, and thought that the obligations of religious law are questionable, as the
religious law in their sights is but dissembling, which has no origin, and this led
them to atheism.
Others are of the opinion that all this suffering and trouble is for the Sake of
Allah Almighty, Who is not in need of the worship of all the worshippers, and in
naught would the disobedience of a disobedient reduce anything from Him, nor
would the worship of a worshipper add anything to Him. The result is that they
returned to lusts and desires, and gave themselves to lewdness, and folded the
carpet of law and rulings, claiming it to be out of their pure and clear
monotheism, under pretext that Allah Almighty is not in need of the worship of
worshippers.

382

The quarter of the destructives

Others are of the opinion that the real purpose of worship is the self­
mortification until one reaches with it the knowledge of Allah Almighty; and
once it is obtained, one will have attained the goal, after which there will be no
need of means. The result is that they abandoned endeavor and worship, and
claimed that by their knowledge of Allah Almighty, they have risen above being
constrained by religious obligations, for such obligations are due only upon the
laymen.
Those are but examples of false doctrines and invalid sects which are seventytwo, and it is only one of those which will be saved, Allah willing, i.e. the
followers of the way of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” and his companions “Allah be pleased with them” and those who
followed them with good conduct. It is not to leave world entirely, nor curb
desires and lusts entirely. As for the world, he should take from it only as much
as is sufficient for his provisions; and as for the desires, he should curb of them
what is beyond the religious law and mind, and not follow all desires, nor leave all
desires: but rather follow justice. He should not seek after everything nor leave
everything in this world: but rather, he should learn the real purpose of
everything created in this world, and deal with it in accordance with that purpose.
Let him take from sustenance what sustains his body to worship, from residence
what protects him from thieves, cold and heat, and from clothes what protects
him also from heat and cold. That is because when one’s heart is disengaged
from bodily occupations, it is devoted entirely to the worship and remembrance
of Allah Almighty, and meditation (of His signs) all of his lifetime. At the same
time, let him continue to watch over desires and lusts in order not to exceed the
due limits of piety and god-fearingness.
One will not learn the details of that unless he imitates the saved sect, i.e. the
men of sunnah and established community, according to the statement of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”. He was asked
about these of sunnah and established community, thereupon he said: “(Those
who follow) that on which I and my companions are.” (This narration is reported
by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr). They followed the
method of moderation and clear and right path we have already explained . they
never took the world for the sake of world but rather for the sake of religion, nor
adhered to monasticism and abandoned world entirely, nor were they indulgent
nor excessive: on the contrary, they were in the middle between both extremes.
This is the dearest thing to Allah Almighty, as mentioned earlier in many places;
and Allah knows best.
This is the end of the Book of Condemnation of World; and praise be to
Allah at first and last; and the blessing and peace of Allah be upon the Prophet,
his family and companions.

>• YaTO

5SS5G

0

ondemnatio II

dEl

_____ ____ -_______ __________

It is the seventh book of the quarter of destructives
In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Praise be to Allah, Who deserves praise for the sustenance He enlarged (for
some of His servants), and removes disaster after despair, Who has created the
creation, enlarged sustenance, endowed the worlds with various kinds of
property, and tried them with the turning from one state to another, from ease to
adversity, from poverty to richness, from covet to despair, from richness to
bankruptcy, from solvency to insolvency, from miserliness to satisfaction, from
niggardliness to generosity, from pleasure with what is at hand to grief for what is
lost, from altruism to selfishness, from extravagancy to parsimony, and from
contentment with the little to regarding with slightness the much. He has made
so in order to test them as to which of them are best in conduct, and which of
them gives preference to the world over the hereafter.
The blessing and peace of Allah be upon Muhammad, with whose religion he
abrogated all the religions before him, and upon his family and companions who
followed the way of their Lord with good conduct.
Coming to the point: the temptations and afflictions of this world is so much
and they include all fields of life. But property is the most greatest temptation, the
most destructive affliction, in the sense that none could dispense with it, and
once it exists, none could hardly be safe from it. Once it is lost, one is given to
destitution which is about to lead to ingratitude, and once it is present, it leads to
transgression and great loss. In short, as well as property has merits, it also has
demerits. Its merits are among the saviors, whereas its demerits are among the
destructives. It is abstruse to distinguish its good from its evil, and none is able to
do it except those of insightful minds among the learnt. So, it is important to
specify an independent book to the exposition of that, for what we have
mentioned in the condemnation of this world did not deal with property in
particular in so much as it included the world in general, for the world includes all
transitory portions and fortunes; and property is a part of it, in addition to
desires, lusts, love for authority, inclination to exacting retribution, anger, envy,
and arrogance.
But now, we are going to consider in this book the property in particular in
terms of its merits and demerits, and if man looses it, he is given to destitution,
and if it is available to him, he is given to richness. It is with both states of
destitution and richness that man is put to trial. The one who lacks money always
wavers between two states: parsimony and satisfaction, one of which is
blameworthy and the other is praiseworthy. The miser also wavers between two
states: the covet of what is at die hands of people, and endeavor to work hard in
different professions and industries, with loss of hope in getting what is with the
people; and the former is worse than the latter. The wealthy has two states:
383

The quarter of the destructives
384
withholding due to niggardliness and spending, and one of them is praiseworthy
and the odier is blameworthy. The two states of the spendthrift are extravagancy
and thrift, and the latter of them is praiseworthy.
It is important to uncover those unclear issues, which might be explained in
fourteen chapters, Allah willing:
Exposition of condemnation of property
Praise of property
Exposition of its merits and demerits in detail
Condemnation of miserliness and covet
Treatment of miserliness and covet
Excellence of bounteousness
Stories about bounteous
Condemnation of niggardliness
Stories about niggards
Altruism and its excellence
Definition of generosity and niggardliness
Treatment of niggardliness
Various duties concerning property
Condemnation of richness and commendation of poverty

CHAPTER ONE: EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF WEALTH AND
REJECTION OF LOVING IT
Allah Almighty says: “O you who believe! Let not your riches or your children
divert you from the remembrance of Allah. If any act thus, the loss is their own.”
(Al-Munafiqun 9)
di)‘5 l^Ju

p-^=»idj'

4©

'>1

^

OiAJ*

y

p-*

He further says: “And know you that your possessions and your progeny are
but a trial; and that it is Allah with whom lies your highest reward.” (Al-Anfal 28)
4

jOJcS*

^

LcJt *1J-df-lj

So, whoever prefers his property and children to what is with Allah Almighty
has indeed been given to a great loss. Allah Almighty further says: “Those who
desire the life of the Present and its glitter, to them We shall pay (the price of)
their deeds therein, without diminution.” (Hud 15)
4 ©^ tp?

u_>ji

He also says: “Nay, but man does transgress all bounds, In that he looks upon
himself as self-sufficient.” (Al-Alaq 6-7)
4©
°kj {(J>}
oj
^
There is neither might nor power but with Allah, Most High, Most Great.
He says too: “The mutual rivalry for piling up (the good things of this world)
diverts you (from the more serious things), Until you visit the graves.” (AtTakathur 1-2)

Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth

385

i
fJJ !j*£
From among the Prophetic narrations, a mention may be made of the
following:
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
“Love for property and majesty causes hypocrisy to grow in the heart, in the
same way as water causes herbage to grow.” The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” further said: “No rabid wolves have been sent
to a fold of sheep, more destructive than those two of love for property, honour
and majesty in the religion of a Muslim person.” (This narration is reported by
At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i on the authority of Ka’b Ibn Malik). The Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said too: “Let these of much
property be ruined, except those who spend it on the servants of Allah as such
and such; and how few they are!” (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani on
the authority of Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Abza; Ahmad on the authority of Abu
Sa’id; and both sheikhs on the authority of Abu Dharr). It was said to the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: “O Messenger of
Allah! Which of your people is the worst?” he said: “The rich among them.”
(This narration is reported, with slight change of wording, by At-Tabarani and AlBaihaqi on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Ja’far; and Al-Bazzar on the authority
of Abu Hurairah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: “After you, a people will come and eat the most pleasant things of this
world in their variety, ride the most graceful horses in their variety, marry the
most beautiful women in their variety, put on the smartest clothes in their variety.
They will have bellies which are not satiated with the little, and souls which are
never satisfied with the much. They will devote themselves to this world, go and
return to it. They will take it as a god apart from their God (Allah), and a lord
apart from their Lord. They will be subject to it, and follow their own desires and
whims. So, it is a command from Muhammad Ibn Abdullah, to such of your
spring as joins that time, not to greet them, nor visit the sick among them, nor
follow their funeral processions, nor respect the old among them, for whoever
does so will help undermine (the structure of) Islam.” (This is reported by AtTabarani on the authority of Abu Umamah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "Leave the world to its adherents, for whoever takes from the world more
than his need will indeed take his destruction unfeelingly." (This narration is
reported by Al-Bazzar on the authority of Anas). The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" also said: "The son of Adam says: 'My
property! My property! Do you have from your property but what you eat and
consume, you put on and tear, or give in charity and send forward?" (This
narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Ash-Shakhir
and Abu Hurairah). A man asked the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him”: "O Messenger of Allah! Why do I not love death?" he asked
him: "Do you have property?" he answered in the affirmative, thereupon the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Then, send it

;

t ;

V
r
'

■

The quarter of the destructives
386
forward, for whoever sends forward his property likes to join it, and whoever
leaves behind his property likes to remain behind with it." The Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Mankind has real three
friends: one follows him until his souls is arrested, the other to his grave, and the
third to his resurrection. His property follows him until his soul is arrested. His
family follows him to his grave. His deed follows him to his resurrection." (This
narration is reported by Ahmad and At-Tabarani on the authority of An-Nu'man
Ibn Bashir).
The disciples said to Jesus, son of Mary “peace be upon them”: "Why do
you have the ability to walk on water and we have not?" he asked them: "What
is the rank of money in your sight?" they praised it, thereupon he said: "But it is
of no significance to me." Salman Al-Farisi wrote the following to Abu AdDarda' “Allah be pleased with them”: "O my brother! Beware of gathering from
this world what you do not give thanks for it, for I heard the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” saying: "On the Day of
Judgement, the world adherent who obeyed Allah in it will be brought with his
property in front of him, and the more he will turn down on the path, the more
his property will say to him: 'Proceed on safely, for you have fulfilled the right
of Allah due upon me'; and the world adherent who did not obey Allah in it will
be brought with his property in between his shoulders, and the more he will
turn down on the path, the more his property will say to him: 'Woe to you! Why
did you not fulfill the right of Allah due upon me?' He will remain as such until
he will invoke perdition and destruction upon himself." (This narration is
reported by Al-Baihaqi).
What we have narrated in the Book of Asceticism and condemnation of
richness and praise of poverty refers in the end to the condemnation of wealth.
So, there is no need to repeat that once again here. The same is true of what has
been related in condemnation of this world, since wealth constitutes its main
component. But, let's now relate what is narrated regarding wealth in particular.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "If
a man dies, the angels say: "What has he sent forward?" but the people say:
"What has he left?" (This narration is reported by Al-Baihaqi on the authority
of Abu Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” further said: "Do not take landed property, lest you would have
desire for this world." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi and AlHakim on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud).
From among the sayings, a mention may be made of the following:
It is reported that a man abused Abu Ad-Darda' “Allah be pleased with him”
and did evil to him, thereupon he said: "O Allah! as for him who has abused me,
make healthy his body, make abundant his property, and make long his lifetime."
Consider how he regarded much property to be the utmost trial and affliction,
particularly when added to health and long life, and this is because it should
inevitably lead to transgression. Ali “Allah be pleased with him” put a Dirham on
his hand and said: "Indeed, if you are not given out by me, you would be of no
benefit for me."

i
i
1

!
p

i.

!
«

f

387
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
It is reported that Umar “Allah be pleased with him” sent to Zainab Bint
Jahsh her income, and when she asked about it, she was told that it was her
income which was sent to her by Umar. She said: "May Allah forgive for him!"
Then she took a curtain she had and tore it and made it a case in which she put
her income and distributed it among her family, kith and kin and the orphans
who were under her guardianship. Then, she raised her hand saying: "O Allah! let
not me receive the income of Umar after this year of mine!" she died and was the
first among the wives of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” to join him.
According to AJ-Hassan: "By Allah, none has ever honoured money but that
Allah disgraced him." It is said that when Dirham and Dinar were coined, Iblis
raised them and placed them on his forehead and kissed them saying: "Whoever
likes you is really my servant." Samit Ibn Ajlan said: "No doubt, Dirhams and
Dinars would be the reins of hypocrites, thereby they would be led to the fire of
Hell." According to Yahya Ibn Mu’adh: "The dirham is like a scorpion and if you
are not perfect in treating it with good Ruqyah, then, do not take it, for if it bites
you, its poison will kill you." He was asked: "What is its Ruqyah?" he said: "To
take it form lawful sources, and spend it properly."
Al-Ala’ Ibn Ziyad said: “I saw in a dream an old lady dressed in skin, and
having from all colours of adornment, and the people were attached to her in
awe, and looking at her. I came close to her and looked and wondered at their
looking at her and devotion to it in such admiration. I then asked her: “Woe to
you! Who are you?” she said: “Do you not know me?” I answered in the negative,
thereupon she said: “I’m the world.” I said: “Then, I seek refuge with Allah from
your evil!” she said: “If you like to be given refuge from my evil, then, you should
have aversion for Dirham and Dinar.” That is because money constitutes the
main component of this world, for with them everything might be obtained.
Whoever keeps patient on abandoning them has indeed kept patient on
abandoning the entire world.
It is reported that Maslamah Ibn Abd-Al-Malik entered upon Umar Ibn AbdAl-Aziz "may Allah have mercy upon him" at his last moments and said to him:
"O Commander of Believers! You have done a thing which none of the rulers has
ever done before you. You have left your children with no single Dirham (to
inherit from you)." He had thirteen children. On that he asked to be made to sit
down and then he said: "As for your statement that I have not left any Dirham
for them (to inherit), it should be known that I have not forbidden to them any
right they are eligible to take, nor have I given them any right that is for others
than them. My children are one of two: either obedient to Allah, and Allah
suffices him, for Allah is the friend and protector of the righteous, or disobedient
to Allah, and I do not care about his destiny."
It is reported that Muhammad Ibn Ka'b Al-Qarzi had much property and it
was said to him: "Save it for your children." He said: "No, but I save it for my
own soul with my Lord, and leave my Lord for my children." It was said to Abu
Abd Rabbih: "O my brother! Do not go with evil and leave your children with
good." On that he gave out one hundred thousand Dirhams from his property."

The quarter of the destructives
388
Yahya Ibn Mu'adh said: "Man encounters two calamities at his death regarding
his property, and neither the foremost nor the last have ever heard about them
before." He was asked about diem, thereupon he said: "Although his property
entirely is taken from him, he will be questioned about it entirely."

CHAPTER TWO
EXPOSmON OF PRAISE AND CONDEMNATION OF WEALTH
SIMULTANEOUSLY
It should be known that Allah Almighty has given the property the name
of good in many places of His Holy Book. Consider His Statement: " It is
prescribed, when death approaches any of you, if he leave any goods, that he
make a bequest to parents and next of kin, according to reasonable usage."
(Al-Baqarah 180)

4 10
LaiThe Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "How
good is the property for the good man." (This narration is reported by Ahmad
and At-Tabarani on the authority of Amr Ibn Al-As). To be sure, what is related
concerning charity and performance of Hajj refers to the good of property, since
without it nothing of those could be achieved.
Allah Almighty further says: "so your Lord desired that they should attain
their age of full strength and get out their treasure a mercy (and favour) from
your Lord." (Al-Kahf 82)
4 ^2^

Cr?

J

L>-jh-LLjj ^

He says reminding His servants of His favors upon them: "Give you increase
in wealth and sons; and bestow on you gardens and bestow on you rivers (of
flowing water)." (Nuh 12)
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Poverty is about to lead to ingratitude." (This narration is reported by Al-Baihaqi
on the authority of Anas). This statement is to praise property.
One could not understand the point of combination between praise and
dispraise of property unless he knows the wisdom of property, the real purpose
of it, and its merits and demerits. By so doing, it would be revealed that it is good
in some point and evil in some point, and it is praised when it is good, and
dispraised when it is evil. It is not merely good nor merely evil. This is why it is
sometimes praised and sometimes dispraised. But the insightful discerning person
knows for certain that what is praiseworthy of it differs from what is
blameworthy thereof. It is satisfactory to say here that the purpose of the
intelligent wise people is the happiness of the hereafter which represents the
abiding bliss. This is the purpose of the generous and bountiful. When the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” was asked about
the most generous and the most intelligent among the people, he said: "Those

!
I

389
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
who remember death and get ready for it most among them." (This narration is
reported by Ibn Majah on the authority of Ibn Umar).
This happiness is attained only by three means in this world: merits of soul,
like knowledge and good manners; merits of body like health and soundness; and
merits that are outside the body like property and all the other means. The
highest of them all are those of the soul, then those of the body and then those
outside the body. In this way, those outside the body are the most despicable
among them all, and of a surety, wealth is included in those. Money is also the
most despicable among the despicable merits for it serves all and nothing serves
it, and it is wanted for other than it and not for its own self. As for soul, it is the
precious valuable gem that should be made happy, and it serves knowledge and
good manners, in order to obtain them as integral part of it. Body serves soul by
means of organs and senses, and food and clothes serve body; and we have
already explained that the purpose of food is just to sustain body, and of
marriage to preserve progeny, and of body to perfect and justify soul and adorn it
with knowledge and good character. The knowledge of that sequence gives a due
estimate of wealth, in terms of being necessary for food and clothes, which, in
turn, is necessary to sustain the body, which, in turn, is necessary to perfect the
soul, which is good in itself. If one is acquainted with the benefit, final goal and
purpose of a particular thing, and uses it only for that final goal, without turning
to anything else, he will do good and get benefit, and his deed will achieve the
right purpose.
The wealth then is a tool and a means for a right purpose. But at the
same time, it is possible to be used as a tool and a means for corrupt
purposes, i.e. the purposes that keep off the happiness of the hereafter, and
close the way of knowledge and deed. This is why it is praiseworthy at some
point and blameworthy at some point: it is praiseworthy when its purpose is
praiseworthy, and blameworthy when its purpose is blameworthy. Whoever
takes from this world more than what is sufficient for him, has indeed taken
his destruction unfeelingly (according to the narration of Al-Bazzar on the
authority of Anas). Since men are inclined, by nature, to follow desires and
lusts which cut the way to Allah Almighty, and since wealth is to facilitate
that, there is a great danger in taking from it more than the necessary needs
and requirements.
This is why the Prophets “peace be upon them” sought refuge with Allah
from its evil. Our Prophet “peace be upon him” said in this issue: "O Allah!
Limit the sustenance of the family of Muhammad to the point of satisfying only
the minimum requirements of living." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs
on the authority of Abu Hurairah). Thus, he did not demand from this world but
that whose good is expected. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” further said: "O Allah! let me live as a poor, Cause me to die as a
poor, and gather me in the company of the poor persons." (This narration is
reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Anas; Ibn Majah and Al-Hakim on
the authority of Abu Sa'id). Abraham “peace be upon him” sought refuge with
Allah Almighty from such wealth when he said: "O my Lord! make this city one

The quarter of the destructives
390
of peace and security: and preserve me and my sons from worshipping idols."
(Ibrahim 35)

4 SfS fo' Zgi

!
'

' i

i

3

^>-Toj ^’jjJ Dii 5j3 ^

Of a surety, he intended here both gold and silver, for the rank of the
Prophet deems him far above ascribing divinity to such stones, given that he
was sufficed that even before his Prophethood when he was still very young.
But the meaning of worship here is to have love for, be deceived by, and rely
on them.
The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: " Let the slave
of Dinar, Dirham, and the garment perish as he will be pleased if these things
are given to him, and if not, he will be displeased. Let such a person perish and
relapse, and if he is stabbed with a thorn, let him find no one to take it out for
him.” (It is narrated by Ibn Majah, Al-Hakim and Al-Bukhari on the authority
of Abu Hurairah). Here, he shows that whoever loves those (Dirham and
Dinar) becomes a worshipper of them, and whoever worships a stone is a
worshipper of an idol, and whoever worships anything else other than Allah
Almighty is like a worshipper of idols, for such worship diverts him from Allah
Almighty, and hinders him from fulfilling His rights. This is polytheism. But
there are two kinds of polytheism: hidden polytheism which does not enjoin the
eternal life in the fire of Hell, and the believers could almost hardly be free
form it, for it is more hidden than the creeping of ants; and apparent
polytheism, which enjoins the eternal life in the fire of Hell: we seek refuge with
Allah form both.

CHAPTER THREE
EXPOSITION OF MERITS AND DEMERITS OF WEALTH

i i;

It should be known that property is like a female-snake which has poison and
medicine. Its merits lie in the medicine it has, and its demerits lie in the poison it
contains. If one knows its merits and demerits he becomes able to beware of its
evil and get benefit from its good.
As for its merits, they are divided into worldly and religious. There is no need
to mention those worldly merits for they are well-known and common to all of
the people, and had it not been for this, they would not have competed over
demanding it
As for the religious merits, they are included under three:
The first is to spend on oneself, either in an act of worship or to seek its aid
on an act of worship. One might spend money in such acts of worship as Hajj
and Jihad, which could not be accomplished without;. property; and they are
among the principal acts of worship, of which the poor and needy are deprived.
He might spend money to sustain himself like getting food, clothes, residence,
marriage, and all the other requirements of living. If those needs are not available,
the heart will be occupied by them and not disengaged for the religion; and the
means by which worship is accessed is also regarded worship. Thus, to take what
is sufficient from this world in order to seek its aid in fulfillment of the
requirements of religion is a religious merit. But this does not include luxury and

Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth

391

getting what is beyond the need, for those belong to the worldly transitory
portions.
The second is to spend money on people. It is of four divisions: alms,
benevolence, protection of honour and charge of employment. The reward alms
is not hidden, and it is sufficient to say that it extinguishes the fire of the wrath
oh the Lord Almighty. We have already made a mention of its reward in detail. In
relation to benevolence, it is meant to spend money on the rich and dignitaries in
the form of hospitality, gifts and aids. This is different from alms which is unique
to the needy and poor. But anyway, it is among the religious merits, since by
which one acquires brothers and friends, obtains the attribute of generosity and
bounty, and joins the company of the generous. None is described as generous
unless he does favor to others. There is a great reward for that, according to
many narrations about the excellence of giving food and gifts and entertaining
not the poor and needy.
As for protection of honour, we mean by it the spending of money to avert
the verbal criticism of the foolish and lampoon of poets, and repel their evil and
harm. This is one of the religious portions no matter how close it might be to the
transitory fortunes. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "What is spend by a man to protect his honour therewith is recorded
as a charity for him." (This narration is reported by Abu Ya'li on the authority of
Jabir). Why not since it prevents the backbiter from backbiting, and suppresses
enmity because of his evil words, which might result in transgression and
exceeding the due limits in exacting retribution.
Regarding the charge for employment, to be sure, the acts and works that
facilitate life for man are many, and if he is to do all of them by himself, he will
waste his time, and it will become difficult upon him to follow the way to the
hereafter through remembrance and meditation, which is the highest station.
Whoever has no money needs to do by himself all works to serve himself,, which
puts him to severe trouble, for by so doing, he will loose the other acts of
worship such as knowledge, deed, celebration and meditation, which none else
could do on his behalf. In this way, he will waste his time in great loss.
The third is not to spend on a particular man, but rather to achieve a public
interest, like building mosques, bridges, hospitals, hostelries, and the other
endowments assigned to serve the public interests of people. This is among the
permanent good things whose reward survives even after death, and which bring
about the blessing of the supplications of the righteous.
These are the religious merits of money, let alone the transitory portions, like
salvation from humiliation of begging, getting rid of destitution and attaining
honour and power, getting more brothers, friends and helpers, and gaining
respect and reverence in the hearts of others.
In relation to the demerits of property, they are divided into religious and
worldly. The religious are three:
The first is to lead to disobedience and committing sins. To be sure, desires
and lusts are various, and in many cases, financial disability might hinder one
from committing much sins, and in this way, it is out of protection for him to
have no money. Whenever man has no hope of doing a sin, he is not motivated

The quarter of the destructives
392
to do it. But once he feels he is able to do it, he is motivated to do it. Money
gives one the ability to do sins, and once it is available, one is motivated to
commit sins. If he commits sins, he would be ruined, and if he keeps padent, he
will be put to severe difficulty, for patience with ability is more difficult on the
soul, and the affliction of luxury and comfort is more grievous than that of
adversity and hardship.
The second is to lead to luxury and indulgence in what is permissible, and
this is the first degree (of evil). Should the wealthy be able to limit himself to
the parley bread, the coarse and rough clothes, and leave the delicious kinds
of food as the Prophet Solomon “peace be upon him” used to do, in spite of
his great dominion? But with luxury , indulgence in the pleasures of this world
becomes customary to him with which he could not dispense. Once he is not
able to give it up, and at the same time, he is exposed to a financial crisis, he
would probably be forced to achieve his luxury through unlawful sources,
adulation, flattery, hypocrisy, showing off, and even telling lies. Whoever has
much property, his need of people grows so much, and whoever becomes in
need of people should inevitably be forced to flatter them and disobey Allah
Almighty in order to please them. It is from that need that both enmity and
friendship arise, which give rise to envy, hatred, rancor, arrogance, talebearing,
backbiting, telling lies, and the other sins which belong to both heart and
tongue.
The third from which almost none is free is that the maintenance of his
property diverts him from the remembrance of Allah as it should be, and it is a
great loss to be diverted from Allah Almighty. For this reason, Jesus “peace be
upon him” said: "Money has three evils: it is taken from unlawful sources." It
was said: "But if it is taken from lawful sources?" he said: "Then, it is spent
improperly." It was said: "But if it is spent properly?" he said: "Then, it surely
diverts from the remembrance of Allah Almighty." This is the chronic disease,
for the foundation, essence and marrow of worship is to remember Allah
Almighty, and reflect on His Majesty and Glory, and this requires a disengaged
heart, and the owner of property is not so, for he always spends morning and
evening in occupation of the maintenance of his wealth, each according to his
profession and trade. But he, who has only the sustenance of his day is safe
from all of that.
Those are the worldly evils of property, let alone the suffering of the owners
of wealth, regarding trouble, hard work of collecting money, fear of loosing it,
anxiety, worry, anguish, difficulty of averting enviers, trouble of maintaining and
preserving it, and the like of these. The medicine of property then is to take only
the necessary sustenance from it, and spend the surplus on different sides of
good; and what is beyond that is poisons. We ask Allah Almighty to help us do
so, and grant us safety form its evil: He has power over all things.

CHAPTER FOUR
EXPOSmON OF CONDEMNATION OF MISERLINESS AND COVET; AND
PRAISE OF CONTENTMENT
It should be known that poverty is praiseworthy provided that the poor

393
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
should be satisfied, not covetous of what is in the hand of people, nor eager to
earn money whatever it might be. He is not so unless he becomes contented with
the necessary food, clothes and residence, and limit the range of his hope to his
day or month at maximum. But if he has longing for much wealth, or makes long
the range of his expectations, the honour of contentment will escape him, and he
will be put to humiliation of covet and greed, which inevitably lead him to the
bad manners and committing shameful deeds. However, mankind is predisposed,
by nature, to greed and covet, and lack of contentment and satisfaction.
From among the Prophetic narrations regarding this issue, a mention may be
made of the following:
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Were mankind to have two valleys of gold, he would seek to have a third, for
nothing fills the inside of mankind but dust, and Allah turns in repentance to
whomever He wills." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on the
authority of Ibn Abbas and Anas). It is narrated on the authority of Abu
Waqid Al-Laithi “Allah be pleased with him” that he said: Whenever the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” received a new
revelation, we would come to learn it from him. One day I came to him and
he said: Allah Almighty says: "We have sent money in order that people would
establish prayer and give alms; and were mankind to have a valley of gold, he
would like to have another valley, and were he to have two, he would like to
have a third, and nothing but dust fills the inside of mankind; and Allah
Almighty turns in repentance to whoever repents." (This is reported by
Ahmad and Al-Baihaqi).
Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari “Allah be pleased with him” said: A Surah like Bara'ah
was revealed and then it was taken away, with the following remaining of it:
"Verily, Allah Almighty supports that religion through people who have no
portion (in the hereafter); and Were mankind to have two valleys of money, he
would seek to have a third, for nothing fills the inside of mankind but dust, and
Allah turns in repentance to whoever repents." (This narration is reported by
Muslim with a slight variation of wording; and At-Tabarani literally).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "Two eaten things never satiate: that of knowledge and that of wealth."
(This narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud). The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” also said:
"Mankind grows old and two things remain still young with him, the long hope
and love for wealth" or in similar words, (this narration is reported by both
sheikhs on the authority of Anas).
Since this is a misleading instinct and destructive nature in mankind, Allah
and His Messenger “peace be upon him” praised contentment. In this issue, the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Blessed be
he who is guided to Islam and has only the minimum requirements of living with
which he is satisfied." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i
on the authority of Fadalah Ibn Ubaid; and Muslim on the authority of
Abdullah Ibn Umar). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be

i«
!:

!
:
!|

i

ij

The quarter of the destructives
394
upon him” said too: "No one, be he poor or rich, but that on the Day of
Judgement, he would like to have been given sustenance in this world (as little as)
to cover only his basic needs).” (This narration is reported by Ibn Majah on the
authority of Anas). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "Richness does not result from much property, but rather richness
results from self-satisfaction." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on the
authority of Abu Hurairah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
forbade greed and earnest pursuit of money. He said: "O people! Constrict your
pursuit (of wealth), for no servant will take but what is written for him, and no
servant will leave this world before he is given what is written for him." (This
narration is reported by Al-Hakim on the authority of Jabir). It is reported that
Moses “peace be upon him” asked Allah Almighty: "O Lord! Which of Your
servants is the richest?" He said: "The most contented among them with what I
have given him." He said: "Then, which of them is the justest?" He said: "Who
takes back the right from himself most among them."
Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "The Holy Spirit inspired me that no soul
will die until it receives its sustenance that is written for it. So, fear Allah and
constrict your pursuit (of money)." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu AdDunya and Al-Hakim). Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” said: the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said to me: "O
Abu Hurairah! If you are given to severe hunger, I advise you to have a loaf and a
cup of water, and everything otherwise in this world is exposed to destruction."
Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” further said: the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Be pious perchance you would
be the most worshipping among the people; and be contented perchance you
would be the most thanksgiving among the people; and love for the people the
same as you love for yourself, perchance you would be a faithful believer." (This
narration is reported by Ibn Majah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” forbade
covet according to the narration of Abu Ayyub Al-Ansari “Allah be pleased with
him” in which he said: A Bedouin came to the Prophet “peace be upon him” and
said: "O Messenger of Allah! Give me a brief advice." On that he said: "When
you offer prayer, pray like a man who bids farewell (as he is going to leave this
world immediately), and do not say anything (evil) for which you are forced to
apologize, and loose hope of what is in the hands of people." (This narration is
reported by Ibn Majah; and Al-Hakim on the authority of Sa'd Ibn Abu
Waqqas).
It is narrated on the authority of Awf Ibn Malik Al-Ashja’i “Allah be pleased
with him” that he said: We were seven, eight or nine with the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”, and he said to us: “Should you
not give the pledge of allegiance to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him?” we stretched our hands and one (of us) said: “O
Messenger of Allah! We have given you the pledge of allegiance (earlier): then,

395
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
for which (more) should we give you the pledge of allegiance (once again)?” on
that he said: “To worship Allah (Alone) and not ascribe anything to Him (in
worship), to establish the five (obligatory) prayers (in congregation), to listen
and obey (your rulers), (and he said a word in secrecy after which he said) and
to ask nothing from the people.” He (the narrator) said: I saw that if the whip
fell down from anyone of those, he would not ask anyone to bring it to him.
(This narration is reported by Muslim, Ibn Majah and Abu Dawud).
From among the sayings and tradidons, a mention may be made of the
following:
Umar Ibn Al-Khattab “Allah be pleased with him” said: "No doubt, covet
leads to poverty, and despair (of getting what is in the hands of people) leads to
richness; and whoever looses hope of having what is in the hands of people
dispenses with them." One of the wise men was asked about the concept of
richness, thereupon he said: "It is to limit your hopes, and be satisfied with what
suffices you." In this meaning, it was said (in a form of poetic verses): "Living is
but hours to pass quickly. So, be satisfied with your living, perchance you would
be contented, and leave your desires perchance you would living as a free. For it
may be that gold and pearl lead to destruction of its pursuer."
It was the habit of Muhammad Ibn Wasi' "may Allah have mercy upon him"
to wet the dry bread with water and eat thereof and say: "Whoever is satisfied
with that needs not anyone." According to Sufyan "may Allah have mercy upon
him": "The best of your world is that by which you are not put to trial, and the
best of your trials is that which is not in your hands." According to Ibn Mas'ud
“Allah be pleased with him”: "No day comes but that an angel calls: "O
mankind! The little that satisfies you is better than the much that causes you to
be a transgressor." According to Samit Ibn Ajlan: "O mankind! Your abdomen
is no more than a span in a span: why should it leads you to the fire?" a wise
man was asked bout his wealth thereupon he said: "It is to seem outwardly
beautiful and be inwardly moderate, and loose hope of what is in the hands of
the people."
It is reported that Allah Almighty said: "O mankind! if the integral world
becomes in your possession, you will have from it only your sustenance, and if I
give you your sustenance from it and make the reckoning for it on anyone else,
then, I would be charitable to you." According to Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased
with him”: "If anyone of you is to ask for anything, let him ask for it easily and
kindly, for indeed, he will not take but the sustenance that is doomed to him to
take." One of the Umayyads wrote to Abu Hazim, asking him decisively to raise
his needs to him, thereupon he replied: "I have raised my needs to my Lord, and
have accepted what He gives me of it, and been satisfied with what He withholds
from me from it."
It was said to a wise man: "Which is the most pleasant thing to the rational,
and which is the most helpful thing to remove grief?" in reply, he said: "The most
pleasant thing to him is the good righteous deed which he sends forward, and the
most helpful thing to remove grief is the contentment with the preordained fate."
According to another wise man: "I have found out that the one who has the

The quarter of the destructives
396
deepest anxiety among the people is the envier, the most pleased among them is
the contented, the most long-suffering among diem on harm is the miser when
he covets, the one who has the best living is he who rejects the world most
among them, and die one who shows the greatest regrets among them is the
learnt who indulges in this world."
Umar “Allah be pleased with him” said: "Should I not tell you about what I
render lawful from the property of Allah Almighty? Two garments, one to
protect me from die cold of winter, and the other from the heat of summer, a
riding mount to perform Hajj and Umrah, and afterwards, my sustenance is like
the sustenance of anyone of the Quraish people, in a way diat makes me neither
the highest nor the lowest among them. By Allah, I do not know even whether or
not this is lawful." He seemed to have doubt whether this amount was beyond
what is sufficient for contentment.
One blamed his brother for miserliness, saying: "O my brother! You are a
petitioner and petitioned: you are petitioned by Him Whom nothing could
escape, and you petition that which you are sufficed, as if what is absent from you
has been revealed to you, and what is you have has been removed from you. You
seem, O my brother, that you have not seen a deprived miser nor a sustained
abstinent." In a similar meaning, it was said (in a form of poetic verses): "I see
that your richness makes you more keen on this world, as if you would never die,
but, is there an end with which you could say: 'This is sufficient for me for I
have been contented'?"
It is related by Ash-Sha'bi "may Allah have mercy upon him" that a man
caught a comb, thereupon it asked him: "What do you like to do with me?" he
said: "I like to slaughter and then eat you." It said: "By Allah, my flesh never
satiates you. But let me teach you three things, which are better for you than to
eat me, one of which while I am in your hand, the second when I become on the
tree, and the third when I become on the mountain. He asked it to give him the
first advice, and it said: "Do not grieve for what escapes you." He then released it.
When it became on the tree, he asked it to give him the second and it said: "Do
not believe that what is not will not be." When it flew and became on the
mountain, it said: "O wretched man! Were you to slay me, you would have
extracted from my inside two pearls, the value of each of which is twenty
weights." He then grieved and bit his lip. Then he asked it to give him the third
advice, thereupon it said: "You have forgotten two things, how should I give you
the third? Have I not told you not to grieve for what has escaped you, nor to
believe that what was not would be? My flesh, blood and feather are not equal to
twenty weights, how would I have in my inside two pearls, the value of each of
which is twenty weights?" then, it flew and disappeared. This is an example for
the excessive covet characteristic of mankind, which blinds him from seeing the
truth, until he thinks what is not will be.
According to Ibn As-Sammak: "No doubt, hope is a rope in your heart and a
fetter in your foot. So, take out the hope from your heart, so that your foot
would be released from the fetter." Abu Muhammad Al-Yazidi said: I visited ArRashid and found him looking at a paper containing something written in gold,

397
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
and when he saw me, he smiled. I said: "Does it contain a benefit, may Allah
mend you O Commander of Believers?" he answered in the affirmative saying. "I
have found these two poedc verses in a store belonging to the Umayyads, and
regarded them as good, to which I added a third verse." He then recited to me
the following: "If the gate of a need is closed in your face, then, leave it for
another perchance its gate would be opened to you. It is sufficient for you to fill
your abdomen (to satisfy your hunger), and avoid the evil matters. Moreover, do
not give out your honour, and avoid sins, perchance you would be kept far from
punishment because of that."
Abdullah Ibn Salam “Allah be pleased with him” asked Ka'b: "What does
cause the sciences to vanish from the minds of the learnt, after they had
understood and retained them well?" he said: "Covet, self-greediness and demand
of needs." A man asked Al-Fudail to explain to him the statement of Ka'b “Allah
be pleased with him” thereupon he said: "It means that a man covets of a thing
which he demands thereupon he looses his religion. As for self-greediness, it
makes one the keenest eager to skip nothing at all. In relation to the demand of
needs, it is that you have a need from so and so, and another need from so and
so, and once he fulfills your need, he might disgrace you with it, leads you
wherever and whatever he likes, with the result that you would become subject to
him. If he passes by you, you greet him, and if he falls ill, you visit him to inquire
about his health, just out of your love for this world and not for the Sake of Allah
Almighty. Were you to have no need from him, it would have been better for
you." Then he said: "This is better for you than one hundred narrations to take
through weak chains of transmission."
According to a wise man: "It is surprising that if mankind is given the glad
news of his permanent life in this world, he would not be inclined, by nature, to
collect wealth more than he does, given his short enjoyment and expectation of
death at any moment." According to Abd-Al-Wahid Ibn Zaid: "I came upon a
monk whom I asked: "From where do you eat?" he said: "From the grain-store of
(Allah), Most Kind, Full of Knowledge: He Who created the millstone brings to it
its grist." Then, he beckoned with his hand to his molar teeth. Glory be to
(Allah), the Omnipotent, Full of Knowledge.

CHAPTER FIVE
TREATMENT OF MISERLINESS AND COVET; AND MEDICINE BY WHICH
CONTENTMENT IS ACQUIRED
It should be known that this medicine is composed of three elements:
padence, knowledge and work, and their composition produces five things.
The first pertains to work, i.e. to be thrifty and moderate in ving an
spending. Whoever likes to attain the honour of contentment, should close upon
he could, and reduce himself, as
himself all gates of spendings as much as
. That is because he
possible as he could, to the necessary needs and requirements
If one
whose spendings are extensive could not be satisfie wit co/1 J
single
lives alone, he should be satisfied with a single coarse an ^roug g, ^
his
kind of food whatsoever, make little his condimen
he should reduce
capacity and get himself accustomed to

The quarter of the destructives
398
each of them to the same extent which is easy with the minimum effort, and with
which one becomes able to reduce his demands and be reasonable in his living. It
is the origin of contentment, i.e. to be moderate in spending, and give up
extravagancy and profligacy.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Indeed, Allah likes moderateness in all affairs." (This narration is reported by
both sheikhs on the authority of A'ishah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "Not destitute is he who adheres
to economy (in his living)." (This narration is reported by Ahmad and AtTabarani on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud and Ibn Abbas). The Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said too: "Three are saviors: fear
of Allah Almighty in secrecy and public, moderateness in both states of richness
and poverty, and justice in both states of anger and pleasure." (This narration is
reported by Al-Bazzar, At-Tabarani, Abu Na'im and AJ-Baihaqi on the authority
of Anas).
It is reported that a man saw Abu Ad-Darda' “Allah be pleased with him”
picking up grains from the ground saying: "Your moderateness in living is out of
your religious knowledge and understanding." Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with
them” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: "Economy, right way and guidance are a part of over twenty parts of
Prophethood." (this narration is reported by Abu Dawud; and At-Tirmidhi on
the authority of Abdullah Ibn Sarjis). According to a particular narration:
"Economy constitutes half the living." (This is narrated by Abu Mansur AdDailami on the authority of Anas).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "He who adheres to economy (in living), Allah Almighty enriches him; and
he, who spends extravagantly, Allah Almighty impoverishes him; and he who
remembers Allah, Allah Almighty loves him." (This narration is reported by AiBazzar on the authority of Talhah Ibn Ubaidullah). The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "If you intend to do a thing, you
have to be thrifty' until Allah Almighty makes for you a relief and a way out."
(This narration is reported by Ibn Al-Mubarak). To be sure, thrift in spending is
one of the most important things to be observed.
The second is that if what is suffices him immediately is available to him, he
should not trouble himself for the sake of the future. He is helped do so if he
shortens the range of his hope and is verified that he should inevitably receive the
sustenance that is doomed to him, no matter miser or generous he might be. That
is because the severe miserliness is not the right way to receive sustenance. On
the contrary, he should be confident of the promise of Allah Almighty Who says:
" There is no moving creature on earth but its sustenance depends on Allah: He
knows the time and place of its definite abode and its temporary deposit: all is in
a clear Record." (Hud 6)
14^3^3 IajiszS

14sjj &\ jp

+$

However, Satan always promises him poverty and enjoins lewdness upon him,
saying*. "Unless you are miser and keen on collecting and saving, it may be that

399
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
you fall ill and become powerless, and expose yourself to endure humiliation of
begging."
Thus, he continues to trouble him, along his lifetime by pressing him to
pursue wealth and money, for fear of poverty, and at the same time, the more he
gets troubled, the more he laughs at him. It is said in description of such a case:
"And whoever spends long times in collecting his wealth for fear of poverty,
then, it is indeed the poverty which he does." Once, both sons of Khalid entered
upon the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” who said
to them: "Despair not of the sustenance as long as life runs in your bodies, for
man is born by his mother as red and naked and then he is sustained by Allah
Almighty." (This narration is reported by Ibn Majah on the authority of Habbah
and Sawa', sons of Khalid). Once, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” came upon Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him” who
was in the state of grief. On that he said to him: "Reduce your concerns, for what
has been decreed would inevitably be, and you should certainly receive your
sustenance (that is doomed to you)." (This narration is reported by Abu Na'im on
the authority of Khalid Ibn Rati*). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: "Behold! O people! Reduce your pursuit (for this
world), for no servant will have but what has been doomed to him, and none
would leave this world before he receives from it what has been doomed to him
in willing submission."
Therefore, man could not give up miserliness unless he has good confidence
of Allah’s right regulation of the matters, in terms of the determination of the
sustenance of his servants, which they should inevitably get even if they reduce
their pursuit. I should be known that Allah gives sustenance more often to His
servant from sources which he expects not as shown from His statement: " And
for those who fear Allah, He (ever) prepares a way out, And He provides for him
from (sources) he never could imagine." (At-Talaq 2-3)
If a gate of sustenance is closed upon him, he should not put himself to
trouble for it. the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "Allah is resolute but to sustain His believing servant from sources
which he never imagines." (This narration is reported by Ibn Hibban on the
authority of Ali).
Al-Mufaddal Ad-Dabbi said: I asked a Bedouin: "From where do you earn
your living?" he said: "From the vows made in Hajj." I further asked: "Then, if
they depart (what do you do)?” on that he wept and said: "Were our living to be
suspended only on sources we know, surely, we would not live at all." Abu
Hazim “Allah be pleased with him” said: "I found out that this world is of two
things: one is for me, and thus I would not receive before its due time even if I
demand it by the power of the heavens and the earth; and the other is not for me,
and as I did not get it in the past, I would never expect to get it in the future.
What belongs to others than me is withheld from me, just as what belongs to me
is withheld form the others. How then should I spend my lifetime in any of
both?" this medicine is relevant to knowledge, and it is necessary to avert Satan's
intimidation of poverty.

The quarter of the destructives
The third is that one should know the honour of free of want that is gained
by contentment in contrast with the humiliation of miserliness, greed and covet.
Being verified of this fact, he would be more inclined to contentment, for
miserliness always brings about trouble, and covet leads to humiliation, in
contrast with only the pain of patience on lusts, desires and extra things that is
to be experienced in contentment. This pain is not known but to Allah
Almighty, for which one receives the reward in the hereafter, unlike miserliness
and covet, which make one vulnerable to die sight of people, in addition to the
evil consequence and sin he incurs upon himself. Moreover, the covetous
always looses the self-honour and the power to follow the truth. The more one
is covetous and miser, the more he becomes in need of people, whom he could
not invite to the truth: On the contrary, he is forced to flatter and adulate them,
which causes his religion to destruction. Whoever gives no preference to the
self-honour over the appetence of the abdomen surely suffers from deficiency
and weakness of mind and faith .

400

In this respect, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "The believer's honour results from his dispensing with the people."
(This narration is reported by At-Tabarani, Al-Hakim, Abu Ash-Shaikh and Abu
Na'im on the authority of Sahl Ibn Sa'd). both freedom and honour lie in
contentment. For this reason, it is said: "Dispense with whomever you like,
perchance you would be like him; and be in need of whomever you like,
perchance you would be his captive; and be kind to whomever you like,
perchance you would be his chief."
The fourth is to consider so often the luxury of Jews and Christians, in
addition to the lowly and foolish among the people, and those who have neither
religion nor mind, and compare their states with the states of the Prophets and
saints, the devotees of Allah Almighty, the rightly-guided caliphs, and all of the
companions and their followers and successors who followed them with good
conduct. He should also listen to their speech and narrations, regard their
affairs and states, and then give his mind the freedom to choose whether to
imitate the lowly and foolish among the people, or emulate the best and the
highest of people in the Sight of Allah Almighty. Having done so, it becomes
easier to him to keep patient on destitution and poverty, and be satisfied with
the little. If he enjoys much food, it should be known that the donkey eats more
than him; and if he enjoys much sex, it should be known that the pig is stronger
than him in sex; and if he gets adorned with clothes and ornaments, it should
be known that there is among the Jews and Christians such as has much
adornment and ornaments than him. But, on the contrary, if he is satisfied with
the little, none would share him in his rank except the Prophets and saints.
The fifth is to understand the great risk that lies in collecting wealth, as we
have already mentioned in the evil of money, in terms of the fear of robbery,
theft, loss, in contrast with the security and disengagement from worry to be
experienced by him who has no wealth. Furthermore, he should remember the
severe damage he would receive as we have mentioned in the evil of wealth, as he
would be kept away from the Garden for as long as five hundred years. That is

401
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
because if he is not satisfied with the necessity that suffice him, he would join
the company of the wealthy and rich, and be taken out of the group of the poor.
In order to do so, he should always look at such as inferior to him, and not to
such as superior to him in this world, for by the time Satan always turns his sight
to such of people as superior to him in wealth, saying: "Why do you weaken to
pursue wealth, given that owners of wealth enjoy delicious kinds of food, smart
clothes and graceful residence?" on the contrary, he turns his sight to such of
people as inferior to him in religion saying: "Why do you constrict living upon
yourself and fear Allah so much, given that so and so, who is more
knowledgeable than you, does not fear Allah as such? Furthermore, all the people
are amidst their enjoyment and luxury, so, why do you like to distinguish yourself
from them?"
Abu Dharr “Allah be pleased with him” said: My bosom friend, the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” recommended me
to look at such of people as inferior to me, and not at such of them as superior to
me (in this world)." (This narration is reported by Ahmad and Ibn Hibban). Abu
Hurairah “ALlah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "If anyone of you looked at such of
people as given superiority by Allah to him in wealth and character, he should
immediately turn to look at such of them as inferior to him, to whom he is given
superiority." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs).
It is by virtue of those things that one is able to acquire the characteristic
of contentment. Its basic fundament is patience and short hope. Additionally,
he should know that his patience in this world, whatever it might be, is very
limited, i.e. no more than a few days after which he will enjoy a long time. Ir
this way, he is like a sick who perseveres the bitter medicine in expectation foi
the permanent cure.

CHAPTER SIX
EXPOSITION OF EXCELLENCE OF BOUNTEOUSNESS
It should be known that if wealth is not available, one should devote
himself to satisfaction and keep himself from miserliness and greed; and if it
is available, he should devote himself to altruism, bounteousness, doing
favour, and rather keep himself far from niggardliness and covetousness. To
be sure, bounteousness is one of the good manners characteristic of the
Prophets “peace be upon them” as well as one of the foundations of
salvation, to which the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” referred in his statement: "Bounteousness is one of the trees of the
Garden, whose branches are hanging to the earth, and whoever takes hold of
any of those branches, it would inevitably lead him to the Garden." (This
narration is reported by Ibn Hibban on the authority of A'ishah; Ibn Adi and
Ad-Daraqatni on the authority of Abu Hurairah; and Abu Na'im on the
authority of Jabir).
Jabir “Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: Gabriel “peace be upon him” said:
Allah Almighty said: "This (Islam) is the religion which I have admitted for

The quarter of the destructives
402
Myself, and nothing maintains it but bounteousness and good moral
character. So, honour it with them as much as you could, (or, according to
another version, as much as you go along with them)." (This narration is
reported by Ad-Daraqatni). A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her” said: the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Allah
Almighty has never created any of His devotees but to be predisposed, by
nature, to good character and bounteousness." (This narration is reported by
Ad-Daraqatni and Ibn Adi).
Jabir “Allah be pleased with him” said: It was said: "O Messenger of Allah!
Which deed is the best?" on that he said: "Patience and openhandedness." (This
narration is reported by Abu Ya'li and Ibn Hibban; and Ahmad on the authority
of A'ishah). Abdullah Ibn Amr “Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Allah Almighty likes
two characteristics and dislikes other two: as for those which Allah Almighty
likes, they are good character and bounteousness; and as for those which Allah
Almighty dislikes, they are bad character and niggardliness; and if Allah intends
good for a man, He uses him in fulfillment of the needs of people." (This
narration is reported by Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami).
It is narrated on the authority of Al-Miqdam Ibn Shuraih from his father
from his grandfather that he said: I said: "O Messenger of Allah! Guide me to
a deed that causes me to enter Paradise." On that the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "What causes forgiveness to
be assured to you is to serve people with food, to greet with peace whomever
you meet, and to speak good words." (This narration is reported by AtTabarani). According to another version: "What makes Paradise assured is to
serve others with food and spread peace among the people." According to a
third narration on the same authority: "Adhere to good words and serve
others with food."
Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Bounteousness is a tree in the
Garden, and if anyone of the people is bounteous, he takes hold of anyone of its
branches, which never leaves him until it admits him to the Garden." (This
narration is reported by Ad-Daraqatni). Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri “Allah be pleased
with him” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: Allah Almighty says: "Seek bounty from the merciful among My servants,
perchance you would live in their shade for I have lodged in them My mercy; and
do not seek it from those of hardened hearts, for I have lodged in them My
displeasure." (This narration is reported by Ibn Hibban, Al-Khara'iti and AtTabarani).
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with them” that
he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Ignore the sin of the bounteous, for Allah Almighty takes hold of his hand
whenever he stumbles." (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani and AlKhara'iti). Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "No doubt, sustenance runs faster

403
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
towards the provider of food than a knife to the hump of a camel; and Allah
Almighty commends the provider of food before His angels “peace be upon
them”." (This narration is reported by Ibn Majah on the authority of Anas and
Ibn Abbas but with a slight variation of wording).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Indeed, Allah is munificent, and He likes munificence and good manners; and
He dislikes the trivial and insignificant of matters." (This narration is reported by
Al-Khara'iti on the authority of Talhah Ibn Ubaidullah Ibn Kariz; and AtTabarani, Al-Baihaqi and Al-Hakim on the authority of Sahl Ibn Sa'd with a
slight variation of wording). Anas “Allah be pleased with him” said: the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” was not asked to
give anything for the sake of Islam but that he gave it. a man came and asked
him, and he commanded that a big herd of sheep grazing between two
mountains, from those of charity be given to him. On that he returned to his
people and said: "O my people! Embrace Islam, for Muhammad gives like the
giving of a man who has no fear of poverty." (This is reported by Muslim).
Ibn Umar “Allah be pleased with them” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Allah has servants whom He chooses for
His favors for the benefit of people. So, if one withholds those benefits from the
people, Allah Almighty then will transfer His favor from him to another." (This
narration is reported by At-Tabarani and Abu Na'im). It is reported on the
authority of Al-Hilali that he said: Some captives belonging to Banu Al-Anbar
were brought to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” who commanded that they be killed except for a man from them. Ali Ibn
Abu Talib “Allah be pleased with him” said: "O Messenger of Allah! All of them
worship the same god, religion, and commit the same sin: why have you spared
the life of this man from among them?" on that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Gabriel “peace be upon him” descended
to me and commanded me to kill them and leave that man for Allah Almighty
appreciates his bounteousness."
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Everything has a fruit, and the fruit of doing favor is the quick release (from
punishment)." It is further reported on the authority of Naff from Ibn Umar
“Allah be pleased with them” that he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Food given by a munificent is a
medicine, and food given by a niggard is an ailment." (This narration is reported
by Ibn Adi and Ad-Daraqatni). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” further said: "He in whose sight the favor of Allah is great,
then, the service of people becomes great in his sight." (This narration is
reported by Ibn Adi and Ibn Hibban on the authority of Mu'adh). So, whoever
does not endure that service, exposes the favor of Allah to disappear from him.
Jesus “peace be upon him” said: "Take much of that which the fire never
eats." It was said: "What is that?" he said: "It is to do favor). A'ishah “Allah be
pleased with her” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said: "No doubt, the Garden is the abode of the bounteous." (This

The quarter of the destructives
404
narration is reported by Ibn Adi, Al-Khara'iti and Ad-Daraqatni). Abu Hurairah
“Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him” said: "The bounteous is close to Allah, close to the people,
close to the Garden, and far from the fire; whereas the niggard is far from Allah,
far from the people, far from the Garden, and close to the fire. No doubt, an
ignorant bounteous is dearer to Allah than a knowledgeable niggard; and
niggardliness is the most chronic disease." (This narration is reported by AtTirmidhi and Ad-Daraqatni).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "Do favor to such as are and such as are not eligible to it equally. If you
succeed to get those who are eligible to it, this is well, otherwise, you yourself
would be one of those eligible to it." (This narration is reported by Ad-Daraqatni
on the authority of Ja'far Ibn Muhammad from his father from his grandfather).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” further said:
"No doubt, the pious among my nation do not enter the Garden by virtue of
their prayer or fasts in so much as by virtue of their bounteous souls, sound
hearts and sincere advice to Muslims." (This narration is reported by AdDaraqatni and Abu Bakr Ibn Lala on the authority of Anas; and Al-Khara'iti on
the authority of Abu Sa'id).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Allah Almighty has chosen for doing favor some of His creatures, to whom He
has made it lovable, and made them love it. he has directed the favor seekers to
them, and made it too easy upon them to give in the same way as He has made
easy the rainfall to the barren territory to give life to it and give life to its
inhabitants therewith." QThis narration is reported by Ad-Daraqatni; and AlHakim on the authority of Ali). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: "Every favor one does is a charity, and whatever one
spends upon himself and his family is written as a charity for him, and whatever
one safeguards his honour therewith is reckoned as a charity for him, and no
spending one spends but that it is incumbent upon Allah to compensate it." (This
narration is reported by Ad-Daraqatni, Ibn Adi, AJ-Khara'iti and Al-Baihaqi on
the authority ofjabir).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "Every favor one does is a charity; and the guide to good is like its doer, for
Allah Almighty likes to relieve the desirous for relief." (This narration is reported
by Ad-Daraqatni on the authority of Amr Ibn Shu'aib from his father from his
grandfather). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
also said: "Every favor you do to a rich or a poor is a charity." (This narration is
reported by Ad-Daraqatni on the authority of Abu Sa'id and Jabir; Al-Khara'iti
and At-Tabarani on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud). It is narrated that Allah
Almighty revealed to Moses “peace be upon him” not to kill As-Samiri for he
was bounteous.
It is narrated on the authority of Jabir “Allah be pleased with him” hat he
said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him”
dispatched an expedition under the leadership of Qais Ibn Sa'd Ibn Ubadah and

405
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
when they were given to severe trouble, he slaughtered for them nine riding
mounts to eat. When they made a mention of that to the Messenger of Allah
“Allah's blessing and peace be upon him’' he said: "No doubt, generosity is
characteristic of the members of this family." (This narration is reported by AdDaraqatni).
There are many traditions and sayings in this respect, of which a mention may
be made of the following:
According to Ali “Allah be pleased with him”: "If the world turns its face
towards you (i.e. you become wealthy and rich), then, spend of it as much as you
could, for it never vanishes; and if it turns away from you (and you become
poor), then, spend also for it never survives." Mu'awiyah asked Al-Hassan Ibn Ali
“Allah be pleased with him” about valor, relief and generosity, thereupon he said:
"As for valor, it is that a man safeguards his religion, warns of himself, deals with
his guest generously, and become good in case he is forced to engage in dispute,
attack and aversion. Relief is to avert one's neighbour and keep patient on
adversity. Generosity is to hasten to do favor before one is asked to do it, serve
others with food, be kind to the beggar, and give him what is available to him."
A man raised a complaint to Al-Hassan Ibn Ali “Allah be pleased with him”
who said to him: "Your need would be fulfilled, Allah willing." It was said to him:
"O son of die (daughter of the) Messenger of Allah! Why do you not look at the
complaint first and then give your reply in accordance with it?" On that he said"By so doing, Allah Almighty will ask me about the time I make him stand in
humiliation in front of me until I finish from reading the complaint." According
to Ibn As-Simak: "I wonder at those who buy slaves with thier property, and doe
not buy the free men with their favor." A Bedouin was asked: "Who is your
chief?" he said: "He, who endures our insult, gives our beggar, and excuse our
ignorant."
Ali Ibn Al-Hussain “Allah be pleased with them” said: "Whoever is described
to given his property to those who ask is not a bounteous. That is because the
real bounteous is he who begins with giving the rights of Allah Almighty in
relation to those who worship and obey Him, expecting no thanks from the
people, in case he does so in expectation for the reward of Allah Almighty." AlHassan Al-Basri "may Allah have mercy upon him" was asked about
bounteousness, thereupon he said: "It is to give your wealth, generously for the
Sake of Allah Almighty." He was further asked about decisiveness, thereupon he
said: "It is to withhold your wealth for His Sake." When he was asked about
extravagancy, he said: "It is to spend your wealth out of love for authority and
majesty."
According to Ja'far As-Sadiq "may Allah have mercy upon him": "No wealth
is more helpful than mind; and no calamity is more grievous than ignorance; and
no support is beneficial as consultation. Behold! Allah Almighty says 'I am
Bounteous, Generous, and no wicked should be My neighbour'. No doubt,
wickedness is out of disbelief, and disbelievers will be in the fire; whereas
generosity and munificence are out of belief, and the faithful believers will be in
the Garden." According to Hudhaifah “Allah be pleased with him”: "How many

The quarter of the destructives
406
a person who is wicked in religion and reckless in living would enter the Garden
by virtue of his bounteousness and openhandedness."
It is reported that Al-Ahnaf Ibn Qais saw a man having a Dirham in his hand.
He asked him: "Whose is this Dirham?" he said: "It is mine." On that he said to
him: "It is yours until it comes out of your hand (i.e. until it is spent in charity)."
The following poetic verse was said in a similar meaning: "You are subject to
money as long as you withhold it and once you spend it, then, it becomes yours."
Wasil Ibn Ata' was called Al-Ghazzal (spinner) because he used to sit with the
spinners and whenever he saw a weak woman, he would give her (as much as he
could). According to Al-Asma'i: Al-Hassan Ibn Ali wrote to his brother AlHussain “Allah be pleased with them” blaming him for giving poets, thereupon
he sent to him the following reply: "No doubt, the best property is that with
which one safeguards his honour."
It was said to Sufyan Ibn Uyainah: "What is bounteousness?" he said: "It is to
be kind to one's brothers and spend money generously in charity." He resumed:
"My father inherited fifty thousand Dirhams which he sent in secrecy to his
brothers, and said: "I used to ask Allah Almighty in my prayers to admit my
brothers to the Garden: should I then withhold money from them?"" according
to Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him": "To give what is available as
much as one could is the utmost generosity." It was said to a wise man: "Who
among the people is the dearest to you?" he said: "He, who does favor more
often to me." It was said: "But if this is not available?" he said: "Then, he to
whom I do favor more often." According to Abd-Al-Aziz Ibn Marwan: "If a man
surrenders to me until I do my favor to him, then, his favor to me is like mine to
him."
Al-Mahdi asked Shabib Ibn Shabbah: "How have you found the people in
my house?" he said: "O Commander of Believers! Anyone of them enters your
house hopeful (of your gifts), and comes out well-pleased and satisfied." A
man quoted the following two poetic verses in front of Abdullah Ibn Ja'far:
"No doubt, the favor does not become a favor until its effect returns to such
of people as eligible to it. so, if you intend to do a favor, direct it to Allah, or
your kith and kin, otherwise, leave it." on hearing that, Abdullah said: "Those
two poetic verses cause one to become covetous. But rather you should
exceed the favor and if it gets the honoured among the people, then, it is
good for they are eligible to it, and if it gets the wicked, you yourself would be
one of its men."

CHAPTER SEVEN: STORIES ABOUT BOUNTEOUS
It is narrated on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Al-Munkadir from Umm
Durrah, the servant-maid of A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her” that once,
Mu'awiyah sent a wealth of one hundred and eighty thousand Dirhams in two
cases to A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her”, who asked for a dish to be
brought in which she started to distribute the money among the people and
when it was evening, she asked the slave-girl to bring her breakfast. She
brought bread and oil as condiment. Umm Durrah said to her: "Have you not
been able to keep aside a Dirham from what you have distributed today

407
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
therewith to buy meat for our breakfast?” she said: "Had you reminded me, I
would have done.”
It is reported on the authority of Iban Ibn Uthman that a person liked to do
harm to Ubaidullah Ibn Abbas. He went to the dignitaries of Quraish and said to
them: "Ubaidullah Ibn Abbas invites you to have your lunch in his house." They
came until the house became crowded with them. He said: "What is the matter?"
they told him the story. He commanded that fruits be bought and served to them,
and ordered his servants to cook food and bake bread. The fruits were presented
to them and by the time they had finished from them, the tables of food were
placed before them. They ate and then left. Ubaidullah said to his agents: "Do we
have what allows us to do the like of that everyday?" they answered in the
affirmative, thereupon he said: "Then, let those come to have their lunch in our
house everyday."
It is narrated on the authority of Mus'ab Ibn Az-Zubair that he said:
Mu'awiyah performed Hajj and when he finished he passed by Medina. AlHussain Ibn Ali said to his brother Al-Hassan “Allah be pleased with them”: "Do
not meet or greet him." When Mu'awiyah left, Al-Hassan said: "We owe a debt
and we have to come to him to discuss the matter with him." Thus Al-Hassan
rode until he caught up with him. He greeted him and told him about it. at the
same time, a camel of big hump passed by him, and it was carrying eighty
thousand Dirhams, and it was a heavy load that it was troubled and remained
behind the other camels. Mu'awiyah asked about it, and he was told, thereupor
he said: "Give it with what it has to Abu Muhammad."
It is narrated on the authority of Waqid Ibn Muhammad Al-Waqidi from his
father that he raised a complaint to Al-Ma'mun, about his much debt and his
inability to endure it. on that Al-Ma'mun wrote the following on the back of the
complaint: "No doubt, two characteristics have been combined in you:
bounteousness and shyness. It is bounteousness that has consumed your wealth,
and it is shyness that hinders you from telling us about the hardship in which you
are. Based on that, I have commanded that one hundred thousand Dirhams be
given to you. If I have got your desire, then, expand your hand in giving more
and more; and if I fail to get your desire, then, it is your crime upon yourself. You
related to me when you were in charge of judiciary of Ar-Rashid on the authority
of Anas “Allah be pleased with him” that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said to Az-Zubair Ibn Al-Awwam “Allah be
pleased with him”: "O Zubair! It should be known to you that the keys of
sustenance of servants are opposite to the Throne (of Authority), and Allah
Almighty gives every servant as much as is in proportion to what he spends:
whoever spends more receives more, and whoever spends little receives little."
And you know better." (This narration is reported by Ad-Daraqatni). In his
comment, Al-Waqidi said: "By Allah, that Al-Ma'mun reminded me of the
narration is dearer to me than the gift which was one hundred thousand
Dirhams."
A man asked Al-Hassan Ibn Ali at for a need, thereupon he said to him: "O
so and so! I appreciate the right of your asking me, and my knowledge of what is

The quarter of the destructives
408
incumbent upon me to do to you is too great upon me (to return you with
failure), and my hand fails to fulfill to you what you are fitting for, and whatever
is given, no matter how much it might seem, is litde in the Sight of Allah
Almighty. So, if you accept what is available, and relieve me of the difficulty of
the obligation to fulfill your right as it should be." He said: "O son of the
(daughter of die) Messenger of Allah! I accept and thank you for your gift, and
further excuse for unavailability." Al-Hassan called his agent and went on
accounting him for his spendings until he investigated it. then he said to him:
"Bring me what remains of the three hundred Dirhams." He brought fifty
thousand Dirhams thereupon Al-Hassan asked him: "What have you done with
die five hundred Dinars?" he said: "It is with me." He asked him to bring it and
he brought it to him. Al-Hassan then gave both Dirhams and Dinars to the man
and told him to bring carriers to carry them for him. When he brought the
carriers, Al-Hassan gave him his garment to pay their charge. His agents said to
him: "By Allah, after that, we would have no Dirham." He said: "But I expect to
have a great reward with Allah Almighty."
The reciters of Basrah gathered in the house of Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased
with them” and said: "We have a neighbour who was in the habit of standing at
night (for supererogatory prayers) and fasting by day, and everyone of us hopes
to be like him. He gave his daughter to his nephew and he is poor and does not
have the wherewithal of marriage to prepare her." Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased
with them” stood and took hold of their hands and got them into his house and
opened a box there and brought out six cases of money. He asked them to
convey them to him. Then, Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with them” said: "But
even, we have not been just to him. We gave him what would divert him from his
standing and fasting. Let's go to help him prepare his daughter. However, the
world is too insignificant to divert a believer from the worship of his Lord, and
we should not be too arrogant to serve the devotees of Allah." They then did
accordingly.
It is reported that when the people in Egypt were stricken by famine, at the
time Abd-Al-Hamid Ibn Sa'd was the governor, he said: "By Allah, I would show
Satan that I am his enemy." He then spent on the needy among them until prices
fell. Then, he was dismissed and left owing as much as one million Dirhams to
traders. He mortgaged with them the ornaments of his wives which were as much
as five hundred million Dirhams. When it was difficult upon him to repay the
debt, he sent to them to sell them, and spend the remaining upon such of people
as did not receive his gift.
Abu Tahir Ibn Kathir was a Shiite. A man said to him: "I beseech you by the
right of Ali upon you to grant me your date-palms in such and such place." On
that he said to him: "I have done, and by his right upon me, I would give you
what is next to them." This was many times the like of what the man demanded.
A poet praised Abu Marthad who said to him: "By Allah, I have what I would
give you. But anyway, go to the judge and claim I owe you ten thousand
Dirhams, and I would admit it until when the judge puts me to prison because of
that, my family would not leave me in prison." He did accordingly, and it was not

409
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
after the evening that ten thousand Dirhams were given to him, and Abu
Marthad was taken out of the prison.
Ma'n Ibn Za'idah was the governor of Basrah. A poet was present at the gate
of his palace with the intention to enter upon him, but he stayed for a long time,
and it was not available to him. He said to one of Ma'n's servants: "If the
governor enters the garden, then, point him out to me." When he entered the
garden, the servant informed him and he wrote a poetic verse on a piece of wood
and threw it in the spring of water that is open to the garden. Ma'n was at the
head of the spring. When he saw the piece of wood, he took and read it: "O
bounteousness of Ma'n! Talk to Ma'n in privacy about my need, for I have no
intercessor to him but you." He asked about the writer of this and he was invited
to him. He asked him: "What have you said?" he recited to him his poetry (in his
praise), thereupon he ordered that ten cases of money would be given to him. He
took them and the governor put the piece of wood underneath his carpet. When
it was the next day, the governor took out the piece of wood and read the poetic
verse once again, thereupon he invited the man and gave him one hundred
thousand Dirhams. When the man took the sum he felt afraid the governor
might take back what he had given him. He left the town. When it was the third
day, the governor read the poetic verse, and called for the man, but he was not
available. On that Ma'n said: "It is incumbent upon me to give him until there
remains no Dinar in my treasury."
According to Abu Al-Hassan Al-Mada'ini: Once, Al-Hassan, Al-Hussain, soni
of Ali, along with Abdullah Ibn Ja'far “Allah be pleased with them” set out as
pilgrims and their belongings delayed to catch up with them. They then were
given to hunger and thirst. They came upon an old lady in her tent whom they
asked: "Do you have anything to drink?" she answered in the affirmative. They
made their riding mounts kneel near her tent, and she had nothing but a little
sheep in one corner of the tent. She said: "Milk it and drink its milk." They did
accordingly. Then they asked her: "Do you have anything to eat?" she said: "I
have nothing other than this little sheep. Let anyone of you slaughter it in order
that I would cook food for you to eat." One of them stood and slaughtered it and
removed skin and she cooked food for them to eat. They ate and stayed there
until it became cooler. When it was time for them to leave, they said to her: "We
are men from Quraish and our journey is in that direction. If we return safely, we
would do a good favor to you."
Then, they left. Her husband came and she told him about the story of
these men, thereupon he became angry and said to her: "Woe to you! Do you
slaughter my sheep for a people whom you do not recognize, and claim that
they are men from Quraish?" some time later, they were forced to enter
Medina, and were engaged in transporting dung to it and sell it and get their
earnings from that. The old lady passed by one of Medina's streets, and behold!
Al-Hassan Ibn Ali “Allah be pleased with them” was sitting on the gate of his
house. He recognized her, but she did not recognize him. He sent his slave to
invite her and he asked her: "O slave-girl of Allah! Do you recognize me?" she
answered in the negative. He said: "I am your guest on such and such a day."

The quarter of the destructives
410
She said: "Let my father and mother sacrifice their lives for you! Are you he?"
he said: "Yes." Al-Hassan “Allah be pleased with him” commanded that one
thousand sheep of those of charity be bought for her, and one thousand Dinars
be given to her.
He sent her in the company of his slave to Al-Hussain “Allah be pleased
with him” who asked her: "What is the gift of my brother to you?" she said:
"One thousand sheep and one thousand Dinars." Al-Hussain “Allah be pleased
with him” commanded that the like of it be given to her. Then, he sent her in
the company of his slave to Abdullah Ibn Ja'far “Allah be pleased with him”
who asked her: "How much is the gift of both Al-Hassan and Al-Hussain to
you?" She said: "Two thousand sheep and two thousand Dinars." On that
Abdullah Ibn Ja'far gave her two thousand sheep and two thousand Dinars. He
said to her: "Had you started with me, surely, you would have troubled them."
The old lady returned to her husband with four thousand sheep and four
thousand Dinars.
It is reported that Abdullah Ibn Amir Ibn Kariz came out of the mosque in
order to go home. As he was alone, a young man stood and walked besides him.
He asked him: "O young man! Do you have a need?" he said: "May Allah reform
you! I saw you walking alone, and I said to myself: "Let me protect you with
myself, and I seek refuge with Allah from receiving any harm." Abdullah took
hold of his hand and walked with him to the house. He called for one thousand
Dinars which he gave to the young man and said to him: "Spend this for how
good manners you have been taught by your family!"
It is related that some Arabs came to visit the grave of one of the bounteous
among them. They halted near his grave and spent the night there. They had
came from a far town. One of them saw in a dream that bounteous man who said
to him: "Do you like to exchange your camel for my excellent mount?" however,
the deceased bounteous had left an excellent mount. The man who was sleeping
had a fat camel. He said: "Yes." He exchanged his camel for his excellent mount.
When he signed the deal, the deceased man slew that camel in the dream. At that
time, the sleeping man woke up and behold! Blood was flowing out of the breast
of his camel. He stood towards it and slaughtered it, and distributed its flesh
among his companions and cooked it and they satiated their desire for hunger.
Then, they left and proceeded on. When it was the next day, and they were still
on the way, a caravan received them, and a man said: "Who is so and so?" the
man who saw the bounteous in the dream said: "I am." He asked him: "Have you
bought from so and so anything?" he referred to the deceased, the inhabitant of
the grave. He said: "Yes, I have exchanged my camel for his excellent mount in a
dream." He said: "Then, here it is his excellent mount. He is my father and I saw
him in a dream and he said to me: "If you are really my son, give my excellent
mount to so and so."
A man from Quraish returned from journey and on the way he found a
Bedouin who was disabled and diseased. He said to the man: "O so and so! Help
me endure the difficulty of time!" he said to his slave: "Give him what has
remained with you of the expenses." The slave poured in the lap of the Bedouin

Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth

411

four thousand Dirhams. The Bedouin started to get up but he failed because of
weakness. On that he wept. The man asked him: "What is wrong with you? Do
you regard little what we have given you?" he said: "No, but I have remembered
what the earth eats of your generosity, thereupon I wept."
Abdullah Ibn Amir bought from KhaLid Ibn Uqbah Ibn Abu Mu'ait his
house which was in the market for ninety thousand Dirhams. When it was
night, he heard Khalid's family weeping. He asked his family: ""Why are those
weeping?" they said: "They are weeping for the loss of their house." On that he
said: "O slave! Go to them and inform them that both the money and house
together are theirs."
It is related that Harun Ar-Rashid sent five hundred Dinars to Malik Ibn
Anas "may Allah have mercy upon him". When the news of that reached AlLaith Ibn Sa'd, he sent to him one thousand Dinars. Harun became angry with
him and said: "Do I give him five hundred and you give him one thousand,
although you are one of my wards?" he said: "O Commander of Believers! I get
a daily income of one thousand Dinars from my crops, and I have felt shy of
giving the like of him less than the income of one day." It is reported that the
obligatory charity was not due upon him, although his income was one
thousand Dinars a day (and this is because he used to spend them all in
charity). It is related that a woman asked him to give her some honey,
thereupon he gave her a big water-skin full of honey. It was said to him: "But
she would have been satisfied with less than that." On that he said: "She has
asked in accordance with her need, and we give her in proportion to the favor
of Allah upon us." It was the habit of Al-Laith "may Allah have mercy upon
him" not to deliver his daily talk before he would give three hundred and sixty
needy and indigent in charity.
Al-A'mash said: One of my sheep fell ill, and Khaithamah Ibn Abd-ArRahman used to come to visit it every morning and evening in order to
inquire about its health, and asked me: "Has it got its fodder in full? How
have the boys kept patient on loosing its milk since it fell ill?" I had a piece of
matted hair to sit on and whenever he came out he would tell me to take what
he left underneath it. he kept doing so until his gift reached as much as three
hundred Dinars during the period the sheep was ill, to the extent that I hoped
the sheep did not recover.
Abd-Al-Malik Ibn Marwan said to Asma' Ibn Kharijah: "I have been
reported that you have many good characteristics. So, tell me about them." He
said: "But others could tell about them better than I could do." He said: "I
assure that you should tell me about them." On that he said: "O Commander of
Believers! I have never stretched my legs in front of anyone of my sitters, nor
have I served others with food but that I was grateful to them more than they
were to me, nor has anyone begged anything from me and I regarded as much
what I gave him."
Sa'id Ibn Khalid entered upon Sulaiman Ibn Abd-Al-Malik and Said was a
generous man: whenever he was asked to give anything which was not available
to him, he would write a bill on himself until he would receive his yearly income.

The quarter of the destructives
412
When Sulaiman looked at him, he quoted the following poetic verse: "I have
heard in the morning a caller calling: ’Help that helpful assisting young man'!"
Sulaiman asked him: "What is your need?" he said: "To fulfill my debt." He
asked him: "What is it?" he said: "thirty thousand Dinars." He said: "I shall give
you your debt and the like of it besides."
Once, Qais Ibn Sa’d Ibn Ubadah fell ill and he felt his brothers were too slow
to come to visit him. When he asked about that it was said to him: "They feel shy
of so much debt they owe you." On that he said: "May Allah disappoint a wealth
that hinders the brothers from visiting their brother!" then, he ordered a caller to
announce publicly that 'He who owes a debt to Sa'd Ibn Qais is free from
obligation'. In the evening, the step of the stairs of his house got broken because
of the great number of people who came to visit him.
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Ishaq that he said: I offered Asr prayer
in the mosque of AJ-Ash'ath at Kufah, in pursuit of a debtor of mine, and after
prayer a garment and a pair of sandals were placed in front of me. I said: "But I
am not of the people of this mosque." It was said: "AJ-Ash'ath Ibn Qais Al-Kindi
came back from Mecca yesterday, and ordered that a garment and a pair of
sandals be given to such of men as prayed in this mosque."
It is narrated on the authority of Ash-Shafi'i while he was in Mecca in the
neighbourhood of the Ka'bah that he said: There was in Egypt a man who used
to gather money for the poor. Once, a man begot a child. He said: "I went to
him and said: "I have begotten a child and I have nothing to spend." He stood
with me and went to a family and entered upon them and asked them, but
nothing was given to him. He came to the grave of a man and sat near it and
said: "May Allah bestow mercy upon you! You used to do such and such (deeds
of generosity). Today, I visited some people and asked them to pay the
spendings of a born child, but they gave me nothing." He stood up, brought
out a Dinar and divided it into two halves, and gave me one and took the other.
He said to me: "This is a debt you owe until Allah opens (the gates of
sustenance) for you." I took it and went away, and remedied with it what I was
able to remedy.
On that night, the man (who gave half the Dinar to me) saw in a dream the
deceased inhabitant of that grave, who said to him: "I have heard all that you
said, and I could give no answer to you. but anyway, go to my house, and tell
my sons to dig in the place of the oven and extract a parcel containing five
hundred Dinars: carry it to that man." When it was the next day, he went to the
house of the deceased and related the story to his family. They told him to sit
and they dug the place and extracted the parcel of Dinars. They brought it and
placed it in front of him. He said: "This is your property, and I have no right to
take it." they said: "Should he give out of bounteousness while he is dead and
we do not do while we are living?" when they insisted, he carried the parcel of
Dinars to the parent of the born child, and related the story to him. He took
from it only a Dinar which he divided into two halves, and gave him back the
one he had given as a loan, and took the other and said: "This is sufficient for
me." He gave the remaining in charity to the poor. In his comment on that,

413
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
Abu Sa'id (the narrator) said: "1 don't know which of them is more bounteous."
It is reported that when Ash-Shafi'i, "may Allah have mercy upon him" fell
fatally ill in Egypt, he said: "Tell so and so to wash my dead body." When he
died and the news of his death reached him, he came and said: "Bring me his
reminder." He looked at it and behold! Ash-Shafi'i was owing seventy thousand
Dirhams, which the man recorded on himself, and repaid it on his behalf and
said: "This is my washing of his dead body." Abu Sa'id said: "When I came to
Egypt, I asked about the house of that man, and was guided to it. I saw some of
his grandsons and visited them and found the traces of good in them. I said (to
myself): "The traces of his good have reached them, and the effect of his
blessing have appeared on them." I quoted the statement of Allah Almighty in
this respect: " their father had been a righteous man." (Al-Kahf 82)
Ash-Shafi'i "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "I still love Hammad Ibn
Abu Sulaiman for a particular thing I have been informed that he did: Once, he
was riding his donkey when one of his buttons was cut off. He went to the tailor
and asked him to sew it. When he liked to dismount the tailor said to him: "By
Allah, you would not dismount." He sewed it while he was riding. When he
finished, he brought out a parcel containing ten Dinars which he handed over to
the tailor and apologized to him for regarding it very litde."
It is reported on the authority of Ar-Rabie Ibn Sulaiman that he said: A man
caught hold of the stirrup of Ash-Shafi'i "may Allah have mercy upon him"
thereupon he said to me: "O Rabie! Give him four Dinars and apologize to him
on my behalf for they are very litde." According to Ar-Rabie once again: I heard
Al-Humaidi saying: "Ash-Shafi'i "may Allah have mercy upon him" came from
San'a to Mecca with ten thousand Dinars. He pitched his tent outside Mecca and
spread the Dinars over his garment, and went on giving every passer-by a handful
of that until when it was time for him to offer Zhuhr prayer, he shook off the
garment which was empty."
It is reported on the authority of Abu Thawr that he said: "Ash-Shafi'i "may
Allah have mercy upon him" intended to go to Mecca with a great wealth, and
he could hardly save money in his hand because of his openhandedness,
thereupon I said to him: "Would that you buy a landed property to be for you
and your children after you!" he then came out and when he returned I asked
him about the wealth, thereupon he said: "I have found no landed property
fitting for me to buy in Mecca, for most of them were made endowments. But ii
built in Mina dwellings for our companions when they perform Hajj to stay in
them." On that he recited the following two poetic verses: "I see myself
desirous for things which are beyond the reach of my wealth. My soul does not
submit to me to withhold money, and my wealth does not enable me to do
what I like to do."
It is narrated on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Abbad Al-Muhallabi that he
said: "My father entered upon Al-Ma'mun who gave him as a gift one hundred
thousand Dirhams. When he came out he gave all of them in charity. Having
learnt that, Al-Ma'mun blamed him when he returned to him once again. On that

The quarter of the destructives
414
he said to him: "O Commander of Believers! To withhold what is available means
that you have bad assumption of (Allah) the worshipped." Then, he gave him a
further one hundred thousand Dirhams."
It is reported that a man entered upon Sa'id Ibn AJ-As and begged something
from him, thereupon he commanded that one hundred thousand Dirhams be
given to him. The man went on weeping, and Sa'id asked him about the cause of
his weeping, thereupon he said: "I weep for the earth to eat up the one who is
like you." he commanded that another one hundred thousand Dirhams be given
to him.
It is reported that Talhah owed fifty thousand Dirhams to Uthman “Allah be
pleased with them". One day, Uthman came out to the mosque to whom Talhah
said: "Your money has become ready, so, take it." on that he said: "It is for you O
Abu Muhammad, to help you on your valor." Su'dah Bint Awf said: I entered
upon Talhah and found him in anxiety. I asked him about the reason and he said:
"1 have much property which aggrieves me." I said: "What does aggrieve you?
invite your people (and distribute it among them." He said: "O slave! Invite to me
my people!" he then distributed it among them. I asked the servant: "How much
was it?" He said: "Four hundred thousand." A man entered upon Talhah “Allah
be pleased with him” and begged something from him by the right of his kinship,
thereupon Talhah said to him: "None has ever asked me by the right of this
kinship before you. I have apiece of land for which Uthman “Allah be pleased
with him” offered to give me three hundred thousand Dirhams. Take it if you so
like, otherwise, let me sell it to Uthman and give you the price." He favored the
price, thereupon he sold it to Uthman and gave its price to the man.
It is said that Ali “Allah be pleased with him” wept one day and when he was
asked about the reason he said: "I have received no guest for seven years, and I
fear Allah might have humiliated me." It is reported that a man went to his friend
and knocked the door of his house, and when he opened the door for him and
asked him about the reason for his visit, he said: "I owe a debt of four hundred
Dirhams." He weighed and gave it to him. Then, he went on weeping. His wife
asked him: "Why have you given him since it was difficult upon you?" on that he
said: "I weep because I have not inspected his state and waited until he became in
need."
May Allah bestow mercy upon those who have such characteristics of
generosity and bounteousness, and forgive for them their sins.

CHAPTER EIGHT
EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF NIGGARDLINESS
Allah Almighty says: " And those saved from the covetousness of their own
souls; they are the ones that achieve prosperity." (Al-Hashr 9)
4. ©

p-A dlylJjli

Oyi

}

He also says: "And let not those who covetously withhold of the gifts which
Allah has given them of His Grace, think that it is good for them: nay, it will be
the worse for them; soon shall the things which they covetously withheld be tied
to their necks like a twisted collar, on the Day of Judgment. To Allah belongs the

415
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
heritage of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is well-acquainted with all that
you do." (A1 Imran 180)
L* oy*yh~** p-k

y& Ijj

y*

He says too: "(Nor) those who are niggardly, or enjoin niggardliness on
others, or hide the bounties which Allah has bestowed on them; for We have
prepared, for those who resist faith, a punishment that steeps them in contempt."
(An-Nisa 37)
& 4Ul

Ac id

i ©>

*>

3

^

b*

There are many Prophetic narrations, of which a mention may be made of the
following:
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Beware of niggardliness, for it ruined those who were before you, and forced
them to shed the blood of each other, and made lawful their taboos." (This
narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Jabir). The Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "Beware of
niggardliness, for it invited those who were before you to shed the blood of each
other and they did accordingly, invited them to make lawful their taboos and they
did accordingly, and invited them to sever relations with each other, and they did
accordingly." (This narration is reported by Al-Hakim on the authority of Abu
Hurairah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "No
niggard, nor a deceptive nor a betrayer, nor a person who makes reminder of
generosity shall enter the Garden." (This narration is reported by Ahmad and AtTirmidhi on the authority of Abu Bakr). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "There are three destructives:
niggardliness that is obeyed, an inclination that is followed, and self-vanity." The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Verily, Allah
Almighty dislikes three: the old man who commits adultery, the niggard who
makes reminder of his generosity, and the poor who is arrogant." (This is
reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Ali).
The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “The example of
a miser and an almsgiver is like the example of two persons wearing iron cloaks."
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” also said: “The
example of an almsgiver and a miser is like the example of two persons who have
two iron cloaks on them from their breasts to their collar bones, and when the
almsgiver wants to give in charity, the cloak becomes capacious till it covers his
whole body to such an extent that it hides his fingertips and covers his footprints
(obliterates his tracks). And when the miser wants to spend, it (the iron cloak)
sticks and every ring gets stuck to its place and he tries to widen it, but it did not
become wide." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of
Abu Hurairah).

The quarter of the destructives
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "Two characteristics never gather in a faithful believer: niggardliness and
bad manners." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of
Abu Sa'id). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
also said (by way of supplication): "O Allah! I seek refuge with You from
niggardliness, and I seek refuge with You from cowardice, and I seek refuge
with You from being sent back to the geriatric age." (This narration is reported
by Al-Bukhari on the authority of Sa'd). the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Beware of injustice, for injustice will be
darkness on the Day of Judgement. Beware of profanity for Allah Almighty
never likes the profane or the disrespectful. Beware of niggardliness for it was
niggardliness that ruined those who were before you: it enticed them to lie and
they lied, to do injustice and they did injustice, and to sever relations with each
other and they did accordingly." (This narration is reported by Al-Hakim and
Abu Dawud on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr; and Muslim on the
authority of Jabir).
416

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"The worst of characteristics a man has is niggardliness with fearfulness, and
cowardice with weakness.” (This narration is reported by Abu Dawud on the
authority of Jabir). Once, a person fell as a martyr during the lifetime of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and a woman
wept on him crying: "O my martyr!" On that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "What makes you know that he is
really a martyr? Perhaps he used to engage himself in what does not concern
him, or withhold from his property what would not have decreased it." (This
narration is reported by Abu Ya'li on the authority of Abu Hurairah; and AlBaihaqi on the authority of Anas).
It is narrated on the authority of Jubair Ibn Mut’im “Allah be pleased with
him” that he said: While we were in the company of The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” with the people returning from
Hunain, some Bedouins caught hold of The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” and started begging of him so much so that he had to stand under
a (kind of thorny tree (i.e. Samurah) and his cloak was snatched away. The
Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” stopped and said: “Give me
my cloak. If I had as many camels as these thorny trees, I would have distributed
them amongst you and you will not find me a miser or a liar or a coward." (This
is reported by Al-Bukhari).
Umar “Allah be pleased with him” said: Once, the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” distributed something among the
people and I said: "Such and such a people were more entitled to it than those."
On that he said: "They put me between two choices: either to beg me
disrespectfully, or accuse me of niggardliness, and of a surety, I am not a
niggard." (This narration is reported by Muslim). Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri “Allah be
pleased with him” said: Two men entered upon the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” and asked him to give them the price of a camel

Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth

417

and he gave them two Dinars. When they came out they met Umar Ibn AlKhattab “Allah be pleased with him” and they thanked the Prophet and said
good words about him. Umar “Allah be pleased with him” entered upon the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and greeted him
and told him about what they had said. On that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "But I have given so and so ten to one
hundred Dinars, and he said no good word. One of you might beg me
importunately even though he begs fire." Umar “Allah be pleased with him” said:
"Then, why do you give them what is fire?" he said: "They insist on begging me
and Allah Almighty rejects niggardliness for me." (This narration is reported by
Ahmad, Abu Ya'li and Al-Bazzar).
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with them”
that he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: "Generosity stems from the generosity of Allah Almighty. So, be
generous, perchance Allah would be generous to you. behold! Allah Almighty
has created generosity and made it in the form of a man whose head is rooted
in the stem of the tree of Tuba, and straightened some of its branches by the
branches of the Farthest Lote-tree, and let the others hang down to the world:
whoever catches hold of any branch of it will be admitted to the Garden.
Behold! Bounteousness is out of faith, and (those of) faith will be in the
Garden. On the other hand, He Almighty has created niggardliness from His
displeasure and made it in the form of a man whose head is rooted in the stem
of the tree of Zaqqum, and let some of its branches hang down to this world:
whoever catches hold of any of its branches will be admitted to the fire.
Behold! Niggardliness is out of disbelief, and (the men of) disbelief will be in
the fire (of Hell)."
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "Bounteousness is a tree that produces its fruits in the Garden. For this
reason, no one but a bounteous shall enter the Garden. On the other hand,
niggardliness is a tree that produces its fruits in the fire. So, none but a niggard
shall enter the fire." Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” said: the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” asked the
delegate of Banu Lihyan: "Who is your chief O Banu Lihyan?" they said: "Our
chief is Al-Jadd ibn Qais, except that he is a niggard." On that the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Which disease is more
chronic than niggardliness? But your chief is Amr Ibn Al-Jamuh." (This
narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Ka'b Ibn Malik).
According to another version, they said: "Our chief is Jadd Ibn Qais." He
asked: "By which thing do you regard him your chief?" they said: "He is the
wealthiest among us, except that niggardliness is seen from him." The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Which
disease is then more chronic than niggardliness? This is not your chief." They
asked: "Then, who is our chief O Messenger of Allah?" he said: "Your chief is
Bishr Ibn Al-Bara’."
Ali “Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing

The quarter of the destructives
418
and peace be upon him” said: "Verily, Allah dislikes him who is covetous during
his lifetime, and bounteous only when death overtakes him." Abu Hurairah
“Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: "An ignorant bounteous is dearer to Allah than a
covetous worshipper." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi). Abu Hurairah
“Allah be pleased with him” further said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Both covetousness and faith never gather
in the heart of a servant." (This narration is reported by An-Nasa'i). The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "Two
characteristics never gather in a faithful believer: niggardliness and bad manners."
(This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu Sa'id).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "It
is not fitting for a faithful believer to be covetous, nor to be coward." The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said:
"Anyone among you might say that the sin of the covetous is more justifiable
than that of the wrongdoer; and which wrongness is more grievous in the
Sight of Allah than covetousness? Allah Almighty has sworn by His Honour,
Magnificence and Majesty that neither a covetous nor a niggard shall enter the
Garden."
It is reported that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” was circumambulating the House and behold! There was a man hanging in
the curtains of the Ka'bah, saying: "I beseech you (O Allah) by the sanctity of this
House to forgive for me my sin." The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said to him: "What is your sin? Describe it to me." He said:
"It is too great to describe to you." he said: "Woe to you! is your sin greater or are
the earths?" he said: "No, my sin is greater O Messenger of Allah." He said: is
your sin greater or are the mountains?" he said: "No, my sin is greater O
Messenger of Allah." He said: is your sin greater or are the seas and oceans?" he
said: "No, my sin is greater O Messenger of Allah." He said: is your sin greater or
are the heavens?" he said: "No, my sin is greater O Messenger of Allah." He said:
is your sin greater or are the Throne (of Authority)?" he said: "No, my sin is
greater O Messenger of Allah." He said: is your sin greater or is Allah?" he said:
"No, Allah Almighty is greater and higher O Messenger of Allah." He said: "Woe
to you! describe to me your sin." He said: "O Messenger of Allah! Although I am
a wealthy, whenever a beggar comes to beg me, he seems as if he faces me with a
flame of fire." On that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said: "Keep away from me, and do not burn me with your fire. By
Him Who has sent me with guidance and honour, were you to stand in between
the Comer and Station (of Abraham) and keep praying for a million years, and
wept so much until your tears turn into running rivers therewith you water the
plants, and then die while you are cunning (i.e. niggard), Allah Almighty would
throw you prone on your face into the fire (of Hell). Woe to you! have you not
learnt that niggardliness is disbelief, and that people of disbelief would be in the
fire? Woe to you! have you not learnt that Allah Almighty says: " Behold, you are
those invited to spend (of your substance) in the Way of Allah: but among you

419
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
are some that are niggardly. But any who are niggardly are so at the expense of
their own souls. But Allah is free of all wants, and it is you that are needy."
(Muhammad 38)

o*

o*5

o*
^

^
^

11

(c^) cl^iLaJI JLulj

i

4*!ya* 'M
.<

^

•#

<OJlj

And: "And those saved from the covetousness of their own souls; they are
the ones that achieve prosperity." (Al-Hashr 9)
4©
vlljlljli
Oyi
}
From among the sayings and traditions, a mention may be made of the
following:
Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with them” said: "When Allah Almighty created
the Garden of Eden, he told it to get adorned, and it did accordingly. Then, He
told it to demonstrate its rivers, and it demonstrated the spring of Salsabil, the
spring of camphor, and the spring of Tasnim, from which there burst into the
Gardens the rivers of wine, honey and milk. Then, He told it to show its thrones,
chairs, suites, ornaments, and the beautiful women with big lustrious eyes,, and it
did. He looked at it and told it to speak, and it said: "Blessed be he who shall
enter me." On that Allah Almighty said: "By My Honour and Power, I shall cause
no niggard to inhabit you."
According to Umm Al-Banin, sister of Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz: "Fi to the
niggard! Had niggardliness been a shirt, I would not have put it on, and had it
been a way, I would not have followed it." according to Talhah Ibn Ubaidullah
“Allah be pleased with him”: "We feel regarding our wealth what niggards feel,
but we persevere and keep patient (and expect the reward from Allah)."
According to Muhammad Ibn Al-Munkadir: It was said: "If Allah Almighty
intends evil for a people, He causes the worst of them to be their chiefs, and
makes their sustenance in the hands of the niggard among them." According to
Ali “Allah be pleased with him”: "A severe time will come upon the people in
which the rich among them would have a strong grip on what is in his hand,
although he has not commanded to do so. Allah Almighty said: " and do not
forget liberality between yourselves. For Allah sees well all that you do." (AlBaqarah 237)
According to Abdullah Ibn Amr “Allah be pleased with them”:
"Covetousness is more grievous than niggardliness. For the covetous is he
who covets of what is in the hand of another until he takes it and then
withholds what he has; and the niggard is he who withholds what he has."
According to Ash-Sha'bi: "I do not know which of both shall go farther in the
fire of Hell: the niggard or the liar." It is said that the Indian sage and the
Roman philosopher came to visit the Persian king Anushirvan. The Indian
sage was required to speak and he said: "The best of people is he who is seen
bounteous, reverent at the time of anger, deliberate in his speech, humble
when he is elevated, and compassionate towards every one fitting for mercy."

The quarter of the destructives
420
The Roman philosopher said: "He, who is niggard and his property, is taken
by his enemy, and he does not give thanks as much as it should be, will not be
successful. Of a surety, the liars are blameworthy, and the talebearers die as
poor, and whoever shows no mercy to others, is placed under the control of
him who is merciless."
In his comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: "We have put
yokes round their necks right up to their chins, so that their heads are forced up
(and they cannot see)" (Ya Sin 8)

iQ

otiiVT jj ^ i&f y&A a ui£ bj»

Ad-Dahhak said: "It refers to niggardliness. Allah Almighty has held back
their hands from spending in the Cause of Allah, and thus they see no guidance."
According to Ka'b: "Every morning, two angels are entrusted to man, and one of
them says: "O Allah! Hasten on to destroy the wealth of him who withholds from
spending" and the other says: "O Allah! Hasten on to compensate him who
spends his property." Al-Asma'i aid: I heard a Bedouin describing a man saying:
"He has become trivial in my sight since the world became great in his sight, to
the extent that he regards the beggar like the angel of death when he comes to
him."
According to Abu Hanifah "may Allah have mercy upon him": "I think I
could not regard as just a niggard, for niggardliness forces him to seek to take
what is beyond his due for fear of being wronged. So, whoever is like this could
not be trustworthy." According to Ali “Allah be pleased with him”: "By Allah, no
generous seeks to take even what is due to him. Allah Almighty says: " he
confirmed part thereof and repudiated a part." (At-Tahrim 3)
i0
O*aJ.p
>
Bishr Ibn Al-Harith said: "It is not sinful to backbite a niggard. The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "You are then
indeed a niggard."" Once, a woman is praised in presence of the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” as having the habit of fasdng by
day and standing at night for supererogatory prayers, except that she was sdngy.
On that he said: "Where is her good then?" .
Bishr said: "Looking at the niggard hardens hearts, and meedng niggards
causes distress to the faithful believers." According to Yahya Ibn Mu'adh: "The
heart could but love the bounteous no matter disobedient they might be; and it
could but dislike the niggards, no matter obedient they might be." According to
Ibn Al-Mu'tazz: "The one who withholds his wealth most among the people is
he who gives out his honour generously most among them." Yahya Ibn
Zakariyya “Allah be pleased with them” met lblis in his real form and asked
him: "O lblis! Tell me about the dearest of people to you and the most hateful
of them to you." he said: "The dearest of people to me is the stingy believer;
and the most hateful of them to me is the bounteous wicked." He asked him
about the reason, thereupon he said: "Because the niggard has sufficed me with
his niggardliness. As regards the bounteous wicked, there is fear that Allah
Almighty might regard his bounteousness, and then admit him." Then, he

421
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
turned back saying: "Had it not been for the fact that you are Yahya, I would
not have told you."

CHAPTER NINE: STORIES ABOUT NIGGARDS
It is reported that in Basrah, there was a rich stingy man. One of his
neighbours invited him to a meal of eggs mixed with butter, from which he ate so
much excessively, and then drank a great quantity of water until his abdomen got
swollen, and he suffered severe pain and became at the threshold of death. The
physician visited him and asked him to vomit what he had eaten, thereupon he
said: "Do you like me to vomit eggs mixed with butter? Death is dearer to me
than that."
It is reported that a Bedouin came to visit a man who was eating figs, and
when he sensed him he covered the figs with his garment. Then, he asked the
Bedouin: "Do you recite anything of the Qur'an perfectly?" he said: "Yes. Allah
said: "By the olive and the mount of Sinai."" The man asked him: "Where is the
fig?" he said: "it is underneath your garment."
A man invited his brother to his house and served him with no food until
afternoon. The guest became so much hungry to the extent of turning mad. The
host took the 'Ud and said to him: "Tell me, by my life: which song do you like
me to sing for you?" he said: "The song of frying food."
It is reported that Muhammad Ibn Khalid Ibn Yahya Al-Barmaki was severely
stingy. One of his relatives was required to describe his repast, and he told that it
was almost empty void of any delicious kind of food. He asked him: "Who
among the people attends it?" he said: "The honourable scribes (of deeds)." He
said: "Then, who eats with him?" he said: "The flies." He said to him: "But I see
that your privates are exposed, and your garment has much holes, although you
are his relative." On that he said: "By Allah, I could not have a needle to sew it
therewith. Were Muhammad to have a house lying from Baghdad to Nubia filled
with needles, and were Gabriel and Michael, and even the Prophet Jacob to come
to borrow from him a needle to sew the shirt of the Prophet Joseph which was
torn from the back, he would not have done."
It is reported that Marwan Ibn Abu Hafs used not to eat flesh out of
stinginess and niggardliness, barring the flesh of the heads, which he used to send
his slave to buy it for him whenever an animal was slaughtered. He was asked:
"We see that you eat but the flesh of heads at summer and winter: why do you
favor it?" he said: ""Because I know well the price of the head exactly and the
slave could not deceive me regarding it. Furthermore, it is not like the flesh that is
to be cooked from which the cooker might eat without my knowledge. If he were
to take an eye, an ear, or a part of the tongue, I would know it easily. It also
represents different kinds of flesh to me: the eye, the ear, the tongue, and the
flesh that covers the skull. Therefore, I am sufficed the cost of being cooked."
Once, he came out aiming at meeting Al-Mahdi, the caliph. His wife said to
him: "What is my reward if you are given the gift?" he said: "If I am given one
hundred Dirhams, I would give you a Dirham thereof." He was given sixty
thousand Dirhams from which he gave her only four Daniqs." On another
occasion, he bought meat for a Dirham, and then he was invited to a meal by one

The quarter of the destructives
422
of his friends. On that he returned the meat to the butcher and lost a Daniq from
the payment, and said: "It is out of extravagance to eat meat."
It is reported that Al-A’mash had a neighbour who invited him pressingly to
visit him for a meal of bread and salt. At last, Al-A'mash, out of his anger, agreed
and entered his house. He served him with bread and salt. Then a beggar came
and asked for something, and the house lord said to him: "May Allah bless you."
He asked him for the second time and the man said the same. In the third time,
the man said to him: "You should go, otherwise I would come out to strike you
with the stick." On that Al-A’mash said to him: "You should go, for by Allah, I
have never seen a man more true to his word than him. For a long time, He have
been inviting me to a meal of bread and salt, and when I came, he added nothing
to that."

CHAPTER TEN
EXPOSITION OF ALTRUISM AND ITS EXCELLENCE
It should be known that each of bounteousness and niggardliness is divided
into many levels, and the highest level of bounteousness is altruism, which is that
one gives out his money although he is in need of it. Bounteousness in itself is to
give out money without being in need of it, to such of men as is or is not in need
of it. To be sure, to give out with need is more severe. As well as bounteousness
could reach to a level at which one gives his money to another although he is in
need of it, niggardliness might also reach a level at which one withholds from
himself, although he is in dire need. How many a niggard who withholds money
to the extent that when he falls ill, he does not buy the treatment, and when he
has any desire, he does not satisfy it so long as he is to afford for it, and were he
to find it for free, surely, he would get it. This niggard withholds money from
himself although he is in need of it, in contrast with the bounteous who gives out
his money although he is in need of it. However, the morals are gifts given by
Allah Almighty to whomever He likes.
There is no level higher than altruism in bounteousness. For this reason,
Allah Almighty praised the companions "May Allah be pleased with them" when
He said: " but give them preference over themselves, even though poverty was
their (own lot)." (Al-Hashr 9)
i 0)

^ o&jlj

3?

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Whoever of people has a desire which he suppresses and rather gives another
person preference over him, his sins will be forgiven." (This narration is reported
by Ibn Hibban and Abu Ash-Shaikh on the authority of Ibn Umar). A'ishah
“Allah be pleased with her” said: "The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” never ate his fill for three consecutive days until he died; and
had we liked, we would have been able to eat our fill, but rather we used to give
others preference over ourselves." (This narration is reported by Al-Baihaqi).
It is narrated in both Sahihs on the authority of Abu Hurairah: A man came
to The Prophet “PEACE BE UPON HIM”, and told him that he was suffering
from a severe hunger. The Prophet "PEACE BE UPON HIM" sent a messenger

423
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
to his wives (to bring something for that man to eat) but they said that they had
nothing except water. Then Allah's Aposde "PEACE BE UPON HIM" said:
"Who will take this (person) or entertain him as a guest?" An Ansari man said: "I
will do." So he took him to his wife and said to her: "Entertain generously the
guest of Allah's Aposde "PEACE BE UPON HIM"." She said: "We have got
nothing except the meals of my children." He said: "Prepare your meal, light your
lamp and let your children sleep if they ask for supper." So she prepared her
meal, lighted her lamp and made her children sleep, and then stood up pretending
to mend her lamp, but she put it off. Then both of them pretended to be eating,
but they really went to bed hungry. In the morning the Ansari went to Allah's
Aposde "PEACE BE UPON HIM" who said: "Tonight Allah laughed or
wondered at your action." Then Allah revealed: "But give them preference over
themselves, even though poverty was their (own lot).” (Al-Hashr 9)

Bounteousness is one of the morals that belongs to Allah Almighty, and
altruism is its highest level. This was a part of the good manners of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and this is why
AJlah Almighty described him as great in His statement: " And you (stand) on an
exalted standard of character." (Al-Qalam 4)

i

cP ^13}

Abdullah Ibn Sahl At-Tastari said: Moses “peace be upon him” said to his
Lord: "O Lord! Let me see one of the degrees given to Muhammad “peace be
upon him” and his nation." He said: "O Moses! You would not endure it But
anyway, I would show you only a great glorious position therewith I preferred
him to you as well as to all of My creatures." He uncovered to him the dominion
of the heavens and he saw a position which was so much great that he was about
to be damaged, as a result of its glorious lights and nearness to Allah Almighty.
He asked: "O Lord! With which thing have You raised him up to that honour?"
He said: "With a character with which I have favored him apart from all the
people. I mean altruism. O Moses! None comes to me, having acted upon it even
for a part of his lifetime but that I would feel shy of calling him to account, and
let him occupy in my Garden wherever he likes."
It is reported that Abdullah Ibn Ja'far went to his landed property and came
upon an enclosed garden of date palms belonging to a people, and there was a
black slave working in it. When the slave received his sustenance, a hungry dog
entered the enclosed garden and came closer to the slave, who, in turn, threw a
loaf of bread and it ate it. Then, he threw to it another one and it ate it. Then, he
threw the third one and it ate it. He did so while Abdullah was looking at him. He
asked him: "O slave! How much is your daily sustenance?" he said: "Only what
you have seen." He asked him: "Then, why have you given that dog preference
over you with it?" he said: "This is not a land of dogs. But this dog has come
from a far distance while being hungry, and I disliked to eat my fill and it remains
hungry." He asked him: "Then, what are you going to do today?" he said: "I am
going to leave my stomach empty that day." Abdullah said: "Should I be blamed

The quarter of the destructives
424
for my bounteousness, given that this slave is more bounteous than me?" he
bought the enclosed garden with its slave and equipment, emancipated the slave,
and granted the garden to him.
Once, a man presented to Umar “Allah be pleased with him” the head (of a
slaughtered animal) as a gift thereupon Umar said: "My brother so and so is in
need of it more than me." He sent it to him, and the latter said the same and sent
it to a third, and so on until the head continued to be moved among seven
families and in the end, it returned to the first one (who gave it).
When Adi Ibn Abu Talib “Allah be pleased with him” spent the night on the
bed of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" (on
the day the polytheists conspired to kill him), Allah Almighty revealed to
Gabriel and Michael “peace be upon them” that "I have made a bond of
brotherhood between you, and given one of you a longer life than the other: so,
who of you would give preference to his brother with his life over himself?"
both chose and loved the life, thereupon Allah Almighty revealed to them: "Do
you not have a good example in Ali Ibn Abu Talib? I have made a bond of
brotherhood between him and my Prophet Muhammad “peace be upon him”
thereupon he spent the night on his bed in order to sacrifice his life for him,
and give him preference over himself. Descend then to the earth in order to
safeguard himself from his enemies." Gabriel kept standing by his head, and
Michael by his feet, and Gabriel was saying: "Well done Ibn Abu Talib! Allah
Almighty commends you in the presence of the angels." On that occasion,
Allah Almighty revealed: " And there is the type of man who gives his life to
earn the pleasure of Allah; and Allah is full of kindness to (His) devotees." (AlBaqarah 207)
4

J

^

c

(_£jZA ^

id I ^

^

It is reported that over thirty persons gathered in the house of Abu AlHassan Al-Antaki in a village near Rayy, and there were only a limited number of
loaves, which could not satisfy them all. They then fragmented them and
extinguished the lamp, and sat to have their meal, and when it was lifted, behold!
The food was the same since it had not been touched by anyone, for each of
them gave the others preference over himself. It is reported that once, Shu’bah
was visited by a beggar but he had nothing to give him. On that he took off a
piece of wood from the ceiling of the house and gave it to him, and apologized to
him (for he had nothing to serve him with)."
It is reported on the authority of Hudhaifah Al-Adawi that he said: "On the
day of the battle of Yarmuk, I set out in search for a paternal cousin of mine, and
I had some water. I said to myself: "If he is still alive, I would water him, and
wash his face therewith." I found him and asked him whether he needed water,
and he beckoned to me in the affirmative. But another person said: "Ah!" my
paternal cousin beckoned me to go to water that man. I went to him and behold!
He was Hisham Ibn Al-As. I said to him: "Would I water you?" a third person
heard us and said: "Ah!" Hisham beckoned to me to go to water that man. I went
to him and behold! He had died. I returned to Hisham and he had died. I
returned to my paternal cousin, and he also had died: may Allah bestow mercy

425
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
upon all of them."
According to Abbas Ibn Dihqan: "None has ever come out of this world in
the very state in which he entered it like Bishr Ibn Al-Harith. During his fatal
illness, a man came to him and made a complaint of his need, thereupon he took
off his shirt and gave it to him, and borrowed a garment in which he died.
It is reported on the authority of a Sufi that he said: "We gathered with the
intendon to set out for Jihad. We came out through the gate of Jihad and a dog
from the town followed us. When we walked a little, behold! We saw a dead
beast. We ascended a hillock land and sat there. Looked at the dead animal, the
dog returned to the town and came back with twenty dogs, which went on eadng
of the dead animals until they finished it, while the dog was looking at them, but
did not take part with them. Only the bones remained, and it was not before the
dogs returned to the town that the dog started to eat of the remaining bones.
Then, it turned away.
However, we have related a set of stories about altruism and states of saints in
the Book of Poverty and Ascedcism. So, there is no need to repeat them here;
and it is by Allah that success is obtained, and on Him we should rely.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
EXPOSITION OF DEFINITION AND REAL NATURE OF BOUNTEOUSNESS
AND NIGGARDLINESS
You may say that through the proofs of Sharia, it is learnt that niggardliness is
among the destructives: but what is its definition, and with which thing maq
becomes a niggard? No man sees himself but a bounteous, although he might be
seen as a niggard by others. One might do a thing in which people are different:
some render it as an act of niggardliness, and others do not regard it so. People
could hardly be free from having love for wealth, for which he safeguards and
withholds money; and once he withholds it, he becomes a niggard. In this way,
none could be far from niggardliness. If withholding in its own right does not
lead to niggardliness, and niggardliness is of no significance without withholding,
then, what is the kind of niggardliness, which brings about destruction? What is
the definition of bounteousness with which one is described as bounteous, for
which he receives reward?
In reply to that, let's say that some people are of the opinion that the
definition of niggardliness is to withhold what is due upon the person to give;
and thus, if one gives out what is due upon him to give, he is not a niggard. But
even, this alone is not sufficient. He, who returns meat to a butcher or bread to a
baker because of being a bit less than what is due, is a niggard, according to the
consensus. He, who hands over to his dependents the amount of expenses
enjoined upon him by the judge and then constricts upon them in a morsel or a
date they might eat beyond what is due, is also a niggard. Similarly, he, who has a
loaf of bread in front of him, and then is visited by him whom he thinks to share
food with him, thereupon he hides the loaf from him, is, by all means, an evident
niggard.
According to others, the niggard is he who regards it difficult upon himself to
give a gift. But also, this alone is not sufficient for definition. If it is intended to

r
The quarter of the destructives
426
refer to any kind of gift, then, how many a niggard upon whom it is not difficult
to give a little gift, like a grain, but no more. If it is intended to refer to some
gifts on the exclusion of others, how many a bounteous to whom it is difficult to
give particular gifts on the exclusion of others. For this reason, this should not be
judged as a niggard.
As regards bounteousness, some say that it is to give, but without making
reminder of generosity, and to relieve others immediately. Others say that it is to
give others without waiting for them to beg. It is also said that bounteousness is
to be pleased with the beggar and joyful of giving a gift, as much as it could be. It
is further said that bounteousness is to give for the Sake of Allah Almighty: since
a servant belongs to Allah Almighty, he gives from the property of Allah
Almighty, giving no importance to poverty or destitution. It is said that whoever
gives some and keeps some, is bounteous, and whoever gives the greater portion
and keeps the least portion for himself, is generous, and whoever favors to suffer
trouble in order to give another preference over himself, is altruistic, and
whoever gives nothing is stingy.
But even, all of those statements does not encompass the real nature of
generosity and niggardliness. Let's say that money is created for a particular
wisdom and objective, i.e. its fit to fulfill the needs of people. It might be
withheld from being spent on that for which it is created, and it might be spent
on that for which it is not created, and it might be disposed of with moderation,
i.e. to be saved where it should be saved, and spent where it should be spent.
Thus to withhold where you should spend is stinginess, and to spend where you
should withhold is extravagance, and in between them there is a middle which
is praiseworthy. It is in this middle that both generosity and bounteousness lie.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” was
commanded to be bounteous, and nothing else, as shown form the statement of
Allah Almighty: " Make not your hand tied (like a niggard's) to your neck, nor
stretch it forth to its utmost reach, so that you become blameworthy and
destitute." (Al-Isra' 29)
4

i
I

;

ULJbuLii* JaJL-jT ^ 1 ^ ]o ,~,y>

jjl a!Ju

)>

He Almighty further said: " Those who, when they spend, are not extravagant
and not niggardly, but hold a just (balance) between those (extremes)." (AlFurqan 67)
4

Liy JiJ’i

oi^=3

pi iyiij oiAl

Generosity then lies between extravagance and tightfistedness, between
withholding and stretching the hand forth to the utmost reach. In other words, it
is to determine his spending and withholding in accordance with what is due. But
it is not sufficient for him to do so only with the organs unless his heart is well
pleased with it. If one spends where he should spend, but his soul pulls him to
withhold, and he resists it, he is not bounteous by nature in so much as he
pretends to be bounteous. That is because one's heart should not be attached to
wealth except in so much as to that for which it is created, i.e. where it is to be
spent.

Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth

427

But you may say that this depends upon the knowledge of what is due to be
spent. In reply to it, let me say that what is due is divided into two: what is due
by religious law, and what is due out of valor and usage. The bounteous is he
who withholds neither what is due by religious law, nor what is due out of valor
and usage. If he withholds any of both, he is a niggard. But whoever withholds
what is due by religious law is more stingy, like him who rejects to pay the due
alms, or give the spending of his dependents, or gives it but with difficulty. Such
is stingy by nature, although he pretends to be bounteous. A mention also may be
made of him who points out the impure of his property to give, and is not
pleased to give out of the good and lawful of his property: all of this is
niggardliness.
As to what is due out of valor, it is not to constrict upon or disturb others in
regard with the trivial and insignificant things: this is blameworthy. But
blameworthiness here differs by the difference of states and persons, of a surety,
what is rendered blameworthy from the wealthy is not rendered so from the
poor, and what is rendered blameworthy from one with his family and
dependents is not rendered so from him with anyone else, and what is rendered
blameworthy from one with his neighbour is not rendered so from him with
anyone else, and so is true of hospitality: what is rendered blameworthy
concerning food is not rendered so concerning anything else, and what is
rendered blameworthy in relation to buying a shroud, a sacrifice, or bread for
charity, is not rendered so in relation to buying anything else.
The niggard then is he who withholds where he should not withhold, eithei
by law or out of valor. But there is no specific amount to determine as a limit
But we can say that niggardliness is to withhold money from a particular purpose,
which is more important than to save it. To maintain religion is more important
than to save money. Thus, the withholder of alms and spending is a niggard. To
maintain valor is more important than to save money. Thus, to constrict upon
others in the trivial things improperly disgraces the valor for the sake of his love
for property. Thus, he is a niggard.
There is another level, i.e. that a man fulfills what is due upon him, either by
law or out of valor. But at the same time, he has much property, which he does
not spend in the different aspects of charity, and on the needy among the
people. In this way, the purpose of saving wealth in order to help him confront
the calamities of time in this world, is counteracted by the purpose of receiving
reward, which is to raise him in degree in the hereafter. To withhold money
from that latter purpose is niggardliness in the sight of the intelligent among the
people and not so in the sight of the laymen. That is because the laymen's sight
is restricted to the transitory fortunes of this world. They regard as of great
importance to withhold money in order to avert therewith the disasters and
afflictions of time in this world. A layman also might seem stingy when he has
an indigent neighbour whom he does not give, under pretext that he had paid
the due alms. But this, as we have mentioned, differs by the difference of the
amount of money each of them has, and the extent to which the needy is in
need of sustenance, righteous and eligible. Whoever fulfills what is due upon

;

i

The quarter of the destructives
428
him either by law or out of valor, as it is fitting for him, becomes free from
niggardliness. But by no means would he be described as bounteous and
generous unless he gives out what is beyond that, in search for excellence and
high rank.
If he is pleased to spend beyond what is obligatory by law and valor, in a way
that makes him blameless, he will be generous and bounteous as much as he is
pleased to spend. The levels therein are coundess, and some people are more
bounteous and generous than others. That is because doing favor beyond what is
obligatory by usage and valor is out of bounteousness and generosity, provided
tiiat it is done with good pleasure, and not for the sake of any kind of interest,
like seeking reward, service, or thanks, for such of people as covets of thanks and
praise is a seller of favor and not a generous or bounteous person. That is
because he buys praise with his wealth, and praise is delicious, and it is in itself
intended, unlike generosity, which is to give out without compensadon.
This is the real nature of generosity; and it is not expected in its reality but
from Allah Almighty. In regard to mankind, he is described as generous or
bounteous by way of allegory and not reality. That is because he gives out
nothing without a particular purpose to be expected. But in case his purpose is to
receive reward in the hereafter, or to obtain the excellence of generosity, and
purify himself from the vice of niggardliness, he then is generous. If he is
prompted by his fear of being lampooned, or becoming an object of blame of
people, or by an interest or a benefit he expects from the beneficiary, he is not
generous nor bounteous, for he is forced to give out by necessity of those
motives, which are encouraging compensations.
In confirmation of that, it is reported that a worshipping woman stood by the
side of Hibban Ibn Hilal who was sitting among his companions and said: "Is
there anyone of you to ask about something?" they said: "Ask about what you
like." They referred to Hibban Ibn Hilal. She asked: "What is bounteousness in
your sight?" they said: "It is to give out and spend and adhere to altruism." She
said: "This is bounteousness in this world: what is bounteousness in the
religion?" they said: "It is to worship Allah Almighty with good pleasure, and not
under compulsion." She asked: "Then, do you expect reward for that?" they said:
"Yes." She said: "Why?" they said: "Because Allah Almighty has promised to give
us by each good deed as much as ten times the like of it." On that she said:
"Glory be to Allah! If you give only one act and take ten times the like of it, with
which thing do you regard yourself bounteous?" they asked her: "Then, what is
bounteousness in your sight, may Allah bestow mercy upon you?" she said:
"Bounteousness is to worship Allah with good pleasure and delight with obeying
Him, and not under compulsion, and expect no reward for that, and rather leave
yourselves to your Lord to do with you what He likes. Do you not feel shy of
Allah Almighty that He would look at your hearts and know that you seek a thing
in return for a thing? This is evidendy odious in this world."
Another worshipping woman said: "Do you regard bounteousness in Dirham
and money?" they asked: "Then, in which thing else?" she said: "In the souls."
According to Al-Muhasibi: "Bounteousness in religion is to give out yourself and

429
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
fret it for the Sake of Allah Almighty; and your heart is generous by giving out
yourself and shedding your blood for the Sake of Allah Almighty, with good
pleasure, and not under compulsion, expecdng no transitory nor deferred reward,
even though you could hardly dispense with reward: but it becomes close to your
certainty that to make perfect your bounteousness and generosity, you should
leave the matter of choice to Allah Almighty, to do with yourself what you could
not do well to it."

CHAPTER TWELVE
EXPOSITION OF TREATMENT OF NIGGARDLINESS
It should be known that niggardliness results from the love for wealth. There
are two causes of loving wealth: one is the love for desires, which could not be
attained except by money, besides the long-lived hope. If one is to know that he
will die a day or a few days later, perhaps he would not withhold his money, for
the amount he needs during that short period is not much. But if his hope is
short-lived and at the same time, he has children, his children take the place of
his long-lived hope, for he regards their survival as a condnuadon of his own
survival, and this is why he withholds money. This is why the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him,, said: "The child causes (his parent) to
be sdngy, coward and ignorant." (This narradon is reported by Ibn Majah on the
authority of Ya'li Ibn Murrah'; and Abu Ya'li and Al-Bazzar on the authority of
Abu Sa'id). If to that is added the fear of poverty and lack of confidence of thf
coming of sustenance, inevitably, niggardliness becomes stronger.
The second cause is to have love for the money in its own right. How man\
a person who has of money what is sufficient for his spending during his enure
lifedme, in addidon to more extra, given that he is an old man with no
descendants. But in spite of that, he is not pleased to give out alms, or even to
treat himself when he falls ill. That is because he has come to love Dinars and
Dirhams, and adore them and be delightful with their presence in his hand.
Thus, he hoards them under the ground, and knows that he is to die inevitably,
and somebody else is to take it after him, and this one might be his enemy. But
even, he is not pleased to eat thereof or give in charity anything out of it, even
as little as a grain. This is one of the heart diseases, which is too difficult to
treat, particularly during the old age. It is a chronic disease whose medicine is
not expected.
The example of such a niggard is like a man who loves another person, but he
engages in the messenger of his beloved, with whom he forgets his real beloved,
and gradually, he comes to love the messenger instead of the beloved. To be sure,
Dinars and Dirhams are no more than a messenger through which one's needs
are attained, and this is why they are loved; and this is because what makes the
beloved accessible is beloved in itself. At a later stage, the needs themselves are
forgotten, and gold turns to be beloved in itself. But this is the greatest error. It is
the ignorant who sees difference between gold and stone except in so much as
being a means to fulfill the needs. But what is beyond his needs and the stone are
in the same position.
Those are the causes of loving wealth. Each of them should be treated by its

The quarter of the destructives
430
opposite, Love for desires is treated by contentment with and keeping patient on
the little. The long-lived hope is treated by remembering death so often, and
taking lessons from the death of one's fellows, and their severe trouble in
gathering wealth and its loss or going after them to somebody else. One's care
about his child is treated by the faith in the fact that when his Creator has created
him, He also has created his sustenance with him. How many a child who
inherited nothing form his father, but his state is much better than him who
inherited. He also should know that although he gathers wealth in order to leave
his child in good, he himself, by so doing, would go to evil. Moreover, if his
child is pious and righteous, Allah Almighty will not forget him; and if he is
wicked and disobedient, he might use the wealth he has left for him in his
wickedness, and the evil consequence of that will return to him.
Moreover, he should treat his heart by reflecting so often the narrations and
stories pertaining to the condemnation of niggardliness, and praise of
bounteousness, and Allah's threat to punish for niggardliness. One of the great
medicines is to meditate the states of the niggards, and people's aversion towards
them, for there is no niggard but that his stinginess is seen by odiers as odious;
and once he becomes a niggard, he knows that he will be odious and hateful in
the hearts and sights of all the people, like the other niggards. His heart is treated
also by thinking about the real purposes of money for which it is created. Having
learnt so, he would not save from money except as much as suffices his needs,
and save the remnant for himself in the hereafter, i.e. to give it in charity in
expectation for the reward.
Those medicines result from his knowledge and work simultaneously. If he
knows by the light of his insight that spending is much better for him than
withholding in both the world and the hereafter, he will be prompted to spend,
particularly if he is of sound mind. He should not cease to spend for Satan always
frightens him of poverty, and keeps him off spending. It is reported that Abu AlHassan Al-Bushanji was one day in the privy when he called his pupil and asked
him to take off his shirt to give it to so and so in charity. His pupil said to him:
"Would you not wait until you come out of the privy?" he said: "I do not feel
secure of changing my mind, and a thought had already occurred to my mind to
give it in charity."
However, the niggardliness could not disappear unless one forces himself
to do so, just as adoration could not be removed unless one travels and
becomes far from the residence of the beloved. The long time he spends
abroad consoles his heart and helps it forget him. Similarly, he, who likes to
treat niggardliness, should leave wealth, by giving it out. Furthermore, if he is
to throw it into the sea, it will be much better for him than to withhold it, out
of love for it. One of the nice tricks is to deceive himself by good reputation
of spending, in order to be seen of men, thereby he removes from himself the
impurity of niggardliness and rather obtains the impurity of showing off.
However, later on, he could turn to remove dissimilation. In this way, seeking
a good reputation is like the thing by which he consoles himself, when it is
weaned from wealth, just as a baby is consoled when he is weaned from his

431
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
mother's breast by playing with birds, not for the sake of playing in itself, but
in order to be engaged from breast by it and later on he might be diverted
from it to anything else.
It is in that way that the vicious qualities should be directed over each other,
as appetence is directed over anger in order to break it, and anger is directed over
appetence in order to curb it. But this treatment is beneficial for him in whom
niggardliness prevails the power of authority and showing off. If the power of
authority is important to him like wealth, then, it will be of no benefit, for he will
give up a vice to strengthen another. The sign of that is that it is not difficult
upon him to spend for the sake of showing off, in which case, dissimilation
prevails in him. If it is difficult upon him to spend for the sake of showing off,
then, he should spend, for in this case, it is the disease of niggardliness that
prevails in his heart.
The example of how the vicious qualities avert each other is like a dead
body that is eaten by warms. Later, those warms turn to eat each other until
they become less in number. They continue to eat each other until they are
reduced to two strong warms, which fight each other until one of them eats the
other and becomes fat. It remains alone hungry until it dies. Similarly, those
vicious qualities might be directed over each other, and thus curbed, in such a
way as to make the weak among them sustenance for the strong, until there
remains only one, which it becomes easier upon him to remove through selfmortification, i.e. to withhold sustenance from it. To withhold sustenance from
a quality is not to act in accordance with it. Any quality requires one to act upor
it, and once it is opposed, it will die. Niggardliness, for instance, requires one
to withhold money. If one does not withhold money, and rather starts to spend
it even with difficulty at first, one by one, spending becomes natural, and
niggardliness dies gradually.
To be sure, the treatment of niggardliness results from both knowledge and
work. The knowledge is to learn the evil of niggardliness in contrast with the
benefit of bounteousness; and the work is to adhere to generosity and
bounteousness, and spend even by way of ostentation. But niggardliness might be
too strong to hinder one from making sense to its evil. The desire to remove it
will not be stimulated in absence of such knowledge, leaving the disease chronic.
It is like the illness whose medicine is unknown. There is no way to treat it but to
keep patient until death.
It was the habit of some Sufi sheikhs to treat the quality of niggardliness in
their pupils by forbidding their assignments and specifications to them, or
exchanging theirs for those of others; and if anyone of them was pleased with a
new garment or carpet, it would be taken from him and given to another, and he
would be given an old shabby one to which he might not be inclined. In this way,
the heart forsakes the enjoyment of this world. Whoever does not follow that
way will get affable to this world and its chattels. If they are taken from him, he
will grieve as much as he loves it.
One day, a vessel of turquoise adorned with jewels the like of which had
never been seen was given as a gift to a king, with which he became pleased. He

The quarter of the destructives
432
asked a sage who was with him about his opinion in it, thereupon he said: "I see
that it is a cause of affliction or poverty.” He asked him about the reason, and he
said: "If it gets broken, it will not be repaired, and this is an affliction; and if it is
stolen, you will be in need of it, and will not find the like of it; and before it was
given to you, you were safe from such affliction and poverty." It happened that it
got broken or was stolen one day, thereupon the king became very aggrieved. On
that he said: "No doubt, the sage has told the truth. Would that it was not given
to us!"
This is the case of all means and causes of this world. The world is an enemy
to the enemies of Allah for it drives them to the fire of Hell; an enemy to the
devotees of Allah, for it aggrieves them when they keep patient on giving it up;
an enemy to Allah Almighty, for it cuts off His way on His servants; and an
enemy to itself for it eats itself. Wealth could not be kept but in treasures and
stores under the guardianship of guards, and those could not be obtained except
by money. In this way, money eats itself and opposes itself until it perishes.
Whoever knows the evil of money does not become affable to, nor pleased with
it, nor does he take from it but as much as is sufficient for his need. Whoever is
satisfied with the necessary amount that is sufficient for his need does not
become stingy, for what is withheld for his need is not niggardliness. Therefore,
he does not trouble himself to save what he needs not: on the contrary, he
spends it, and in this way, money becomes like the water on the shore of a river,
which the people do not withhold from anyone for they take from it only as
much as is sufficient for their needs.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
EXPOSITION OF MAN’S DUTIES REGARDING HIS WEALTH
It should be known to you that the wealth, as we have already described it, is
good in some point and evil in some point. Its example is like a female-snake,
which a physician might take and extract medicine therefrom, and a heedless
might take and be killed by its poison unknowingly. But anyway, none could be
free from the poison of wealth unless he observes five duties:
The first is to know the real purpose of money for which it is created, to
need it only when it is earned, to save from it only as much as what is sufficient
to fulfill the need, and to give no importance to it more than it deserves.
The second is to observe the sources of his income: in this issue, he should
avoid the sources, which are entirely unlawful, or unlawful for the most part, like
the property of rulers and governors. He should also avoid the undesirable
sources, which contradict valor, like the gifts, which carry the suspicion of bribe,
or begging which is not free from humiliation, and the like of those which tear
the curtain of valor and modesty.
The third pertains to the extent to which he should earn of money: he
should neither multiply, nor decrease it: but rather reduce himself to the
necessary amount, which is sufficient to fulfill his need of food, clothes and
residence. Each of those consists of three levels: the maximum, the minimum
and the middle, which is the optimum. If one inclines to the little, and is close
only to what is necessary, he is right; and if he goes beyond that, he falls in a

Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth

433

bottomless pit. We have already mentioned the details of those levels in the
Book of Asceticism.
The fourth is to observe the way of exit, i.e. to spend moderately, and keep
himself far from extravagance and tightfistedness. This is to spend what he
lawfully earns properly, i.e. in its right places. That is because it is equally sinful to
take it from unlawful sources, and spend it improperly.
The fifth is to have good intention whenever he takes, leaves, withholds and
spends. He should take what he takes just to seek its aid to do the acts of
worship, and leave what he leaves out of piety and asceticism. Once he does so,
no harm shall befall him, no matter how much money he might have. This is the
significance of the statement of Ali “Allah be pleased with him": "If one takes all
what the earth contains therewith he intends the Countenance of Allah Almighty,
he will be abstinent; and if one leaves all that the earth contains, therewith he
does not intend the Countenance of Allah Almighty, he will not be abstinent."
Thus, all of your movements and motionlessness should be for the Sake of
the Countenance of Allah Almighty, which you should restrict to worship or
what helps you worship perfectly. However, although eating and fulfillment of
sexual desires are the farthest from worship, at the same time, they help one
do his acts of worship perfectly. If you direct your intention in them to such a
goal, they would become acts of worship in their own right. This is the same
intention you should have in all that keeps you, like clothes, sustenance,
furniture, etc, for all of that is needed in religion; and what is beyond the
necessary need should be intended to benefit another one of the servants of
Allah Almighty. Whoever does so is like him who takes from the female-snake
of wealth its medicine, and avoids its poison. Thus, the abundance of mone)
causes no harm to him.
But none is granted such a high rank barring he, who is well-established and
well-educated in religion. If a layman imitates a learned in multiplying wealth,
under pretext that he resembles the rich among the companions “Allah be
pleased with them”, he then is like a boy who sees a physician taking a femalesnake in order to extract its medicine, and, thinking that he takes it only because
he regards it as beautiful and its skin as smooth, he imitates him and takes it, with
the result that its poison kills him immediately. But there is difference between
them: the one killed by a female-snake knows that he is a killed person, whereas
the one killed by wealth does not know that he is a killed person. The world is
likened to a female-snake which blows poison although its skin is smooth. As
well as it is impossible for a blind to imitate a sighted in crossing the mountain
tops, seas and the difficult and rough streets, it is also impossible for a layman to
imitate a learned in dealing with wealth.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
CONDEMNATION OF RICHNESS AND COMMENDATION OF POVERTY
It should be known to you that people are different as to whether the
thankful rich is superior to the patient poor or vice versa. We have explained that
in detail in the Book of Poverty and Asceticism. But in this book, our purpose is
to confirm that poverty is much better and higher than richness in general, giving

434 ----------------------------------------------------- The quarter of the destructives
no attention, at least now, to die detailed states of each, we are going to limit
ourselves to relating a chapter written by Al-Harith Al-Muhasibi in one of his
book in reply to a rich learned, who based his argument upon the rich among the
companions, and die proliferation of the wealth of Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf
“Allah be pleased with him” in particular, in an attempt to give himself
resemblance to them. Al-Muhasibi was an encyclopedist and well-versed in the
science of practical religion, in which he had precedence over all the nation's
researchers in the field of self-defects and evils of works, in addition to the
profound acts of worship. For this reason, his speech is worthy of being related
without adaptation.
After his speech in reply to some evil learned, he said: "We have been
reported on the authority of Jesus, son of Mary “peace be upon him” that he
said: "O evil learned! You observe fasts, offer prayer and give in charity, but at
the same time, you do not do what you are commanded to do, and study what
you do not do. Evil is your judgement! You repents in words and hopes, and act
in accordance with your inclinations. It is of no profit to you to clean your skin,
and leave your hearts impure. Let me tell you the truth: do not be like the sifter,
from which the pure and fine powder comes out, and only the rubbish remains in
it. Similarly, you bring out wisdom from your mouths, and only hatred and rancor
remain in your breasts. O slaves of this world! How could he attain success in the
hereafter, whose desires of this world never die out? Let me tell you the truth:
your hearts weep because of your deeds. You have put your world under the
control of your tongues, and your deeds under your feet. Let me tell you the
truth: you have corrupted your hereafter for the good of your world has become
dearer to you than the good of your hereafter. Which people then are to lose
more than you if you know? Woe to you! Until which time would you describe
the way to the walkers and remain in the place of the confused people? It seems
as if you invite the people of this world to leave it for you step by step. Woe to
you! What could the lamp avail in the dark house if it is put on its surface, while
the inside of it remains lonely and dark? Similarly, it is of no profit to give out the
light of knowledge with your mouths, while your insides remain idle, lonely and
dark. O slaves of this world! You are neither pious slaves, nor honourable free
men. This world is about to uproot you, throw you prone on your faces and then
on your nostrils, seize you by your forelocks because of your mistakes and sins,
and then drive you from behind you until it hands you over to the King, as naked
and individuals, Who, in turn, will show you your privates, and punish you for
your evil deeds."
Then, Al-Harith "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "O my brothers!
Those are the evil learned, the devils of men who tempt people to do evil like
them, they have desire in this world and its good things, which they give
preference over the hereafter. They interpret religion to serve their worldly
interests and affairs. In this way, they are put to shame and disgrace as regards
their transitory fortunes, and in the hereafter they will be the losers, unless Allah
Most Generous forgives out of His Bounty.
Coming to the point: I have seen that the pleasure of the ruined by this world

435
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
is mixed with embitterment, which results in different kinds of concerns and sins,
and to destruction and perdition he will be given in the end. The ruined one
rejoices at his hope, with the result that neither his world remains for him, nor
does his religion become faultless. That is because he has lost both the world and
the hereafter, and this is, to be sure, the evident loss. How grievous this affliction
is, and how odious this calamity is! Behold! Observe Allah (in all of your deeds)
O my brothers, and let not Satan and his devotees deceive you, using arguments
which are refuted in the Sight of Allah Almighty. They compete over this world,
under pretext of false excuses and arguments.
They claim that the companions of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” had wealth. In this way, those deceived adorn their
attitudes with the mention of the companions “Allah be pleased with them” in
order to be excused by the people for gathering wealth. No doubt, Satan has
deceived them, although they know not. Woe to you O tempted person! Your
argument by the wealth of Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf “Allah be pleased with
him” is caused by an intrigue from Satan, who shows it on your tongue, in order
to bring you to destruction. That is because once you allege that the best among
the companions “Allah be pleased with them” intended to multiply their wealth
for the sake of honour and adornment, you have backbitten the masters, and
ascribed them to an odious thing.
Once you allege that gathering wealth from lawful sources is better thar
leaving it, you have criticized Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” and all the Messengers, and ascribed them to
lack of desire and asceticism in this good for which you and your companions
are desirous, and further ascribed them to ignorance since they did not gather
wealth as you do. Once you allege that gathering wealth from lawful sources is
higher and better than leaving it, you then claim that the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” was not sincere in his advice to the
nation, for he forbade them to gather wealth; and had gathering wealth been
good, he then would have cheated the nation when he forbade them to do so,
according to your false claim. But even, by the Lord of the heaven, you have
told a lie about the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him”. He was sincere in his advice to this nation, merciful and compassionate
towards them.
Once you allege that gathering wealth is better than leaving it, you then claim
that Allah Almighty has not looked, with the eye of mercy, to His believing
servants, when He forbade them to gather wealth, given that gathering wealth is
good for them, or that Allah Almighty does not know the excellence of gathering
wealth, thereupon He forbade them to gather it, and it is you who know well its
excellence and good, which prompts you to have a desire to multiply wealth,
seeming, by so doing, more knowledgeable of the points of good and excellence
than Allah Almighty "Exalted and Hallowed He Be from your ignorance".
O tempted man! Consider with your mind how Satan afflicted you when he
made it alluring to you to argue by the wealth of the companions. Woe to you!
What would you avail from arguing by the wealth of Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf

The quarter of the destructives
436
“Allah be pleased with him”, given that on the Day of Judgement, he would like
he was not given more than his daily sustenance? In this respect, I was reported
that when Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf “Allah be pleased with him” died, some of
the companions of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "By Allah, we fear for Abd-Ar-Rahman concerning the property he
left." Ka'b said: "Glory be to Allah! Why do you fear for Abd-Ar-Rahman, since
his earnings are lawful, he spent properly, and what he left is lawful?" his
statement reached Abu Dharr “Allah be pleased with him” who set out in search
of Ka’b, and on the way, he came upon a part of a camel's jawbone, which he
took with his hand. He then proceeded on in pursuit of Ka'b. it was said to Ka'b
that Abu Dharr was searching for him, thereupon he came out in flight from him
until he entered the house of Uthman “Allah be pleased with him”. At the same
time, Abu Dharr “Allah be pleased with him” traced him until he reached the
house of Uthman “Allah be pleased with him”. When he entered, Ka'b stood and
hid himself behind Uthman, in flight from him. Abu Dharr said addressing him:
"O son of the Jewish woman! Do you claim that there is no harm in the property
left by Abd-Ajr-Rahman Ibn Awf? One day, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” set out towards (the mountain of) Uhud and I
was in his company. He said: "O Abu Dharr!" I said: "I am responding to your
call O Messenger of Allah!" he said: "Those who have the greatest wealth (in this
world) will have the least (good deeds) on the Day of Judgement, except such as
spends like this and this, i.e. on his right, on his left, in front of him and on his
back, and few are they!" then, he said: "O Abu Dharr!" I said: "Yes, O Messenger
of Allah, let my father and mother sacrifice their lives for you!" he said: "I would
not be pleased to have as much wealth as the mountain of Uhud to spend in the
Way of Allah, if when I die there will remain thereof even as little as two Qirats."
I said: "Or two quintals (hundredweights) O Messenger of Allah?" he said: "No,
only two Qirats." Then he said: "You want the more, and I want the less." (This
narration is partially reported by both sheikhs). He means that 'Should the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” intend so, and you,
son of the Jewish woman, say that there is no harm in the property left by AbdAr-Rahman? You have then told a lie, and anyone who says so has told a lie." He
gave no reply to him out of fear of him until he came out.
It is reported that a caravan belonging to Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf “Allah be
pleased with him” arrived from Yemen, thereupon the people of Medina
clamored all at once. A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her” said: "What is the
matter?" they said: "It is because of a caravan belonging to Abd-Ar-Rahman that
arrived in Medina." On that she said: "No doubt, Allah and His Messenger have
told the truth." When the news of that reached Abd-Ar-Rahman “Allah be
pleased with him” he asked her, and she said: "I heard the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” saying: "I saw the Garden, and saw
that the poor among the Emigrants and Muslims will enter it as running, and
none among the rich will enter with them except Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf, who
will enter it with them as crawling."" (This narration is reported by Ahmad). On
that Abd-Ar-Rahman “Allah be pleased with him” said: "Then, I have given the

Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth

437

caravan and what it contains in charity in the Way of Allah Almighty; and
emancipated the slaves who work in it perchance I would enter the Garden in
their company as running."
It is reported that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said to Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf “Allah be pleased with him”: "You will be
the first among the rich of my nation to enter the Garden, and you will not enter
it except as crawling." (This narration is reported by Al-Bazzar on the authority
of Anas; and Al-Hakim on the authority of Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf).
Woe to you O tempted man! What is the significance of your arguing by the
wealth, given that Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf “Allah be pleased with him” with his
good deeds and favors he used to do, and charitable gifts he used to give, let
alone his company with the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” and being one of the ten given the glad tidings of entering the Garden
(according to the narration of At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Sa'id Ibn Zaid),
would be made to stand in the plain ground on the Day of Judgement, and suffer
its terrors because of his property which he earned from lawful sources? Because
of his earning his wealth for the sake of abstinence (from begging), doing favors,
spending from his wealth moderately, giving charitable gifts, and spending in the
Cause of Allah with good pleasure and heart contentment, he would enter the
Garden in the company of the poor Muslims, though not as running like them,
but rather lagging behind them as crawling. What do you think then about the
like of us, who are sunk in the temptations of this world?
Therefore, how amazing you are O tempted man! You roll in the mixtures of
suspicions and impure things, and compete with others over the dirty among the
people, and turn in lusts, desires and ornaments, and in the temptations of this
world, and in spite of all that, you argue by Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf “Allah be
pleased with him”. You allege that if you gather wealth, you do only what the
companions “Allah be pleased with them” did, likening yourself to the righteous
predecessors. Woe to you! This is one of the false analogies made by Iblis to his
devotees. Let me describe to you your states and the stats of the righteous
predecessors in reality, perchance you would come to know your faults and flaws,
and the extent to which the companions “Allah be pleased with them” were
superior to anyone else.
By my life! Some companions intended their wealth for abstinence (from
begging), spending therefrom in the Way of Allah. They earned from lawful
sources, ate from lawful and good sustenance, spent with moderation, and gave
in charity the surplus that was beyond their needs. Moreover, they neither
withheld the rights due upon their wealth, nor were they stingy: on the contrary,
they gave most of their wealth in charity for the Sake of Allah, and some of them
gave theirs entirely. At the times of adversity, they gave preference to Allah most
often over themselves. Tell me by Allah: are you as such? By Allah, your
resemblance to the people is very far.!
Nevertheless, the good companions “Allah be pleased with them” were
inclined to be indigent, safe from the fear of poverty, confident of Allah
Almighty in sustenance, well-pleased with His decrees, contented at the time of

The quarter of the destructives
438
hardship, thankful at the time of prosperity, patient at the time of adversity,
praising at die time of ease, humble to Allah Almighty, and abstinent from
arrogance and pride. They did not take of the permissible from this world but
what is sufficient for the minimum requirements. They drove away the world
with its good things, persevered its undesirable things, tasted its bitterness, and
refrained from its luxuries and splendour. Tell me by Allah: are you like them?
It is reported that whenever the world turned its face to them, they would
grieve and say: "It is a sin whose punishment has been hastened on for us from
Allah Almighty", and whenever they saw poverty turning its face to them, they
would say cheerfully: "Welcome to the motto of the righteous." It is reported
from one of them that whenever morning came upon him and his dependents
had anything (of this world), he would remain sad and depressed, and whenever
morning came upon him and they had nothing, he would become pleased and
cheerful. It was said: "It is the habit of people to become sad if they had nothing,
and pleased if they had anything (of sustenance), and you are not so." On that he
said: "No doubt, whenever morning comes upon me and my dependents have
nothing, I would become pleased, in imitation of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”, and whenever morning comes upon me and
my dependents have anything, I would become aggrieved, for in this case, I
would not imitate the pattern of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” and his family." It is also reported that whenever they
followed a way to luxury in this world, they would grieve and fear saying: "What
do we have to do with this world?" Whenever they followed a way to adversity,
they would be pleased and happy and say: "It is only now that our Lord has cared
about us."
Those are the states of the righteous predecessors; and their excellence is
beyond our description. Tell me by Allah: are you like them? you are, to be
sure, unlikely similar to them, let me describe to you your states, O tempted
man. At the time you become rich and luxurious, you soon transgress all
bounds and grow too arrogant to submit to the truth. At the time of
prosperity, you grow happy and neglect to give thanks to the Lord for His
favor. At the time of adversity, you despair of Allah's mercy, and at the time
of disaster, you become displeased, and not satisfied with the fate of Allah.
You further dislike poverty and disdain from neediness, given that this is the
source of pride of the Messengers. You gather and save wealth, for fear of
poverty; and this is due to your evil assumption of Allah Almighty, and lack of
confidence of His guarantee, and sufficient is this for sin. You also gather
wealth to seek its aid to fulfills your desires and enjoy the splendor and
blessings of this world.
It is reported that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "The worst among my nation are those who are nourished with the
luxury of this world until their bodies put on flesh on them." it is also reported
that a learned said: "On the Day of Judgement, some people will come to
demand their good deeds, thereupon it will be said to them: "You have
consumed your good things in the life of your world, and enjoyed of them."" but

439
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
even, you are heedless for you will be deprived of the blessing of the hereafter
because of the blessing of this world. What a disastrous sigh it is! You also gather
and save wealth for the sake of proliferadon, boasting, loftiness and adornment in
this world. It is reported that whoever seeks after this world for the sake of
proliferation or boasting will meet Allah Who will be angry with him. But even,
you are careless about the anger of your Lord with you when you seek after
proliferation and loftiness.
You also prefer to survive in this world more than to move to the
neighbourhood of Allah Almighty. That is because you dislike to meet Allah, and
Allah dislikes more to meet you. You are heedless. You regret for the vanities of
this world that escaped you. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” said: "Whoever regrets for the vanities of this world that escaped
him, draws himself as long as a month (or a year) closer to the fire of Hell." But
you regret for what has escaped you, careless about your closeness to the
punishment of Allah Almighty. You sometimes leave your religion in order to
enjoy of your world with pleasure. It is reported that the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Whoever likes and is pleased
with this world, will have no fear of the hereafter." It is also reported that a
learned said: "You will be reckoned for your regret for the vanities of this world
that escape you, as well as for your pleasure with its luxury and splendor." But
even, you are pleased with your world, by which you are deprived of the fear of
the punishment of Allah Almighty.
You also are concerned with the affairs of your world more than you are with
the affairs of your hereafter. You also regard your disaster in your sins easier
upon you than your disaster in the reduction of your world, and you fear the loss
of your wealth more than you fear committing sins. You also spend on the
people all that you gather of the impurities, in quest for loftiness and fame in this
world. You also please the creatures on the account of displeasing Allah
Almighty, in order to be respected and honoured in this world. Woe to you! It
seems as if it is easier upon you to be despised by Allah on the Day of Judgement
than to be scorned by the people in this world. You also hide your shameful
deeds from the people and do not care that Allah Almighty knows them all. It
seems as if your scandal in the Sight of Allah Almighty is easier upon you than
your disgrace in the sight of the people. Do you regard the slaves in a higher
position in your sight than Allah Almighty? Exalted and Hallowed be Allah from
your ignorance!
How do you argue given all of those defects and shortcomings of you? How
do you contaminate yourself with the impurities and dirty things and at the same
time argue by the wealth of the good and pious among the people? How far!
How far! How removed you are from the righteous predecessors! By Allah, it is
reported that they were more abstinent in what was made lawful for them than
you are in what is made unlawful for you. That in which you see no harm was
among the destructives in their sight. The minor slip was regarded by them more
grievous than a major sin is regarded by you now. Would that the best and most
lawful of your property attains the degree of their suspicious things. Would that

The quarter of the destructives
440
you fear of your evil deeds just as they feared for their good deeds that they
might not be accepted. Would that your fasting is like their leaving fast, your
diligence in worship is like their weariness and sleep, and all of your good deeds
are like a single one of their evil deeds. It is reported that one of the companions
“Allah be pleased with them” said: "The booty of the sincere lovers of truth is
what they loose of this world, and their satiety is what is concealed from them of
it. Whoever is not so is not with them in this world, nor will he be with them in
the hereafter." Glory be to Allah! How different those two parties are from each
other! The party of the good and glorious companions "may Allah be pleased
with them" in their highness in the Sight of Allah Almighty, and the party of the
like of you in lowness until Allah the Most Generous forgives and pardons by His
bounty.
Therefore, if you claim that you imitate the glorious companions “Allah be
pleased with them” in gathering wealth for refraining from begging and spending
it in the Cause of Allah Almighty as they did, you should first consider your state.
Woe to you! Do you find the lawful in your time like theirs in their own time? Do
you regard yourself cautious of seeking after the lawful just as they were in their
search for it? It is reported that one of the companions “Allah be pleased with
them” said: "We used to leave seventy doors to lawful for fear we might fall into
a door leading to the unlawful." Do you expect yourself to have such caution?
No, by the Lord of the Ka'bah, I do not think that you are so.
Woe to you! Be sure that your gathering wealth to spend it on the acts of
righteousness is no more than intrigue that is made alluring to you by Satan,
thereby to lead you to earn what is suspicious, mixed with the unlawful and
forbidden. It is reported that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” said: "He, who dares to plunge into the suspicious is about to fall
in the unlawful." (This narration is reported with a slight variation of wording by
both sheikhs on the authority of An-Nu'man Ibn Bashir).
Do you not know, O deceived man, that to fear of plunging into the
suspicious is higher, much better and more significant in the Sight of Allah
Almighty than to obtain them and spend them in the Way of Allah Almighty
and righteousness? This is reported to us from one of the learned, that he said:
"To leave a single Dirham for fear of being from unlawful sources is much
better to you than to spend in charity one thousand Dinars from suspicious
sources, which you do not know whether or not it is lawful for you." If you
claim that you are too cautious and pious to approach the suspicious, and that
you gather wealth from lawful sources, in order to spend it in the Way of Allah
Almighty, woe to you! You should be more pious in avoidance of being called
to account. However, the glorious companions “Allah be pleased with them”
were afraid of the matter of question. It is reported that one of them said: "I
would not be pleased to earn one thousand Dinars daily from lawful sources
and spend them all in the Way of Allah even if it is not to divert me from
performing Friday prayer." When he was asked about the reason he said: "For I
am not in need of standing on the Day of Judgement, and being asked (by
Allah): "O My servant! From which sources have you earned, and in which
thing have you spend?""

441
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
Those pious who were present when Islam was flourishing, and the lawful
was prevailing, left wealth for fear of reckoning, lest the good might not be able
to avert the evil, if there is any. In contrast with them you are: you feel safe
although the lawful in your time is lost. You compete with others over the
impurities and dirty things, and then claim falsely that you gather wealth from
lawful sources. Woe to you! Where is the lawful so that you would gather it? And
even, if the lawful is available to you, do you not feel afraid your heart might
change when you become rich? It is reported that many of the companions
“Allah be pleased with them” inherited lawful wealth, which they left, for fear it
would spoil their hearts. Do you covet of having your heart cleaner and purer
than the hearts of the companions “Allah be pleased with them”? if you think so,
of a surety, you then have good assumption of your own self, which always
enjoins evil upon you.
Woe to you! I am only a counselor to you. I see it better for you to earn
money only in so far as it is sufficient for the minimum requirements of your
living than to gather wealth to spend it on the acts of righteousness, lest you
would be called to account. It is reported that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "He, who is called to account will be
punished." (This is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of A'ishah).
It is further reported that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” said: "On the Day of Judgement, a man will be brought, and h<
gathered wealth from unlawful sources, and spent it on what is unlawfu.
thereupon it will be said: 'Admit him to the fire of Hell'; and a man will be
brought, and he gathered wealth from lawful sources, and spent it on what is
unlawful, thereupon it will be said: 'Admit him to the fire of Hell'; and a man will
be brought, and he gathered wealth from unlawful sources, and spent it on what
is lawful, thereupon it will be said: 'Admit him to the fire of Hell'; and a man will
be brought, and he gathered wealth from lawful sources, and spent it on what is
lawful, thereupon it will be said to him: 'Stand, for perhaps you, seeking after that
wealth, neglected anything I have enjoined upon you: perhaps you did not offer
prayer in its due time, or indulged in anything of its bowings and prostrations or
ablution'. He will say: 'No Lord: I earned money from lawful sources, spent it on
what is lawful, and did not waste anything of what You have enjoined upon me'.
It will be said to him: "Then, perhaps you boasted because of that wealth in your
vehicle or garment, by which you showed pride'. He will say: "No Lord, I did
neither boast nor show pride over anyone by any of those'. It will be said: 'Then,
perhaps you withheld the right of anyone I have commanded you to give, as
regards your relatives, orphans, needy and indigent, and wayfarers'. He will say:
"No Lord, I earned money from lawful sources, and spent it on what is lawful. I
neither indulged in anything of what You have enjoined upon me, nor boasted,
nor showed pride, nor wasted the right of anyone You have commanded me to
give'. Then, those will be brought to raise their cases against him, saying: 'O Lord,
You have given him, enriched him, caused him to live among us, and further
commanded him to give us'. If he really gave them as it should be, neither
boasted, nor showed pride, nor wasted anything of what has been enjoined upon

The quarter of the destructives
442
him, it wiU be said to him: 'Now, stand and give thanks for every kind of favor
that was bestowed upon you, as regards your food, clothes, drink, pleasure, and
so on'. He will continue to be questioned as such."
Woe to you! who could dare to expose himself to be questioned in the same
way as this man will be questioned, i.e. this man who earned his money from
lawful sources, spent it on what is lawful, did not waste anything of what was
enjoined upon him, and rather fulfilled all of the rights due upon him as it should
be. What do you think of men like us, who are sunk in the temptations and
pleasures of this world? Woe to you! it is for the sake of avoiding those questions
that the pious feel afraid of approaching the good things of this world. For this
reason, they were pleased with the little that covered only the minimum
requirements of their living, and acted upon righteousness.
Woe to you! you should have in those righteous men a good pattern to
follow. But if you reject, and insist on your claim that you are too pious and
righteous to earn only from lawful sources, in order to refrain from begging, and
spend it in the Way of Allah, and that you will not spend anything of the lawful
but properly and rightfully, and that your heart will not change because of wealth,
and that you will not displease Allah in anything concerning your secret and
public: if you claim you will do all of that, although I have doubt that you will do
so, you'd rather be satisfied with the minimum requirements of living, and keep
yourself away from those of wealth when they are made to stand to be
questioned, and join the first generation in the company of the well-chosen
“peace be upon him” without being detained for questioning or reckoning,
receiving either safety or just blame.
It is reported that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "The poor among the Emigrants will enter the Garden five hundred
years before the rich among them." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi
and Ibn Majah on the authority of Abu Sa'id). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "The poor among the faithful
believers will enter the Garden before the rich and wealthy among them, and will
eat and enjoy of its good things, while the others will remain barefooted and
kneeling. Allah will say: "Those before you are my requested people. You were
the kings and rulers of the people: show Me what you did concerning what I gave
you."
It is reported that a learned said: "I would not be pleased with the red cattle
(i.e. the most expensive among them) should I not be in the company of he first
generation, with Muhammad die Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him”." O people! Hasten to be among the racers in the company of
those of the light burdens, i.e. the company of the Messengers “peace be upon
them”, and be in awe of remaining behind and leaving the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”, and all the pious. Zaid Ibn Arqam
“Allah be pleased with him” said: We were in the company of Abu Bakr AsSiddiq “Allah be pleased with him” when he asked for drink and water and
honey were brought to him. When he brought it close to his mouth he wept and
caused his companions to weep. They stopped from weeping, but he did not. He

443
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
wept once again that they thought they were unable to ask him about the reason.
But when he dried his eyes they asked him: "O successor of the Messenger of
Allah! What has led you to weep?" he said: "I was with the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” when I saw him averting something
from himself, although I saw none with him. I asked him: 'O Messenger of Allah!
What is that which you avert from yourself?' he said: 'It is this world which is
represented to me and I said to it: "Keep away from me!" then, it returned and
said to me: "Indeed, if you are able to flee away from me, those to come after you
will never flee away from me.'" He commented: "So, I feel afraid this might have
caught me, with the result that it would separate me from the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”." (This narration is reported by AlBazzar, Al-Hakim, Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and Al-Baihaqi).
O people! Those people wept in awe that a sip of lawful drink might
separate them from the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him”. Woe to you! you are blessed in various kinds of luxury and
delights, different sorts of desires and lusts, and unlawful earnings, having no
fear that those might not separate you from the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”. Woe to you! how ignorant you are! Should
you remain behind the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” on the Day of Judgement, put in mind the terrors from which
angels and Prophets “peace be upon them” would be scared. Should you fail
to hasten to be among the racers, surely, you would fail to join them, should
you seek to have much wealth, you would be led to a difficult reckoning.
Should you not be satisfied with the little, you would be led to a long
standing, crying and wailing. Should you be satisfied with the states of these
who remain behind, you would be separated from the companions of the right
hand, and from the Messenger of the Lord of the world “peace be upon him”.
Should you disagree with the pious, you would be among those to be called to
account in the terrors of the Day of Judgement. So, consider your state, and
resolve upon your plan.
Therefore, if you claim that you copy the guidance of the righteous
predecessors, regarding your satisfaction with the little and abstinence even in
the lawful, spending your wealth, giving others preference over yourself,
fearing no poverty, saving nothing for your future, aversion for proliferation
and richness, contentment with poverty and adversity, happiness with
neediness and littleness, pleasure with humility and meekness, dislike of
loftiness and highness; and claim that you are too strong to have your mind
and heart change from good, since you reckon yourself one by one for the
Sake of Allah Almighty, and judge all of your affairs in accordance with what
pleases Allah Almighty, and that you gather wealth from lawful sources in
order to spend it in the Way of Allah: woe to you O deceived man! Consider
your matter carefully! Do you not learn that to leave engagement in gathering
wealth in order to disengage your heart to worship, remembrance of Allah,
meditation of His signs, and taking lessons from the states of others to learn,
is safer for your religion, easier for reckoning, more secure from the terrors of

l

1

|’i

,!

hi
I

The quarter of the destructives
444
the Day of Judgement, more rewardable and much higher in the Sight of Allah
Almighty?
It is reported from one of the companions “Allah be pleased with them” said:
"If there is a man having Dinars in his lap which he gives in charity, and another
who is remembering Allah Almighty, then, the latter who remembers Allah
should be better than the former who gives in charity." A learned was asked
about him who gathers wealth in order to spend it on righteous deeds, thereupon
he said: "To leave that is more righteous for him." One of the Tabi'is was asked
about two persons, one sought for this world and gained wealth from lawful
sources, therewith he kept relation with his kith and kin, and sent forward good
for himself, and the other avoided it entirely: which of them was the better. On
that he said: "No doubt, how far they are from each other! The one who avoided
it is superior to the other as much as the East is far from the West." Woe to you!
consider how superior you will be if you leave the world and do not engage in
gathering wealth.
Therefore, even if there is excellence in gathering wealth, it should become
incumbent upon you to imitate your Prophet “peace be upon him” whose
guidance Allah Almighty commanded us to copy, and be satisfied with what he
accepted for himself when he preferred to avoid the transitories of this world.
Woe to you! consider what you have heard, and be certainly confident of the
fact that happiness and felicity lie in avoiding this world. So, you should
proceed on to be among the racers under the flag of the well-chosen “peace be
upon him” to the abode of Garden. It is reported that the Messenger of Allah
“Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said: "The masters of believers in the
Garden are such of men as whenever he has his early meal, he does not find his
supper, and whenever he likes to have a loan, he would find none to give him,
whoever has no garment but what screens him, is not able to get his earnings
permanently: but at the same time, every morning and evening he is satisfied
with his Lord: they will be in the company of those upon whom Allah Almighty
has conferred favor,, from among the Prophets, the sincere lovers and affirmers
of truth, the martyrs, and the righteous, and how good those are for company!"
(This is reported on the authority of Abu Hazim from Abu Hurairah).
O my brother! After going through this statement, if you gather wealth, you
then will be false to your claim that you do so for the sake of righteous deeds, but
you do so for fear of poverty and in search for bliss, adornment, proliferation,
showing pride, loftiness, affectation, exaltation, and reputation. Woe to you!
observe Allah Almighty, and feel shy of your claim O deceived man! Woe to you!
if you are tempted by the love for this world, you should acknowledge that good
and excellence lie in your satisfaction with what provides for the minimum
requirements of your living, and avoiding what is unnecessary. Whenever you
gather wealth, you should scorn yourself, admit your sin and fear reckoning. This
is, to be sure, more convenient to salvage you than to seek for arguments to
justify your gathering wealth. O my brothers! It should be known to you that
although the lawful was mostly available during the time of the companions
“Allah be pleased with them” they were the most pious and abstinent from what

445
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
is permissible. On the contrary: although the lawful is mosdy missing in our time,
we do not limit ourselves to satisfaction with what provides for our sustenance
and screens our privates. May Allah Almighty save you and us from gathering
wealth.
Therefore, where are we from the piety, abstinence and caudon taken by
the companions “Allah be pleased with them”? where are we from their
conscience and good intentions? We have been afflicted, by the Lord of
Heaven, with the inclinadons and diseases of souls, and in the near future, we
are going to come upon the fire. How excellent the happiness will be of these
of light burdens on the Day of Resurrection, and how long the sadness and
grief will be of those of proliferation and pride. I have advised you in general,
and those who accept my advice in particular, and how few are those who
accept it. May Allah help you and us attain success, for every good lies with
His mercy: amen."
His speech is sufficient to show the superiority of poverty to richness; and
there is no more we could add to it. It is confirmed by all stories we have
related in the Book of Condemnation of This World, and the Book of Poverty
and Asceticism. It is also confirmed by the narration on the authority of Abu
Umamah Al-Bahili “Allah be pleased with him” that Tha'labah Ibn Hatib said
to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "O
Messenger of Allah! Supplicate Allah to bestow wealth upon me." He said: "O
Tha'labah! A little for which you give thanks is better than much which you
never endure." He said once again: "O Messenger of Allah! Supplicate Allah to
bestow wealth upon me." He said: "O Tha'labah! Do you not have a good
pattern in the Prophet? Are you not pleased to be like the Prophet of Allah
Almighty “peace be upon him”? behold! By Him in Whose Hand is my soul,
had I liked to have mountains turn into gold and silver with me, they would
have turned." He said: "By Him Who has sent you with the truth as a Prophet,
if you supplicate Allah to bestow wealth upon me, I would give the right to
every one eligible to take it, and do such and such." On that the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "O Allah! Bestow wealth
upon Tha'labah Ibn Hatib!"
he took property of sheep, and they grew as much as worms, until Medina
became narrow upon him. He left it and took resort to one of its valleys and
limited himself to performing Zhuhr and Asr in congregation, and left the other
prayers. His sheep further proliferated and grew so much (by which he was
occupied) to the extent that he left performing all prayers in congregation
except Friday. They grew further like worms until he was diverted even from
performing Friday prayer in congregation. He used to meet riders every Friday
and ask them about the news of Medina. Later on, the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” asked about him saying: "What is
about Tha'labah Ibn Hatib?" it was said: "O Messenger of Allah! He has taken
property of sheep, until Medina became narrow upon him..." and he was told
about his news in full, thereupon he said: "Woe to Tha'labah! Woe to Tha'labah!
Woe to Tha'labah!"

The quarter of the destructives
On that occasion, Allah Almighty revealed: " Of their goods take alms, that so
you might purify and sanctify them; and pray on their behalf, verily your prayers
are a source of security for them: and Allah is One Who hears and knows." (AtTawbah 103)

446

i

pi

Oj

^

rA-^a3

Crf

•*

^

Allah Almighty then enjoined the obligatory charity upon Muslims. The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” sent two men, one
from Juhainah and the other from Sulaim to collect charity, and sent a letter with
them, in which he ordered the people to give them the charity due upon their
property. He commanded them to collect charity from Muslims and said to them:
"Come upon Tha'labah Ibn Hadb and so and so, a man from Sulaim, and take
form them the charity due upon their property." They set out and came upon
Tha'labah and asked him to give his charity, and showed to him the letter of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”. On that he said:
"This is nothing more than Jizyah! This is nothing more than Jizyah! This is
nothing more than the like of Jizyah! Go and when you finish from the other
people, return to me."
They set out aiming at the one from Sulaim who, hearing of their arrival, kept
aside the best of his camels to the obligatory charity, and when they came to
him, he received them with those camels. When they saw them they said: "This is
not due upon you, and we do not like to take the best of your property as
charity." But he insisted that they should take them, when they finished and
returned to Tha'labah once again, and asked him to give his charity, and he said:
"Show to me your letter." He read it and said: " This is nothing more than the
like of Jizyah! Go until I give my decision." They went to the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” who, before seeing him, said: "Woe to
Tha'labah!" he further invoked good and blessing upon the man from the tribe of
Sulaim. They told him about what Tha'labah and the man from Sulaim had done.
On that occasion, Allah Almighty revealed: " Amongst them are men who made
a Covenant with Allah, that if He bestowed on them of His bounty, they would
give (largely) in charity, and be truly amongst those who are righteous. But when
He did bestow of His bounty, they became covetous, and turned back (from their
Covenant), averse (from its fulfillment). So He has put as a consequence
Hypocrisy into their hearts, (to last) till the Day whereon they shall meet Him:
because they broke their Covenant with Allah, and because they lied (again and
again)." (At-Tawbah 75-77)

C 4j)T

Jj ji_51^1^

i

(d|J)j*-* p-A? ^yj e-y.

'CL>yJ&±

At that time, one of Tha'labah's relatives was sitting with the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and when he heard what had
been revealed in connection with him, he set out until when he came to him he
said: "Let your mother be bereaved of you O Tha'labah! Allah Almighty has

Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth

447

revealed such and such in connection with you." Tha'labah set out until when he
came to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and
asked him to accept his charity from him. He said: "Allah Almighty has forbidden
me to accept charity from you." he went on throwing handfuls of dust on his
head, thereupon the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said to him: "This is the (consequence of) your deed. I commanded you,
but you did not obey me." When he rejected to take anything from him, he
returned home. When the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” died, he brought his charity to Abu Bakr As-Siddiq “Allah be pleased
with him” who rejected to accept it. Then, he brought it to Umar Ibn Al-Khattab
“Allah be pleased with him” who rejected to take it from him. Later on,
Tha'labah died during the caliphate of Uthman “Allah be pleased with him”.
(This narration is reported by At-Tabarani).
This is an example of the transgression caused by wealth, which you might
learn from that narration. For the blessing of poverty on the one hand, and the
evil omen of richness on the other hand, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” favored poverty for himself and his family. In this issue,
it is narrated on the authority of Imran Ibn Hussain “Allah be pleased with him”
that he said: I had a good position and rank with the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him". One day I came to him and he said to me: "O
Imran! You have a good position and rank with us: do you like to accompany me
to visit Fatimah, the daughter of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” and inquire about her health?" I said: "Yes, let my father and
mother sacrifice their lives for you O Messenger of Allah." He stood and I stood
with him (and we proceeded on) until he came at the gate of the house of
Fatimah “Allah be pleased with her”. He knocked the door and said: "Peace be
upon you! could I enter?" she said: "Yes O Messenger of Allah." He asked: "I and
the man that is with me?" she said: "Yes you and the man that is with you O
Messenger of Allah." Then she said: "By Him Who has sent you as a Prophet, I
have nothing over me but a garment." He said: "Do with it such and such." He
beckoned with his hand to her (to cover her body with it). She said: "I have then
screened my body: what about my head?" he threw to her a worn out sheet he
was having over himself and said: "Put it over your head." Then, she admitted
them, he entered and said: "Peace be upon you O my daughter! What are you
now?" she said: "By Allah, I have become suffering, and what increased my pain
is that I have no food to sustain myself, and hunger has troubled me." On that
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” went on
weeping, and said: "Do not be scared O my daughter. By Allah, I have never had
food for three days; and I am dearer than you to Allah Almighty, and were I to
ask my Lord, surely He would provide me with food. But I have preferred the
hereafter to this world." Then, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” patted on her shoulder and said to her: "Receive the glad
tidings! By Allah, you will be the chief of women of Paradise." She said: "Then,
what about Asia, the wife of Pharaoh, and Maryam, daughter of Imran?" on that
he said: "Asia is the chief of the women of her own world; Maryam is the chief of

The quarter of the destructives
448
the women of her own world; Khadijah is the chief of the women of her own
world; and you are the chief of the women of your own world: you will have your
homes of pipes in which you will receive no harm nor noise." Then, he said to
her: "Be satisfied with (Ali) your paternal cousin, for by Allah, I have given you in
marriage to a chief in this world, and a chief in the hereafter." (This narration is
reported by Ahmad and At-Tabarani on the authority of Ma'qil Ibn Yasar).
Consider the state in which Fatimah “Allah be pleased with her” who was a
part of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and
how she gave preference to poverty over richness. Whoever observes the states,
acts and sayings of the Prophets and Messengers “peace be upon them”, allies
and devotees of Allah “Allah be pleased with them” will have no doubt that the
loss of wealth is much better than having it even if it is to be spent on aspects
of good and righteousness. The least thing to do with it, in terms of fulfilling
the rights due upon it, warding off suspicions, and spending it on the aspects of
good might divert people from the remembrance of Allah Almighty, which
requires disengagement of heart, and there is no disengagement in the presence
of wealth.
It is narrated on the authority of Jarir from Laith that he said: A man
accompanied Jesus “peace be upon him” and said to him: ""Let me be in your
company." They set out together until they came upon the bank of a river where
they sat down to get their early meal and they had three loaves. They ate two and
the third remained. Then, Jesus “peace be upon him” stood to the river and
drank and when he returned he did not find the third loaf. He asked the man
about who had taken it, and he told him that he did not know. He saw a deer
with its little sons. He invited one of them and it came running towards him. He
slaughtered and roasted it, and they ate of its flesh. He then said to the little deer:
'Stand (and be raised) by permission of Allah." It stood (and was raised) and
went away. Jesus “peace be upon him” said to the man: "I ask you by Him Who
has shown to you this miracle: who has taken the loaf?" He said: "I do not
know." They reached a spring of water where Jesus “peace be upon him” took
hold of the hand of the man and both walked on water. When they crossed it he
said to him: "I ask you by Him Who has shown to you this miracle: who has
taken the loaf?" He said: "I do not know." They reached a desert where they sat
down. Jesus “peace be upon him” heaped up a hillock of dust and sand and then
said to it: "Be gold by permission of Allah." It turned to gold and he divided it
into three thirds and said: "A third is for me, a third is for you, and a third for
him who has taken the loaf." He said: "Then, it is I who has taken the loaf." Jesus
“peace be upon him” said to him: "Then, let the entire of it be for you." He left
him.
Two men reached him in the desert and the gold was with him. They
wanted to take it from him and kill him. He said: "Let it be divided into three
thirds among us. Send one of us to the village to buy food for us to eat." One
of them was sent to the village. He said (to himself): "Why should I let those
share this gold with me? This gold is mine alone. Then, I should poison the
food to kill them and take the gold." They did accordingly. At the same time,

449
Book seven: Condemnation of niggardliness and greed for wealth
both men said: "Why should we let this man share this wealth with us? If he
returns, we should kill him and divide the wealth between us." When he
returned they killed him and took the wealth. But they also ate the food and
were killed by poison. All of them died and the wealth remained in the desert
until Jesus “peace be upon him” came upon them while being in that state and
said to his companions: "This is (an example of) this world. So, you should
warn of it."
It is reported that Dhul-Qamain came upon a nation having nothing of the
worldly enjoyments like the other people. They dug graves and every morning,
they looked after them, cleaned and swept them, and offered prayer near them,
they grazed pot-herbs like animals did. Their sustenance depended upon the
plants of the earth there. Dhul-Qarnain sent to their king to come to him, and
he replied: "I have no need of him. So, let him come to me if he so likes."
Dhul-Qarnain said: "Really, he has told the truth." Dhul-Qarnain came to him
and asked him: "I have sent to you to come to me and when you rejected, I
came to you." he said: "Had I had a need for you, surely, I would have come to
you." Dhul-Qarnain asked him: "Why do I see you in a state in which I have
never seen anyone of the other nations?" he said: "What is that?" He said: "You
have no worldly enjoyments, or anything else. Would you not take gold and
silver to get benefit from them?" he said: "No, for none has been given
anything of them but that he has longing for what is better than it." He asked
him: "Then, why have you dug graves, and every morning you look after them
by cleaning and sweeping them, and then offer prayer near them?" he said: "In
order that whenever we look at this world had have hope in it, our graves
should prevent us from hope." He said: "I see also that you have no food
barring the pot-herbage: why do you not take animals and milk them and drink
their milk and get benefit from riding them?" he said: "We dislike to make our
bellies graves for them, and see that the pot-herbage is sufficient for
sustenance. To be sure, the minimum quantity of food is sufficient for the
sustenance of mankind, and once it goes beyond the pallet, its taste becomes
unfelt, whatever it might be."
Then, the king stretched his hand from behind Dhul-Qarnain and took a skull
and said: "O Dhul-Qarnain! Do you know whose this is?" he answered in the
negative thereupon he said: "It belongs to one of the kings on earth, whom Allah
Almighty gave power of authority over the people of the earth, thereupon he
transgressed the due bounds, wronged people and oppressed them, when Allah
Almighty saw that from him, He caused him to die, and he became like a thrown
stone. Allah Almighty calculated his evil for him in order to punish him with
them in the hereafter." Then, he took another decomposed skull and said: "O
Dhul-Qarnain! Do you know whose this is?" he answered in the negative,
thereupon he said: "this belongs to another king who succeeded him, and, seeing
how the previous king was wrongful, transgressing and oppressing, he humbled
himself and became submissive to Allah Almighty, and enjoined justice among
the people of his kingdom. Then, he became like what you see: Allah Almighty
calculated his good deeds for him in order to reward him with them in the

I
The quarter of the destructives
450
hereafter." Then, he inclined to the skull of Dhul-Qarnain and said: "And this
skull will be like those both. So, O Dhul-Qarnain, consider what you are going do
to." Dhul-Qarnain said to him: "Do you like to be in my company so that I
would take you as brother and minister, and make you my partner in the
dominion bestowed upon me by Allah Almighty?" he said: "Both you and I could
not gather in one place." Dhul-Qarnain asked him about the reason, and he said:
"Fro all the people are enemies of you, and friends of me." He said to him:
"What is the reason for that?" he said: "They show enmity to you because of the
authority and wealth you have in your hand, whereas none shows enmity to me
for I reject all of that." Then, Dhul-Qarnain left him with surprise from his state,
and admonition of his affair."
Those stories guide you to the evil of richness.
This is the end of the Book of Condemnation of Wealth and Niggardliness,
praise be to Allah Almighty, and it is followed by the Book of Condemnation of
Majesty and Showing Off.

:

i

1

digit: (^OlifeajQQECttili I(H; 11 vtfMiv • D.c

It is the eighth book of the quarter of destructives
In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Praise be to Allah, the Knower of the unseen, Who learns the mysteries of
hearts, and forgives the major sins, knows what is hidden in the conscience, and
is well-acquainted with the secret intentions, Who accepts of deeds only the
perfect, and pure of the flaws and stains of showing off and polytheism, for all
the dominion is His Alone, and He is free of want of the polytheism of the
polytheists. Allah's blessing and peace be upon Muhammad, his family and
companions, who are free from treachery and showing off,.
Coming to the point: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” said according to the narration on the authority of Shaddad Ibn
Aws “Allah be pleased with him”: “What I fear most for my nation is to join
things (in worship) with Allah: I do not say that they will worship the sun or
the moon, or even an idol, but it is that they do deeds for things other than
Allah (in reference to showing off), and have lust as hidden as the creeping of
a black ant on a rock on a dark night (for women and property, no matter
illegal it might be).” (This narration is reported by Ibn Majah). The brokers
among the learned failed to encompass its evils, let alone the laymen and
pious among the people, that is because its evils are most hidden within the
self, with which the learned, worshippers and serious followers of the way to
the hereafter are afflicted.
When they oppress, mortify and humiliate their own selves, wean them from
lusts, and safeguard them from desires and suspicions, and force them by
oppression to do several acts of worship, their selves then fail to covet of
committing apparent sins that are visible and sensible, and rather seek for
comfort by affectation of doing good and demonstration of knowledge and work.
Thus, they find a way to flee from the difficulty of mortification to the pleasure
of acceptability and respectability among the people, which causes them to hasten
to demonstrate obedience in order to be seen of the creatures giving no
importance to satisfaction with the sight of the Creator Himself, to be pleased
with the praise of the creatures giving no attention to the satisfaction with the
praise of the Creator, putting in mind that if the people know that so and so
avoids lusts and suspicions, and mortifies himself in worship, they surely will
praise him exaggeratingly and excessively, look at him with great respect and
reverence, seek blessing from seeing and meeting him, desire for the blessing of
his supplication and invocation of good upon them, become eager to adopt his
opinions and thoughts, take the initiative to offer service to him, honour him in
celebrations to the best and highest degree, excuse him as regards transactions
and deals, give him priority in gatherings, banquets and clothes, humble
451

E
■

;

The quarter of the destructives
452
themselves before him, and comply with his purposes and commands.
This results in the pleasure and desire which the soul receives and they are
among the greatest pleasures and desires, for they prompt the soul to scorn the
avoidance of sins and flaws, and make it easy upon it to endure the coarseness
and roughness of regular acts of worship, for by so doing, it fulfills one of the
greatest pleasures and desires. Such person thinks that his life is with Allah and
well-pleasing acts of worship, although his life is with his hidden desire which
minds are too blind to perceive. He also sees that he is sincere to his obedience
of Allah and avoidance of His taboos, although this desire is lurking in the self, to
make alluring to it the acts of worship, affectation, and pleasure with the rank and
position it receives among the people. By so doing, one's deeds and acts of
worship become fruitless, and he is enlisted among the hypocrites, although he
thinks he is among the nearest to Allah Almighty.
This is, to be sure, one of the intrigues that afflict the self, from which none is
safe barring the sincere lovers and affirmers of truth, and a profound pitfall from
which none is saved but die nearest to Allah Almighty. For this reason, it is said
that the last thing to come out of the heads of the sincere lovers and affirmers of
truth is the love for authority.
Given that showing off is the lurking chronic disease, which is the great net
of devils, it becomes incumbent to explain its real nature, causes, levels, divisions,
the ways of treating it and how one should beware of it. This might be exposed in
two parts about majesty and showing off.

PART ONE
CONDEMNATION OF MAJESTY
It includes:
Exposition of condemnation of fame
Exposition of excellence of anonymity
Exposition of condemnation of majesty
Exposition of meaning and real nature of majesty
Exposition of the reason why it is dearer than wealth and property
Exposition of the fact that majesty gives illusory and not real perfection
Exposition of the extent to which majesty might be praised or dispraised
Exposition of causes of love for praise and dislike of dispraise
Exposition of treatment of love for majesty
Exposition of treatment of love for praise
Exposition of treatment of dislike of dispraise
Exposition of different cases of people as regards praise and dispraise
Those are then twelve chapters, from which the concept of majesty is clear;
and it is Allah Who grants success.

CHAPTER ONE
EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF FAME AND REPUTATION
It should be known to you, may Allah reform you, that majesty ensues from
prominence and fame, and it is dispraised; and what is praise is the anonymity
unless Allah Almighty makes famous a man in order to help him spread the

Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off-

453

religion of Allah, without being ostentatious to seek fame.
In this respect, Anas “Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "It suffices a man for evil
in his religion and world that people point to him with their fingers, unless
Allah Almighty protects him." (This narration is reported by Al-Baihaqi). Jabir
Ibn Abdullah “Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "It suffices a man for evil in his religion
and world that people point to him with their fingers, unless Allah Almighty
protects him. No doubt, Allah Almighty does not look at your faces, but rather
He looks at your hearts and works." (The first part of this narradon is reported
by At-Tabarani and its concluding part by Muslim on the authority of Abu
Hurairah). In reladon to that, this narradon was mendoned to Al-Hassan and it
was said to him: "O Abu Sa'id! Whenever people see you, they point to you
with their fingers." On that he said: "He (the Prophet) does not mean that, but
rather he refers to the religious innovator who is wicked in his world."
According to Ali “Allah be pleased with him”: "Humble yourself and avoid
fame, and don't raise yourself in order to be renowned; and learn and conceal
(your knowledge), and keep silent perchance you would become safe. By so
doing, you would please the dutiful pious and taunt the wicked." According to
Ibrahim Ibn Adham "may Allah have mercy upon him": "He is not truthful to
Allah Almighty who loves fame." According to Ayyub As-Sikhdyani: "By Allah,
none proves true to Allah Almighty but that he is pleased to have his position
unknown to the people." It is reported from Khalid Ibn Ma'dan that whenever
the attendants of his gathering increased in number, he would leave it for fear of
fame. It is reported from Abu Al-Aliyah that whenever more than three sat tc
listen to him, he would leave them, once, Talhah saw with him a people who
were more than ten, thereupon he likened them to flies coveting of honey and
moths desirous for fire.
It is reported on the authority of Sulaim Ibn Hanzalah that he said: While
were walking behind Ubai Ibn Ka'b “Allah be pleased with him” Umar “Allah be
pleased with him” saw him, thereupon he struck him with the stick. He said:
"Consider O Commander of Believers what you are doing!" he said: "No doubt,
this (gathering of people round you) is a slip to the follower and a source of
temptation to the followed." According to Al-Hassan: Once, Ibn Mas'ud “Allah
be pleased with him” came out of his house, and some people walked behind
him. He turned to them and said: "Why are you following me? By Allah, were
you to know in which state I am when I close the door of my house upon me,
none of you would follow me."
It is reported that a man accompanied Ibn Muhairiz on journey, and when
he was about to leave him he asked him for an advice. He said: "If you could,
know others and let none know you, walk behind others and let none walk
behind you, ask and let none ask you." once, Ayyub set out on journey and a lot
of people came out to send him off thereupon he said: "Had I not been sure
that Allah Almighty knows well that I dislike this conduct, I would have feared
the displeasure of Allah Almighty." Mu'ammar said: I blamed Ayyub for his

I

The quarter of the destructives
454
long shirt (which refers to fame), thereupon he said: "In the past, fame was in
the long shirt, and now, it is in shortening it." A learned one said: I was with
Abu Qilabah when a person wearing dazzling clothes entered upon him.
Looking at him, he said: "Beware of this praying ass", in reference to seeking
for fame.
According to Ath-Thawri: "They disliked fame regards expensive and cheap
clothes together, for both attract the sights of people." A man asked Bishr Ibn
Al-Harith to advise him, thereupon he said: "Be anonymous and make good and
lawful your food." Hawshab used to weep for his name reached the people in the
gathering mosque. According to Bishr: "I do not know a man who likes to be
renowned among the people but that he looses his religion and is disgraced
among them." he said once again: "None will taste the sweetness of the hereafter
who likes to be renowned among the people in this world."

CHAPTER TWO
EXPOSmON OF EXCELLENCE OF ANONYMITY
I

:

I

Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” reported: The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “Perhaps there is a person with
disheveled hair and covered with dust, who might be turned away from the doors
(though he is highly estimated by Allah) that if he took oath by Allah (about
anything) Allah would fulfill his oath.” [This narration is reported by Muslim] it is
further narrated on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him” that
he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"How many a person with no more than two coarse woollen garments, and
although he is trivial in the sight of people (he is highly estimated by Allah that)
were he to take oath by Allah Almighty, He would fulfill his oath, and were he to
ask Allah for Paradise, He would give him Paradise, although He might give him
nothing in this world." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: " May I not inform you about the inmates of Paradise?" They said: "Do this,
of course." He said: "Every humble person who is considered to be humble; and
if he were to adjure In the name of Allah, He would fulfill it." He then said: "May
I not inform you about the denizens of Hell-Fire?" They said: "Yes." He said:
"Every haughty, fat and proud (person)." (This narration is reported by both
sheikhs on the authority of Harithah Ibn Wahb). It is reported on the authority
of Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” that he said: the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "The inhabitants of
Paradise comprise each disheveled person that is covered with dust, and puts on
two coarse rough woolen garments, and seems trivial in the sight of the people to
the extent that if he seeks permission to enter on the governors, he would be
given no permission, and if he demands the hand of a woman, his demand would
not be accepted, and if he says anything, no attention would be paid to his saying.
The needs of anyone of them do not go beyond his breast. (This is their state in
this world and) on the Day of Judgement, should the light given to anyone of
them be divided among the people, it would extend to cover them all."
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:

455
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off
"From among my nation, there is such as if he comes to anyone of you to ask
him for a Dinar, he would not give him, and if he asks him for a Dirham, he
would not give him, and if he asks him for even a fils, he would not give him.
But at the same time, if he asks Allah for the Garden, He would give it to him.
If he asks him to give him anything of this world, He would not give it to
him; and He does not withhold this world from him except that because it is
insignificant in His Sight." (This narration is reported by Tabarani on the
authority of Thawban).
It is reported on the authority of Umar “Allah be pleased with him” that
once, he entered the mosque and found Mu'adh Ibn Jabal “Allah be pleased with
him” weeping near the grave of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him”. He asked him about the reason, thereupon he said: I heard
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” saying: "No
doubt, showing off is polytheism, no matter how litde it might be. Verily, Allah
Almighty loves the pious righteous who are anonymous among the people to the
extent that if anyone of them is absent, he would not be missed, and if they are
present, they would not be known. But in spite of that, their hearts are lights of
guidance, with which they are saved from each dark gloomy calamity." (This
narration is reported by At-Tabarani and Al-Hakim).
It is reported on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Sawid that he said: Once,
the people of Medina were given to drought. There was in Medina a righteous
man and he was trivial in the sight of people. He stuck to the mosque of th
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”. While the peop
were engaged in their supplication (for relief), a man came upon them, havini
two worn of coarse woolen garments. He offered a two-rak'ah prayer which he
shortened. Then he raised his hands and said: "O Lord! I swear that You should
provide us with rain at this time." He did not return his hand nor finish from
his supplication before the sky was covered with clouds and it rained so much
heavily that the people feared of drowning. On that he said: "O Lord! If You
know that they have been satisfied, then, withhold it now." The rain stopped.
The righteous man followed the one who invoked rain until he knew his house.
Early in the morning of the next day, he went to him and said: "I have come to
ask you for a need." He asked him: "What is it?" he said: "To supplicate with a
supplication for me." He said: "Glory be to Allah! Should a man like you ask me
to supplicate Allah with a supplication for him?" he asked him: "What has
caused you to reach such a rank as I saw?" he said: "I have obeyed Allah in
what He has commanded and forbidden me, and when I asked Him, He gave
_ _ »i
me.
Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him” said: "Be lights of guidance, and stick
to your houses, and give light to the dark nights, and refresh your hearts (with
faith), no matter how worn of your garments might be, perchance you would be
known among the inhabitants of the heaven, no matter how anonymous you
might be among the people of the earth." Abu Umamah “Allah be pleased with
him” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Allah Almighty says: "The Happiest among My slaves is a person of a little

The quarter of the destructives
456
portion (from this world), and a great fortune of prayer, who worships and obeys
his Lord perfectly in secrecy, is anonymous among the people who knows him
not to point to him with fingers, and keeps patient on that." Then, the Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” poked him and said: "I mean a
man whose death is hastened on for him, whose legacy is little, and for whom no
much people weep when he dies." (This is reported by both At-Tirmidhi and Ibn
Majah).
Abdullah Ibn Umar “Allah be pleased with them” said: "The dearest of
Allah's servants to Him are the strangers." It was said: "Who are the strangers?"
he said: "Those who flee for their religion. On the Day of Judgement, they will
gather with the Messiah “peace be upon him”." According to Al-Fudail Ibn Iyad:
I was reported that Allah Aimighty will say, out of showing His favors He
bestowed upon His servant: "Have I not conferred favors upon you? have I not
screened you? have I not made you anonymous?" Al-Khalil Ibn Ahmad used to
say: "O Allah! Raise me to the highest degree in Your Sight, make me the
humblest in my sight, and make me no more than an ordinary person in the sight
of the people."
According to Ath-Thawri: "I found my heart agree with a strange people in
Mecca and Medina who suffer hardship." According to Ibrahim Ibn Adham: "I
have never been pleased except once when I spent the night in the mosque of a
village in Damascus until the Mu'adhdhin dragged me by my leg and drove me
out." According to Al-Fudail: "If you could make yourself unknown to the
people, then, do it, and there is no harm on you not to be known, and there is no
harm on you not to be praised, and there is no harm on you to be dispraised by
the people so long as you are praised by Allah Almighty."
Those are the Prophetic narrations and traditions which confirm to you how
fame is blameworthy, and how anonymity is excellent. Fame here is intended to
seek majesty and authority. Love for majesty is the origin of all kinds of
corruption. You may say: "Which fame is greater than the fame of the Prophets
“peace be upon him”, the rightly-guided caliphs and the pioneering learned and
scholars? Why has the excellence of anonymity escaped them?" in reply to that,
let's say that what is blameworthy is to seek for fame. But when fame is given to a
servant by Allah Almighty, without being ostentatious to get it, it is not
blameworthy. But it is a means of temptation for the weak and not the strong
among the people. The weak is like a would-be sunk in the company of some
people who are about to sink. It is better for him to be anonymous among them
than to be renowned for if he becomes known, they would attach themselves to
him, and he will weaken to help them, with the result that all will sink, unlike the
strong one for whom it is better to be known to them, for in this case when they
attach themselves to him, he would be powerful enough to help and rescue them,
and receive reward for that.

CHAPTER THREE
EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF MAJESTY
Allah Almighty says: " That House of the Hereafter We shall give to those
who intend not highhandedness or mischief on earth: and the End is (best) for
the righteous." (Al-Qasas 83)

457

Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off
4

^3^3*^!

ijic-

y oiAU

o^S/T jiojt JJis ^

He Almighty then has assigned the abode of hereafter to such of men as
intends neither highhandedness nor mischief. He further says: " Those who
desire the life of the Present and its glitter, to them We shall pay (the price of)
their deeds therein, without diminudon. They are those for whom there is
nothing in the Hereafter but the Fire: vain are the designs they frame therein, and
of no effect are the deeds that they do!" (Hud 15-16)
tpi

^ £|3

^

U Jlauj lrr5 \^ Jay»*3

ojl>S\ Ajjj

}

^

Loving for majesty is one of the greatest pleasures and adornments of this
world.
From among the Prophetic traditions, a mention may be made of the
following:
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Loving for wealth and majesty causes hypocrisy to grow in the heart just as
water causes herbage to grow in the earth." The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” further said: “No rabid wolves have been sent
to a fold of sheep, more destructive than those two of love for property, honour
and majesty in the religion of a Muslim person.” (This narration is reported by
At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i on the authority of Ka’b Ibn Malik). The Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said to Ali “Allah be pleased
with him”: "Verily, the people are ruined mostly by following their inclinations
and loving for praise."

CHAPTER FOUR:
EXPOSITION OF MEANING AND REAL NATURE OF MAJESTY
It should be known to you that both property and majesty represent the main
foundations on which this world is established. Property is to have possession of
concrete things from which one gets benefit, majesty is to have possession of
hearts which exalt and dignify the person and obey and comply with his
commands. As well as the rich person is he who possesses money therewith he
fulfills his desires, achieves his purposes, and accomplish all of his fortunes in this
world, the dignified one is he who has possession of the hearts of people, i.e. has
the ability to dispose of them in what serves his interests. As well as the rich gains
money by means of many professions and crafts, he also gains the hearts of
people by means of many dealings.
Hearts are not subjugated except through particular kinds of knowledge and
beliefs. If a heart believes that a particular person has a certain characteristic that
draws him close to perfection, it soon is attracted to him, and becomes subject to
his personality as much as is in proportion to the strength of its belief on the one
hand, and in accordance with the degree of the perfection of the prominent on
the other hand. It is not requisite that the prominent should be perfect in himself;
but it is sufficient for the heart to have faith in his perfection. As well as the lover
for property likes to have possession of slaves and slave-girls, the seeker after

The quarter of the destructives
458
majesty likes to subjugate and enslave the free men through having possession of
their hearts. But even, the enslavement sought by the prominent is greater for the
owner possesses the slaves by force and oppression, and the slave by nature is
disobedient, and were he to be left, he would rebel against slavery, unlike the
prominent who possesses hearts of the free men by obedience and submission.
In this way, what is required by the prominent is beyond what is required by the
wealthy.
The concept of majesty then is to establish a high rank of a particular person
in the hearts of people, and as strong as is their belief that he has a certain
characteristic of perfection, they submit to him; and as strong as the hearts
submit to him, he becomes able to dispose of those hearts; and as strong as is his
power to dispose of hearts, he loves and rejoices at majesty. This is the concept
and real nature of majesty. It has many fruits, like praise and acclamation. The
one who has belief in the perfection of the prominent could not help but making
a mention of his good characteristics. Service also is one of those fruits, for he
could not help offering himself to serve him in the very manner he likes. A
mention may be also made of altruism, exaltation, reverence, veneration, etc.
To have majesty established in the hearts means that hearts have faith that a
particular person has a certain characteristic that draws him to a degree of
perfection, in terms of knowledge, or worship, or good manners, or good
ancestry, or power of authority, or physical beauty, or strength of body, etc. all of
those characteristics and their likes cause hearts to exalt him, and this is how
majesty is established in them; and Allah knows best.

CHAPTER FIVE:
EXPOSITION OF REASON WHY MAJESTY IS DEARER THAN
WEALTH; AND DIFFICULTY OF REMOVING IT FROM HEARTS EXCEPT
BY SELF-MORTIFICATION
It should be known that the reason why gold and silver, and all kind of
property are dear to a person is the same which causes majesty to be dear, if not
dearer to a person than property and wealth, just as gold is dearer than silver even
if they are equal in value. That is because you know, for certain, that both
Dirhams and Dinars (i.e. silver and gold) are not useless as pebbles in themselves
to fulfill desires and achieve purposes required by people in so much as they are
means to do all that one loves; and this is why they are dear to him. The same is
true of majesty. The meaning of majesty is to have possession of hearts. As well
as the possession of wealth gives one power to fulfill his desires, the possession
of hearts of free people, and subjugation of them to his service provide him with
power to achieve his purposes. That they join in the same cause requires that they
should join in the same love. Moreover, giving preponderance to majesty over
wealth requires that majesty should be dearer than wealth.
However, there are three reasons why majesty is dearer than wealth:
The first is that it is easier to attain wealth through majesty than to attain
majesty through wealth. If a learnt or an ascetic who is prominent in the hearts of
people likes to have wealth, it becomes easy upon him to do so. The wealth of

459
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offthe masters of hearts are available to serve the hearts, and be given to such of
people as in whose perfection there is a belief. On the contrary, if a despicable
man finds a treasure, and he has no characteristic of perfection, and he likes to
attain majesty through that treasure, he fails to do so. Thus, majesty is a tool and
a means to wealth. Whoever has majesty could possess wealth through it, whereas
whoever has wealth could not possess majesty through it. This is why majesty is
dearer.
The second is that wealth is exposed to damage and wasdng,, by being lost,
stolen, or illegally usurped; and in order to preserve it, there is a dire need of
guards and storekeepers. But once hearts of people are possessed, they are not
exposed to such evils and dangers, and thus there is no need of any of those
things, for they are far from the hands of thieves and usurpers. Majesty then is
safe and secure from being usurped or stolen. It is true that hearts might grow
angry and be ready to turn if the state or belief in perfection changes, but it is
easier to avert that.
The third is that the possession of hearts grows and increase with no effort
or difficulty. That is because once hearts submit to a person out of faith in his
having a certain characteristic of perfection, tongues go on speaking fluently in
praising and appreciating him, and the result of course is that others come to
submit to him too. This is why man is inclined by nature to love majesty and
fame. But in relation to wealth, it is only one person who possesses it, and he
could not guard and invest it except with effort and suffering. Thus, if majesty of
a particular person becomes in circulation among the people, hearts submit tc
him, and tongues go on speaking about him fluently, the wealth then will be
regarded with contempt in comparison with it.
Those are the points of giving majesty preponderance over wealth. But you
may argue that the problem still exists in the sense that neither wealth nor
majesty should be loved. However, it is true. The extent to which one becomes
able to fulfill his desires and avert harm from him is known, like the one who
needs clothes, residence and food, or the one who is afflicted with disease or
punishment, which he could not avert from himself except by means of wealth
or majesty: in which case, his loving for majesty and wealth is understood. That
is because such of things as without which the beloved is unattainable is in itself
beloved.
The nature of mankind is therefore amazing. It is predisposed to collect
wealth, hoard up gold and silver and save money as much as is beyond the
essential needs, to the extent that if one has two valleys of gold, he wishes to have
a third, and so on. Similarly, one likes to be prominent across the land as far as he
could reach, even if his majesty is to extend to areas and countries he would not
go nor see its inhabitants, in order that they might exalt him, keep good relation
with him through gifts and grants, or help him achieve certain purposes. And
even in case of despair of any gift, grant or exaltation, he takes pleasure from
that, for people are predisposed by nature to it.
Therefore, it is out of ignorance, for it is love for such of things as of no use
in the world and the hereafter. But in spite of that, hearts could hardly be free

The quarter of the destructives
460
from that love; and this is due to two reasons, one is evident and perceptible, and
the other is more subde and ambiguous, and although it is greater than the
former, it, therefore, is more delicate and abstruse, and beyond the reason of the
intelligent, let alone the stupid among people. That is because it stems from a
vein that is hidden in the self, and an instinct that is lurking in the nature, which
none knows but those who dive deep into people's selves.
The first reason is to avert the pain of fear. One always feels afraid because
of his evil assumption. Although he might have of wealth what suffices him
immediately, his long hope prompts him to feel afraid that his money would be
consumed and he might have nothing to sustain him in the coming days, and
thus he needs further money. Once this occurs to his mind, fear rises within
himself, and nothing removes that fear except to collect and save money. It is due
to his fear for himself and his love for life, he assumes that life is long, that his
needs in it are more, and that his money is exposed to damage and danger.
Feeling afraid of all of that, he seeks to collect as much wealth as he could in
order to remove that fear from himself. There is no limit of money to remove
that fear. Such a person could not cease to collect money even if he is to have
possession of all what the world contains.
For this reason, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "Two greedy persons are never satisfied: the person who has greed for
knowledge, and the person who has greed for wealth." (This narration is reported
by At-Tabarani on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud; and Al-Bazzar on the authority
of Ibn Abbas). Such a disease provokes his love for majesty and fame to be
established in the hearts of those far in residence form him, thinking that it is not
unlikely that he might leave his homeland for theirs, or that they might leave
theirs for his country, and in both cases, he might seek their aid to achieve his
purposes and fulfill his desires. Being so, the majesty he receives in their hearts
causes him a great pleasure and joy, in view of the security it saves for him from
that fear (of time's vicissitudes).
The second reason is stronger and more effective, for it is spiritual, and the
spirit is a Divine matter, which Allah Almighty describes in His statement: " They
ask you concerning the Spirit (of inspiration). Say: "The Spirit (comes) by
command of my Lord: of knowledge it is only a litde that is communicated to
you, (O men!)" (Al-Isra' 85)

Its being Divine means that it belongs to the mysteries of the sciences of
disclosure, and there is no concession to demonstrate it so long as the Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" himself did not demonstrate
it. But first of all, you should know that the heart is inclined to such brutal
qualities as eating and having sexual relation; such wild qualities as fighting,
striking and harming; such devilish qualities as cunning, deception, cheating, and
seducing; and such Divine qualities as magnificence, honour, and seeking
loftiness. That is because it is composed of different origins explaining which
takes a very long time.
Anyway, let's say that in view of its Divine origin, it likes divinity by nature,

461
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offi.e. oneness of perfection and uniqueness of existence by way of independence.
As perfection is one of the Divine characteristics, it is lovable to man by nature.
Perfection lies in the uniqueness of existence, for to be sure, sharing in existence
is shortage and imperfection. The sun is perfect for it exists alone, and had there
been another sun sharing existence with it, it would have been imperfect, in view
of the shortage of the unique existence of sunniness. It is only Allah Almighty
Who maintains sole existence, for there is none to share existence with Him, and
all things that exist are but traces and effects resulting from His power, which
could not survive by themselves, but they are sustainable only by His power. In
this way, they do not co-exist with Him Almighty, for co-existence requires
equality in rank, and the equality in rank is shortage and imperfection, for the
perfect is He Who is uniquely matchless. As well as the rising of sunlight over all
parts of the earth is not an imperfection in its nature in so much as it is integral
to its perfection, and that the sun is imperfect when there exists another sun to
be equal to it in rank, similarly, all things in this world that exist result from the
rising of the lights of the Divine power, and thus it is following and not followed.
The meaning of divinity then is to maintain unique existence, and this
achieves perfection. Every man, by nature, likes to be uniquely perfect. This
explains the statement of a Sufi person: "There is no man but that he has in his
mind the idea stated by Pharaoh: 'I am your supreme Lord', except that he finds
no way to declare it." It is the same as he said. Slavery is a kind of self-oppression
and divinity is lovable in itself. This is due to the Divine portion He Almighty ha
lodged in man as shown from His statement: " Say: "The Spirit (comes) b
command of my Lord"". But although the soul fails to attain perfection, it neve
ceases to have desire for it. It loves perfection, has longing for it, and takes
pleasure from it for the sake of itself and not for the sake of anything beyond it.
Every existing being loves itself and likes to be perfect, and dislikes destruction
which expresses its shortage and imperfection. Ranking second to the uniqueness
of existence, perfection lies in having possession of all the other existing things in
the universe. The utmost degree of perfection is that others offshoot from you,
and as this is impossible, the degree ranking second to it is to have possession of
them. In this way, to have possession of all things has become lovable for it
achieves a kind of perfection.
Every existing being knowing itself likes itself and desires to be perfect in
itself, and takes pleasure from it. To have possession of a thing is to have the
power to affect or change it, according to the strength of willpower on the one
hand, and the extent to which this thing is subject to your power on the other
hand. This is why man likes to have possession of all things that exist with him.
But the existing beings are divided into the unchangeable in itself, like the
essence, attributes and acts of Allah Almighty; those changeable in themselves,
though being beyond the power of people, like the celestial bodies, the dominion
of the heavens, the souls of angels, jinns, devils, as well as mountains and oceans;
and those changeable by the people's power, like the land, its parts, and what it
contains of minerals, plants and animals. To this third class, the hearts of men
belong, for they are effectible and changeable, like their bodies and the bodies of
animals.
As existing beings then are divided into that which man has no power to

The quarter of the destructives
462
change, like the essence, attributes and acts of Allah Almighty, the dominion
of the heaven, the celestial bodies, etc, and those which could change like the
things that exist on the surface and within the earth, man then is inclined to
have possession of these of the first class by encompassing them with
knowledge, learning and recognition. This is why man likes to know about
Allah Almighty, angels, orbits, planets, stars, and all wonders of heaven,
oceans and mountains, for this is a kind of possession, which, in turn,
achieves a degree of perfection.
The second class which contains the earth and the earthly things, which
man could change by his power, he likes, by nature, to have possession of
them, by his power to affect and dispose of them as much as he pleases. They
are of two divisions: bodies and souls. The bodies pertain to things like
Dirhams, Dinars, and luggage: He should have power to do with them what
he likes, such as to give, withhold, deliver or take; and it is this power which
achieves for him a degree of perfection. Perfection is one of the Divine
characteristics, which is lovable by nature. This is why he likes wealth, even
though it is beyond his essential needs of food, clothes and residence. He also
likes to possess slaves and further enslave free men even by oppression and
dominance, in order to be able to dispose of their bodies and personalities,
even if he does not have possession of their hearts, which might not believe in
his perfection to come to love him. In this way, oppression replaces love in
subjugating them.
The second division includes the souls and hearts of men, which he likes to
have possession of, and power to dispose of in the very manner and way that
cause them to be subject to his command and under his disposal. This possession
is also a kind of perfection, for it belongs to the Divine characteristics. But hearts
become subject only by love, which stems from the belief in one's perfection.
Every kind of perfection is lovable in itself, for perfection belongs to the Divine
characteristics. All the Divine characteristics are lovable by nature in view of the
Divine portion lodged within man by Allah Almighty. It is that which experiences
no death in order to vanish, nor does it come under the consumption of dust. It
is the lodging of faith and knowledge, which reaches man to the meeting of Allah
Almighty.
The meaning of majesty then is to subjugate hearts; and whoever gets the
hearts subject to him has a power and possession. Both power and possession
belong to the Divine characteristics. The hearts, by nature, loves perfection,
which is attained through knowledge, power, authority, wealth, and majesty.
Majesty, therefore, is a means to power, and as well as there is no limit to what
is learnt, there is also no limit to the things over which man might have power.
As long as there remains a thing to be known or possessed, longing never fades
away, and this means that imperfection survives. For this reason, the Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Two greedy persons
are never satisfied: the person who has greed for knowledge, and the person
who has greed for wealth." Qliis narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the
authority of Ibn Mas'ud; and Al-Bazzar on the authority of Ibn Abbas).

463
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offWhat is sought by the heart is perfection, which is attained through
knowledge and power. Its different degrees are beyond calculation. That is
because the pleasure and delight of every one are determined by the extent to
which he attains perfection. This is why wealth, power and majesty are lovable.
The matter of loving them goes beyond the fulfillment of desires, for even in the
absence of this factor, they also remain lovable. Man might love such of sciences
as through which he achieves no purposes or fulfills no desires. Moreover, he
might skip many purposes for the sake of obtaining knowledge about all wonders
and problems that is available to him. That is because knowledge means to have
possession of what is learnt, and this achieves a kind of perfection, which belongs
to the Divine characteristics. For this reason, it is lovable by nature. But even,
many errors result from the love for perfection of knowledge and power, which
we shall show in detail later, Allah willing.

CHAPTER SIX:
EXPOSITION OF THE FACT THAT MAJESTY GIVES ILLUSORY
AND NOT REAL PERFECTION
You now have come to know that in the absence of the uniqueness of
existence, there is no perfection to be attained but through knowledge and
power. But its real perfection is confused with illusory perfection. That is, the
perfection of knowledge belongs only to Allah Almighty Alone (and not to
anyone else). This is clear from three points:
The first pertains to the abundance and extensiveness of what is learnt: He
Almighty encompasses with His knowledge all existing beings. Thus, the more
man's knowledge is much, the more he is close to Allah Almighty.
The second pertains to the relation of the knowledge with what is learnt in
its reality, as being completely revealed and exposed. In this issue, the learnt
objects are exposed and revealed in their reality to Allah Almighty in the most
perfect way. Thus, the more one's knowledge is clear, certain, authentic and
reliable in the details of what is learnt, the more he is close to Allah Almighty.
The third pertains to the eternal survival and constancy of knowledge in a
way in which it never changes nor disappears. The knowledge of Allah
Almighty survives forever, and its change is unimaginable. Similarly, the more
one's knowledge is unchangeable and invariable, the more he is close to Allah
Almighty.
As to what is learnt, they are two divisions: the changeables and the eternals.
The example of the changeables is like the knowledge that Zaid is in the house. It
is a knowledge that implies a learnt object. But it is conceivable that Zaid might
come out of the house, while the belief that he is still in the house remains,
thereby turning knowledge into ignorance, which belongs to imperfection and
not perfection. If you have a belief in a right thing which is conceivable to
change, your perfection then is susceptible to turn into imperfection, and your
knowledge into ignorance. This example represents all changeable things in this
world, like your knowledge, for instance, of the height of a particular mountain,
the area of a particular piece of land, the distance between particular countries,
etc, and your knowledge of a particular language which consists of a changeable

The quarter of the destructives
464
set of vocabulary, that varies from time to time by the change of different
generations, customs and habits. The specifics of that kind of knowledge is like
mercury which changes from a state to another. Its perfection is temporary and
not permanent.
The second division includes the eternal knowledge, like, for instance, the
necessity of what is necessary, the possibility of what is possible, and the
impossibility of what is impossible. This kind of knowledge is eternal, for in no
way could a necessary turn into a possible, nor a possible into an impossible, nor
an impossible into a necessary.
All those divisions belong to the knowledge of Allah Almighty, as to what is
necessary for Him, what is impossible of His attributes and what is possible of
His acts. The knowledge about Allah Almighty, His attributes and acts, and
wisdom that lies behind the creation of both the heavens and the earth, his
organization of things in this world and the hereafter, is the real perfection, which
draws the knowledgeable of it closer to Allah Almighty, and whose benefit
returns to the soul even after death. This knowledge becomes a light for the
knowledgeable after death, since their Light runs forward before them and by
their right hands, and they say: "O Lord! Perfect upon us our light." This means
that this knowledge is a beneficial capital to uncover what is not uncovered in
this world. Whoever has nothing of the knowledge of AJQah Almighty should not
covet to get such a light: on the contrary, he remains like him who is in the
darkness from which he never comes out, Or like such as in "the depths of
darkness in a vast deep ocean, overwhelmed with billow topped by billow,
topped by (dark) clouds: depths of darkness, one above another: if a man
stretches out his hand, he can hardly see it! For any to whom Allah gives not
light, there is no light!" (An-Nur 40)
£

\ © jy Cj? ^ hii \jy

<U)I jii-“jJ

l

f

uSL JJ jojS

There is no happiness then but in the knowledge of Allah Almighty. The
knowledge of anything else is divided into what is pointless, like the knowledge
of poetry, genealogies of Arabs, etc, and what helps in the knowledge of Allah
Almighty like the knowledge of Arabic language, interpretation of the Qur'an,
religious jurisprudence, and news and stories (of the ancient people). The
knowledge of Arabic language helps in the knowledge of the interpretation of
the Qur'an; and the knowledge of the interpretation of the Qur'an helps in the
knowledge of the way acts of worship are done correctly, and a soul is purified;
and the knowledge of the way a soul is purified helps in making it more ready
to accept the guidance to the knowledge of Allah Almighty, as shown from His
statement: " Truly he succeeds that purifies it, And he fails that corrupts it!"
(Ash-Shams 9-10)
He further says: "And those who strive in Our (Cause), We will certainly
guide them to Our Paths: for verily Allah is with those who do right." (AlAnkabut 69)

Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off-----------A Cfi) 0*“*^

^ Ojj ^4—

465

^ b J4^' 0*^1 ^

All of those items of knowledge are means to achieve the knowledge of Allah
Almighty. Perfection then lies in the knowledge of Allah Almighty, His attributes
and acts, and it implies all kinds of knowledge that encompass the existing beings.
All existing beings are produced from His acts. So, whoever knows them as being
the act of Allah Almighty, and as being subject to the Divine power, will and
wisdom, it would be integral to the knowledge of Allah Almighty. This is the
ruling on the perfection of knowledge. Although it is not relevant with the rulings
on majesty, showing off and wealth, we have mentioned them here in order to
complete all the divisions of perfection.
As for power, man could not attain real perfection in it. Although he might
have real knowledge, he could not have real power. The real power belongs to
Allah Almighty, and what occurs following the man's will, power and
movement is indeed produced by the act of Allah Almighty as we have already
stated in the Book of Patience and thanks, and in the Book of Reliance, and in
many other places. The perfection of knowledge remains with the servant after
his death, and conveys him to the meeting with Allah Almighty, unlike power,
in which no real perfection is possible for man. It is no more than a means for
him to attain the perfection of knowledge, like the soundness of his organs and
limbs, the power of his hand to grasp things, his foot to walk, and his senses to
perceive. This power is only a tool for him to achieve the reality of the
perfection of knowledge.
In order to attain those faculties, he might seek the power of majesty and
wealth, to help him get his food, clothes and residence. Unless he use it to help
him know the Glory of Allah Almighty, no good lies in it, except the temporary
pleasure. Ignorant is he who thinks it to be perfection; and most people suffer
the same ignorance in this respect. They, though false, think that to have power
over bodies by oppression, over money by getting much wealth, and over hearts
by majesty, is perfection. When they love it, they pursue it, and when they pursue
it they engage themselves in and compete over it, thereby they forget the real
perfection, which draws one nearer to Allah Almighty and His angels, i.e. the
knowledge and freedom.
Knowledge is, as we have already mentioned, to be well-acquainted with
Allah Almighty, His attributes and acts. As for freedom, it is to release oneself
from the fetters of desires and lusts, and anxieties and concerns of this world,
in imitation of the angels whom no desire induce, nor anger irritate. However,
to avert the traces of desire and anger from the self is a part of perfection,
which is one of the characteristics of angels. One of the attributes of the Divine
perfection is the impossibility of change and variation. Thus, the more one is
less changeable and affected by the incidents, the more he is close to Allah
Almighty, similar to the angels, and his position higher in the Sight of Allah
Almighty. This is a third kind of perfection besides the perfection of knowledge
and power. We have not included it in the previous divisions for its real nature
refers to shortage and scarcity. To be sure, change is a shortage, for it means
the loss of a certain attribute. The loss of a particular thing then is a shortage in
the pleasures.

The quarter of the destructives
There are then three kinds of perfection, given that invulnerability to change
and submission to desires and lusts is perfection in itself, like the perfection of
knowledge and freedom. I mean by it not to submit to desires and seek the
worldly means and causes. Furthermore, the perfection of power is a way to
attain the perfection of knowledge and freedom. But, if the perfection of power
ends with his death, his perfection of knowledge and freedom continues to be
effective after his death, as being a mean to the nearness of Allah Almighty.
Consider then how the ignorant have been turned over prone on their faces, and
sought the perfection of power through majesty and power, although it is not
valid, and even in case it is valid, it is perishable. At the same time, they turned
away from the freedom of knowledge and freedom which is endless and
everlasting.
It is those who have purchased the life of this world for the hereafter: no
doubt, the punishment will not be lightened from them, nor will they be helped.
They did not understand the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty: "
Wealth and sons are allurements of the life of this world; but the things that
endure, Good Deeds, are best in the sight of your Lord, as rewards, and best as
(the foundation for) hopes." (Al-Kahf 46)

466

^

I

bX»j -UP je->-

OU,

jij uiilTs^JTLy o.ijO'Tj Ouil >

Both knowledge and freedom are the everlasting good things, which continue
to be perfection in the soul even after death, unlike the perfection of wealth and
majesty which perishes sooner or later. It is just like the example given by Allah
Almighty when He says: " The likeness of the life of the Present is as the rain
which We send down from the skies: by its mingling arises the produce of the
earth, which provides food for men and animals: (it grows) till the earth is clad
with its golden ornaments and is decked out (in beauty): the people to whom it
belongs think they have all powers of disposal over it: there reaches it Our
command by night or by day, and We make it like a harvest clean-mown, as if it
had not flourished only the day before! thus do We explain the Signs in detail for
those who reflect." (Yunus 24)
^bJl yc LLf

I c-jCj t-4j

ji *j bp. i

f LLiJI ^ja

eUo jJl

L* LlSj

js* ^4.1 l^lai

C-lJI

<0 d

y

') iSU'jS’ \j~~*

\ g*

He further says: " Set forth to them the similitude of the life of this world: it
is like the rain which We send down from the skies: the earth's vegetation
absorbs it. But soon it becomes dry stubble, which the winds do scatter: it is
(only) Allah Who prevails over all things." (Al-Kahf 45)
li

j V1 oLp *-Aj

i ((^2

li t LIuLJ I qa

t LlS" LuUJl

y*

yv=> IJ ^

y y ^ o&j

What is scattered by the wind of death is the splendor of this world, and what
survives even after death is among the good things that endures forever.
Perhaps you now have come to know that the perfection of power through

Book eight: Condemnation of majesty an<l showing off--------------- -------- 4^7
wealth and majesty is illusory and not real, and whoever spends his time in
attaining it is ignorant. To this meaning, Abu At-Tayyib Al-Mutanabbi the great
poet, refers when he says: "Whoever spends the long hours on collecting wealth
and gathering property for fear of poverty, then, it should be known to him that
it is poverty which he does." But exception is made here for such of men as earns
only what provides for the minimum requirements of his living, which helps him
attain the real perfection (of knowledge and freedom). O Allah! Make us among
those whom You have helped and guided to the good.

CHAPTER SEVEN
EXPOSITION OF THE EXTENT TO WHICH MAJESTY AND WEALTH MIGHT
BE PRAISED OR DISPRAISED
Since you learned that majesty is to have possession of hearts, it is then
subject to the same ruling of possessing wealth. It is one of the transient things
of this world. It ends by death. At the same time, the world is the farm of the
hereafter. All that is created in this world is fitting for provision for the hereafter.
As well as the least amount of wealth is necessary to provide for food, clothes
and residence, the least extent of majesty is necessary, in order for man to be able
to live among the people. As well as man could not dispense with food to sustain
him, and this is why he loves the money therewith he buys food, he also could
not dispense with a servant to serve him, a companion to help him, a teacher to
guide him, and a ruler to safeguard him and avert from him the injustice of the
evil among men.
Thus, it is not blameworthy for him to like to have in the heart of his
servant a certain position which summons him to serve him, in the heart of
his companion a certain position which encourages him to accompany and aid
him, in the heart of his teacher a certain position which motivates him tc
guide and teach him, in the heart of his ruler a certain position that urges him
to protect him and avert evil from him. Majesty, like wealth, is a mean to
transient things; and there is no difference between them. But by verification,
it is clear that both wealth and majesty are not loved for their own sake. Their
example is like one who likes to have a water circulation in his house for
which he is forced by necessity of answering the call of nature. Indeed, he
likes to dispense with answering the call of nature, in order to dispense with
that water circulation. He does not then like the water circulation in itself.
Whatever is sought just as a means to a beloved thing, it is that beloved which
is intended by love.
Let's give another example. A man might love his wife in order that through
her he gets rid of the surplus desire, just as he gets rid of the remaining food in
the water circulation, and were he to fulfill his desire through any way else, he
would then abandon her, just as were he to dispense with answering the call of
nature, he would not enter the privy. But one might love his wife for her own
sake, for he adores her, and in this case, were he to fulfill his desire through any
way else, he would also remain with her (for he loves her for her own sake and
not only for the sake of fulfilling his sexual desire).
The same ruling is applicable to both majesty and wealth. Each of them might
be loved for any of both ways: it is not blameworthy to like them to have access

The quarter of the destructives
468
through them to the essential tasks of body; and it is blameworthy to love them
for their own sake in what is beyond the necessary needs and requirements of
body. But such a person is not described as sinful or disobedient as long as this
love does not lead him to commit a sin. But it is sinful, if not forbidden, to have
access to majesty and wealth through worship. This is the concept of the
forbidden showing off, as we shall see later.
But you may ask about the extent to which it is permissible to pursue that, in
reply, let me say that there are three ways to pursue that, two are permissible and
the third is forbidden:
The forbidden way is to seek a position in their hearts based on their belief in
his having a certain attribute which he does not have, like knowledge, piety or
ancestry. This is forbidden for it belongs to falsehood and dissembling, either by
word or deed.
One of the permissible other two ways is to seek a position for a certain
attribute he really has, like the demand of the Prophet Yusuf “peace be upon
him” from the king as told by Allah Almighty: "Set me over the treasuries of the
land: I will indeed guard them, as one that knows (their importance)." (Yusuf 55)
r

i

,

ui

g>yy>- 'Js-

He sought to have position in his heart depending upon his power of
safeguarding and knowing on the one hand, and the king's need of him on the
other hand; in which case he was true to his demand.
The other permissible way is to seek to hide one of his defects or sins in order
that his position in the hearts of people would not disappear because of it. this is
also permissible for it is not blameworthy to put curtain over one's defects, and it
is impermissible to remove the curtain and highlight what is shameful. There is
no dissembling in that. It is just to close the gate of knowing what is pointless or
useless. It is like the one who hides from the ruler, for instance, that he drinks
wine, but does not give him the false impression that he is pious. His statement
that he is pious is dissembling, whereas his avoiding to recognize that he drinks
wine does not give the impression that he is pious.
One of the forbidden ways here is to seek to pray perfectly in front of a
certain person, in order to instill within him the belief of being pious. This is
showing and dissembling, for by so doing, he gives him the false impression that
he is of the sincere worshippers who submit to Allah Almighty. To seek majesty
through that way is forbidden and unlawful. It applies to seeking it by the way of
committing any other sin. It is similar to seeking to earn wealth from unlawful
sources. As well as it is impermissible for one to possess the property of another
by way of dissembling, it is also impermissible for him to have possession of his
heart by falsehood and deception. To be sure, the possession of hearts is more
serious than the possession of wealth.

CHAPTER EIGHT:
EXPOSITION OF CAUSES OF LOVE FOR PRAISE
AND DISLIKE FOR DISPRAISE
It should be known that there are four causes of loving praise and taking
pleasure from it:

Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off

469

The first cause, which is the strongest of them all, is that one feels perfection
in himself. We have already mentioned that perfection is lovable, and the
perception of what is loved is pleasant in itself. When one feels he is perfect, he
gets comforted and pleased and delighted. The praise gives the praised the sense
of perfection. The attribute with which one is praised might be evident or
suspicious. If it is evident and clear, the pleasure taken from it is less effective,
but not absent. If the attribute is suspicious, the pleasure taken therefrom is
greater and more effective. It is like being praised by perfection of knowledge,
perfection of piety, or absolute goodness. One might have doubt as to whether
his knowledge or piety is perfect, and have longing for this suspicion to be
removed, in order to become certain of being matchless in those attributes. If this
is mentioned to him by another, he then rests assured of being so. The more the
praiser is acquainted with those attributes, the more the praised becomes pleased
and delighted. A pupil becomes very pleased with his teacher praising him with
good intellect, much knowledge and sound mind. It is by the same cause that
dispraise is disliked, for it always reminds one of his shortage and defect.
Shortage is counter to the lovable perfection, and this is why it is hateful and
painful. For this reason, the pain is greater when dispraise comes from such of
men as well-acquainted with attributes and qualities, as we have already
mentioned in the cause of praise.
The second cause is that the praise gives the impression that the heart of the
praiser is in the possession of the praised, under his disposal, subject to his will,
and submissive to his command. The possession of hearts is lovable, and to sense
it is pleasant. Based on that, the more the praiser is important and renowned, the
more the praised is pleased and delighted, and vice versa. It is by that cause also
that dispraise is hateful and painful.
the third cause is that the praise given by a praiser could be a means to catch
the hearts of other people, particularly if the praiser is a man of authority and
influence. This applies to the public praise: in this case, the more the audience is
massive, and the praiser is important and renowned, the more the praise is
pleasant, and the dispraise is painful.
The fourth cause is that praise indicates to the veneration and reverence of
the praised. The praiser is forced to give a free rein to the tongue to speak
fluently about the praised, either willingly or unwillingly. In this way, veneration is
pleasant for the power of influence and oppression it carries. This pleasure
happens even if the praiser does not believe within himself in what he praises
with. But that he is forced to praise him with it indicates to oppression. Thus, the
pleasure is determined in proportion to the power of the praiser. the pleasure
taken from the praise given by the powerful praiser is more effective than the
pleasure taken from the praise given by a weak praiser.
The pleasure of praise becomes the strongest when those four causes gather
altogether in a praiser, and weakens as much as they decrease. In relation to the
first cause, i.e. the feeling of perfection, it might be repelled if the praised knows
for certain that the praiser is not true in what he says about him. If he is praised,
for example of being generous, openhanded, courageous, etc, and he knows that

The quarter of the destructives
470
he is not so, the pleasure of perfection then disappears from himself, and there
remains only the pleasure of the possession of the heart of the praised. If he
knows that die praiser does not believe in what he says about him, and that he, at
die same time, does not have such attribute of praise, then, the second pleasure
of the possession of the heart fades away, and there remains only the pleasure of
oppressing him and forcing his tongue to praise him with good. If the praise is
not caused by fear, and is rather by way of jesting and joking, all pleasures vanish.
This is sufficient to highlight the reason for which one takes pleasure from
praise, and gets pained because of dispraise. We have mentioned that in order to
know the remedy for loving majesty and wealth, and loving praise and fear of
criticism. If the cause is unknown, the remedy becomes impossible. The remedy
in the end is to analyze the causes of the disease. And Allah is the helper to attain
success with His bounty and kindness; and Allah's blessing and peace be upon
every chosen servant.

CHAPTER NINE:
EXPOSITION OF REMEDY OF LOVING MAJESTY
It should be known that he who is seized by the love for majesty, limits his
interest and attention to care about the people, seeks to endear himself to them,
and is eager to have his acts and deeds help exalt his position in their hearts. This
is, to be sure, the first seed of hypocrisy and showing off. Of course, this leads to
indulgence in worship, and doing acts of worship just in order to be seen of men,
and delve into what is forbidden in order to catch hearts. For this reason, it is
not strange that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” likened the love for honour and property to two rabid wolves. The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "It
(such love) causes hypocrisy to grow in the same way as water causes herbage to
grow in the land." Hypocrisy is the contradiction between the outward and
inward by deed and word. Whoever seeks to have position in the hearts of people
is forced to behave with hypocrisy towards them, and seem to them as having
good and praiseworthy moral character, which he might not have. This is out of
hypocrisy.
Love for majesty then is among the destructive sins which should be treated
and remedied. If it lasts for a long time, the heart is predisposed by nature to it,
just as it is to the love for wealth. Its remedy is composed of knowledge and
work. The knowledge is to learn the reason for which he loves majesty, i.e. to
have the power over the hearts of people. We have already explained that even if
this is valid, it ends by death, and thus it is not among the good things that
endure forever. If all of the people on the surface of this earth, from the East to
the West fall in prostration to you during your lifetime, fifty years later, neither
you nor those who do this will remain alive on the earth. The religion should not
be given up for the sake of that transient thing, for religion represents the eternal
life which never ends.
To be sure, whoever understands the difference between the real and
illusory perfection, majesty seems slight in his sight. But majesty seems slight
only in the sight of such of men as regards the hereafter as if he sees it with his

471
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offown eyes, and despises the transients of this world, and seems in the very state
of Al-Hassan Al-Basri who wrote the following admonition to Umar Ibn AbdAl-Aziz: “Peace be upon you! You seem as if you are the last to be doomed to
death, but even you have died.” In reply to him, Umar sent to him the
following: “Peace be upon you! You seem as if you are in the world, although
you have not been engaged in it, and rather you are still engaged in the
hereafter.” Those devoted themselves to the good consequence, for which they
acted in accordance with piety. They learnt that the good consequence should
be for the faithful believers. The result was that they despised both wealth and
majesty in this world.
But unfortunately, the sights of most people are weak and limited to the
transients of this world. That is because their light does not extend to see the
consequences. It is in that context that we should consider the statement of Allah
Almighty: " Nay (behold), you prefer the life of this world; But the Hereafter is
better and more enduring." (Al-A'la 16-17)

i 0 &G3*- *>$>3 0

’S. >

He Almighty further says: " Nay, (you men!) But you love the fleeting life,
And leave alone the Hereafter." (Al-Qiyamah 20-21)

i 0 s>'Sn

o 5L?

ojii s. vr >

Such a person should treat his heart, first by knowing the evils and diseases of
the world, i.e. to consider the dangers that threaten the prominent in this world.
However, every prominent is an object of envy and harm of the people. He
always fears for his majesty lest he would loose his position when the hearts of
people towards him change, and the hearts change swifter than cooking vessels
do when they are boiling. What is built upon the hearts of people is like what is
built on the sea waves. On the other hand, to engage in caring about the hearts,
maintaining majesty, repelling the intrigues of the enviers, and avert the harms is
a transient concern, which contaminates the pleasure of majesty. In no way could
the fear be removed by the hope in this world, let alone the loss of the hereafter.
As such the weak sight should be treated. But the one of piercing sight and
strong faith does not turn to this world with its transitory things. This is the
remedy regarding knowledge.
In terms of work, it is to cancel out majesty from the hearts of people, by
doing acts for which he is blamed, until he seems slight in the sight of people. By
so doing, he will give up the pleasure of acceptability, become affable with
anonymity, reject the people and be satisfied with the acceptability in the Sight of
the Creator. This is the school of blame-seekers, who delved into the shameful
deeds in their form in order to fall in the eyes of the people, and become safe
from the evil of majesty. But even, this is impermissible for him whom the
people imitate and follow, because he weakens the religion in the hearts of the
Muslims. Furthermore, he, whom none imitates or follows, it is impermissible for
him to do what is forbidden for the sake of that: but he is likely to do of such
permissible acts as falls his position from the hearts of people. It is reported from
one of the ascetics that he was visited by a king and when he learnt that he

The quarter of the destructives
472
became in a position close to the king, he asked for food, and went on eating
greedily until he lapsed from the eyes of the king, who turned away and left him.
On that the ascetic said: "Praise be to Allah Who has turned you from me." Some
of them drank a lawful drink in a vessel whose colour gave the false impression
that he was drinking wine, thereupon he fell from the eyes of the people.
Regardless of that conduct's being harmful when it is made permissible from
the perspective of religious jurisprudence, the masters of hearts always treat
themselves differently from what a Mufti might say, so long as they see it more
convenient to reform their hearts, and later they would compensate the things in
which they have indulged. In this respect, one of the people was recognized for
his asceticism. In order to remove that idea from the minds, he entered a public
bath and when he came out, he had put on the clothes of another one, and kept
standing in the way for some time. When the people saw him, they beat him so
much, deprived him of the clothes, and abandoned him.
One of the strongest ways of removing majesty is isolation from the people,
and migration to a land in which one is anonymous. However, the one who gets
isolated in his house in the town in which he is famous could hardly be free from
loving the position he has in the hearts of the people because of his isolation. He
might think that he does not love that majesty. But even, he is deceived, for were
the hearts of the people to change from the belief they had in him, and ascribe
him to a bad deed, he might become grieved and sorry, as shown from his
attempts to apologize for that evil act to which they ascribe him, in order to
remove from their hearts that idea they have about him.
On the other hand, whoever loves position and majesty is like him who
loves wealth and property. But the former is worse for the temptation of
majesty is more grievous. So long as he covets of the people, he could not help
loving the position and majesty in their hearts. But if he earns his sustenance
from his labour, and becomes independent of the people, they will be equal in
his sight, and it will be the same to him whether or not he has position in their
hearts. Nevertheless, one could not cease to covet of the people except by
satisfaction: if one is satisfied with what is doomed to him, he will dispense
with the people, and once he dispenses with the people, he will not engage
himself in caring about them, nor will he give importance to his position in
their hearts.
In order to do so, one might seek the aid of the news and narrations about
condemnation of majesty and commendation of anonymity. He also should
consider the states of the righteous predecessors, and how they adhered to
mortification on the exclusion of honour and power, and desired for the reward
of the hereafter.

CHAPTER TEN
EXPOSITION OF REMEDY OF LOVE FOR PRAISE
AND DISLIKE FOR DISPRAISE
It should be known that most people were ruined because of their love
for praise and dislike of dispraise; and this made them suspend all of their
movements and procedures on pleasing others, in the hope of their praise

473
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offand for fear of their dispraise. This is, to be sure, one of the destructives
which should be remedied, by knowing the causes that lead people to love
praise and dislike dispraise. There are many reasons, and a mention may be
made of the following:
The first is that by praising, the praised feel perfection. The way of remedy is
to return to your mind and say to yourself: "Do you really have the same
characteristic you are praised with?" If you really have it, then, does it deserve
praise? it might be either a characteristic that deserves praise, like knowledge and
piety, or does not deserve praise like property and majesty, or anything of the
transients of this world. If it belongs to the transients of this world, then,
rejoicing with it is like the rejoicing with the plant of the earth which grows and
then turns to be dry stubble, which the winds do scatter. It is the weak-minded
foolish who rejoices with such transients. For this reason, the rational should not
rejoice with the transients of this world; and in case he rejoices with them, he
should not rejoice with being praised with them, for it is not the praise which
causes them to exist.
But if it is a characteristic which deserves praise, like knowledge and piety,
then, he should also not rejoice with it, for indeed, the conclusion of deeds is
unknown. Although such characteristics require pleasure, for they draw one close
to Allah Almighty, the fear of the danger of the evil conclusion of deeds should
divert one from any kind of pleasure and delight in this world. To be sure, the
world is an abode of grief and distress and not an abode of happiness and
pleasure. On the other hand, if you rejoice with them in the hope of the good
end, then, you should rejoice with the favor of Allah Almighty upon you, Who
has provided you with knowledge and piety, more than you rejoice with the
praise of the praiser. The pleasure results from feeling of perfection, and
perfection results from the bounty of Allah Almighty and not from the praise of
the praiser. You then should not rejoice with the praise for by no means would
the praise increase you in bounty.
If this characteristic with which you are praised is not in you, then, to
rejoice with it is a kind of madness. Your example is like him whom another
one mocks at saying: "How pleasant is the odor that comes out of his belly
when he excretes." Although he knows well what his excretion carries of
stinking odor and putrid substance, he rejoices at what the other says about
him. The same is true of you if you are praised with righteousness and piety,
and Allah Almighty knows well your evil and wickedness, it will be evident
ignorance. If the praiser is true, you should rejoice with the bounty of Allah
upon you when He has provided you with that good characteristic, and if he is
false, then, you should grieve.
The second reason is the feeling of possession of the heart of the praiser,
which might lead to the possession of other hearts. This reason refers to the love
for majesty and position in the hearts of the people. We have already mentioned
the way of its remedy, i.e. to cut off all covets of the people, and leave seeking
position in their hearts for the seeking of position in the Sight of Allah Almighty.
You should also know that your seeking and rejoicing with position in the hearts

The quarter of the destructives
474
of people lapses your position in the Sight of Allah Almighty. How then should
you rejoice with it?
The third reason is the shyness that forces the praiser to praise you. You
should not rejoice with that: on the contrary, you should grieve for the praiser
praises you under compulsion of shyness. You should rather grow angry with that
in imitation of the righteous predecessors, for the evil of the praise returns to the
praised more than to the praiser. According to a righteous predecessor:
"Whoever rejoices with the praise, has enabled Satan to enter into the inside of
his body." Another one said: "If it is said to you 'How good you are' which is
dearer to you than the statement 'How evil you are', then, you should know that
you are evil not good."
It is narrated that a man praised another in the presence of the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” thereupon he said: "If your
companion (whom you have praised) was present and accepted what you have
said about him, and then died in that state, he would enter the Garden." If this
narration is authentic, then, it is destructive. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” further said to another praiser: "Woe to you!
You have broken his back. If he (the praised) heard you (and accepted your
praise), he would never prosper until the Day of Judgement." The Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Do not praise each other,
and if you see the praisers, then, throw dust at their faces."
This is the state of the glorious companions “Allah be pleased with them”. All
of them were in awe of praise and its temptation, and the great pleasure with it
that might enter the heart because of it. one of the rightly-guided caliphs asked a
person about something, and he said: "O Commander of Believers! You are
better than me, and know best." On that he grew angry with him and said: "I
have not commanded you to commend me or give me prestige (before Allah
Almighty)." It was said to one of the companions “Allah be pleased with them”:
"People are still good as long as you survive among them by virtue of Allah." On
that he grew angry and ascribed him to those of Iraq (who were predisposed to
hypocrisy). When another one was praised, he said: "O Allah! This man has come
close to me by displeasing You. O Allah! I make you witness that I dislike him."
They seemed to have disliked praise for fear they would rejoice with the
praise of the creatures while they might be hateful in the Sight of the Creator.
Their occupation by their own affairs in the Sight of Allah Almighty caused
them to dislike the praise of anyone else. That is because the real praised is he
who is close to Allah AJmighty, and the dispraised is he who is far removed
from Allah Almighty. If the praised is among the denizens of fire in the Sight
of Allah, and at the same time, he rejoices with the praise of people, then,
how ignorant he is! If he is among the inhabitants of the Garden, he should
rejoice only with the bounty of Allah Almighty upon him, more than with the
praise. That is because his matter is in the Hand of Allah Almighty and not in
the hand of anyone else. Once he knows for certain that he receives his
sustenance and death from Allah Almighty, and not by virtue or help of
anyone else, he does not turn to the praise and dispraise of the creatures. By

475
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off
so doing, the love for praise would lapse from his heart, and he would devote
himself to what concerns him of his religion and worship. Allah guides us to
right, by His mercy.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
EXPOSITION OF REMEDY OF DISLIKING DISPRAISE
We have already explained that the cause of disliking dispraise is counter to
the cause of loving praise. The remedy is similar. It is enough to say here that
whoever dispraises you is one of three: he might be true to what he says, and he
intends with it to advise you and show mercy towards you; and he might be true
to what he says, but he says it with the intention to cause harm to you; and he
might be false in his statement.
If he is true to what he says, with which he intends to advise and counsel you,
then, you should not grow angry and resent him. That is because whoever
presents to you your defects and shortcomings, you should thank him for he has
guided you to what might destroy you perchance you would avoid it. you should
rejoice with that, and occupy yourself by removing from you the dispraised
attribute, as much as you could. But to grieve at that, condemn and dislike him
because of that, is evident ignorance.
If his intention is to cause harm to you, at least you have got benefit from his
statement about you, with which he has guided you to your defects to avoid if
you are ignorant of it, reminded you of it if you know it and try to overlook it, or
defaced it in your eyes in order to be prompted to remove it from you. All of that
should cause happiness to you. So, you should engage in pursuit of the means of
happiness, which he has made available to you. If you intend to enter upon a king
and your garment is dirty, and somebody alerts you to that, you should rejoice
with him, for he has saved you from the anger of the king if you enter upon him
with that dirt. All evil manners are destructive in the hereafter, and since man
knows them from his enemies, he should seize that opportunity, if his intention is
to cause harm to you, then, the crime of it would be upon himself, and he benefit
would return to you, for he has alerted you to your defects. In this way, you
should get benefit from that, and let him bear the crime and incur the sin upon
himself.
The first case is that he attributes lies to you, and dispraise you with that
from which you are free in the Sight of Allah Almighty. You should also not
grieve because of that: on the contrary, you should think of three things: the first
is that if you are really free form that defect, you could hardly be free from any
like it, and what Allah Almighty screens of your defects is more. So, you should
give thanks to Allah, for He has not let him know your defects, and diverted him
to that from which you are free.
The second is that this might be expiation for your sins. By so doing, he
seems to throw you with a defect from which you are free, and purifies you from
sins with which you have been contaminated. To be sure, whoever backbites you
has indeed presented his good deeds to you, and whoever praises you has indeed
cut off your back. What is the matter with you that you rejoice with cutting off
your back and grieve with the gifts of good deeds which draw you close to Allah

The quarter of the destructives
476
Almighty? Do you not claim that you like to be close to Allah Almighty?
The third is that the poor little man (who dispraises you) has harmed his
religion and looses his dignity infront of Allah Almighty, and by fabricating lies,
ruined himself and exposed himself to His painful punishment and torment. You
should then not grow angry with him, for Allah Almighty is angry with him. That
is because if you grow angry with him, and invoke evil upon him, you would
cause Satan to tease him. But rather you should invoke good upon him saying:
"O Allah! Reform him! O Allah! Turn to him in repentance! O Allah! Bestow
mercy upon him!" you should do so in imitation to the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” who said: "O Allah! Forgive for my
people! O Allah! Guide my people for they know not." (This narration is reported
by Al-Baihaqi, and he said so when some of his people struck him “peace be
upon him”). He seemed to have said so when his people struck him, broke his
canine tooth and wounded his face, and killed Hamzah “Allah be pleased with
him” his paternal uncle. Ibrahim Ibn Adham invoked forgiveness upon him who
wounded his head, and when he was asked about that he said: "I learn that my
sins would be forgiven for me because of him, and since I received from him
nothing but good, I do not like that he would be punished because of me."
What facilitates the dislike of dispraise upon you is to cut off covet of people.
Whatever he, with whom you dispense, dispraises you, you would give no care to
his dispraise. The foundation of religion is satisfaction, by which covet of majesty
and wealth is cut off. As long as there is covet, the love for majesty and praise
prevails in the heart of him of whom you covet, and you do your best to attain
the high position in his heart. But the result of that is the destruction of religion.
The petitioner of wealth and majesty who covets of praise and position and
dislikes dispraise and condemnation should not hope to keep his religion sound
and perfect. How far it is!

CHAPTER TWELVE
EXPOSmON OF DIFFERENT CASES OF PEOPLE REGARDING
PRAISE AND DISPRAISE
It should be known that the people have four cases in relation to the praiser
and dispraiser:
The first is that one rejoices with the praiser and gives thanks to him, and
grows angry with the dispraiser and resents him, and likes to requite him. This is
the case of the most people; and it is the utmost degree of disobedience.
The second is to have feeling of rancor for the dispraise, but he holds back
his tongue from condemning the dispraiser, and rather rejoices within himself.
On the other hand, he gets comforted with the praiser, but keeps his outward
from showing pleasure with it. although this belongs to shortage, it is better than
the previous case.
The third which represents the first degree of perfection is to give no care
about both praiser and dispraiser equally. He neither grieves with the dispraise,
nor rejoices with the praise. Although a worshipper might think he is so, he
might be deceived by his false assumption unless he checks its signs. Its signs are
that he does not get bored of the dispraiser no matter how long he sits with him

477
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offmore than he gets of the praiser, nor does he fulfill the needs of the praiser faster
and more active than he does of the dispraiser, nor is it easier upon him to miss
the dispraiser in his gatherings than to miss the praiser, nor is it more distressing
to him the death of the praiser who always lauds him than the death of the
dispraiser who condemns him, nor does he grieve for the misfortunes of the
praiser more than he does for the misfortunes of the dispraiser, nor does he find
the slip of the praiser lighter upon his heart than the slip of the dispraiser. The
more both dispraiser and praiser are equal in his sight, the more he comes to
attain that level of perfection. But even, how far this is from hearts! Most people
rejoice with the praise though they feel not because they do not check themselves
about those signs.
On the other hand, a worshipper might find himself to be more inclined to
the praiser than to the dispraiser, and Satan adorns this inclination to him, saying:
"The dispraiser has disobeyed Allah by dispraising you and the praiser has obeyed
Allah by praising you. How then should you regard them equal in your sight? It is
out of faith to get bored of the dispraiser." This is evident dissembling.
Considering the matter, one finds that from among the people, there are many
who commit major sins more than the dispraiser with his dispraise. But he does
not get bored of them in the same way as he does of the dispraiser. Furthermore,
he knows that the praiser who praises him might also dispraise others (therewith
he commits sins). But in spite of that, he does not get bored of him (as long as he
does not dispraise him), given that the dispraise is sinful, regardless of the
dispraised.
Thus, the deceived worshipper grows angry for his own sake, and resents for
his own inclination. Furthermore, Satan makes alluring to him to behave as such,
with the intention to give precedence to his inclination, which keeps him far away
from Allah more and more. Whoever does not know well the intrigues of Satan
and the evils of the self, most of his acts of worship are no more than useless
trouble and fruidess effort, which cause him to loose the goods of this world, and
the rewards of the hereafter. In connection with them, Allah says: " Say: "Shall we
tell you of those who lose most in respect of their deeds? Those whose efforts
have been wasted in this life. While they thought that they were acquiring good
by their works?" (Al-Kahf 103-104)

The fourth is to be true to his worship. It is to dislike praise and becomes
displeased with the praiser, for he knows well that this praise is a means of
temptation to him, which is to harm him, break his back, ruin his religion, and
destroy his good deeds, and, at the same time, like the dispraiser, for he knows
well that by dispraising him, he presents his defects to him, guide him to avoid
them, and further grants his good deeds to him. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "The top of humility is to dislike to be
described with righteousness and piety." It is reported that the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Woe to the fasting! Woe to

I

The quarter of the destructives
478
the one who stands (at night to perform prayer)! Woe to him who puts on wool
(out of asceticism)! Except such and such." It was said: "Except who O
Messenger of Allah?" he said: "Except he who refrains from this world, dislikes
praise and likes dispraise." This is very difficult and grievous, and if this narration
is authentic, it is destructive.
The highest ambition of the like of us is to covet of the second case, i.e. to
conceal pleasure with the praise and displeasure with the dispraise, and not to
demonstrate that through word and deed. We could not covet of the third case,
which is to give no care to both the praiser and dispraiser equally. If we check
ourselves about the signs of the second case, we would fail to do it, for we could
not help dealing generously with the praiser more than with the dispraiser, and be
more active in fulfilling the needs of the former than we would be regarding the
latter. Indeed, we could not treat them with equality outwardly and inwardly. If
there is one who could assume equality of treatment with both at least outwardly,
let us take him as example to follow. What do you think then about the other two
levels?
On the other hand, each of those four levels has many degrees. In relation to
raise, from among the people, there is such as hopes for praise and appreciation,
in order to attain good reputation and fame among the people, and he is ready to
so anything in order to achieve this desire. He is ready to do acts of worship just
to be seen of men. He also is careless about committing what is forbidden in
order to attract the hearts of others, and magnetize tongues to praise and laud
him. Such a person is among the ruined and destroyed. There is such as seeks it
but through the permissible and not the impermissible things nor the acts of
worship. Such a man is on an undermined sand cliff ready to crumble to pieces.
The limits of the words and deeds therewith he attracts the hearts of people
could hardly be adjusted, and this is why he is apt to fall into what is unlawful, in
order to attain praise. Thus, he is very close to the ruined of the previous degree.
There is such of people as does neither wants nor seeks to attain praise. But if
he is praised, of a surety, the signs of pleasure would be visible on him. If he does
not mortify himself to reject that, he is about to be drawn by the excessive
pleasure to the previous degree. But even, if he mortifies himself to force his
heart to dislike pleasure, by putting before his eyes the evil of praise, he would be
given to the risk of self-mortification, and wavering between win and loss. There
is such of them as when he hears praise, he would neither be pleased with, nor
grieve at, nor care about it. such person is good if he is really sincere to his
conduct. There is such of them as dislikes the praise whenever he hears it. but his
aversion does not lead him to grow angry with the praiser, nor reject his conduct.
At the best, he dislikes, grows angry and demonstrates his anger, truthfully and
sincerely, for if he is not true or sincere, in the sense that what he pretends
contradicts what he feels in his heart, he then is a hypocrite.
On the contrary, the same is true of the people in relation to the dispraiser.
The first degree is to demonstrate anger with the dispraiser, and the last is to
demonstrate joy with him. One does not demonstrate joy with the dispraiser
unless he is enemy to his own self, dislikes it, and knows well its defects and

479
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offshortcomings. Of a surety, man always is pleased with him who dispraises his
enemy. Such a person does not only rejoice with him who dispraises his own self,
but rather thanks him, thinking him to be prudent and smart as he brings to his
attention his defects and flaws. It is a profit to him, for by dispraising him, he
lowers his position in the sight of people, thereby protects him from their
temptation. If good deeds are given to him as a result of dispraise, it will be good
for him to compensate for his defects which he fails to remove. If one engages
himself along his lifetime just to get accustomed to have both the praiser and
dispraiser equal in his sight, he will have no time for anything to do. Furthermore,
there still remain many obstacles that separate him from happiness, and this is
one of them. Nothing could remove any of them but by way of difficult long
self-mortification.

PART TWO
CONDEMNATION OF SHOWING OFF
It pertains to seeking for majesty and position through acts of worship, which
stands for showing off, and it includes:
Exposition of condemnation of showing off
Exposition of real nature of showing off; and what validates the description
of showing off
Exposition of Levels of showing off
Exposition of concealed showing off
Exposition of the extent to which showing off frustrates work
Exposition of medicine and remedy of showing off
Exposition of concession to disclose acts of worship
Exposition of concession to conceal sins
Exposition of leaving some acts of worship for fear of showing off and evils
Exposition of what is valid for a servant to do to practice his acts of worship
because of people's seeing him
Exposition of what is binding upon a novice to do before and after an act of
worship
Those then are eleven chapters; and Allah helps us attain success.

CHAPTER ONE
EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF SHOWING OFF
It is should be known that showing off is unlawful, and the maker of show
(of deeds) is hateful in the Sight of Allah Almighty as confirmed by many Holy
Verses, Prophetic narrations and traditions and sayings.
From among the Qur'anic Verses, a mention may be made of the following
statements of Allah Almighty:
"So woe to the worshippers Who are neglectful of their Prayers, Those who
(want but) to be seen (of men), But refuse (to supply) (even) neighbourly needs."
(Al-Ma'un 4-7)

The quarter of the destructives

480

0

O

J* r* vtfQ

S& b

4 Sf5 bj* k*-h
"Those that lay Plots of Evil, for them is a Penalty terrible; and the plotting of
such will be void (of result)." (Fatir 10)
40> Jyri y*
cL>Llp
o>LiLUT
^ jjlj ^
According to Mujahid, they are the hypocrites. Allah Almighty further says:
mi
We feed you for the sake of Allah alone: no reward do we desire from you, nor
thanks." (Al-Insan 9)

i 0 OjSi %

6j >

He praised the sincere and truthful who had no intention but the
Countenance of Allah Almighty, which is counter to hypocrisy or showing off.
He also says: "whoever expects to meet his Lord, let him work righteousness,
and, in the worship of his Lord, admit no one as partner." (Al-Kahf 110)
4
^'^x>~ ^ ‘"5^3
tLsJ
^^^
This Holy Verse was revealed in connection with those who expect the
hereafter with their works and acts of worship, and do not intend to be seen
of men.
From among the Prophetic narrations, a mention may be made of the
following:
It is reported that a man asked the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him": "O Messenger of Allah! How does one get salvation?" he
said: "It is that a man does not do any act of worship with the intention to be
seen of men." According to the narration of Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with
him” about the three men, i.e. the killed in the Way of Allah, the aimsgiver, and
the reciter of the Book of Allah, Allah Almighty says to each of them: "You have
told a lie! You wanted to be said that so and so is generous. You have told a lie!
You wanted to be said that so and so is brave. You have told a lie! You wanted to
be said that so and so is a reciter (of the Qur'an)." In this way, the Messenger of
Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” told that they would receive no
reward, and that it is showing off which made fruitless their deeds. (This
narration is reported by Muslim).
It is reported on the authority of Ibn Umar “Allah be pleased with them” that
he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"He, who makes a show (of deeds) to be seen of men, Allah makes his
(humiliation) visible to the people; and he who makes a show (of deeds) to be
heard of men, Allah displays his (sins) publicly." (This narration is reported by AlBaihaqi and At-Tabarani). According to a long narration, Allah Almighty will say
to His angels: "This man did not intend Me with his deed. So, put him in a deep
pitfall (of Hell)." (This narration is reported by Ibn Al-Mubarak and Ibn Abu AdDunya on the authority of Hamzah Ibn Habib).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "The thing of which I fear most for you is the minor polytheism." They
;

481
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offasked: "What is the minor polytheism O Messenger of Allah?" he said: "Showing
off. On the Day of Judgement, Allah Almighty will say when He rewards the
people by their deeds: "Go to those to whom you used to make show (of your
deeds): do you find any reward with them?"" (This narration is reported by
Ahmad and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Mahmud Ibn Labid; and At-Tabarani
on the authority of Rafi' Ibn Khadij). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him,, further said: "Seek refuge with Allah Almighty from the
well of grief." It was said: "What is that O Messenger of Allah?" he said: "It is a
valley in the Hell prepared for the (Qur'an) reciters to be seen of men." (This
narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah on the authority of Abu
Hurairah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said too:
"Allah Almighty says: "Whoever does a deed for Me, in which he joins others
with Me, it is entirely for such a partner, and I'm free from it, I'm free from it. I'm
the most independent of ascribing partners to Me (in worship)."" (This narration
is reported by Malik, Ibn Majah and Muslim with slight variation of wording on
the authority of Abu Hurairah).
According to the Messiah “peace be upon him”: "If anyone of you observes
fast, let him oil his head and beard and wipe his lips in order that people would
not see that he is fasting. If he gives in charity with his right hand, let him hide it
from his left hand. If he prays, let him hang down the curtain of the door of his
house. Of a surety, Allah distributes praise in the same way as He distributes
sustenance."
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Allah Almighty never accepts a deed in which there is (as little as) an atom's
weight of showing off." It is reported that Umar “Allah be pleased with him” said
to Mu'adh “Allah be pleased with him” when he saw him weeping: "What does
lead you to weep?" he said: "A Hadith I heard from the inhabitant of this grave",
i.e. the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”. He said:
"The least degree of showing off is a kind of polytheism." (This narration is
reported by At-Tabarani and Al-Hakim). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "The thing of which I fear most
for you is showing off and hidden fame." The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "In the shade often Throne (of Majesty)
on the Day on which there will be no shade but His, there will be a man who
gave a charity with his right hand, which he was about to hide from his left
hand." (This narration is reported by both sheiks on the authority of Abu
Hurairah). For this reason, it is reported (by Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Abu
Ad-Darda^ that the deed to be done in secrecy is seventy times superior to that
to be done in public.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "On the Day of Judgement, the maker of show (of deeds) will be called: "O
wicked! O treacherous! O maker of show (of deeds)! Your deed has been lost and
your reward rendered fruitless. Go and take your reward from him for whom you
used to do your deeds."" (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on

-

The quarter of the destructives
482
the authority of a companion whom he did not name), it is further narrated on
the authority of Shaddad Ibn Aws “Allah be pleased with him” that he said: I
saw the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” weeping
thereupon I said: "What causes you to weep O Messenger of Allah?" he said: "I
fear polytheism for my nation. Behold! They do worship neither sun nor moon
nor stone, but they make show of their deeds." (This narration is reported by Ibn
Majah and Al-Hakim).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"When Allah Almighty created the earth, it trembled with its inhabitants,
thereupon He created mountains as pegs to make firm the earth. The angels said:
"Our Lord has never created a creation stronger than mountains." Then, He
Almighty created iron therewith He cut off mountains, and created fire therewith
He melted iron, and created water therewith He extinguished fire. Thus, the
angels differed (as to which of the creation is the strongest). They said: "Let's ask
Allah Almighty." They said: "O Lord! Which among Your creation is the
strongest?" Allah Almighty said: "I have never created a creation stronger in My
Sight than the heart of mankind when he gives a charity with his right hand
which he hides from his left hand." This is the strongest creation He has ever
created." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Anas,
with a slight variation of wording).
It is narrated by Abdullah Ibn Al-Mubarak from a man that he said to Mu'adh
“Allah be pleased with him”: "Relate to me a Hadith you heard from the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”." Mu'adh went on
weeping so much that I thought he would not stop. Then, he stopped and said: I
heard the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” having
said to me: "O Mu'adh!" I said: "I am answering your call O Messenger of Allah,
let my father and mother sacrifice their lives for you!" he said: "I'm going to relate
to you a Hadith, which, if you keep, it will benefit you, and if you waste, your
argument with Allah Almighty will be lost on the Day of Judgement. O Mu'adh!
Before Allah Almighty created the heavens and the earth, He had created seven
angels, and assigned each angel to be a gatekeeper of each one of the seven
heavens. The keepers of deeds ascend with the servant's deed from morning to
evening, having light like the sunlight, and when they ascend with it to the first
heaven, they multiply it, thereupon he angel entrusted to guard the first heaven
says to the keepers: "Strike with that deed the face of its doer. I'm in charge of
backbiting. My Lord has commanded me not to let the deed of a backbiter pass
over me to anyone else."
He said: "Then, the keeper ascend with a righteous deed belonging to a
servant and multiply it and when they come with it upon the second heaven, the
angel entrusted to guard it says to them: "Stop, and strike with that deed the face
of its doer, for he intended with this deed of his the good things of this world.
No doubt, my Lord has commanded me not to let the deed of such a man pass
over me to anyone else. He used to boast because of it over the people in their
gatherings."
He said: "Then, the keepers ascend with an illuminating deed of fasting,

F

i

483
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offobligatory charity and prayer, that appeals the keepers, until when they come up
with it to the third heaven, the angel entrusted to guard it says to them: "Stop,
and strike with that deed the face of its doer. I'm the angel in charge of
arrogance. My Lord Almighty has commanded me not to let his deed pass over
me to anyone else. He used to behave arrogandy towards the people in their
gatherings because of that deed."
He said: "Then, the keepers ascend with a deed of the servant, as shining
as a glittering star, having sounding resuldng from glorification, prayer, Hajj
and Umrah, until when they come up with it to the fourth heaven, the angel
entrusted to guard it says to them: "Stop and strike with that deed the face of
its doer. Strike with it his back and front. I'm in charge of haughtiness. My
Lord Almighty has commanded me not to let his deed surpass me to anyone
else. It was his habit that whenever he did a deed, he would mix it with
haughtiness."
He said: "Then, the keepers come up with the servant's deed to the fifth
heaven, as if it were a bride to be carried home in procession to her husband,
thereupon the angel entrusted to it says to them: "Stop and strike with that deed
the face of its doer, and let him carry it on his shoulder. I'm the angel in charge of
envy. He used to envy the people. He used to envy such of men as learnt and did
the like of his deed, or did extra acts of worship. My Lord Almighty has
commanded me not to let his deed surpass me to anyone else."
He said: "Then, the keepers come up with the servant's deed of prayer,
obligatory charity, fasting, Hajj and Umrah, to the sixth heaven, thereupon he
angel entrusted to it says to them: "Stop and strike with it the face of its doer,
for he showed no mercy to anyone of the servants of Allah Almighty stricken
with affliction: on the contrary, he used to glee at his misfortune. I'm the
angel of mercy. My Lord has commanded me not to let his deed surpass me to
anyone else."
Then, the keepers come up with the servant's deed of prayer, obligatory
charity, fasting, striving (in the Way of Allah), piety to the seventh heaven,
having sounding like the sounding of thunder, and light like the light of sun;
and it ascends in the company of three thousand angels, and when they reach
the seventh heaven, the angel entrusted to it says to them: "Stop and strike
with that deed the face and organs of its doer, close therewith his heart. I
screen from my Lord such of deeds as therewith the Countenance of Allah is
not intended. He intended with his deed others than the Countenance of
Allah Almighty. He intended celebrity among the religious jurisprudents, and
renown among the religious scholars. My Lord has commanded me not to let
his deed surpass me to anyone else. Every deed that is not done for the Sake
of Allah is showing off. Indeed, Allah never accepts the deed of him who
makes show (of his deeds)."
He said: "Then, the keepers come up with the servant's deed of prayer,
obligatory charity, fasting, Hajj, Umrah, celebration of Allah, and good manners,
in the company of many angels until when they go through all veils and screens
to the Presence of Allah Almighty, stand in front of Him, and bear witness of this

484
The quarter of the destructives
deed's being righteous and done with sincerity for Allah Almighty, thereupon He
says to them: "You are the keepers of My servant's deed, and I am the Watcher
over himself. He did not intend Me with that deed, but intended others than Me.
So, let My curse be upon him." Ail the angels then say: "Let Your curse and our
curse be upon him." The inhabitants of the heavens say: "Let the curse of Ailah
and the curse of us be upon him." Ail seven heavens and earth and their
inhabitants send their curses upon him."
Mu'adh said: 1 said: "O Messenger of Ailah! You are the Messenger of Allah,
and I am no more than Mu'adh." The Messenger of Ailah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: "Then, imitate me, and if your deed is defective O
Mu'adh, hold back your tongue from harming your brothers from among the
keepers of the Qur'an, incur your sins upon yourself, and not upon them,
commend not yourself by dispraising them, nor raise yourself above them, nor
mix the deed of this world with that of the hereafter, nor behave arrogantly in
your gathering lest people would beware of your evil manners, nor speak
privately to a man while you have another (i.e. when you are only three), nor
regard yourself superior to men lest the good of both the world and hereafter
would cease from you, nor tear the (honour of the) people lest the dogs of fire
would tear you in the fire on the Day of Judgement. Allah Almighty says: "By
those who gendy draw out the souls of the blessed." (An-Nazi'at 2)

i 0 i£ii

i

>

Do you know what those are O Mu'adh?" I said: "Who are those let my
father and mother sacrifice their lives for you O Messenger of Allah?" he said:
"They are Dogs in the fire that remove flesh and bone." I said: "Let my father
and mother be sacrificed for you O Messenger of Allah! Who could endure all
of that, and who could be saved from it?" he said: "O Mu'adh! This is easy
upon him to whom Allah makes it easy." The sub-narrator said: "Afterwards, I
have never seen anyone more reciting of the Qur'an than Mu'adh “Allah be
pleased with him”."
From among the traditions and sayings, a mention may be made of the
following:
It is reported that Umar “Allah be pleased with him” saw a man lowering his
neck thereupon he said to him: "O man of the neck! Raise your neck. Submission
does not lie in the necks in so much as it lies in the hearts." Once, Abu Umamah
Al-Bahili “Allah be pleased with him” saw a man in the mosque weeping in his
prostration, thereupon he said to him: "Is it also your same conduct if you are in
the house?" according to Ali “Allah be pleased with him”: "The maker of show
(of deeds) has three signs: he becomes lazy when he is alone, and becomes active
when he is in congregation, and does more when his deed is praised, and does
little when it is not praised."
It is reported that Ubadah Ibn As-Samit “Allah be pleased with him” said to
the Messenger of Ailah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "I fight with
my sword in the Way of Allah Almighty, intending the Countenance of Allah and
the praise of people." He said to him: "Then, you shall receive no reward." He
asked him thrice, and in each time the Prophet gave him the same reply. In the

485
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offthird time, he added: "Allah Almighty says: "I am the most independent of
ascribing partners to Me (in worship)."" A man asked Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab:
"Anyone of us does a favor with the intention to receive both praise from people
and reward from Allah Almighty." He asked him: "Do you like to be hateful (in
the Sight of Allah)?" he answered in the negative, thereupon he said to him:
"Then, if you do a deed for the Sake of Allah, do it with sincerity to Him Alone."
Ad-Dahhak said: "None of you should say: 'This is for the Countenance of
Allah and the face of you', nor 'This is done for the Sake of Allah and for
keeping good relations with kith and kin', for indeed, it is not befitting for Allah
Almighty to have a partner with Him." Once, Umar “Allah be pleased with him”
beat a man with the stick and then asked him to take retaliation from him. He
said: "No, I leave it for the Sake of Allah and for your sake." On that Umar
“Allah be pleased with him” said to him: "Then, you shall have done nothing.
Either you should leave it for my sake so that I would know it, or for the Sake of
Allah Almighty Alone." He said: "I have left it for the Sake of Allah Almighty
Alone." He said: "This is good then."
Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "I have accompanied a
people, and wisdom used to occur to the mind of anyone of them and were he to
speak with it, it would have been of great benefit to him and his companions, and
nothing prevented him from that except his fear of fame; and anyone of them
used to pass in the street and see a harmful thing, and nothing prevented him
from removing it but his fear of fame." It is said that a maker of show (of deeds)
will be called by four names on the Day of Judgement: "O maker of show (of
deeds)! O Treacherous! O looser! O wicked! Go and take your reward from him
for whom you did your deed, for there is no reward with us for you."
According to Al-Fudail Ibn Iyad: "In the past, they used to make show (of
deeds) which they really did, and nowadays, they make show (of deeds) which
they do not do." According to Ikrimah: "Verily, Allah Almighty gives a man
for his intention more than he gives for his work, for no showing off lies in
the intention." According to Al-Hassan “Allah be pleased with him”: "A
maker of show (of deeds) intends to challenge the decree of Allah Almighty.
Although he is an evil man, he likes that people should describe him as a good
man. But even, how should it be given that the hearts of the faithful believers
should recognize him, for he is recognized for putting on hypocrisy in the
Sight of Allah Almighty?"
Qatadah said: "If a servant makes show (of deeds), Allah Almighty says:
"Look! My servant makes fun of Me." According to Malik Ibn Dinar: "Reciters
(of the Qur'an) are of three kinds: Reciters of (Allah) Most Gracious, reciters of
this world, and reciters of kings; and Muhammad Ibn Wasi' belongs to the
reciters of (Allah) Most Gracious." According to Al-Fadl: "Whoever likes to see a
maker of show (of deeds), let him look at me." According to Muhammad Ibn AlMubarak: "Show righteousness at night, for it is more honourable than to show it
by day, for your righteousness by day is for the sake of people, whereas it is at
night for the Sake of the Lord of the worlds." According to Sulaiman: "To ward
off (the evil effects of showing off resulting from) a deed is more difficult than to

The quarter of the destructives
486
do the deed itself." According to Ibn Al-Mubarak: "It was the habit of one of
people to circumambulate the House while he was in Khurasan." It was said to
him: "How is that?" he said: "He liked that no mention should be made of his
being close to the house in Mecca." According to Ibrahim Ibn Adham: "Not true
to Allah is he who likes to be renowned."

CHAPTER TWO
EXPOSmON OF REAL NATURE OF SHOWING OFF
It should be known that the (Arabic) word 'Iliya'" (showing off) is derived
from Ru'yah (vision), i.e. to make show of a thing to be seen of men; and
Sum'ah is derived from Samma'a (to cause to hear), i.e. to do a thing in order
to be heard of men. Showing off is to seek position in the hearts of people, by
showing to them the good characteristics. Majesty and position in the hearts
of others are sought by acts of worship as well as by deeds other than
worship. But showing off is usually restricted to seeking position and majesty
through acts of worship. The definition of showing off then is to intend
people by doing deeds of worship. Thus, the (false) worshipper represents the
maker of show (of deeds), the people are those in whose hearts he seeks with
his worship, and the characteristics and deeds he does to achieve that purpose
are the objects of showing off.
The objects of showing off are divided into five divisions, with which one
adorns by way of affectation: body, clothes, speech, deed and followers and
concrete things. The world-seekers make show of those things. But it is less
punishable to seek majesty and make show of deeds different from worship than
to make show of the acts of worship.
The first division which is to make show in religion of the body. It is to
show leanness and paleness to give the false impression of excessive diligence
trouble and grief for religion, and giving preference to the hereafter over this
world. By leanness, one intends to indicate to the scarcity of food, and by
paleness to insomnia, diligence and sadness. Such a person also makes show of
disheveled hair to give the false impression of wholehearted devotion to
worship and religion. Once those things appear to the people, they know that
this man is righteous, because of which he gets comforted. In order to achieve
such comfort, his soul summons him to show those showy things. A mention
may be made also of lowered voice, sunken eyes, and withered lips, in order to
indicate to his regularity on fasting, religious reverence, and hunger. In
connection with that, the Messiah “peace be upon him” said: "If anyone of you
fasts, let him oil his hair, comb his head and apply kohl to his eyes." The same
is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah “AJlah be pleased with him”. This
is due to the fear of Satan's evil suggestion to him of showing off. For this
reason, Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him” said: "If morning comes upon
you as fasting, oil your hair."
This is how those of religiosity make show of the religious deeds. In contrast
to them are the world-seekers, who make show of fatness, brightness, medium
size, smartness and prettiness, cleanness of body, strength and proportion of
muscles, etc.

487
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off
The second is to make show of appearance and clothes. As for appearance,
it is to dishevel the hair of the head, shave mustaches, lower the head in walking,
be quiet in movement, keep the trace of prostration on the forehead, put on
coarse and rough clothes in general, and the woolen garments among them in
particular, shorten the lower garment to half the leg, shorten the sleeves, give up
cleaning the clothes, and leave it torn. He make show of all of that to
demonstrate that he follows the sunnah, and imitates the righteous servants of
Allah Almighty. There are many other aspects of that.
The point here is that those makers of show (of clothes) are of different
classes: some of them seek the position among the righteous men, by
demonstrating asceticism. That is, to put on torn dirt coarse rough clothes, with
the intention to show that he is careless about this world and its good things.
Were he to be asked to put on a moderate clean garment as the righteous
predecessors used to do, it would be as harmful to him as slaying, for fear that
the people would say that he had given up asceticism, and turned away from
austerity, and rather desired for the good things of this world. Another class seek
acceptability not only among the righteous people, but also among kings and
dignitaries and those who have the power of authority. If they put on expensive
graceful clothes, they would be rejected by the reciters, and if they put on tom
coarse clothes, they would be despised by the dignitaries and celebrities. That is
because they seek to be acceptable to the world-seekers and men of religion. For
this reason, they put on clothes that might please both parties. Were they to be
required to wear coarse and rough wool, it would be as harmful to them as
slaying, for fear of being scorned by kings and rich, and were they to be asked to
wear expensive and graceful clothes, it would be grievous upon them, for fear of
being accused by men of righteousness of turning to the clothes of the worldseekers. The members of each class see their position in a particular kind of
uniform, and disdain to change it, regardless of being more or less expensive than
theirs, and of being permissible, for fear of being an object of blame.
The world-seekers make show of expensive clothes, fine garments, graceful
vehicles, extensive adornment of residence and furniture, and the like of that
This is evident to the people. Although they put on coarse rough clothes in their
houses, it is difficult upon them to meet the people with them, and rather prefer
to be excessive in adornment.
The third is to make show of speech. The men of religion make show of
preaching, reminding (of the hereafter), speaking with wisdom, retaining stories
and news (about the righteous) to use in argumentation and debate,
demonstrate much knowledge, and show care about the states and affairs of the
righteous predecessors. It is also to move lips with celebration (of Allah) in the
presence of people, enjoin right and forbid evil at the sight and hearing of
people, show anger for evildoings, show regret for people's committing sins,
weakening voice in speech, making it smooth during recitation of the Qur'an, to
indicate to fear, grief, sadness, submission, and humility, claim to memorize
Prophetic traditions and narrations, meet grand sheikhs and imams, criticize
narrators of Hadith by pointing out his linguistic errors, in order to show how

i

.

i

i

t!
!

The quarter of the destructives
488
acquainted he is with the Prophetic narrations, to hasten to debate and engage
in argumentation with the intention to silence his opponents, in order to show
to the people his religious knowledge. However, the kinds of affectation with
speech are countless.
As for the world-seekers, they make show of retaining poetry and ostentation
of eloquent speech, quoting strange and rare cases of grammar to highlight their
superiority and excellence over others, and showing affection to the people to
attract their hearts.
The fourth is to make show of deed, like the one who makes show in prayer
of long standing, protracting back, long bowing and prostration, lowering head,
leaving turning sideways, showing quietness and tranquility, and straightening
both feet and hands. He also resorts to observing much fasts, giving much in
charity, serving others with food, performing Hajj and Umrah, sticking to
reverence and quietness and lowering head in walking to the extent that a maker
of show might walk hastily to fulfill his need until when he makes sense to
somebody looking at him, he soon returns to slowness and quietness, and
lowering head, for fear he might be ascribed to hastiness, and once the man
disappears, he soon returns to hastiness. Moreover, he does not remember Allah
by way of renewing submission in so much as in response to his fear of a man
seeing him, who might think he is not righteous. Some of them feel shy of having
their privacy contradict their public, thinking that by so doing, they would get rid
of showing off. But how far! Since they do so for fear of people and not for the
Sake of Allah Almighty, their showing off is multiplied.
The world-seekers make show of deed by strutting and moving both hands
while walking, narrowing paces, taking up the garment's tail, and moving
shoulders, in indication to majesty and respect.
The fifth is to make show of the increasing number of companions,
visitors and those with whom he mixes. Such a person forces himself to have
the learnt, celebrities and righteous men and worshippers visit him, in order to
be said that so and so seeks blessing by visiting him, or so and so frequents
him so much, or to have kings or rulers come to his house, in order to be said
that such and such a king or governor seeks blessing by him in view of his
high rank in religion. Some of those also remember so often many sheikhs
and righteous people, in order to boast of having a lot of them among his
acquaintances.
Those are the things of which the hypocrites make show, seeking therewith
position and majesty in the hearts of people. Some of them are satisfied with
getting people have good assumption of his good manners and religion. How
many a monk who kept himself in his church for many years, and how many a
worshipper who got isolated to the top of a mountain for a long time! What
makes such do so is just his knowledge that by doing so, he would receive high
position and great rank in the hearts of the people. Were he to know that the
people have ascribed him to a sin or crime in religion, from which he is guiltless,
he would be confused and troubled, and would not be satisfied with the
knowledge of Allah Almighty about his innocence: on the contrary, he would

489
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offgrieve so much, and endeavor, as much as he could, to remove that evil
assumption from the people's hearts, given that he does not covet of their wealth.
But he does so for he loves majesty which is pleasant in itself as we have already
mentioned in the previous part of this book.
Some makers of show are not satisfied with having a high position in the
hearts of people: but he endeavors to have tongues unleashed to speak fluently
about him with praise and acclamation. Some of them seek fame along the
country, in order that a lot of people would frequent him. Some of them seek to
be renowned in the sight of kings, in order that his intercession would be
accepted, and his needs fulfilled quickly. Others seek to gather wealth and gain
property from the endowments and the wealth of the orphans, all of which is
unlawful. Those represent the worst class of makers of show.
But you may ask about whether showing off is unlawful, undesirable or
permissible, or is subject to details. In reply to that, let me say that it is subject to
details which go as follows: showing off is to seek majesty, whether through acts
of worship or other deeds. If it is sought through acts other than those of
worship, then, it is like seeking wealth, and thus it is not unlawful as being to seek
majesty and position in the hearts of people. But as well as wealth might be
earned by forbidden means, the same is true of majesty, and as well as earning
little wealth which provides for one's necessary needs is praiseworthy, to get a
little majesty in the hearts of people therewith to ward off evils is praiseworthy. It
is that sought by Yusuf “peace be upon him” when he said: "Set me over the
store-houses of the land: I will indeed guard them, as one that knows (their
importance)." (Yusuf 55)

4

<jJ

^^

As well as wealth contains fatal poison and beneficial medicine, the same is
true of majesty. As well as much wealth diverts one from the remembrance of
Allah Almighty, and the hereafter, the same is true of majesty, if not more, for the
temptation caused by majesty is more grievous than that caused by wealth. If we
say that to have possession of much wealth is unlawful, we do not say that to
have possession of much hearts is unlawful, unless wealth and majesty lead one
to do what is impermissible. It is true that to divert one's attention to the
extensive majesty and wealth is the beginning of evil, for the lover for both
wealth and majesty could not give up the sins of heart and tongue. But to receive
majesty without seeking to get it nor becoming aggrieved for its removal is
harmless. None has ever had majesty and position greater than that of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” and the rightlyguided caliphs after him, but to divert one's attention to seek majesty and
position is deficiency in religion, but not unlawful.
Based on that, let's say that to make good man's dress whenever he comes out
to the people belongs to making show (of deeds), but is not unlawful, because it
is not showing off through acts of worship but through the worldly deeds.
Compare to it then all adornments therewith one beautifies himself. This is
confirmed by the narration of A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her” that once, the
Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” intended to come

.

The quarter of the destructives
490
out to meet his companions, and he started to look at the spring of water and
straighten his hair and turban, thereupon she asked him: "Do you do so O
Messenger of Allah?" he said: "Yes. Indeed, Allah likes that a servant should get
adorned for his brothers when he comes out to meet them." (This narration is
reported by Ibn Adi).
This is out of worship from the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” for he was commanded to invite the people and attract their
hearts to follow the new religion, and it was incumbent upon him to seem
honorably smart in their sights, and were he to fall from their eyes, they would
have no desire to follow him. So, it was due upon him to seem to them in his
best states lest the eyes of the laymen would despise him, for indeed, the laymen's
eyes always stretch to see the outward other than the inward aspects. This was the
real purpose of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him”. But if one intends to seem smart in the eyes of people, for fear of their
criticism and blame, and in order to receive respect and honour in their hearts, it
would not be unlawful, for man has the right to relieve himself of the pain of
blame and criticism, and seek the company of his brothers and friends, and if
they get bored of and detest him, they would not become companionable to him.
This is why to make show (of deeds) through acts other than those of
worship might be either permissible, or dutiful or undesirable, according to the
different purposes intended. For this reason, we say that if a man spends his
wealth on a group of the rich not by way of worship or charity, but in order to
get him think he is generous, he is a maker of show (of deeds), but his conduct
is not unlawful.
But if one makes show of deeds of worship, like prayer, fasting, almsgiving,
performing Hajj and Umrah, and fighting, the perpetrator has two cases:
the first is that his purpose is only showing off, giving no importance to the
reward. This conduct then invalidates his worship, for the reward of deeds
ultimately depends upon the intention one has when he does it. it is also sinful
and by doing it he becomes disobedient, as confirmed by a lot of Qur'anic Verses
and Prophetic narrations.
It has two implications: the first pertains to the worshippers, which is
dissembling and cunning, for by making show of acts of worship, he gives
people the false impression that he is sincere and obedient to Allah Almighty,
although he is really not so. However, dissembling in the worldly matters is
unlawful. If one, for instance, fulfills the debt of another just to give the people
the false impression of being generous and openhanded, he is sinful, for he has
got possession of the hearts of people by way of deception and cunning.
The second pertains to Allah Almighty, for by doing the acts of worship to
make show, he ridicules Allah Almighty. Qatadah "may Allah have mercy upon
him" said: "When a man makes show (of acts of worship), Allah Almighty says
to His angels: "Look at that man how he ridicules Me!"" a typical example is to
stand in front of a king along the day. His intention is not to be in service of
the king in so much as to be able to watch a king's particular slave-girl. By so
doing, he ridicules that king, for his intention is not to serve him, but to watch

491
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offone of his slaves.
Which contempt is greater than that with which one regards Allah Almighty
when he intends by obeying Him to make show of his deeds to one of His
servants, too powerless to benefit or even harm him? Is it but because he thinks
(though falsely) that this servant has more power to fulfill his needs than Allah,
and that he is worthier of nearness and closeness than Allah Almighty? Which
ridicule is more than to raise a servant above the master? To be sure, this is
among the major destructive sins. This is why the Messenger of Allah “Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him” named it the minor polytheism (according to
the narration of Ahmad on the authority of Mahmud Ibn Labid; and AtTabarani on the authority of Rafi' Ibn Khadij).
But this does not mean that some kinds of showing off are more severe and
grievous than others, as we shall see later in the levels of showing off, Allah
willing. But in general, showing off in entirety with its all levels is sinful. If one
does not but fall in prostradon and bow (in prayer) in order to make show (of
deeds) to anyone other than Allah Almighty, it is sufficient for sin. That is
because by so doing, one intends to come close to anyone other than Allah
Almighty; and this is evident polytheism. But showing off belongs to the
concealed polytheism, for the maker of show makes much of people in his
heart, which requires him to bow and prostrate, in order to show his deeds to
them rather than to do so with sincerity to Allah Almighty. The exalted is the
people and not Allah Almighty. Once a person intends to exalt the people by
his prostration rather than to exalt Allah Almighty, he has become at the
threshold of polytheism.
But since he intends to exalt himself in the heart of him to whom he make
show of deeds, in order that the latter would exalt him as a result of his seeming
to exalt Allah Almighty, it is then a concealed and not evident polytheism. It
results from ignorance, and none commits it but him who is deceived by Satan,
who gives him the false impression that the servants have the power to benefit or
harm him, and to dispose of his interests, sustenance, death, etc. this is why he
turns his face from Adlah Almighty to them, and seeks to attract their hearts to
them. If Allah Almighty entrusts to them to dispose of his matters and affairs in
this world and the hereafter, it would be the least punishment for him to receive
for his evil deed. All servants are too powerless to benefit or harm themselves:
how could they then benefit or harm others than them? If it is the case in this
world, how would it be on a day on which no parent would save his child in the
least, nor would a child save his parent? How should an ignorant exchange the
reward of the hereafter and closeness to Allah Almighty for the false covet of
people in this world? We should have no doubt that the maker of show of deeds
of worship displeases Allah Almighty.
The second case is that in which one intends both reward of Allah and
praise of people. This is the polytheism that contradicts sincerity. We have
mentioned its ruling in the Book of Sincerity. This is confirmed by the statement
of both Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab and Ubadah Ibn As-Samit “Allah be pleased with
him”, that he receives no reward for that.

492

The quarter of the destructives

CHAPTER THREE
EXPOSmON OF LEVELS OF SHOWING OFF
It should be known that some kinds of showing off are more grievous and
severe than others, and it differs by the difference of its pillars. It has three pillars:
the object of showing off, that for which one makes show of deeds, and the
purpose of showing off.

The First Pillar: The Purpose Of Showing Off
i

}

Showing off might be intended solely without the worship of Allah
Almighty or the reward, or it might be intended in the company of the worship
of Allah and the reward. In the second case, the purpose of reward might be
stronger, weaker, or equal to the purpose of worship. This results in four levels
of showing off.
The first level which is the most grievous pertains to the absence of the
intention of reward, like him who prays among the people, and were he to be
alone, he would not pray at all. Moreover, he might pray among the people even
without performing ablution. That is because his real purpose is only showing
off. This is hateful in the Sight of Allah Almighty. The same is true of him who
gives out charity for fear of the blame and criticism of people, and not in
expectation for reward, and were he to be alone, he would not give it out at all.
This is the highest level of showing off.
The second is to have besides showing off the purpose of getting reward.
But this purpose is weak to the extent that were he to be in privacy, he should
not have it, nor would it lead him to act upon it. were the purpose of getting
reward to be absent, the purpose of showing off alone would lead him to act
upon it. this is close to the previous level. Such a person is hateful and sinful.
The third is to have both purposes of reward and showing off equally, in a
way that were each of them to be alone, it would not lead him to act upon it; and
when both gather together, they prompt him to act. This person has his
righteousness corrupted by his evils; and we hope that he be safe with neither
benefit nor loss. But the apparent stories indicate that such a person is not safe.
We have discussed this case in the Book of Sincerity.
The fourth pertains to him who is prompted to act by the knowledge of
people about his affair. But in the absence of that knowledge, he would not give
up worship. Were his purpose to be only showing off, he would not have done
it. we think, and Allah Almighty knows best, that his reward would not be
fruitless, but it would be reduced, or he would be punished as much as is in
proportion to the extent to which his purpose is showing off, and rewarded as
much as is in proportion to the extent to which his purpose is to get reward. As
for the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” that Allah Almighty says: "I'm the most independent of ascribing
partners to Me (in worship)", it is understood to refer to the case in which both
purposes are equal, or the case in which the purpose of showing off is
preponderant.

493

Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off--------------

The Second Pillar: The Object Of Showing Off
It pertains to the acts of worship. It is divided into making show of the
fundamentals of worship, and making show of the features of worship.
The first division: making show of the fundamentals of worship; and it is
more often. It is of three degrees:
The first is to make show of the foundation of faith, and this is the most
grievous kind of showing off, and its perpetrator abides in the fire of Hell
forever. It refers to the person who utters the words of testimony with his
tongue, to which he gives lie within himself. He indeed makes show of the
outward acts of Islam. Allah Almighty describes such a person in many Quranic
Verses. He says: " When the Hypocrites come to you, they say, "We bear witness
that you are indeed the Messenger of Allah." Yea, Allah knows that you are
indeed His Messenger, and Allah bears witness that the Hypocrites are indeed
liars." (Al-Munafiqun 1)
o!

vilil pJji-; aJJIj 4l)l

Jill

<JLXj\

151»

I.e. that their saying contradicts what is lurking in their conscience. He
Almighty further says: " There is the type of man whose speech about this
world's life may dazzle you, and he calls Allah to witness about what is in his
heart; yet is he the most contendous of enemies. When he turns his back, his aim
everywhere is to spread mischief through the earth and destroy crops and catde.
But Allah loves not mischief." (Al-Baqarah 204-205)
13J3

<-*4* <4 ^ 'J*

4

j

"5 <J)Tj J-UTj

^

^3 ^

<4 <]/— 'Jy

He also says: "when they meet you, they say, "We believe": but when they
are alone, they bite off the very tips of their fingers at you in their rage." (A1
Imran 119)
^ {£jpj ’^QxJu iyiy Ifi
\1\13
fSj*j 15J3 ^
He says too: "The Hypocrites, they think they are over-reaching Allah but
He will over-reach them: when they stand up to prayer, they stand without
earnestness, to be seen of men, but little do they hold Allah in remembrance;
(They are) distracted in mind even in the midst of it, being (sincerely) for
neither one group nor for another. Whom Allah leaves straying, never wilt
you find for him the Way." (An-Nisa 142-143)
j-ilh bjfiji
JpJ ^3

33ISJ1 jj I>151513 ]4*ju£- >3 ^
JJ % fV}Li JJ ^ du/a ^

4 0 Sl^.1 .Jj

o\ >
^J

^3

Ji !S)T

There many other Holy Verses in this issue.
Showing off was widespread in the early days of Islam as a lot of people
embraced Islam outwardly, in order to achieve certain purposes. But this kind of

The quarter of the destructives
494
showing off has dwindled during our time, and given room for another kind
according to which hypocrites withdraw inwardly from the religion, as shown
from their denial of the Garden and die fire and the abode of the hereafter, in
inclination to the statement of atheists, or from rejection of some religious laws
and judgements in inclination to the freethinkers, or from a disbelief or religious
innovation they believe in, whilst otherwise showing, etc. those are among the
hypocrites and makers of show who will abide forever in the fire of Hell. There is
no kind of showing off beyond that. They are more grievous than the disbelievers
who announce their disbelief publicly, for they combine both the inward disbelief
and outward hypocrisy.
The second degree is to make show of the fundamentals of worship, but
with reservation of the foundation of faith. Although this is odious in the Sight
of Allah Almighty, it is less grievous than the former. The example is him is like a
man whose wealth is in the hand of another, whom he orders to give out charity,
just for fear of his blame and criticism; and Allah Almighty knows well that were
his property to be in his hand, he would not give out charity. It is also like a man
who is in a gathering, and when the prayer is due, he prays with them, although
were he to be alone, he would not pray at all. It is like a man who fasts Ramadan
as long as he is in the company of people, with the desire for being in privacy to
break fast. It is also like him who attends Friday prayer in the mosque just for
fear of people's blame and criticism, and but for that, he would not attend. It is
like him who keeps good relations with his kith and kin, or is dutiful to his
parents, just for fear of the people, or fights or performs Hajj, not for the sake of
fulfilling the respective obligation.
Such a person makes show of deeds of worship, although he has the
foundation of belief that there is no god but Allah Almighty, Who Alone is
worthy of worship. Were he to be required to worship or fall in prostration to
anyone else other than Allah Almighty, he would not do. But he leaves the acts of
worship because of laziness when he is in privacy, and when he learns that the
people should know about him, he becomes active in doing the acts of worship.
That is because his position in the sight of the people is dearer to him than his
position in the Sight of the Creator, his fear of the people's blame and criticism
greater to him than his fear of the punishment of Allah Almighty, and his desire
for the people's praise stronger than his desire for the reward of Allah Almighty.
This is the utmost degree of ignorance. Such a person is worthy of being hateful
in the Sight of Allah, although he does not turn from the foundation of faith in
terms of belief.
The third degree is to make show not of the foundation of faith nor of the
obligatory duties, but of optional and supererogatory acts of worship, which, if he
leaves, he would not be sinful. But at the same time, were he to be alone, he
would not do them, in view of his weak desire for their reward, and giving
preference to the pleasure of laziness over the expected reward. But he is
motivated to do them by showing off. It is like attending prayers in congregation,
visiting patient to inquire about his health, following fiineral procession, taking
part in washing the dead body of men, offering Tahajjud prayer at night, fasting

495
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offthe day of Arafah, Ashura' (the tenth day of Muharram), and every Monday and
Thursday. A maker of show might do so for fear of blame, or seeking praise,
although Allah Almighty knows well that were he to be alone, he would not add
anything to the obligatory duties.
Although this is odious in the Sight of Allah, it is less grievous than the
former. In the former case, a maker of show prefers the people's praise to the
Creator's appreciation, and wards off the people's blame more than the Creator's
blame, regarding the people's blame greater in his sight than the punishment of
the Creator. But in this case, the maker of show does not do so, for he does not
fear punishment for leaving a supererogatory deed if he leaves it. He seems to
receive half the punishment of the maker of show in the former case. This is the
showing off with the fundamentals of worship.
The second division is to make show of the features of the acts of worship;
and it is of three degrees:
The first degree is to make show of an act which, being left, leads to
deficiency in worship, like him who likes to lighten bowing and prostration, and
shorten standing and recitation, and when the people see him, he makes perfect
bowing and prostration, leaves turning sideways, and completes sitting in
between both prostrations. According to Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with
him”: "Whoever does so regards with slightness his Lord Almighty." That is
because he does not care about Allah's seeing him in privacy, whereas when
somebody sees him, he hastens to make perfect his prayer. The same is true of
him who is used to give out charity from among the bad coins or grains, anc
when the people see him, he gives it out from the good coins and grain for fea
of their blame. Similarly, when such a person fasts, he abstains from backbiting
and obscenity not to make perfect his worship but for fear of the blame of the
people. This belongs to the forbidden showing off, for by it one gives precedence
to the creation over the Creator. But at the same time, it is less grievous than to
make show of the supererogatory acts of worship.
If a maker of show argues that he does so to keep their tongues from
backbiting, for if the people see how he lightens bowing and prostration,
shortens standing and recitation, they unleash their tongues to speak fluently with
blame and criticism. In reply to him, you could say that this is an intrigue made
by Satan to dissemble you. The harm you receive from the deficiency of your
prayer which is a service to your Lord is more grievous than the harm you receive
from the people's backbiting you. If it is religion that lies behind your conduct,
you then would have more sympathy for yourself.
There are two cases for the maker of show in that respect: in the first case, he
seeks position and praise of the people; and this is evidently forbidden. In the
second case, he says: "I do not have the intention to be sincere to make perfect
bowing and prostration. But at the same time, if I lighten that, my prayer would
seem defective in the people's sight, and they would turn to backbite and blame
me. So, to avert their blame and backbiting, let me make perfect my bowing and
prostration in prayer, and although I expect no reward for that, it is better than to
leave it entirely, with the result that I would loose reward and receive the blame."

The quarter of the destructives
496
This is suspicious. The right opinion is that it is binding upon him to be sincere
in his worship, by making perfect his bowing and prostration in prayer. But if he
does not have the intention to do so, he should continue to stick to his habit in
privacy. It is not fitting for him to avert the people's blame by making show of
deeds of worship, for by so doing, he mocks at Allah Almighty.
The second degree is to make show of a deed leaving which does not
lead to deficiency in religion, and doing it is complementary to his worship,
like prolonging bowing and prostration, standing, improving appearance,
raising both hands, hastening to the first Takbir, reciting more than the usual
Surahs, sitting in seclusion so much during the fasting of Ramadan, adhering
to long silence, selecting the best of property for almsgiving, choosing the
most expensive slaves to emancipate for expiations, etc. if he is in privacy, he
would not do any of those things, of which he makes show in the presence of
people to be seen of men.
The third degree is to make show of deeds that are extra what is
supererogatory, like hastening to attend the mosque to offer prayer in
congregation before all the people, aiming at the first row, choosing the right side
of the imam, and the like of those acts. Allah knows that were he to be in privacy,
he would not hasten to do any of those at all.
Those are the degrees of showing off as regards its object. Some of them are
more grievous than others, and all are blameworthy.

The Third Pillar: That For Which One Makes Show (Of Deeds)
Of a surety, showing off should have a goal one seeks to achieve, like
obtaining property or majesty, or any of the worldly purposes. It has three
degrees:
The first which is the most grievous is to seek to do a sin, like him who
makes show of his acts of worship, demonstrates his piety and abstention from
eating what is unlawful or suspicious, and does much supererogatory deeds, and
his purpose is to be recognized for his honesty and righteousness perchance he
would be appointed in charge of judges or endowments or the property of the
orphans which he illegally usurps, or the wealth collected from almsgiving to
distribute among the people, from which he takes as much as he could, etc. one
of them might seem in the dress of Sufism, speak with wisdom and behave with
piety and submission, with the intention to attract a woman or a boy to commit
lewdness with them. Some of them might attend the gatherings of knowledge and
hear preachings and teachings and recitation of the Qur'an, and their purpose is
to watch women and good-looking boys, or set out on journey to perform Hajj,
with the intention to gain the company of a woman or a good boy from the
caravan, etc. those are the most hateful makers of show in the Sight of Allah
Almighty, for they take His obedience as a stairway to disobey Him.
Close to those, though less grievous, is a man who commits a crime and
insists on refuting the claim from himself, and confirms his insistence by showing
piety, like him who denies a particular deposit, and the people claim that it is with
him, thereupon he gives out in charity from his property, in order to be said that
since he gives out in charity from his own wealth, how should he make lawful the

Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off

497

property of anyone else? The same is true of him who is ascribed to committing
fornication with a woman or a boy, thereupon he averts the claim from himself
by showing piety and submission.
The second is that his purpose is to obtain a worldly permissible fortune, like
gaining wealth or marrying a good-looking or noble woman,, etc. a mention may
be made of him who pretends to be sad and weep so much and engages in
preaching and teaching, in order that much wealth would be brought to him, and
women would have desire to get married to him. One also might have a desire to
marry the daughter of a learnt or worshipper, to whom he shows to be
knowledgeable and righteous worshipper, so that he would give him his daughter
in marriage. This showing off is forbidden, for by obedience of Allah, one seeks
worldly fortunes. But at the same time, it is less grievous than the former, for
what is sought here is permissible in itself.
The third is that he does not seek to have any of the worldly portions such as
wealth or marriage, but he shows that he is a good worshipper for fear of being
accused of indulgence or negligence in worship, or ascribed to the laymen and
not to the ascetics or righteous worshippers. A mention may be made of him
who walks hastily, and when he makes sense to somebody looking at him, he
soon slows down his pace and improves his walk; or him, who hastens to laugh
or joke at something, and, fearing of being despised by others, hastens to pray for
forgiveness and show grief saying: "How heedless man is of himself! " Allah
knows well that were he to be in privacy, surely, he would not disdain his
conduct.
The same is true of him who sees a group praying Tarawih, Tahajjud, fasting
every Monday and Thursday, or giving in charity, thereupon he does the same as
their doing for fear he might be joined with laymen, although were he to be
alone, he would not do any of that; or he who becomes thirsty on the day of
Arafah or during the Sacred months, and rejects to drink to quench his thirst, for
fear that people would know that he is not fasting, or him who is invited to food,
and rejects in order to confirm that he is fasting. He might not state that he is
fasting, but he would rather say: "I have a legal excuse." By so doing, he
combines two cunning things: at first, he shows that he is fasting and sincere to
his worship, and that he does not make show of his deeds of worship, since he
avoids to make a mention of his worship to the people thereby he would be a
maker of show of deeds of worship, with the result that people would say that he
screens his worship. On the other hand, if he is forced to drink, he could not
help justifying his conduct, by showing sickness or ailment, for which he is given
to severe thirst, or claiming that he breaks his fast in order to please so and so,
who likes his brothers, and always invites them to share food with him, or to
please his mother who is weak-hearted, and shows sympathy for him and does
not let him fast for fear of him. All of this belongs to the evils of showing off.
In contrast with him is the sincere to his worship, who does not care how
people look at him. If he has no desire for fasting, and Allah Almighty knows
that from him, he will not give others a false impression of something
different about him; and if he has desire for fasting, he will be satisfied with

The quarter of the destructives
498
the knowledge of Allah about him, and will not let anyone share that
knowledge with Him. It might occur to his mind that by showing it, he
prompts others to imitate him. But even, this is among the intrigues devised
by Satan, as will be explained later.
Those are the different levels and degrees of showing off, and the classes
of makers of show, and all are hateful in the Sight of Allah Almighty, Who is
angry with them all. It is among the most destructive sins, for it has many
stains as hidden as the creeping of ants, according to many narrations and
traditions, in which the greatest religious scholars slip, let alone the
worshippers who are ignorant of the self evils and heart diseases; and Allah
knows best.

CHAPTER FOUR
EXPOSITION OF CONCEALED SHOWING OFF THAT IS MORE HIDDEN
THAN CREEPING OF ANTS
It should be known that showing off is divided into what is clear and what is
hidden. The clear showing off is that which leads to doing a deed, even if his
purpose is the reward. More hidden a bit is that which does not lead direedy to
doing deeds, but rather lightens the deed therewith the Countenance of Allah is
intended. It is like him who offers Tahajjud prayer and finds it difficult upon him
every night, and when a guest visits him, he becomes more aedve to do it,
knowing that but for the expectation of reward, he would not pray only for the
sake of making show of deeds before the guest. More hidden is that which does
not affect the deed anyway, but at the same time, it is lurking in the heart.
Since it does not lead to any deed, it could be known only by its signs, the
clearest of which is one's pleasure with people's knowing the acts of worship he
does. How many a servant who is sincere to his worship, and does not like
showing off. But if the people happen to know about his worship, he would
become pleased with that. However, this pleasure indicates to his hidden showing
off that produces delight. Were his heart not to care about the people, surely, he
would not be pleased with their knowing about his worship. That is because
showing off is potential in the heart in the same way as fire is potential in the
stone, and it is the people's knowledge about his worship that extracts pleasure
and delight, i.e. its characteristic signs. Once he feels the pleasure of delight, and
does not counteract it with aversion for it, it turns to be sustenance for the
hidden vein of showing off that is lurking within himself. One of its results is that
it leads him, though stealthily, to make show of a thing that causes the people to
know about him, like showing his leanness, paleness, dry lips, low tone of speech,
traces of tears, etc.
More hidden than that is his concealment from the sight of people, so that
they would know nothing about his worship, nor he would be pleased to make
show of his acts of worship. But at the same time, once he sees the people, he
likes that they should take the initiative to salute him, receive him with joy and
reverence, praise him and make a good mention of him, be active to fulfill his
needs, be lenient with him in transaction, and leave space for him to sit in the
gathering. If their behaviours towards him fall short of his expectations, he would

499
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off----------------grieve and feel estrangement. By so doing, he seems as if he expects reverence
and veneration in reward for his acts of worship of which he does not make
show to the people. Were he not to do those acts of worship in advance, he
would not feel such estrangement because their behaviours towards him are less
than his expectations from them. Were it not to be the same to him whether or
not the people know about his acts of worship, he then would not be satisfied
with the knowledge of Allah about him, nor would he be free from a hidden stain
of showing off, more hidden than creeping of ants. All of that is about to make
fruitless the reward, from which none but the sincere affirmers and lovers of
truth could be safe.
In this respect, it is narrated on the authority of Ali “Allah be pleased with
him” that he said: Allah Almighty will say to the reciters (of the Qur’an) on the
Day of Judgement: "Were prices not made cheap for you? Did the people not
take the inidative to greet you first? Were your needs not fulfilled for you? there
is no reward for you because you have taken in full your rewards (in the world)."
It is narrated by Abdullah Ibn Al-Mubarak on the authority of Wahb Ibn
Munabbih that an itinerant said to his companions: "Indeed, we have left
property and children for fear of transgression, and we feel afraid we have
become more transgressing in this matter of ours than the owners of wealth in
their property. That is because if anyone of us is received by a people, he likes to
be honoured by them because of his religious position, and if he asks for a need,
he likes to be fulfilled soon because of his religious position, and if he buys a
thing, he likes that price be made cheap because of his religious position." The
news of that reached their king, who rode and went to him in a great procession
of people, and behold! The land with its valley and mountain was crowded with
the people. The itinerant asked about that and it was said to him: "This is the king
and he has come to visit you." he asked his servant to bring food to him, and he
brought to him herbage, oil and tree bith. , the itinerant started to fill both
corners of his mouth and eat greedily. The king asked about the man and he was
pointed out to him. He asked him: "How are you?" he said: "Fine, like the
ordinary people." The king said: "This man has no good." He left him and went
away. On that the itinerant said: "Praise be to Allah Who has turned you from
me, while you are criticizing me."
As such the sincere to their worship continue to feel afraid of the concealed
showing off, and endeavor to hide their righteous work from the people, more
than a sinner endeavors to hide his shameful deeds. They do so in the hope that
their righteous deeds be sincerely for the Countenance of Allah Alone, and that
they shall receive reward from Allah on the Day of Judgement for their sincerity
before the people. That is because they learn that Allah will never accept on the
Day of Judgement but that which is done with sincerity, and that they will be in
dire need and destitution on that day on which neither property nor wealth would
be of benefit, nor would a parent be punished on behalf of his child, nor a child
on behalf of his parent, for each of them would be occupied by his own self.
The stains of hidden showing off then are countless. If one feels there is a
difference between a man’s knowing about his acts of worship and an animal s

The quarter of the destructives
500
knowing about that, then, he suffers a branch of showing off within himself. It is
of no interest to the sincere one that anyone should know about his worship,
regardless of his entity. Were he to be sincere to his worship, he would despise
the rational, let alone the foolish and mad among the servants, i.e. would not
mind whether or not they know about his acts of worship, putting in
consideration that none has the power to do anything for him, to benefit or harm
him, to provide him with or withhold sustenance from him, to change the time of
his death, to increase or decrease his reward, etc. but if he does not feel that,
then, he has a stain of showing off.
But not all stains of showing off make fruitless the reward, or corrupt the
deeds, since there is difference among them. You may argue that there is no one
but that he is hardly free from feeling pleasure if his acts of worship are known to
the people. Are all kinds of pleasure blameworthy, or blameworthy in part and
praiseworthy in part? In reply to that, let's say that not all kinds of pleasure are
blameworthy. They are praiseworthy in part and blameworthy in part. The
praiseworthy kinds of pleasure are of four divisions:
The first is that one intends to hide his acts of worship, and be sincere to
Allah Almighty. But when the people know about his worship, he comes to learn
that it is Allah Almighty Who has let them know about that, and demonstrated
the good of his states, therewith he verifies that Allah Almighty does good to
him, and looks at him with the eye of mercy, for he screens his sins and acts of
worship, and Allah Almighty screens his sins upon him and demonstrates his acts
of worship; and there is no kindness better than to screen the evil and
demonstrate the good. In this way, he is pleased with Allah's kindness and mercy
therewith He looks at him not with people's praise for him, and his position in
their hearts. In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty says: " Say: "In the Bounty
of Allah. And in His Mercy, in that let them rejoice": that is better than the
(wealth) they hoard." (Yunus 58)
^ (j|p) 0y-*^^***Jp- J* I

4&X

^

It seems to him that he is accepted in the Sight of Allah, therewith he is
pleased.
The second is that since Allah screens his sins and demonstrates his good
things in this world, he deduces that He Almighty would do the same in the
hereafter, as confirmed by the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him": "Allah never screens a sin upon a servant in
this world but that He would screen it upon him in the hereafter." (This narration
is reported by Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah). In the first case, one is
pleased with the present giving no attention to the future, and in the second case,
one is concerned with the future.
The third is that he thinks that those know about his worship with the
intention to imitate him, with the result that his reward would be multiplied for
their sake. In this way he receives a double reward: the reward of publicity (which
prompts them to imitate him), and the reward of secrecy for he does not intend
to make show of his acts of worship. It is well known that he would receive as
much reward as is the number of those who imitate him; and expectation for that

501
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offabundant reward alone is sufficient for his pleasure.
The fourth is that those who know about his worship praise him for his acts
of worship, thereupon he is pleased with their obedience to Allah as shown from
their praise of him, love for the obedient of Allah, and inclinadon to obedience of
Allah Almighty. This pleasure is with the good faith of the servants of Allah. The
sign of sincerity in that kind is that his pleasure with their praise of anyone else is
the same as his with their praise of him.
The fifth :But the blameworthy kind of pleasure is that one is pleased with
the position he has in the hearts of the people until they praise him, fulfill his
needs, and receive him with honour and respect. This is undesirable; and
Allah Almighty knows best.

CHAPTER FIVE
EXPOSITION OF THE EXTENT TO WHICH SHOWING
OFF FRUSTRATES WORK
Let's say that if one decides with sincerity to do an act of worship, and then
something of showing off occurs to him, it might occur to him either after or
before finishing from work. If it occurs after finishing from work, therewith he
becomes pleased, but without the intention to demonstrate it, then, it would not
frustrate his work, for the work in this case has been done and finished with
sincerity, and free from showing off. That is because he did not hope to make
show of it, nor did he talk to others about it, but it was demonstrated by Allah
Almighty, therewith he became pleased and got comforted.
This is unlike the case in which he decides to do a work with sincerity, and
after he finishes from it, it seems to him to demonstrate it and talk to others
about it: this is risky. But many narrations and traditions tell that it frustrates the
work. It is narrated that once Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him” heard a
man saying: "Yesterday, I have read the Surah of Al-Baqarah entirely." On that he
said: "This is only his fortune from it." (i.e. he receives no reward for it because
he made show of his recitation). It is narrated that a man said to the Messenger of
Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him”: "I have observed fasts
perpetually O Messenger of Allah." On that he said to him: "You have neither
observed fast (for you would receive no reward for it because you made show of
it), nor broken your fast (for you troubled yourself by abstention from food and
drink in vain)." (This narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Abu
Qatadah).
The statement of both Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him” and the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” might provide
evidence for the fact that such a person was not entirely free from showing
off when he decided to do the work, as confirmed by his talking about it
before the people. But it is more relevant to say that he would receive reward
for his deed, and be punished for making show of it after finishing form it.
but in case his heart changes into showing off during working, then, this
might make fruitless his deed.
But sometimes, the idea of showing off might occur during working a deed,
which he decides to do with sincerity. It might be only pleasure which does not

The quarter of the destructives
502
affect the work itself, or showing off which motivates him to work more. In this
last case, if he concludes the work with showing off, then, its reward would be
fruidess. Its example is like a man who, during his doing a supererogatory deed, a
king or a celebrity comes upon him, and he desires him to look at him while
doing die religious service; or like a man who, during his religious service,
remembers something of his wealth he has forgotten, and he likes to get it, and
were it not for fear of people's criticism, he would leave the service and go to his
wealth. In diis case, his reward would be fruidess, and if he is doing an obligatory
duty, it is binding upon him to repeat it. this is confirmed by the statement of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "The deed is like a
vessel (containing cooked food): if its last portion is ripe, then, its first portion
would be ripe too." (This narration is reported by Ibn Majah on the authority of
Mu'awiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan). It is further reported that "He, who makes show of
his deed for an hour, the reward of all the previous deeds become fruitless."
But if showing off occurs to him while he is working the deed in a way
that does not prevent him from completing it for the sake of reward, it then
belongs to the showing off that affects the work. Its example is like a man
who is in prayer and then a group of people come, and, on seeing them, he is
pleased with them and makes show of his deed in their presence, and
improves his prayer for their sake. But even if they did not come, he would
complete his prayer. If showing off prevails over the sense of the purpose of
reward, then, the deed would be fruitless. But it might probably be said that it
does not render fruitless the deed in view of the original decision of sincerity
in the beginning, and the survival of the purpose of reward, no matter how
weak it might turn to be.
Al-Muhasibi "may Allah have mercy upon him" is of the opinion that one's
deed is fruitless by even less than that. He said: "If one does not intend more
than pleasure with people's knowing about his deed, it is debatable: some argue
that it renders fruitless the deed, for by so doing, he contradicts the first decision,
and turns to rely on the praise of the people, and does not complete his work
with the sincerity, for indeed, what counts is the conclusion of work." Then, he
adds: "But as for me, I do not confirm that his work becomes fruitless if he is not
motivated to do more; but I do not feel safe for him. However, if he concludes
his work with showing off, it is close to my certainty that his work would be
fruitless."
But, it may be argued that Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him" said:
"Those are two cases: if there is no harm on him in the first, the second would
cause no harm to him." However, it is narrated that a man said to the Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "O Messenger of Allah! I do
my work in secrecy, and do not like to have anyone know about it, and then the
people know about it, with which I would become pleased." On that he said:
"You would have a double reward: the reward of secrecy, and the reward of
publicity." (This narration is reported by Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Ibn
Mas'ud; and At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban on the authority of Abu Hurairah). In
comment on the statement of Al-Hassan, he (Al-Muhasibi) said: "As for the first

503
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offcase in which there is no harm on him, it is that he does not leave the work; and
the second case, which cause no harm to him, it refers to the delight and pleasure
he receives (from being known to the people) as long as he intends the
Countenance of Allah Almighty. But he did not say that there was no harm on
him in case he decided to make show of the deed after he had decided to do it
with sincerity.
In regard to the Hadith of the Prophet, there are three possibilities: the first is
that he refers to the publicity of his work after finishing from it. the second is
that he refers to his pleasure with the others' imitating him, or to any kind of
praiseworthy pleasures we have already mentioned, and not the blameworthy
pleasure with praise of others, or his position he has in their hearts. This is
confirmed by the fact that he would receive reward for it. none among the nation
is of the opinion that there is reward for pleasure with praise. Then, how should a
sincere receive a single reward, and a maker of show a double reward? The third
is that the Hadith is ended up with Abu Hurairah and not with the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”.
In our sight, the right is to say that if this kind of pleasure does not affect
the work, which remains the same, i.e. is produced from the sincere intention,
then, it would not be fruitless. As regards the narrations about showing off,
they are construed to refer to the case in which one intends anything other
than Allah Almighty. What is related concerning partnership, is construed to
refer to the case in which the purpose of showing off and that of seeking
reward are equal. But the case in which the purpose of showing off is weaker
than that of seeking reward, the reward would not be entirely fruitless. We
have discussed that matter in the Book of Sincerity in more detail. So, you
might go to it.
The third division is that one starts his work with the intention of showing
off. There is no difference that if his intention remains as such until he finishes
from his work, then, his reward would be fruitless. But if he regrets during his
work, and repents and returns to sincerity before finishing from the work, then,
there are three probabilities: a party of people is of the opinion that he should
continue his work. Another party is of the opinion that he should repeat the acts
and deeds during which showing off occurs to him, for they are corrupt, but the
entire work would not be forbidden. The third party adopts the opinion that it is
not binding upon him to repeat anything: but it is sufficient for him to pray for
forgiveness with his heart, and complete his act of worship with sincerity, for
what counts, as we have said, is the conclusion of works. If one starts his work
with sincerity, and concludes it with showing off, surely, his work would be
corrupt. They likens that to a white garment which is contaminated with filth: if
the filth is removed form it, it will returns to its original case. They argue that
prayer, fro instance, with its bowing and prostration is for Allah Almighty, and if
one bows or prostrates for anything other than Allah Almighty, then, he will be a
disbeliever. But in this case, the incident of showing off is mixed with his deed
and then is removed by virtue of regret and repentance; and thus his prayer
would be valid.

The quarter of the destructives
The opinion of the last two parties is different from the religious
jurisprudence. The right is to say that if his intendon while assuming prayer is
showing off, then, his assuming prayer is invalid, and what follows up also is
invalid. Its example is like a man who, being alone, does not pray, and, on
seeing the people, assumes prayer. This prayer is void of intendon, for the
intendon is to respond to the modve of religion, and here there is no religious
motive. But if he is in a state in which he would pray even in the absence of
people, and on seeing them, he likes to be praised by them, then he would
combine two motives: if he is doing an act of worship, in which there is no
lawful nor unlawful, like recitation of the Qur'an, giving in charity, etc, he
disobeys when he responds to the motive of showing off, and obeys when he
responds to the religious motive: " Then shall anyone who has done an atom's
weight of good, see it!, And anyone who has done an atom's weight of evil, shall
see it." (Az-Zalzalah 7-8)
504

4

*5^ V3

cr*3 ^

He shall receive reward as much as is equal to his true intention, and
punishment as much as is equal to his wrong intention. But none of them
frustrates the other.
If he is in prayer, which might be corrupt by the corruption of the intention,
then, in case it is a supererogatory prayer, it has the same ruling of recitation of
the Qur'an and giving in charity, i.e. one disobeys from one point of view, and
obeys from another point of view, and then he receives reward as much as is
equal to his right purpose, and punishment as much as is equal to his wrong
purpose. But we could not say that his prayer is corrupt or that praying behind
him is invalid. Since one should have good assumption of a Muslim that he seeks
reward by his supererogatory prayer, then, it is rendered valid depending upon
that right purpose, and praying behind him is valid, even if his right purpose is
mixed with another purpose in which he is sinful.
If he is in obligatory prayer, in which he combines both motives equally
and inseparably, then, he should be considered to have not fulfilled the
obligation, for the motive of obligation alone did not prompt him to do it. but
in case both motives are independent, in the sense that in the absence of the
motive of showing off he would offer the obligatory prayer, and in the
absence of the obligation motive he would offer supererogatory prayer to
make show of his worship, then, the matter is debatable. It may probably be
argued that the obligation is to pray with sincerity to Allah Almighty, and by
so doing, he has not fulfilled the obligation, or that the obligation is to comply
with the command of prayer, and he has really done it, for the mixing of
another motive with it does not stand against fulfilling the obligation. For
example, if one prays in an illegally usurped house, although he will be sinful
by praying n a usurped house, at the same time, he will have obeyed by
fulfilling the obligation itself.
If showing off is mixed with the initiative to the prayer, and not with the
prayer itself, like him who, on seeing a group of people, hastens to offer the
prayer at the first portion of its due time, and but for them, he would delay

505
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off
the prayer to the middle portion of the time, and but for the obligatory duty,
he would not assume the prayer just for the sake of showing off, then, there is
no doubt that his prayer is valid, and he will have fulfilled the obligation due
upon him, for the modve of prayer itself is not contradicted by any motive
else, and in no way would the motive of choosing the time of prayer invalidate
his prayer. This is all to be said about showing off that motivates one to do a
work. But as for pleasure with people's knowing about one's deed of worship,
which not affects the performance of the deed itself, it is unlikely that it
corrupts the prayer.
We see that this is fitting for the law of jurisprudence. But even, the matter is
abstruse in the sense that the religious jurisprudents did not talk about it, and
even those who talked about it did not take heed of the laws of religious
jurisprudence and the fatwas of jurisprudents concerning the validity and
corruption of the prayer. Their eager to purify hearts and cleanse souls and seek
sincerity led them to render corrupt almost all the acts of worship, depending
only on passing thoughts. To be sure, the knowledge is with Allah Almighty,
Who knows the unseen and the visible, and He is the Most Gracious, the Most
Merciful.

CHAPTER SIX
EXPOSITION OF MEDICINE AND REMEDY OF SHOWING OFF
You have come to know that showing off frustrates deeds, and causes one to
be hateful in the Sight of Allah Almighty, as it is among the major destructives.
Being so, it is fitting for one to seriously undertake to remove it as much as he
could, through self-mortification and enduring all kinds of trouble and suffering.
No cure is expected but by drinking bitter and sore medicines. Almost all the
people are forced to that mortification. The child who is created as weak-minded
sees with his eyes how people deal with each other ostentatiously, with the result
that he turns to be ostentatious in his dealing with others. It is not before the
maturity of his mind that he feels that this is destructive, but unfortunately, after
showing off has become deep-rooted within himself, which he could not
suppress except by self-mortification and resistance of the power of desires and
lusts. This is why almost all the people are forced to undergo that mortification.
But it is very difficult at first and gradually, it turns to be easy. There are two
stations to remedy it: the first is to remove its roots and origins from which its
branches spring. The second is to avert what occurs of it immediately.

The First Station Is To Remove Its Roots And Origins
Its origin is to love majesty and position in the hearts of people. It
includes three principles: pleasure of praise, flight from pain of dispraise, and
covet of what is in the hands of people. In confirmation of the fact that those
are the causes of showing off, which motivates the maker of show to do so, it
is narrated on the authority of Abu Mussa “Allah be pleased with him” that he
said: a Bedouin asked The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him”: "O Messenger of Allah, one of us fights to display his courage";
i.e. he disdains to be overpowered or dispraised for his being defeated, "And a

The quarter of the destructives
506
man fights in order to see his position"; and this is the pleasure of seeking
majesty and appreciation, "and a man fights in order to be remembered (by
people)"; and this is the love for praise, "who amongst these fights in the way
of Allah?" The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: “Who fights that the word of Allah be exalted fights in the way of
Allah.” (This narration is reported by both sheikhs) in another version, the
Bedouin said:
According to Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him”: "When both rows
(of warriors) meet, the angels descend and enlist the fighters according to their
ranks: So and so fights to be remembered by others, so and so fights for the
sake of dominion; and of a surety, fighting for the sake of dominion is caused
by covet of this world." According to Umar “Allah be pleased with him”: "They
say that so and so is a martyr, and perhaps he might have filled what is between
the binders of his riding mount with silver." The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "He, who fights seeking for nothing but
a she-kid, will have only what he intends for." (This narration is reported by
An-Nasa'i).
But one might not have no covet of anything in this world, nor a desire for
being remembered by them: but he bewares of the pain of dispraise, like the
niggard among generous people who give abundance of wealth in charity, in
which case, he gives a litde in charity in order not to be dispraised by
niggardliness, although he does not covet of praise, since others have preceded
him, or the coward among brave people, who does not flee from the battlefield
in order not to be dispraised by cowardice, although he does not covet of any
praise, since others have preceded him to attack the enemies. If he despairs of
praise, he likes to flee from the pain of dispraise. It is also like a man among
some people who spend the whole night in prayer, in which case he prays a few
number of rak'ahs in order not to be dispraised by laziness, though he does not
covet of praise.
Although one might have the power to keep patient on loosing the pleasure
of praise, by no means could he keep patient on the pain of dispraise. For this
reason, he might refrain from asking about something of knowledge which he
needs, for fear of being dispraised by ignorance, or give fatwas without
knowledge, or pretend to have knowledge of Hadith of which he is really
ignorant. He does all of that in avoidance of dispraise.
Those three things motivate the maker of show to make show of deeds. Its
remedy has been mentioned in general in the first half of this book. But now, let's
mention the remedy of showing off in detail. There is no doubt that one likes a
thing and has a desire for having it thinking it to be good, pleasant and beneficial
for him whether immediately or in the future. If he knows that it is pleasant for
him immediately, and harmful to him in the future, it becomes easy upon him to
turn from it, like him who knows that the honey is delicious, but, learning that it
is poisoned, he turns away from it. similarly, the way to remedy this desire is to
know the harm that lies in a desired thing. Once a servant knows the harm that
lies in showing off, and how it corrupts his heart and soul, deprives him of

507
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offsuccess and guidance immediately, and of the good posidon in the Sight of Allah
Almighty in the hereafter, exposes him to grievous punishment, heinous wrath
and apparent humiliation when he will be called in front of all the people: "O
wicked! O betrayer! O maker of show! Had you not felt shy when you sold the
obedience of Allah Almighty for the fortunes of the world, observed the hearts
of the servants, ridiculed the obedience of Allah, sought to obtain the love of
people by displeasing Allah Almighty, get adorned to them by being shameful in
the Sight of Allah, come close to them by becoming far from the Presence of
Allah Almighty, seek to be praised by them by being dispraised by Allah
Almighty, and invoke their pleasure by putting yourself to the danger of the
displeasure of Allah Almighty? Was there not anyone more insignificant to you
than Allah?"
When one considers all of that , and compares what he receives from the
people in this world with what he will loose in the hereafter, and how the reward
of his deeds becomes fruitless, given that by the reward of a single deed to be
done with sincerity, the scale of good deeds might overweigh that of his evil
deeds, and if it is corrupt by showing off, it will move to the scale of his evil
deeds, causing it to overweigh the scale of his good deeds, leading him to the fire
of Hell, of a surety, he turns from showing off. If showing off has no harm but
to frustrate the reward of a single act of worship, it will be sufficient to know to
which extent it is harmful. And even in the case his good deeds overweigh his evil
ones, he knows that in the absence of showing off he would attain, by virtue of
that deed, the highest rank in the company of the Prophets, martyrs and sincere
afflrmers of truth. But it is showing off that would lower his rank. Let alone the
dispersion of his interests in pursuit of observing the hearts of people, for indeed
to please all the people is unattainable. Whoever seeks their pleasure for the
displeasure of Allah Almighty, of a surety, Allah becomes displeased with him,
and causes them to be displeased with him. Moreover, which thing would he gain
by praising them which exposes him to the dispraise of Allah Almighty? His
praising them would not avail him in the least in regard with sustenance or time
of death, nor would it benefit him on the day of his poverty and bankruptcy, i.e.
the Day of Judgement.
As for covet of what is in their hands, its remedy is to learn that it is Allah
Who subjugates their hearts: it is He Who causes them to give, and it is He Who
causes them to withhold. There is no provider of sustenance other than Allah
Almighty. The one who covets of the creatures exposes himself to humiliation;
and if he achieves his objective, he becomes under obligation to them. How
should one then leave what is with Allah Almighty for a false hope and corrupt
imagination, which might or might not hit the mark? And even if it hits the mark,
the pleasure obtained from it is not equal to the pain of humiliation caused by it.
to displease the people is not harmful and does not cause one to be sinful unless
he translates it into words which Allah writes as sins against him. It neither
hastens death on him, nor increases his sustenance, nor causes him to be of the
denizens of the fire if he is among the inhabitants of the Garden, nor causes him
to be hateful in the Sight of Allah if he is praiseworthy to Him. That is because all

i

II

The quarter of the destructives
508
servants are helpless and have no power to benefit or harm each other.
Once he is sure of those evils, and of their causes and means, he then leaves
showing off, and devotes himself to Allah Almighty, for the rational is he who
does not take what harms him much and benefits him little. It is sufficient for
him to know that if the people learn the purpose of showing off that is lurking in
his heart, they would hate him. Sooner or later, Allah Almighty is to uncover his
secret, until he causes him to be hateful to the people, as being a maker of show,
hateful in the Sight of Allah Almighty. But if he proves sincere to Allah Almighty,
surely, Allah uncovers to them his sincerity, causes them to love him, makes their
hearts subject to him, and unleashes their tongues to praise and laud him, given
that no perfection lies in their praise, nor does imperfection lie in their dispraise.
It is narrated that a poet belonging to the sons of Tamim said: "My praise adorns
and my dispraise defames." On that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: "You have told a lie, since the one who does so is Allah
Almighty with Whom there is no god." (This is reported by Ahmad on the
authority of Al-Aqra' Ibn Habis).
That is because adornment lies only in Allah's praise, and defamation lies
in His dispraise. Which good do you have in the people's praise given that you
are blameworthy in the Sight of Allah Almighty, and among the denizens of
fire, and which evil do you receive from the people's dispraise given that you
are praiseworthy in the Sight of Allah Almighty, in the company of those
brought near to Him? So, whoever recalls to his mind the hereafter with its
bliss and happiness would inevitably despise this world and all evils and
embitterment that it contains.
This remedy of showing off and removing its causes pertains to
knowledge. As for the practical remedy, it is to get himself accustomed to hide
his acts of worship as much as he could from the people, and close all gates
upon it in the same way as one closes the gates upon shameful deeds, until his
heart is satisfied with the knowledge of Allah alone of his acts of worship,
giving no importance to the knowledge of people. It is reported that one of
the companions of Abu Hafs Al-Haddad condemned the world and its
inhabitants, thereupon he said to him: "You have showed what you have been
concealing. Do not sit with us after that day." This is why no concession was
given afterwards to condemn it, for condemning the world carries a claim of
abstinence in it.
There is no remedy of showing off better than concealment, which is
difficult in the beginning of self-mortification. But if one keeps patient on it, it
gradually becomes easy upon him. To be sure, " Verily never will Allah change
the condition of a people until they change it themselves (with their own
souls)." (Ar-Ra’d 11)

i. (Js

i

!

^^

^4

Mortification is due upon the servant, and guidance is incumbent upon Allah
Almighty, and it is due upon the servant to knock at the door, and it is incumbent
upon Allah Almighty to open it, " for Allah suffers not the reward to be lost of
those who do good." (At-Tawbah 120)

509

Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off-

4^2^

^9-i ^ ^ * • ->! ^

"Allah is never unjust in the least degree: if there is any good (done) He
doubles it, and gives from His own presence a great reward." (An-Nisa 40)
j

4 O5

^-‘J erf
lib ol3 /j*
fife ^
The Second Is To Avert What Occurs Of It

oj ^

This also should be learnt. When one removes showing off from himself, cuts
off the roots and origins of it from the heart, by satisfaction and contentment,
giving up covet of what is in the hands of people, lowering himself from the sight
of people, and giving no importance to their praise or dispraise, Satan does not
leave him alone during his engagement in the acts of worship: but rather, he tries
to divert him by thoughts of showing off and dissimilation, and his tendencies
and self-inclinations towards it do not cease at all. For this reason, one should be
serious to avert from himself such thoughts of showing off. There are three
thoughts of showing off, and they might occur to mind all at once, or in
succession.
The first is the thought that people know his acts of worship, and that he
likes them to know. This provokes in him the hope of their praise, and
expectation for having a position in their hearts. Then, he is prompted to accept
it and rely on it. those are three states: the first is called knowledge, the second is
called desire, and the third is called determination. Perfect power lies in averting
the first thought before it develops and brings about both the second and third
states. If it occurs to his mind that the people know about his acts of worship,
which encourages his hope for having them know, he should avert it by saying to
himself: "What does it matter you whether or not the people know since Allah
Almighty knows your state? Which benefit does lie in the knowledge of anyone
else?" if the pleasure of praise is roused in his heart, let him remember the evil of
showing off, and how it exposes him to the hate of Allah Almighty, and
punishment and humiliation in the hereafter. As well as the information of
people's knowledge of the acts of worship rouses the desire for showing off, the
information of the evil of showing off provokes aversion for it to counteract that
desire. He thinks of Allah's hate and punishment, and as well as desire invites him
to accept (people's praise), aversion summons him to reject it, and the soul is
attracted to the stronger of them.
Those three are necessary for averting showing off: knowledge, aversion and
rejection. One might go on to do an act of worship with sincerity, and then the
thought of showing off occurs to his mind unintentionally, which he accepts in
the absence of knowledge and aversion. This is because he has love for praise and
fear of dispraise, which causes him to skip the required knowledge of its evil and
miserable consequence, for the heart in this case is fully occupied by the desire
for praise and fear of dispraise. His example is like him who likens forbearance to
himself and condemns anger, and is determined to adhere to forbearance once
his anger is provoked. But later, it occurs to him what causes him to forget his
determination of forbearance, and rather his heart is tilled with rage that hinders
him from remembering the evil of anger.

The quarter of the destructives
Similarly, the sweetness of desire fills the heart and drives out the light of
knowledge and anger. To this Jabir “Allah be pleased with him” referred in his
statement: "We gave the pledge of allegiance to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” under the tree not to flee,, and we did not give
him pledge of allegiance for death. But we forgot it on the day of (the batde of)
Hunain." (This narration is reported by Muslim). That is because their hearts
were filled with fear, which caused them to forget the previous pledge. This is the
case of most desires that attack suddenly. Once it does so, it causes one to forget
his knowledge that is included in the determination of faith; and once he forgets
knowledge, the aversion does not appear, for aversion is the fruit of knowledge.

510

In some cases, man might remember, and know that the thought which
occurs to his mind results from showing off, which exposes him to the
displeasure of Allah Almighty. But, because of his overwhelming desire, he goes
on it, for his inclination here overpowers his mind. As he could not give up the
immediate desire, he delays his repentance, or engages himself from thinking
about that due to his sweeping desire. How many a scholar who is motivated to
do a thing only by the desire to make show of his deeds before the people, even
though he knows it well. But he goes on it, strengthening the argument against
him, for he accepts the caller for showing off, given his knowledge of its evil and
grievous consequence, and its being blameworthy and condemned by Allah
Almighty. Here, of no profit to him is his knowledge in the absence of aversion,
which is its fruit.
Sometimes, both knowledge and aversion are present, but even he accepts
the caller of showing off, for the aversion is weak in comparison with his
overwhelming desire. In this case, the aversion is of no benefit, for the purpose
of aversion is to divert one from the act. This means that the real benefit lies
only in the combination of those three elements: knowledge, aversion and
rejection. Rejection is the fruit of aversion, and aversion is the fruit of
knowledge. Strength of knowledge is determined by the strength of faith, and
weakness of knowledge is determined by heedlessness, love for worldly affairs,
forgetfulness of the hereafter, lacking meditation of what is with Allah
Almighty, and missing reflection on the evils of the life of this world, and the
great bliss of the hereafter. Some of those are produced by others; The origin of
all of that is the love for this world, and the dominance of desires. It is the head
of all sins and the source of all mistakes. That is because the sweetness of the
love for majesty and position, and the worldly good things provokes the anger
of the heart, fascinates it, and hinders it from taking heed of the evil
consequences, and seeking the lights of the Book and the sunnah in addition to
the religious sciences.
You may argue: "If one really dislikes showing off, and rejects it, but even, he
could hardly be free from having his heart inclined to it: would he be in the
company of the makers of show (of deeds)?" in reply to that, it should be known
to you that Allah Almighty did not lay upon the soul a burden more than it could
bear, and one has no power to prevent the evil suggestions of Satan, or curb his
nature in order not to incline to the desires. But the furthest aim is to endeavor

511
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off
not to invest that desire, by learning the evil consequences of that, giving care to
the religious knowledge, and supporting the foundations of faith in Allah and the
Last Day. Once he does so, he has really reached the farthest end of his
obligation.
This is confirmed by the narration in which some companions complained to
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” saying:
"Sometimes there occur to our minds passing thoughts, and to fall down from
the sky and be snatched away by birds or be vulnerable to wind to throw us in a
very distant place, is dearer to us than to talk about them." He asked them: "Have
you really experienced that?" they answered in the affirmative, thereupon the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "This is the
evidently clear faith." (This narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of
Ibn Mas'ud; and An-Nasa'i on the authority of A'ishah). It is further narrated on
the authority of Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with them” that the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Praise be to Allah Who has
reduced the plot of Satan to no more than whispering doubts." (This narration is
reported by Abu Dawud and An-Nasa'i). according to Abu Hazim: "Whatever
occurs to your mind and you dislike for yourself, no harm shall you receive from
your enemy, and whatever occurs to your mind and you accept for yourself, then,
blame it for it."
Therefore, the doubts roused by Satan and dispute of yourself cause no
harm to you as long as you avert them by aversion and rejection. The passing
thoughts pertaining to sciences, imaginations and remembrance which provoke
showing off come from Satan; and desire and inclination stem from the self,
and then aversion springs from faith and traces of mind. But here Satan devises
a trick, i.e. if he fails to lead him to accept showing off, he tries to persuade him
that his righteousness lies in debating Satan, until he deprives him of the reward
of sincerity and presence of heart, for the occupation by arguing Satan and
averting his plots divert the heart from the private conversation with Allah
Almighty, which, in turn, decreases his position in the Sight of Allah Almighty.
Those who get rid of showing off by averting the passing thoughts of
showing off are of four kinds:
The first is that he does not only return the passing thought to Satan and
give lie to him, but also engages in arguing with him for a long time, thinking it
to be safer for his heart. But with verification, it brings about deficiency, for in
this case, he is diverted from the private conversation with Allah and from the
good he receives in it, by fighting the highway man.
The second is to know that argumentation and fighting bring about
deficiency in the behaviour, and this makes him limit himself to giving lie to and
avert Satan, and not to engage in arguing and disputing with him.
The third is not to engage in giving lie to him at all, thinking it to delay
him from private conversation with Allah Almighty. By so doing, he has
decided in his mind the aversion of showing off and giving lie to Satan, and
continues to do what he started to do, even in the presence of aversion, giving
no care to belie Satan.

The quarter of the destructives
The fourth is to know that Satan is going to envy him by sowing within him
the seeds of showing off. Thus, whatever evil suggestions Satan might whisper to
him, he goes on doing his deed of worship with more sincerity and engagement
with Allah Almighty, hiding his acts of worship in order to enrage Satan and
suppress him. this is what infuriates Satan, and gives him to despair and
disappointment. It is reported that it was said to Al-Fudail Ibn Ghazwan: "So and
so mentions you (with evil)." He said: "By Allah, I would enrage him who
commands him to do so." He was asked: "Who commands him to do so?" he
said: "Satan. O Allah! Forgive for him." he meant that he would enrage Satan by
obeying Adlah in him. if Satan knows that form a servant, he would refrain from
him, for fear he would increase his good deeds. According to Ibrahim At-Taimi:
"Satan always invites a servant to the door of sin, and once he does not obey him,
and does good instead, he leaves him." he says once again: "If Satan sees you
wavering, he would covet of you; and if he sees you constandy firm, he would
abscond you."
Al-Harith Al-Muhasibi "may Allah have mercy upon him" set forth an
example for those four: "Their example is like four people who went to a
gathering of knowledge and Hadith, with the intendon to obtain benefit and
favor, and guidance and assistance. A heredc innovator envied them, and
feared they would know the real nature of things. He proceeded to meet one
of them, and tried to hinder him by invidng him to a gathering of error and
falsehood, but he rejected. When he was sure of his rejecdon, he engaged him
by argument, thereupon he was involved in argumentation and disputation,
with the intention to avert his error, thinking it to be for his benefit, although
the purpose of the innovator is to make him miss the benefit of gathering as
much as he delays to come.
When the second came upon him, he stopped him, and tried to forbid him to
attend the gathering. He stopped a litde and pushed the straying person in his
chest, and did not engage himself in fighting him, and soon hastened to join the
gathering. But the straying person rejoiced a bit with the litde time he was able to
stop him to push him. when the third came upon him, he gave no care to him at
all, but he did not despair of him entirely. The fourth came upon him, and he did
not only give no care to him, but also intended to enrage him. he quickened his
pace more and more, and did not slow down in the least. The straying person
reached certitude that if all of them returned and came upon him once again, he
would try with all barring that last one."
You may argue: "Since one could not feel safe from the evil suggestions of
Satan, should one be on the alert in expectation of him to come before he attacks
the mind, or rely on Allah Almighty to avert it from him, or engage in worship
and take no heed of him?" in reply to it, let's say that the people differ in this
issue and are divided into three parties:
A party from Basrah are of the opinion that the strong among the people
dispense with taking any precaution of Satan, for they devote themselves
entirely to Allah Almighty, and engage themselves in loving Him, and the result
is that Satan keeps away from them, and despairs of misguiding them, in the
512

513
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offsame way as he despairs of inviting the weak among servants to wine and
adultery. That is because the pleasures of this world, no matter permissible they
might be, have become like wine and adultery in their sights. They absconded
them endrely, leaving for Satan no way over them. Those are not in need to
beware of him.
A second party from Sham are of the opinion that to take precaudon of him
is needed only for him who is less certain and reliant. That is for whoever is
certain that there is no partner with Allah Almighty Who alone ordains the affairs
of the universe, comes to know that it is of no significance to beware of Satan,
for he is no more than a humiliated weak creature, and he has no power to do
anything except what Allah Almighty dooms it to be, for it is Allah Alone Who
benefits and harms. Thus, one should feel shy of bewaring of anyone other than
Him Almighty. One's certainty of the Oneness of Allah then makes him not in
need of caudon.
A third party from the learned are of the opinion that to take precaution of
Satan is necessary, arguing that, according to those of Basrah, that the strong
among men who devote themselves endrely to Allah Almighty, and engage in the
love of Allah Almighty, dispense with the love for this world and its pleasures, is
a means used by Satan to deceive such men. The Prophets “peace be upon them”
themselves were not able to get rid of the evil thoughts and suggestions of Satan
endrely, then, how could anyone else have the power to do so? Not all the evil
suggestions of Satan belong to the love and pleasures of this world. But some of
them pertain to the attributes and names of Allah Almighty, the embellishment of
religious innovations and errors, etc. none could be saved from the danger
therein. For this reason, Allah Almighty says: " Never did We send a Messenger
or a prophet before you, but, when he framed a desire, Satan threw some (vanity)
into his desire: but Allah will cancel anything (vain) that Satan throws in, and
Allah will confirm (and establish) His Signs: for Allah is full of knowledge and
wisdom:." (Al-Hajj 52)
jAj £ a»T^143

^0»hU)T t/J* Zs+j EJ Vj

{0

ST

cr?

o* ULQI "L*j ^

g'Wjji

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Sometimes the stain (of what I do) is on my heart", given that his devil
embraced Islam, and enjoined upon him nothing but good.
Whoever thinks that his engagement with the love for Allah Almighty is
greater than that of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” and all the Prophets and Messengers “peace be upon them”, is, indeed, a
deceived person. But even, this did not ensure to them to be safe from the evil
plots and intrigues of Satan, from which Adam and Eve were not safe while they
were in the Garden, which is the abode of security and pleasure. Allah Almighty
had already warned them of him saying: "O Adam! verily, this is an enemy to you
and your wife: so let him not get you both out of the Garden, so that you are
landed in misery. There is therein (enough provision) for you not to go hungry
nor to go naked, Nor to suffer from thirst, nor from the sun's heat." (Ta Ha 117119)

The quarter of the destructives

514
^' dh Oj ^2^

^ Q3

5!j

dh

I -UA (jj

Ldjjj ^

^ Cjp) <S'-*=k-) ^3 ^ ijdjaS *3 dblj {(J)) c^)*3
Since one of the Prophets was not safe from the intrigue and plot of Satan
in the Garden, which is the abode of security and happiness, then, how could
anyone else be able to feel safe from his evil plots in this world, which is the
homeland of afflictions and disasters, and the fountainhead of pleasures and
desires that are forbidden? Moses “peace be upon him” said as told by Allah
Almighty: "This is a work of Evil (Satan): For he is an enemy that manifesdy
misleads!" (Al-Qasas 15)

i 0'oJ- tj-^i jii

^ Ili Jii >

This is why Allah Almighty warned all the people of Satan saying: " O you
Children of Adam! let not Satan seduce you, in the same manner as he got
your parents out of the Garden, stripping them of their raiment, to expose
their shame: for he and his tribe watch you from a position where you cannot
see them: We made the Evil Ones friends (only) to those without Faith." (AlA'raf 27)
pSZy,I

^0‘^^jT p ^=td:aj *3 f Si*

}

4 @5
3^ *3 #40 *tJji
^1*?*3
cr? -,4l=^3 3-*
The Qur’an entirely warns people of Satan and its plots. How then should
one not beware of him? to beware of Satan whereas Allah Almighty has
commanded does not stand against the engagement with the love of Allah
Almighty; for it is out of loving Him to comply with His orders and
commands. He Almighty ordered people to beware of the enemy, just as He
ordered to beware of the disbelievers saying: " and let them pray with you,
taking all precautions, and bearing arms: the Unbelievers wish, if you were
negligent of your arms and your baggage, to assault you in a single rush." (AnNisa’ 102)
> ^

(

i. ,

r ,,
t* *-?.«•'<,
^,{ 1 „
t *
I f-j£' ^ • Jjiiju j] IJjjl
p^£>wlz,lj

T . * * J - . „ . * „ C* „
j.t>- Ij
ijAad IyIyca-Jt9 ^

He further says: "Against them make ready your strength to the utmost of
your power, including steeds of war, to strike terror into (the hearts of) the
enemies, of Allah and your enemies, and others besides, whom you may not
know, but whom Allah does know." (Al-Anfal 60)
cr? oiA'o

-**3 ^y^ ^

4?W3 v^3/y cr?

As well as you are required by Allah Almighty to take precaution of your
enemy which you see well, then, it is preferable to take precaution of your enemy
which sees you and you see it not. According to Ibn Muhairiz: "If it is a game
which you see and it sees you not, You are likely to catch it, and if it is a game

515
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off
which sees you and you see it not, it is likely to catch you." he refers here to
Satan. To engage in the love for Allah Almighty is not to refrain from what He
has warned of. It is on the basis of that argument that the opinion of the second
party becomes invalid. I mean those who say that taking precaution of Satan
stands against reliance on Allah Almighty. That the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” mobilized his soldiers, prepared the army well,
dug the trench round Medina, and put on the shield and took up arms did not
cancel his reliance on Allah Almighty. How then should the fear of what Allah
Almighty frightened the people with, and taking precaution of what He
commanded them to beware of stand against the reliance on Him?
we mentioned in the Book of Reliance that the meaning of reliance is not to
refrain from all means and causes entirely. The statement of Allah Almighty:
"Against them make ready your strength to the utmost of your power, including
steeds of war, to strike terror into (the hearts of) the enemies, of Allah and your
enemies, and others besides, whom you may not know, but whom Allah does
know" (Al-Anfal 60)

=
:
=
-

Does not contradict the submission to reliance on Him, if the heart has
faith in the fact that it is Allah Alone Who gives life and brings to death, who
benefits and harms and none shares him in that matter. Similarly, one should
beware of Satan, putting in mind that it is Allah Who guides and leaves to
stray, and that causes are but means subjugated by Allah Almighty. This is the
choice of Al-Harith Al-Muhasibi, and this is the right that is confirmed by the
light of knowledge.
The members of the last party are divided into three divisions concerning
the way they should take precaution of Satan. The first say: "If Allah Almighty
warns us of the enemy, nothing should be more prevailing in our hearts than to
remember him, be on the alert of him, and watchful of his attack at any time,
for if we are heedless of him even for a single moment, he would likely ruin us."
Others say: "This leads to the disengagement of our hearts from the celebration
of Allah Almighty, and concentrate our attention to Satan, and this is the
objective of Satan. The right is to engage in the celebration of Allah Almighty
and worship, but without forgetting Satan, its enmity, and the need of taking
precaution of him; and in this way, we would combine both things. That is
because if we forget Satan entirely, he might attack us suddenly from where we
do not expect, and if we devote ourselves to be watchful of him, we would
neglect the celebration of Allah Almighty. This is why it is better to combine
both things."
But some learned render both parties wrong. These of the first party devote
themselves to the remembrance of Satan and take precaution of him, and the
result is that they forget the celebration of Allah Almighty; and this is evidently
wrong. We have been commanded to take precaution of Satan, in order not to
hinder us from the celebration of Allah Almighty. Then, how should we make

The quarter of the destructives
516
remembering him prevail in our hearts over anything else, given that this is the
goal of our enemy? This leads to the disengagement of the heart from the light of
the celebration of Allah Almighty. If Satan attacks that heart which is void of the
light of the celebration of Allah Almighty, he would likely possess it easily. We
then are not commanded to be watchful in expectation of Satan.
As for the second party, its members share the first when they combine in
their hearts both the celebration of Allah Almighty and the remembrance of
Satan. As much as the hart is occupied by the remembrance of Satan, it
withdraws from the celebration of Allah Almighty. Allah Almighty commanded
that the hearts should be devoted entirely to remember Him, and forget anything
else. The right then is that one should make it binding upon himself to take
precaution of Satan, and have faith in his enmity, and once he does so, he
wholeheartedly devotes himself to remember Allah Almighty, and give no care to
Satan. If Satan comes to him and he knows well that he is his evident enemy, he
would soon take heed of him, and once he takes heed of him, he would avert him
from himself. To engage in the celebration of Allah does not prevent one from
being vigilant to the evil suggestion of Satan.
It is such a heart that is able to avert the enemy from itself if the engagement
in the celebration of Allah Almighty has killed inclination in it, brought to life in
it the light of knowledge and mind, and exterminated in it the darkness of desires
and lusts. The men of deep insight in this way instilled in their hearts the enmity
of Satan, and the readiness to be watchful of it, and made it binding upon them
to take precaution. But at the same time, they did not engage in remembering
him, but in the celebration of Allah Almighty, therewith they averted the evil of
the enemy, and illuminated themselves by the light of celebration until they were
able to get rid of the thoughts of their enemy. The example of the heart in this
case is like a spring intended to be purified from the dirty water in order for the
sweet fresh water to gush forth therefrom. He who engages in remembering
Satan has left in it the dirty water; and whoever combines the celebration of Allah
and the remembrance of Satan has emptied it from the dirty water of one side,
and left it running in the other side, and although he troubles himself so long, the
spring does not become dry of the dirty water; and the man of insight is he who
has blocked the course where the dirty water runs, and filled it with the pure
water, in a way that if the dirty water comes, he averts it with the least trouble.

CHAPTER SEVEN
EXPOSITION OF CONCESSION TO DISCLOSE ACTS OF WORSHIP
It should be known that the benefit of concealing the deeds of worship is
sincerity and salvation from showing off; and the benefit of disclosing them is to
urge the others to imitate them, and exhort them to do good. But at the same
time, the evil of showing off lies in it. according to Al-Hassan: "The Muslims
know well that to conceal the deeds of worship is better." But there is benefit in
disclosing them; and this is why Allah Almighty appreciates concealing and
disclosing when He says: "If you disclose (acts of) charity, even so it is well, but
if you conceal them, and make them reach those (really) in need, that is best for
you: it will remove from you some of your (stains of) evil. And Allah is well

Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offacquainted with what you do." (Al-Baqarah 271)
Cr?

$\yuS\ Lao!3

517

ijip oj ^

Disclosing deeds is divided into two divisions: the first pertains to the deed
itself, and the second to talking about it.
The First Division: To Disclose The Deed Itself
It is like giving in charity in front of the people in order to exhort them to do
the same. This is confirmed by the narration in which an Ansari man brought a
parcel (of food) as charity, and the people then brought their objects of charity in
succession after him. on that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” said: "He, who lays the foundation of a good deed, upon which the
people act after him, will have its reward and the reward of such of men as
follows him, without reducing anything from his reward." (This narration is
reported by Muslim on the authority of Jarir Ibn Abdullah). The same is true of
all the deeds like prayer, fasting, Hajj, Umrah, etc.
But the people more likely incline to imitate each other in giving in charity. If
the fighter in the Way of Allah Almighty intends to set out, and saddles his riding
mount and gets ready before the people to instigate them to follow him, it will be
better for him, for fighting in itself is one of the public deeds which could not be
concealed. Thus, to hasten to do it does not mean to disclose it in so much as to
instigate the others to do the same. Similarly, a man might raise his voice with
prayer at night in order to awaken his neighbours to imitate him. it is better then
to hasten to do such of deeds as could not be concealed like fighting in the Way
of Allah, Hajj, Umrah, etc, in order to stimulate others to do it, provided that it
should have no stain of showing off.
As regards such of deeds as could be concealed, like prayer and giving in
charity, if disclosing the charity, for instance, would harm its recipient, even
though it would stimulate the others to give in charity, then, it is much better to
conceal it, for harming is unlawful. But in case it would cause no harm, it is
debatable. Some say that concealing is better than disclosing even if disclosing
would motivate people to do it. others say that concealing is better than
disclosing which would not instigate the others to follow him. but disclosing
which would motivate the others to follow him is undoubtedly better.
The evidence is that Allah Almighty ordered the Prophets to disclose their
good deeds in order for the people to follow them. As being Prophets, it is
impermissible to think that they were deprived of the better of both. This is
confirmed by the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him”: "He, who lays the foundation of a good deed, upon which
the people act after him, will have its reward and the reward of such of men as
follows him, without reducing anything from his reward." According to another
narration: "The (reward of the) deed to be done in secrecy is multiplied seventy
times that of the deed to be done in public; and the (reward of the) deed to be
done in public upon which the people act is multiplied seventy times that of the
deed to be done in secrecy." (This narration is reported by Al-Baihaqi on the
authority of Abu Ad-Darda*).

The quarter of the destructives
There is no difference about that, for if the heart assumes sincerity, and is
free from the stain of showing off in both cases of concealing and disclosing,
no doubt, that which leads to imitation of good is better. But what is really
feared is the emergence of showing off, for when the stain of showing off
occurs, of no profit to him would be the people's following him, and rather he
would be ruined for it; and in this case, to do deed in secrecy is better than to
do it in public.
But, two duties is incumbent upon such of men as discloses the deed: the
first is that he discloses it where he knows or at least thinks that he would be
followed, and his deed be imitated by the people. How many a man who is
followed by his family and not his neighbours, another by his neighbours and
not the inhabitants of his market, and a third by the inhabitants of his town
and not anyone else, and so on. It is the renowned religious scholar whom the
people follow. But if anyone else discloses any of his deeds, he might be
ascribed to showing off, and none would follow him, and in this case, it is not
fitting for him to disclose his deed uselessly. That is because disclosing deeds
is acceptable from him who is apt to be followed, to those who are eligible to
follow him.
The second is to observe his heart for it might experience the love for hidden
showing off, which summons him to disclose his deed under pretext of having
others follow him, although the real purpose is the pleasure to get adorned by the
deed, and by being followed by others. This is the case of almost such of people
as disclose their deeds, barring the strong and sincere among them, and how few
they are! So, the weak should not deceive himself with the result that he would be
ruined unknowingly. This is the way many religious scholars and worshippers
slip, for they try to imitate the strong among the people in disclosing their deeds,
but their hearts fail to be sincere like theirs, and the result is that the reward of
their deeds becomes fruidess by virtue of showing off. However, to make sense
of that is very abstruse.
The touchstone is to be asked to hide his deed for the people to follow
another worshipper of his fellows, on condition that he would receive in
secrecy the same reward of doing the deed in public. If his heart is inclined to
disclose his deed, then, he is motivated by showing off, and not by seeking the
reward and the desire of having others do good, for the people desire good
regardless of whom they are to follow. Given also that he would receive the
same reward, then, what does cause him to disclose his deed other than the
desire to have position in the sight of the people? So, let the servant beware of
self-deception, for the self is a deceiver, and Satan is on the alert, and the love
for position prevails in the heart. The apparent deeds are hardly safe from evils.
So, one should not exchange safety for anything else, and safety here lies in
concealing deeds, whereas disclosing deeds has of dangers what is beyond the
power of men like us. So, it is preferable for us and all the weak to beware of
disclosing deeds.
518

The Second Division Is To Talk About His Deed
After Finishing From It
It is subject to the same ruling of disclosing the deed itself. But the danger

519
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offhere is more grievous, for talking is easier on the tongue, and the narration might
be subject to addition and exaggeration, for the sol takes pleasure from disclosing
the claim. But in this case, it does not affect the deed itself particularly if one has
really finished from it before talking about it. the ruling on that is if one has his
heart perfecdy strong and sincere, and the people are of no significance in his
sight, and it is the same to him whether they praise or dispraise him, and he
makes a mention of his deed to him who expected to follow him in good, it will
be permissible, if not encouraged, particularly in case the intention is good and
pure from all kinds of evil, for it will be exhortation to good, and the exhortation
to good is good in itself.
The like of that is transmitted from many of the strong righteous
predecessors. It is reported that Sa'd Ibn Mu'adh “Allah be pleased with him”
said: "Since I embraced Islam, I have never offered a prayer and thought of
anything else, and I have never followed a funeral procession and thought of
anything else other than what it is saying, and what is to be said to it; and I
have never heard the Prophet “peace be upon him” saying anything but that I
learnt that it is a fact." According to Umar “Allah be pleased with him”: "I do
not care whether I have become in adversity or prosperity, for I do not know
which of both is better for me." According to Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased
with him”: "I have not become in a state and hoped to be in a different state
other than it."
According to Uthman “Allah be pleased with him”: "I have never made
reminder of generosity, nor hoped (for anything false), nor touched my penis
with my right hand since I gave the pledge of allegiance to the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”." (This narration of Uthman is
reported by Abu Ya'li on the authority of Anas). According to Shaddad Ibn Aws
“Allah be pleased with him”: "Since I embraced Islam, I have never uttered a
word before I thought of it well barring that." That to which he refers is his
statement to his slave: "bring us the provision to send it in order to join the early
meal." When death approached Abu Sufyan, he said to his family: "Do not weep
for me, for I have never committed a sin since I embraced Islam." According to
Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz "may Allah have mercy upon him": "Allah Almighty has
never decreed for me a thing and I hoped that He would have otherwise
decreed."
All of that is to disclose noble states, and it is indicative of showing off if it
issues from people whose purpose is to make show of deeds. But at the same
time, it is indicative of exhortation to good if it issues from one whose purpose is
to have people follow him. the like of this then is permissible by way of
exhortation to imitation for the strong among men, on the conditions we have
already mentioned. For this reason, the door of disclosing deeds should not be
closed entirely, for men are predisposed, by nature, to have love for imitation,
and following each other. Furthermore, much good lies in disclosing the deed
from a maker of show if the people do not know that it is showing off, although
it is a source of evil for the maker of show himself. How many a sincere who
became faithful in worship because of imitating a maker of show in the Sight of

The quarter of the destructives
520
Allah Almighty! To be sure, "Allah Almighty supports that religion by the wicked
man, and by people who have no portion (in the hereafter)." (The first part of
this narration is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Abu Hurairah, and
the second by An-Nasa'i on the authority of Anas). Some of the makers of show
are among those who are followed and imitated by people in this respect; and
Allah Almighty knows best.

CHAPTER EIGHT
EXPOSITION OF CONCESSION TO CONCEAL SINS
It should be known that the basic rule of sincerity is that one's secrecy and
openness should be equal. It is reported that Umar “Allah be pleased with him”
said to a man: "I advise you to do public deed." He said: "O Commander of
Believers! What is the public deed?" he said: "It is that of which, if the people
come to know, you would not feel shy." According to Abu Muslim Al-Khawlani
"may Allah have mercy upon him": "I have never done a deed and cared whether
or not the people would know it, except my sexual intercourse with my wife,
excretion and urination." But this is a high rank which a very few receive, for
none could be free from sins which he conceals and dislikes people to know,
particularly his thoughts of desires, lusts and hopes, given that Allah Almighty is
the knower of all things, no matter secret or public they might be.
One's will to conceal such things from the other people might be thought
of as forbidden showing off. But it is not so. The forbidden showing off is to
conceal that in order to give people the false impression that he is pious and
god-fearing, although he is not so. This is the concealment of a maker of
show. But the truthful person who seeks not to make show of deeds has the
right to conceal his sins, and to grieve if the people know about them, and
this is due to eight excuses:
The first is to rejoice with Allah's screening his sins, and grieve when Allah
tears the screen off him, and puts him to shame, which provokes his fear that
Allah would tear the screen off him on the Day of Judgement, in agreement with
the narration that "If Allah screens a sin upon a man in this world, He will screen
it on the Day of Judgement." This grief springs from the power of faith.
The second is that he knows that Allah Almighty dislikes the emergence of
sins and likes them to be concealed. This is confirmed by the statement of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "Whoever
commits anything of those evil sins, let him screen himself with the screen of
Allah Almighty." (This narration is reported by Al-Hakim). If he has disobeyed
Allah by committing a sin, he should not refrain from loving what Allah Almighty
loves. This springs from the power of faith in Allah's dislike of sins to emerge.
The trace of truthfulness in that is to dislike the emergence of the sin of anyone
else, and grieve for it too.
The third is that he dislikes to be dispraised by people for that sin, for this
aggrieves him, and occupies his heart and mind from the obedience of Allah
Almighty. That is because one, by nature, is harmed by dispraise, and diverted
from the acts of worship. It is for this reason too that he should dislike to be
praised, for praise also diverts him from the celebration of Allah Almighty. This

521
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offresults from the power of faith, for the true desire to disengage his heart for the
obedience and worship is out of faith.
The fourth is that he screens himself for he dislikes people's dispraise, with
which he is harmed, for dispraise is harmful as we know, in the same way as
beadng is painful to the body. The heart's fear of the pain of dispraise is not
unlawful, nor is man sinful for it. but he would be sinful if he is scared by
people's dispraise when it summons him to do what is impermissible, for fear of
their dispraise. It is not binding upon one not to grieve or be pained by the
people's dispraising him. it is true that the perfect truthfulness is to overlook the
appreciation of all the people in a way that his praiser and dispraiser become
equal in his sight, in view of his knowledge that both benefit and harm come
from Allah Alone, and that all servants are powerless. But this does not happen
except in rare cases, for most people are pained and harmed by dispraise, for it
gives the impression of deficiency and shortcoming.
But in many cases, causing pain by dispraise is commendable , if the
dispraiser belongs to those endued with insight of religion, for they are Allah's
witnesses on earth, and their dispraise represents the dispraise of Allah
Almighty, and indicates to deficiency in religion, for which one should grieve.
But it is blameworthy to grieve for loosing the people's praise because of
piety, as if he seems to like praise and appreciation, given that it is
impermissible for one to like to be praised for his obedience of Allah
Almighty, for in this case, he seems to seek a reward for that from anyone else
other than Allah Almighty. If one finds that in himself, he should counteract
it with aversion and rejection.
But it is not blameworthy to dislike to be dispraised for sin, and one has the
right to conceal it for fear of that. Such a man is imagined to have aversion for
praise but dislike dispraise, for his purpose is that the people should leave
praising and dispraising him. how many a patient on missing the pleasure of
praise could not persevere the pain of dispraise. In short, it is not forbidden to
dislike people's dispraise for sin except for one reason, i.e. when his grief for
people's knowing his sin diverts him from fear of Allah's knowing about it, for
this is the greatest deficiency in religion. That is because he should grieve much
more for Allah's knowing about it, and criticizing him for it.
The fifth is to have aversion for dispraise because the dispraiser has
disobeyed Allah Almighty. This is out of faith, and its sign is that he dislikes his
dispraise for anyone else in the same way as he dislikes it for himself. This kind of
pain makes no difference between him and anyone else.
The sixth is to screen his sin in order not to be targeted with evil once he is
recognized for it. That is caused by the pain of dispraise. Dispraise is harmful in
the sense that it gives the heart the impression of one's shortage and deficiency. If
one feels afraid of the evil of him who might know about his sin for one reason
or another, he has the right to conceal it for fear of him.
The seventh is just that he feels shy of having his sin disclosed to the
people. It is a kind of pain, which one experiences from the early days of
childhood once the light of reason shines on him, causing him to feel shy of

The quarter of the destructives
522
the shameful deeds. It is praiseworthy. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Modesty as a whole is good." (This
narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Imran Ibn Hussain). The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said:
"Modesty is a branch of faith." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on
the authority' of Abu Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him" also said: "Modesty brings about nothing but good."
(This narration is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Imran Ibn
Hussain). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: "Indeed, Allah likes the modest forbearing." (This narration is reported
by At-Tabarani on the authority of Fatimah; and Al-Bazzar on the authority of
Abu Hurairah).
To be sure, he who commits wickedness and dissoluteness and does not
care whether or not the people would know his wickedness is more sinful than
him who does so but screens himself and feels shy of people's knowing about
his dissoluteness. But modesty here is much similar to showing off, and a very
few among people could make sense of that. Every maker of show claims that
he is modest, and that he makes good his acts of worship because he feels shy
of people. But this is falsehood, for modesty is a moral character which
originates from the honored disposition, and the motives of both showing off
and sincerity are provoked after it. one might be sincere or might make show of
deeds with it.
Its example is that a man asks his friend for a loan, and although the later is
lot pleased to give him, he feels shy of returning his demand with failure. But
vere this demand to be transmitted to him through a third party, he would not
have felt shy of him, nor loaned him out of showing off, nor for the sake of
seeking reward. Such a person is subject to one of many states: one of them is to
give a clear reply, and do not care to his being ascribed to the lack of modesty.
This is the practice of such of men as barefaced, for the modest should either
give reason for his withholding or give loan. But in case of giving, he is subject to
one of three states:
One of them is to have both showing off and modesty mixed, that is, the
motive of modesty is provoked, which, in turn, prompts the thought of showing
off, according to which he says to himself: "You should give in order to be
praised and appreciated by him, and have your generosity propagate among the
people; or you should give in order that he would not dispraise you and ascribe
you to niggardliness." If he gives, he will have given by motive of showing off,
which has sprung from modesty.
The second is to find it difficult upon himself to return him with failure by
virtue of modesty, and the caller of sincerity is provoked within himself which
causes him to say to himself: "The reward of charity is one, and that of the loan is
eighteen times like it." there is a great reward for that, let alone the pleasure he
would cause to the heart of his friend. This is praiseworthy in the sight of Allah
Almighty. It is a kind of sincerity provoked by modesty.
The third is that one has no desire for reward, nor fear of dispraise, nor

523
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offwish for praise. Its sign is that if the demand of loan is transmitted to him
through a third party, he would not respond to it. but he gives him only for
the sake of modesty, had it not been for modesty, he would have returned him
with failure. If anyone comes to him of whom he feels no shy, he would
return him with failure, regardless of the reward or praise he would receive.
This person is motivated only by modesty and nothing else. It occurs mosdy
with such of men as have shameful characteristics like niggardliness and
wickedness. The maker of show also might feel shy of committing the
permissible deeds. Sometimes, whenever he is seen walking with hastiness, he
would return to quietness; and whenever he is seen laughing, he would return
to silence and reverence, thinking that to be out of modesty, although it is
evident showing off.
It is said that modesty is weakness in part; and this is true. It refers to feeling
shy of what is lawful, like, for instance, feeling shy of preaching the people, or
leading prayer. This kind of modesty is praiseworthy in regard with children and
women; but in regard with men, it is not praiseworthy. Sometimes, you might see
a sin to be committed by an old man and you feel shy of disapproving his act for
it is out of glorifying Allah Almighty to respect the Muslim hoary-headed person.
This shyness is praiseworthy. But better is to feel shy of Allah Almighty. So, you
should not indulge in enjoining right and forbidding evil. The strong person
favors to feel shy of Allah other than to feel shy of people, unlike the weak, who
might not have power to do it.
The eighth is to fear that by disclosing his sin, people might dare to do the
like of it in imitation of him. it is for the same reason only that the acts of
worship might likely be disclosed. It is unique to the imams and persons whom
people are apt to follow. For the same reason too, the sinful should hide his sin
from his family and children in order not to take and learn it from him.
All of those excuses are fitting for concealing sins, but only the last excuse is
fitting for disclosing the acts of worship. If one intends by concealing his sin to
give people the impression of his piety and devoutness, he would be a maker of
show; and the same is true if he has the same intention from disclosing his acts of
worship.
You may ask: "Is it permissible for one to like that people praise him and love
him for his righteousness? It is reported that a man said to the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "Guide me to a deed for which
Allah Almighty loves me and the people love me too." On that he said to him:
"Abstain in this world perchance Allah would love you, and throw to people the
chattels of it perchance they would love you."" (This narration is reported by Ibn
Majah on the authority of Sahl Ibn Sa'd).
In reply to it, let's say that your liking that people should love you might be
permissible, praiseworthy, or blameworthy. It is praiseworthy when you like this
in order to know how Allah Almighty loves you, for if Allah Almighty loves a
servant, he endears him to the hearts of His servants. It is blameworthy when you
like their love and praise for your acts of worship, like prayer, fasting, Hajj,
fighting in the Way of Allah, etc. that is because by so doing, you demand a

The quarter of the destructives
524
transitory compensation for your obedience of Allah other than the reward of the
hereafter. It is permissible when you like them to love you for particular good
merits you have other than the acts of worship. Your love for that is like your
love for wealth, for the possession of hearts is a means to achieve your purposes
like the possession of wealth.

CHAPTER NINE
EXPOSITION OF LEAVING SOME ACTS OF WORSHIP FOR FEAR OF
SHOWING OFF AND EVILS
It should be known hat some people give up acts of worship for fear of the
suspicion of showing of; and this is a clear fault, in which one agrees with Satan.
The following discussion explains what should be left and what should not be left
of the acts of worship for fear of the suspicion of showing off.
The acts of worship are divided into two: those which have no pleasure in
themselves, like prayer, fasting, performing Hajj, and fighting in the Way of
Allah. Those are body mortifications and sufferings. But they become pleasant
when they bring about the praise of people, and the people's praise is
pleasant. The second division includes those which are pleasant in themselves,
and extend beyond the body to imply the dealing with the people, like ruling,
judging, governing, etc. the evils of this division are more grievous than those
of the former for the more it is related with the people, the more it becomes
dangerous.
The First Division
It pertains to those which have no pleasure in themselves, and are related
with the body, like prayer, fasting, performing Hajj, and fighting in the Way of
Allah, etc. the passing thoughts of showing off are three in relation to those:
The first occurs to one before doing the act of worship, which prompts in
him the desire for having the people know it, without being stimulated by the
motive of religion, it should be left, for it is a sin in which there is no worship.
Indeed, in this case, one puts on worship in order to seek the position in the
hearts of people. If one has the power to avert that from him, let him do. It is to
say to himself: "Do you not feel shy of your Lord? Do you do the deed for the
sake of the people and not for the sake of Allah Almighty?" he continues to do so
until the motive of showing off is removed and the soul does the deed for the
Sake of Allah instead of showing off.
The second is that the motive of sincerity prompts him to do the deed,
but on assuming it, the motive of showing off occurs to him. in this case, he
should not leave the deed for it was initiated by a religious motive. Let him go
on doing the deed, and mortify himself to avert from him showing off and
strengthen the motive of sincerity by the remedies and medicines we have
already mentioned, i.e. to enjoin upon himself the aversion and rejection of
showing off.
The third is to intend and decide to do the deed with sincerity, and later on
the motive of showing off occurs to him. in this case, he should do his best to
avert showing off in order to return to the first state of sincerity with which he

Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off-

525

intended to do the deed until he completes the deed. That is because Satan invites
you to leave the deed, and if you do not respond and continue to do it, he leaves
that and invites you to showing off, and if you do not respond and do your best
to avert it, he leaves that and rather says to you: "This deed is not done with
sincerity but you are a maker of show and your effort is fruidess. So, which
benefit lies in doing a deed without sincerity?" he continues to endce you to leave
the deed. If you leave it, you then will have achieved his purpose.
Similarly, it is of no significance to leave the deed out of fear for the people to
ascribe him to showing off, therewith they disobey Allah Almighty. This is one of
Satan's intrigues. That is because he has made a bad assumption of the Muslims,
although he had no right to do so. Even if this is right, their saying should not
cause harm to him and lead him to leave the act of worship and loose its reward.
However, to leave the deed for fear of the people's saying that he is a maker of
show is evident showing off. Had it not been for his love for their praise and
dislike of their dispraise, he would have given no concern to their saying that he
is a maker of show. What is the difference between his leaving the deed for fear
of their saying that he is a maker of show, and his doing the deed perfecdy for
fear of their saying that he is indulgent and neglectful? To leave the deed in this
context is more grievous.
Those are Satan's plots therewith to deceive the ignorant and heedless
among men. There is no salvation from him but to know well the evil of
showing off, i.e. that it is harmful in the hereafter, and no benefit lies in it in
this world. The result is that both aversion and rejection of it are provoked in
your heart. You should further continue to do the deed giving no care to his
temptation. That is because leaving the deeds leads to idleness and loss of ail
good. As long as you find a religious motive to do the deed, do not give it up.
You should strive against the passing thought of showing off, and stick to the
feeling of shy of Allah Almighty if you are forced to exchange His praise for
the praise of people. It is He Who knows well the mysteries of your hearts. If
the people are to know your heart, and that you covet of their praise, surely,
they would dislike you.
Moreover, if you could do more deed out of feeling shy of your lord, and
mordfication to yourself, you should do it without hesitation. If Satan suggests to
you that you are a maker of show, you should know that he is a deceiver in view
of your rejection of showing off, and feeling shy of Allah Almighty. But if you
find no rejection nor fear of it, and the religious motive disappears, giving room
for showing off, at that point, leave the deed. But this is unlikely, for whoever
starts the work with the intention to do it for Allah Alone, the origin of the
purpose for reward should remain with him.
But you may argue that it is reported from some people that they left the deed
for fear of fame. It is narrated that a man entered upon Ibrahim Ibn Adham
while he was reading in the Mushaf, thereupon he folded it and left recitation. In
justification, he said: "This person should not see that we read the Qur'an
regularly." According to Ibrahim At-Taimi: "If your speech appeals you, then,
keep silent, and if your silence appeals you, then, speak." According to Al-

The quarter of the destructives
526
Hassan: "It was the habit of anyone of them to come upon a harmful thing in the
street, and nothing prevented him from removing it but his fear of fame; and it
was the habit of anyone of them that whenever it was necessary for him to weep,
he would change it into laughter for fear of fame." However, there are many
traditions in support of that argument.
In reply, let's say that this argument is counteracted by numerous narrations
in favor of showing the acts of worship. Al-Hassan's preference of turning from
weeping to laughter and not to remove the harmful things from the road for fear
of fame belongs to preaching. But at the same time, he did not give it up entirely,
given that it is permissible to leave the supererogatory deeds for the same
purpose. But as we talk about the better in this respect, which is fitting only for
the strong apart from the weak, it is to complete the deed and strive to avoid
showing off and be sincere as much as one could. But the masters of work always
remedy themselves by what is in opposition to the better out of their severe fear.
But one should follow the strong and not the weak of men.
That Ibrahim An-Nakh'i folded the Mushaf might be because he knew that he
was to leave recitation once this man came to visit him, and that he would need
to resume recitation once he leaves. As he would be occupied from recitation, he
did not like this man to see him reciting in avoidance of the suspicion of showing
off, given that he intended to leave it during the visit and return to it once again.
But those who did not remove the harmful things from the road, it was those
who feared fame for themselves, and people's devotion to them, and diverting
them from acts of worship, which are more important than removing a harmful
wood from the street. In this way, they left that in order to ensure more
important acts of worship.
The statement of Ibrahim At-Taimi "If speech appeals you, then, keep
silent" might be possibly intended to refer to the permissible kinds of speech
like eloquent speech in stories and the like of them, which summons selfimportance; and the same is true of silence. It is then to turn from a permissible
thing to another permissible thing in avoidance of self-importance. But this
does not apply to the true speech to which one is encouraged to speak. The
statement of Al-Hassan about turning from weeping to laughter and abstention
from removing the harmful things from the road for fear of fame might be a
narration of the states of some weak men who do not know really what is better
in that issue, nor perceive those subtleties. But rather he mentioned that in
order to frighten people from the evil of showing off, and deter them to seek
after it.

The Second Division
This pertains to the dealing with the creatures, in which dangers and evils are
so much grievous. The greatest of those is the office of caliphate, followed by
judging, teaching and preaching and issuing fatwas, and spending money.
Caliphate and ruling are among the best acts of worship if they are done
with justice and sincerity. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” said: "A day to be spent by a just ruler is better than sixty-year
worship of a worshipper who worships Allah individually." (This narration is

Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off

527

reported by At-Tabarani and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Ibn Abbas). How
excellent is a day whose worship is greater than the worship of sixty years. The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said:
"Three will be the first to enter the Garden: the first is the just ruler." (This
narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Ayad Ibn Hammad). Abu
Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Three do not have their invocations
return with failure, one of whom is the just ruler." The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "He who will have his
seat the closest to mine on the Day of Judgement is a just ruler." QThis narration
is reported by Al-Asbahani in his Targhib on the authority of Abu Sa'id AlKhudri).
How great then is that act of worship, which the pious and devout among
men strive themselves to avoid. That is because great danger lies in it. By it
the internal characteristics are motivated, and the love of possession and
majesty, in addition to the power of authority prevails in the heart, and those
are the greatest pleasures in this world. If the ruling is lovable as such, the
ruler seeks to obtain his own fortunes, and is about to follow his own desires
and inclinations, with which he rejects to accept any threat for his ruling,
regardless of being true, and rather does what establishes his authority more
and more, regardless of being false. At this point, he exposes himself to
destruction. Being so, a day to be spent by a wrongful ruler is worse than a
sixty-year wickedness of individual wicked according to the concept given by
the previous Hadith.
For this great danger that lies in it, Umar Ibn Al-Khattab “Allah be pleased
with him” used to say: "Who could take it (the ruling) with all what it contains?"
why not since the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: "There is no ruler of even (as little as) ten people but that on the Day of
Judgement he will come with his hand tied to his neck, and either his justice will
release him, or his injustice will destroy him." Qhis narration is reported by
Ahmad on the authority of Ubadah Ibn As-Samit). When Ma'qil Ibn Yasar “Allah
be pleased with him” was appointed a ruler by Umar “Allah be pleased with
him”, he said to him: "O Commander of Believers! Advise me!" he said: "Sit
down and do not accept it from me."
It is reported on the authority of Al-Hassan that a man was appointed a
ruler by the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
thereupon he said to him: "O Messenger of Allah! Chose the better for me.
He said to him: "Sit at home (and reject the office)." (This narration is
reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Ismah Ibn Malik). It is further
reported on the authority of Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Samurah “Allah be pleased
with him” that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said to him: "O Abd-Ar-Rahman! Do not seek for ruling, for if it is
given to you without seeking for it, you will be helped (by Allah) to achieve its
burdens; and if you seek for it, its burdens will be entrusted to you." (This
narration is reported by both sheikhs).

The quarter of the destructives
Abu Bakr “Allah be pleased with him” said to Abu Rafi' Ibn Umar: "Do not
be a chief over even (as little as) two persons." Then, he was appointed the ruler
of all the Muslims, and he undertook it to the best. Rafi* Ibn Umar asked him:
"Have you not advised me not to be a chief of even (as little as) two persons? But
you have been appointed the ruler of all the followers of Muhammad “peace be
upon him”." On that he said to him: "And even now, I repeat my advice to you,
for whoever does not do justice in it incurs upon himself the curse of Allah
Almighty."
The man lacking insight might see that there is contradiction between the
narrations that are reported about the excellence of ruling and the narrations
about the forbiddance of it. But it is not right. The fact is that the strong in
religion among men should not abstain from the offices of ruling, unlike the
weak among them, who should not betake themselves to it lest they would be
ruined. By the strong I mean him who is not swerved (from the truth) by this
world, nor instigated by his covet of its vanities, nor cares, for the Sake of Allah
Almighty, about the blame of a blamer. It is those in whose sight the people seem
insignificant, and who abstain in this world and get bored of it, overpower and
curb their own selves, and suppress Satan who comes to despair of them. Those
are moved only by the truth, and become motionless only by the truth. They are
fitting for the excellence of ruling and governing.
Whoever knows that he is lacking in those attributes, then, it becomes
unlawful for him to seek for ruling; and whoever experiences himself and finds
that he has the power to persevere the loss of desires and lusts but in fields
other than ruling, and at the same time, fears for himself the temptation of
tasting the pleasure of ruling, there is a debate among the scholars as to whether
or not it is binding upon him to flee from ruling. Some say that it is not binding
upon him for it pertains to the fear of something to occur in the future, and at
present, he finds himself strong enough to adhere to the truth and leave the self
pleasures and delights. But the right is that it is incumbent upon him to take
heed of that, for the self is deceptive in its false claim of the truth and promise
of good. If the self makes a decisive promise to adhere to good, there is fear
lest it might be vulnerable to change because of ruling: What then about the
wavering hesitating self? To abstain from accepting the office of ruling is much
easier than to be sacked after assuming it. Dismissal is severely painful and it is
the divorce for men as said. If one assumes the office of ruling, he would hardly
accept to be sacked, and rather give himself to flattery and adulation, and
negligence of the truth, which throws him into the bottom of the fire of Hell.
If the self is inclined to seek the office of ruling, and forced to beg and
demand, this would be a portent of evil. This is why the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "We do not appoint in our jobs
such of men as asks us for them." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on
the authority of Abu Musa). If you understand the different points of view
concerning the judgment on the strong and the weak, you then would know that
Abu Bakr's advice to Abu Raff Ibn Umar not to be a ruler, and then Abu Bakr's
being appointed the ruler of all the Muslims is not contradictory.
528

529
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off
Judging, being less important and effective than ruling and governing, is
subject to the same regulation. That is because every one in charge of a thing is
regarded a ruler and his authority is effective. To be sure, the reward of judging is
great, provided that one should follow the truth, and the punishment in it is
severe if one deviates from the truth. In this respect, the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "There are three kinds of judges:
two will be in the fire (of Hell), and only one in the Garden." (This narration is
reported by men of Sunan on the authority of Buraidah). The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "He who is appointed a
judge has been slain without a knife." (This narration is reported by the men of
Sunan on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
It is subject to the same regulation of ruling as we have mentioned above, in
the sense that the weak among men, and such of people as gives care to the
pleasures and delights of this world should leave it. But the strong in religion
among men, who are careless about the blame of the blamer for the Sake of
Allah should undertake it. One should not undertake judging in case the rulers
and governors are wrongful, and he finds that he would not be able to give his
judgements unless he flatters and adulates them, and neglects the rights of
people for their sake, for were he to judge on them with the truth, they would
dismiss him. But in case he undertakes it, it becomes incumbent upon him to
demand the rights from them, and not to make the fear of dismissal an excuse
to allow for him to neglect the rights. On the contrary, if he is dismissed, the
responsibility would lapse from him. For this reason, he should rejoice with the
dismissal if he judges with sincerity for the Sake of Allah Almighty. If he does
not accept to be dismissed, then, he should know that he judges out of
following the desire and Satan: how should he expect reward for it? Of a surety,
he will be in the company of the wrongdoers in the lowest bottom of the fire of
Hell.
In regard with preaching, teaching, narrating Hadith, giving fatwas and
religious verdicts, etc which contributes to raise the majesty and position of men
in the hearts of people, their danger is grievous, the same as ruling and judging.
These among the righteous predecessors who feared of that used to flee away
from giving fatwas and religious opinions, as much as they could, saying in this
respect: "To say that 'It is reported from so and so' is one of the gates of this
world; and whoever says 'It is reported to us from so and so' seems as if he says
'Leave a place for me to occupy (in this world)'." Bishr said: "What prevents me
from relating narrations is that I desire to narrate, and I could relate narrations
only when I dislike to narrate."
Furthermore, the preacher finds in the people's submission and impression
for his preaching, a matchless pleasure. If this prevails over his heart, he would be
inclined to every kind of flowery discourse, which appeals to the laymen, and
refrain from every kind of speech which the laymen get bored of, regardless of
being true. That is because he gives entire interest to what moves the hearts of
the laymen and subjugate them to his influence and authority. It is also subject to
the same regulation of ruling and judging, i.e. if one has no motive but to seek

!

The quarter of the destructives
530
majesty and position in the hearts of people, gain wealth through religion, and
show pride over others, he should leave it in opposition to his desire until he
becomes strong enough in religion to feel safe from temptation. At that point, he
could return to it.
But you may argue that this judgement on the religious scholars might
result in the idleness and disappearance of all sciences and branches of
knowledge, and the emergence of ignorance among the people. In reply, let's
say that the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
forbade people to seek ruling, and threatened them of that. He “peace be
upon him" said: "You seek after ruling although it will e a cause of grief and
regret on the Day of Judgement, except for him who undertakes it rightfully."
(This narration is partially reported by Al-Bukhari on the authority of Abu
Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "How good the suckling is, and how bad the weaning is!" (This is a part
of the previous Hadith).
It is a well-known fact that if ruling and governing are idle, both religion
and world would become idle, tumult would spread among the people, security
and safety would vanish, the countries and states would be ruined, and in
general, living would become inoperative. But in spite of all of that, why did he
forbid it? Once, Umar “Allah be pleased with him” beat Ubai Ibn Ka'b “Allah
be pleased with him” when he saw some people following him, although he
used to say about him: "Ubai is the chief and master of Muslims." Although he
used to recite the Qur'an to him, he prevented people from following him, and
said in this respect: "This is a cause of temptation to the followed, and
humiliation for the follower." Umar “Allah be pleased with him” himself used
to preach and teach, and did not abstain from that. A man sought the
permission of Umar “Allah be pleased with him" to preach and admonish the
people after the Morning prayer but he gave him no permission. He asked him:
"Do you prevent me from admonishing and advising the people?" he said: "I
fear you would be blown with pride." He saw in him the desire for position and
majesty through preaching.
Ruling, governing, judging, like preaching are very crucial to the living and
religion of people. Each of them has its own pleasure and temptation, and there
is no difference between them in this issue. But to say that forbidding most
people to engage in them leads to the obliteration of knowledge is wrong. That
the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" forbade most
people to engage in judging did not lead to the idleness of judging. Allah
Almighty promised to support this religion with people who have no portion (in
the hereafter). So, do not engage yourself with the matter of people, for Allah
never wastes them; and rather take care of yourself.
Therefore, if there are in a particular city a group of people who engage in
preaching, for instance, then, the forbiddance does not include all its inhabitants.
If the city has but a single man who engages in preaching, and is recognized for
his good speech, deep influence on the hearts of people, and he gives the
impression that he seeks with his preaching only the Countenance of Allah, we

531
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offshould not prevent him from that: On the contrary, we should encourage him to
engage it, and mortify himself. If he says that he could not overpower himself,
we ask him to engage in preaching and mortify himself as much as is within his
capacity, for we know well that if he leaves preaching, the religion of all the
people would be ruined, for there is none to maintain it other than him. If he
goes on that, and his desire is to seek majesty, then he alone would be ruined.
The safety of the religion of the group is dearer and more important in our sight
than the safety of the religion of an individual. So, we make him redemption for
the people. Perhaps it is he in whom the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: " Allah Almighty supports this religion with people
who have no pordon (in the hereafter)." (This narradon is reported by AnNasa'i).
The real preacher is he who desires for the hereafter and refrains from this
world with its vanides as shown in his speech and outward conduct. But as
regards the flowery discourse and rhymed speech invented by the modern
preachers that do not frighten the people from the punishment of Allah, but
rather causes them to dare to commit sins and mistakes, all of them should be
eliminated from the countries for they are the depudes of imposters and
successors of Satan on earth. But we mean the preacher of good preaching and
beautiful outward, who inwardly intends to be acceptable to the people. In the
Book of Knowledge, what we mentioned concerning the threat and punishment
that await the evil learned is sufficient for showing the obligation of caution of
the evils and afflictions of knowledge.
It is within this context that the following statement of the Messiah “peace
be upon him” should be understood: "O evil scholars! You pray, fast, and give
in charity, but at the same time you do not do what you command others to do,
and study what you do not act upon. How evil is your judgement! You repent
only with words and hopes, but act according to your own desires. What does
avail you to cleanse your bodies and leave your hearts contaminated and
impure? Let me tell you the truth: do not be like the sifter from which the pure
and fine powder comes out and only the dregs remains in it. So are you: you
bring wisdom from your mouths and rancor and hatred remain within your
hearts. O slaves of this world! How should such of you as whose desires from
this world never cease attain the (good fortunes of the) hereafter? Let me tell
you the truth: your hearts are weeping in sigh for your evil deeds. You have
made the world under your tongues, and thrown the deed underneath your feet.
Let me tell you the truth: you have corrupted your hereafter with the
correctness of your world. The correctness of your world is dearer to you than
the righteousness of your hereafter. Which people then are more despicable
than you if you know? Woe to you! Until which time will you continue to
describe the way to the walkers, and you yourself remain in your very places, as
if you invite the inhabitants of this world to leave it for you? Be quiet! Be quiet!
What does avail the dark house to place a lamp on its top if its inside remains
dark and lonely? Similarly, it does not avail you to have the light of knowledge
on your tongues, while your insides remain lonely and idle. O slaves of this

The quarter of the destructives
532
world! You are neither pious slaves nor honored free. The world is about to
uproot you and throw you prone on your faces and then on your nostrils, and
your mistake seize you by your forelocks, and the knowledge behind you drives
you and delivers you to the King, barefooted and naked, Who will show you
your shame, and punish you for your evil deeds." When Al-Muhasibi narrated
this tradition in his book, he mentioned that it refers to the evil learned among
men who are a cause of affliction and temptation to the people, for they desire
for the vanities of this world and give it preference over the hereafter, and
subjugate religion to the world. They are ashamed in this world and will be the
losers in the hereafter.
But you may argue that those evils of preaching and teaching are evident. At
the same time, many narrations exhort to engage in them. The Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said in this respect: "If Allah
guides through you even an individual (to the truth) it will be better for you than
this world and what it contains." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on
the authority of Sahl Ibn Sa'd). the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” further said: "If a caller calls to guidance in which he is
followed by anyone, he will receive his reward and the reward of such of people
as follows him." (This narration is reported by Ibn Majah on the authority of
Anas). Thus, a scholar should be advised to engage in teaching knowledge, but
without the intention to make show of his deeds, just as a praying man who
experiences a stain of showing off mixed with his sincerity is encouraged not to
leave the prayer but rather to complete it, and strive himself (to get rid of
showing off).
In reply to it, it should be known that the excellence and importance of
knowledge are great, like ruling and judging. We do not tell anyone of the
worshippers to leave knowledge for knowledge in itself has no evil. But the real
evil lies in him who intends to make show of his knowledge, by undertaking the
task of preaching and teaching, narrating Hadith, etc. We also do not tell him to
leave it as long as he has a religious motive to do it, even if it is mixed with the
motive of showing off. But if nothing but showing off motivates him, then, to
leave making show of knowledge is more beneficial and much safer for him.
The same is true of the supererogatory prayers. But if the thought of showing
off occurs to him during prayer and he dislikes that, he should not leave the
prayer for its sake, for indeed the evil of showing off in the acts of worship is
weaker than it is in such matters as ruling, judging and preaching and teaching.
In short, we could say that there are three levels: the first pertains to the
offices of ruling, and its evil is very dangerous. For this reason, it was left by
many of the righteous predecessors for fear of that evil. The second pertains to
such acts of worship as fasting, praying, performing Hajj and Umrah, and fighting
in the Way of Allah. Both the strong and the weak among the righteous
predecessors undertook them, and there is no report from anyone of them that
he left that for fear of evil; and this is due to the weakness of evils implied in
them, and the power to overcome them by virtue of completing the worship with
sincerity to Allah Almighty. The third level is in the middle between both

Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off

533

extremes. It is to undertake the offices of preaching, teaching, issuing fatwa,
narrating Hadith, etc. their evils are weaker than those of ruling and judging, but
stronger than those of such acts of worship as prayer. The prayer should not be
left no matter how strong or weak one might be. But one should avert from
himself the passing thought of showing off, unlike the offices of ruling which
should be left by the weak apart from the strong; and the offices of knowledge lie
in the middle between both. Whoever experiences the evil of knowledge comes
to know that one more resembles rulers and governors, and it is safer for the
weak to beware of it; and Allah knows best.
There lies a fourth level, i.e. to gather wealth and distribute it on these eligible
to take it. To be sure, spending and showing generosity bring about the praise
and thanks of people, and causing others to become happy gives rise to a
pleasure in the soul. But at the same time, many evils lie in that. For this reason,
when Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him" was asked about two men,
one demanded his sustenance and no more, and the other demanded more and
gave in charity what is beyond his sustenance, he said: "The sitter (who demands
only his sustenance) is much better." That is because they knew well that little
safety lies in this world, and it is more secure to abstain in it in order to come
closer to Allah Almighty. According to Abu Ad-Darda' “Allah be pleased with
him”: "I will not be pleased to stand at the threshold of the mosque of
Damascus, and receive a daily earnings of fifty Dinars, even to give them in
charity. Behold! I do not forbid trade, but I like to be of those whom no trade
nor transaction divert from the celebradon of Allah Almighty."
There is a debate among the religious scholars over that matter. Some say that
if one demands this world from lawful sources, is safe from its evils, and gives in
charity as much as he could, it will be better than to engage in supererogatory acts
and deeds of worship. Others say that to sit in permanent celebration of Allah
Almighty is better than to engage in anything that diverts from Allah Almighty.
The Messiah “peace be upon him” said in this issue: "O seeker of world to be
dutiful therewith, it is more dudful for you to leave it." To be sure, the
remembrance of Allah Almighty is much better and greater. This is due to him
who is safe from the evils. But if one is exposed to the evil of showing off, of a
surety, it will be more dudful for him to leave the world entirely, and rather
engage in remembrance of Allah Almighty.
In short, many evils arise in all deeds in which one deals with the people, and
this brings about pleasure in the soul. It is better for one to do it and avert evils
from himself. If he fails, let him consider, strive himself as much as he could,
seek the advice of his heart, compare evil with good, do what he is guided to by
the light of knowledge, and give no care to his natural inclination. In total, what is
felt to be easier upon the hart is frequendy more harmful upon him, for the self
more often points out evil and hardly takes pleasure from good. But the details of
these matters could not be judged by simple affirmation and negation: They are
entrusted to the diligence of the heart and mind to determine what is more right
and fitting for his religion, and leave what he doubts to what he doubts not.
Furthermore, an ignorant might be deceived in this respect. He might collect

The quarter of the destructives
534
wealth and withhold it and abstain from spending it for fear of the evil of
showing off; and this is evident niggardliness. There is no difference that to
distribute money on what is permissible, in addition to the charitable gifts is
much better than to withhold it. But the difference is over him who needs to gain
his earnings, as to whether it is better for him to gain and spend or to devote
himself to the remembrance of Allah Almighty due to the evils that lie in earning.
As for the money that is gained from lawful sources, to distribute it (on what is
permissible) is better than to withhold it.
You may ask: "By which sign could you distinguish the scholar or preacher
who is sincere and true to his religion from him whose purpose is to make show
of his deed?" in reply to it, let's say that there are many signs for that, one of
which is that if emerges a preacher or scholar who is better than him in
knowledge and preaching, to whom the people are more inclined, he never envies
him. It is true that Ghibtah (harmless jealousy) i.e. to desire for himself the like of
his knowledge is blameworthy. Another sign is that when the celebrities and
dignitaries attend his gathering, his speech never changes: on the contrary, it
remains the same as it was before their arrival. This means that he looks at all the
people with the same eye. A third one is that he dislikes people to follow him in
the streets or markets. There are many other signs for that, which are beyond
calculation.
It is reported on the authority of Sa'id Ibn Abu Marwan that he said: I was
sitting beside Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him" when Al-Hajjaj
entered the mosque from one of its gates on a yellow workhorse and the guards
were surrounding him. He turned sideways in the mosque, and saw no ringshaped gathering more crowded with people than that of Al-Hassan. He turned
towards it and when he became near it he dismounted and walked towards AlHassan who, on seeing him, moved away a bit for him to sit, and so I did, and he
came and sat in between us. Al-Hassan was delivering the same speech he used to
deliver everyday, which he did not interrupt. I said to myself: "I will consider AlHassan today, and see whether the presence of Al-Hajjaj would lead him to make
any change in his speech, either by addition to become closer to him, or by
reduction in awe of him." But Al-Hassan spoke the same words he used to speak,
without the least change. When he finished from his speech, giving no care to AlHajjaj, the latter raised his hand and patted on the shoulder of Al-Hassan and
said: "This sheikh is true and dutiful. Stick to those gatherings and the like of
them and take them a custom for you. Indeed, I was reported that the Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "The gatherings of
remembrance (of Allah) are the gardens of Paradise." Had it not been for the
responsibility of ruling people that is entrusted to us (which occupies us more
often), surely, you would not have attended those gatherings more than us, in
view of our knowledge of their excellence."
Then, Al-Hajjaj smiled and went on delivering a speech so impressive that AlHassan and his companions were astonished by its eloquence and elegance.
When he finished he stood and left. Then, a man from the inhabitants of Sham
came and said: "O Muslim servants of Allah! Do you not wonder? I am an aged

Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off

535

old man who fights in the Way of Allah, which costs me a horse, a mule and a
tent. My income is no more than three hundred Dirhams, and I have seven
daughters." He complained of his state of destitution, until Al-Hassan and his
companions sympathized for him. When the man finished from his speech, AlHassan raised his head and said: "What is the matter with them, may Allah kill
them? They have taken the servants of Allah as subjects, and wealth as their
possession, and killed the people for Dirham and Dinar. If one of them fights an
enemy of Allah, he would fight in graceful tents and on racing mules, and at the
same time, if he makes his brother fight, he would make him fight on foot and as
hungry." Al-Hassan did not finish before he mentioned them with the most
shameful of their misdeeds.
A man from the inhabitants of Sham who was sitting in the company of AlHassan stood and came to Al-Hajjaj, and went about with calumnies against AlHassan. A short while later, the couriers of Al-Hajjaj came to invite Al-Hassan to
him. He went with them and we feared for him due to the severity of his speech
he had delivered. Some time later, Al-Hassan returned to his gathering smiling,
and he hardly smiled. He came until he sat in his gathering. He then exalted
trustworthiness and said: "Indeed, you sit with us by virtue of trustworthiness,
thinking that treachery lies only in the money. Nay! The greatest treachery is that
a man sits with us and we feel confident of him, and then he goes and carries out
calumnies against us. I went to this man (Al-Hajjaj), who asked me to hold back
my tongue and abstain from saying that "If one of them fights an enemy of Allah,
he would fight in graceful tents and on racing mules, and at the same time, if he
makes his brother fight, he would make him fight on foot and as hungry." He
said to me: "I do not think you instigate the people against us, and I do not doubt
your sincerity in advice." However, Allah Almighty averted his evil from me." AlHassan rode his donkey with the intention to go home and when he turned, he
saw some people following him. He asked them: "Do you have any need to fulfill
for you? If you have no need, then, return."
It is by those signs that the sincere and true scholars and preachers could
be distinguishable. When you see scholars have mutual hatred, envy and hate
each other, and behave in opposition to and not in cooperation with each
other, you should know that they have sold their hereafter for their world:
they will be the losers. O Allah! Bestow mercy upon us, O Most Merciful of
those who show mercy.

CHAPTER TEN
EXPOSITION OF WHAT IS VALID FOR A SERVANT TO DO TO PRACTICE
HIS ACTS OF WORSHIP BECAUSE OF PEOPLE S SEEING HIM
It should be known that a man might spend the night with some people, and
all or some of them might stand for Tahajjud prayer. It is the habit of that man to
stand for Tahajjud prayer for a portion of the night whenever he is in his house.
But he is motivated by those to stand and pray more in agreement with them, or
at least pray if he is not accustomed to pray in the house. Similarly, he might be in
a place where its occupants observe voluntary fasts, thereupon he is motivated by
their act to observe fast, and had it not been for that, he would not have

The quarter of the destructives
536
observed fasts. This might be thought of as showing off, and being so, one is
advised to leave die deed. But even, this is not right. It is subject to profound
details.
Every faithful believer has the desire to worship Allah Almighty, to stand for
supererogatory prayer at night, and observe voluntary fasts by day. But he is
hindered by impediments, prevented by occupations, and overpowered by desires
and lusts, and possessed by heedlessness. It may be that his seeing others do the
deed is a means to avert that heedlessness, impediments or occupations. A man
in his house might be hindered from standing for Tahajjud prayer by his lying on
a smooth bed, enjoying of his wife, talking with his family, etc. when he spends
the night in another house, those impediments would be removed from him
which weaken his desire for good. That is because by seeing them, he is
motivated to do good, as he sees them having devoted themselves to Allah
Almighty, and turned away from this world and its occupations. When he looks
at them, he is motivated to compete them, and it becomes difficult upon him to
let them excel him in good. Being so, what stimulates him is a religious motive
and not showing off.
Similarly, he might find it difficult upon him to observe voluntary fasts in his
house due to the availability of the delicious pleasant kinds of food, which he
could not abstain from. But when those kinds of food are lacking, fasting
becomes easy upon him supported by the religious motive. It is well-known that
the present desires are impediments and motives that overpower the religious
motive. If one is safe from them, the religious motive becomes stronger. The
cause that lies behind all of that is one's seeing the people do the deeds and acts
of worship. But at the same time, Satan suggests to him not to do the deed, lest
he would be a maker of show. Furthermore, his desire for doing more might be
caused by his seeing them and fear of being dispraised by them, particularly if
they think he stands for Tahajjud prayer all the night. That is because he does not
accept to let himself fall from their sight, and rather he prefers to preserve his
position in their hearts. At that point, Satan says to him: "Pray for you are sincere,
and you do not pray for their sake, but for the Sake of Allah Almighty. You did
not pray in your house every night because of the much impediments and
occupations; and now you are motivated by the desire to remove the
impediments and not by your desire for their seeing you."
This matter is suspicious except for those of deep insight and
understanding. If one knows that the motive is showing off, he should not add
to what he used to do even a single rak'ah for by so doing, he disobeys AJLlah
when he seeks the praise of people through acts of worship. If the motive is to
remove the impediments and occupations, his Ghibtah (harmless jealousy) to
compete them, let him agree with them. The sign of that is to wonder that were
he to see them praying from behind a screen where they see him not, should he
desire to pray while they do not see him? If he has such desire, let him do it, for
in this case it is the religious motive which stimulates him; and if he finds
difficult upon himself to pray, he should leave it, for the motive is showing off.
On

Friday, one might become active to go to attend the prayer in the

537
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing offmosque more than he does on any day else. Such activity might be caused by his
love for people's praise, or by his imitation of their activity, and his heedlessness
might be removed by their devotion to Allah Almighty. In this case, the religious
motive might be mixed with his tendency to the love for people's praise. If he
finds that the religious motive is preponderant, he then should condnue to do the
deed, and develop within himself the aversion for the love of praise. Similarly,
one might see some people weeping, thereupon he weeps in imitation of them,
not for the sake of showing off but for fear of Allah Almighty. Were he only to
hear the speech (which led the people to weep), he might not weep. But people's
weeping helps make the heart smooth. At other times, he might not be ready to
weep for their weeping, but he forces himself to weep, once for the sake of
showing off, and once with sincerity, for fear of his heart to become hardened,
when they weep while his eyes shed no tears. However, this might likely be
praiseworthy. The sign of sincerity is to offer to him the suggestion that were he
to hear their weeping from behind a screen where they see him not, would he
weep for fear of his heart to become hardened, giving no importance to his
absence from their sight? If he weeps only for fear that they would accuse him of
being heart-hardened, he should give up weeping. Luqman “peace be upon him”
said to his son: "Do not show to the people that you fear Allah, perchance they
would honour you, while your heart is wicked." The same is true of the other acts
and deeds of worship.
All of those belong to the intrigues of Satan and self evil tendencies. If any of
them occurs to his mind, he should soon remember that were the people to know
his hypocrisy and showing off, and learn what is lurking in his conscience, surely,
they would hate him. But Allah Almighty knows well what is lurking in his
conscience, for which He hates him more than they do. It is reported in a
particular narration: "Seek refuge with Allah from the submission caused by
hypocrisy." (This narration is reported by AJ-Baihaqi on the authority of Abu
Bakr As-Siddiq). The submission caused by hypocrisy is that the organs apart
from the heart become submissive.
You should observe your heart in every thought that occurs to your mind,
and consider its sources. If it is for the Sake of Allah, then, go on it, but with
caution of having any hidden implication of showing off, which is like the
creeping of ants. Furthermore, be in awe of your worship, whether or not it
would be accepted by Allah, for fear of your sincerity in it. You should also
beware of having the thought of people's praise occur to you anew after starting
the deed with sincerity. However, this more often happens. If it happens to you,
then, think that Allah Almighty knows you well, and hates you for your showing
off. Remember also the statement of one of the three persons who argue Job
“peace be upon him”: "O Job! Do you not know that one's disclosure of deeds
with which he used to deceive himself always misleads him, and that he is
rewarded only for his real intention?" another one of them said: "O Job! Do you
not know that those who maintain their outward and neglect their inward, their
faces would blacken when they ask Allah Most Gracious for their needs?"
A righteous predecessor used to say: "O Allah! I seek refuge with You from

The quarter of the destructives
538
having the people see that I fear You, although You hate me." Ali Ibn Al-Hussain
“Allah be pleased with him” used to supplicate: "O Allah! I seek refuge with You
from having my outward seem good in the sight of people, while my inward
hideous in Your Sight, from maintaining my showing off before the people, and
neglecting that which You know about myself, from showing to the people the
best of my affairs, and to you the worst of my deeds, in order to come close to
the people with my good deeds, and flee away from them to You with my evil
deeds, with the result that Your displeasure and wrath become due upon me: save
me from all of that, O (Allah) Lord of the worlds."
Those are some evils of showing off. One should observe his heart in order
to make sense of them. According to a particular narration: "Showing off has
seventy doors." Some of them are more abstruse than others; and some are as
hidden as the creeping of ants, and some more hidden than the creeping of ants.
How would one perceive that which is more hidden than the creeping of ants
except by strong inspection and observation? And would that he is able to
perceive it after doing his best to do so. How should one covet of perceiving it
without inspecting the heart and examining the soul in order to know well its
deception. We ask Allah Almighty to provide us with wellbeing by virtue of His
favor, generosity and kindness.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
EXPOSmON OF WHAT IS BINDING UPON A NOVICE TO DO BEFORE
AND AFTER AN ACT OF WORSHIP
It should be known that it is incumbent upon the novice to be satisfied, in all
acts of worship, with the knowledge of AJlah Almighty, and no one else; and
none is satisfied with the knowledge of Allah but he who fears none and expects
reward from none but Allah Almighty, unlike him who fears anyone else, and has
hope in him, in which case he wishes to let him know the best of his affairs and
states. If one finds himself in that state, he should then instill with himself the
aversion for it, from his heart and faith, due to the danger of wrath and anger of
Allah that lies in it. He should also observe himself while doing the great difficult
acts of worship which none could do but he, for at that point, the self is about to
boil out of longing for disclosing the deed of worship, saying: "If the people
know such a great act/fear/weeping from you, they would fall in prostration to
you (out of honouring you). Since none among the people has the power to do
the like of it, how do you accept to conceal it? If you conceal it, the people would
ignore your rank and underestimate your position, and are deprived of taking you
as an example to follow." In this matter, one should make firm his feet, and, in
opposition to his great deed, remember the greatness of the dominion of the
hereafter, the everlasting bliss of the Garden, and the momentous anger and
wrath of Allah upon him who asks for his deed of worship a reward from His
servants.
He should also know that if his disclosing the deed to anyone else is dear to
him, it causes him to fall from the Sight of Allah Almighty, and suffers his great
deed to be fruitless. In this respect, let him say to himself: "How should I follow
that great deed by the people's praise for it, given that the people are too

Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off-

539

powerless to avail me in sustenance or death?" He should persist in that thought
and further say: "It is only the strong among men who are able to adhere to
sincerity; but those who mix (showing off with their deeds), sincerity is not their
portion." By saying and thinking so, he shall have no need to strive himself for
sincerity. Indeed, the need of the person who mixes (showing off with his deed)
to strive himself for sincerity is more pressing, for if the obligatory deeds of the
pious become corrupt, his supererogatory deeds will continue to suffice him,
unlike the mixer, whose obligatory deeds could hardly be free from shortage, and
they are always in need to be amended by the supererogatory deeds. If they are
not fauldess, he would be punished for the shortage of his obligatory deeds.
Thus, the mixer has more need for sincerity. It is narrated on the authority of
Tamim Ad-Dari that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: “The first thing for which a servant will be reckoned on the Day of
Judgement is his (obligatory) prayers: If he completed it, it would be written as
addidonal (good deed) for him. But if he did not complete it, Allah Almighty
would say to His angels: “Look: Do you find any voluntary (prayers) to be
offered by My servant therewith to complete whatever obligatory (prayers) he
missed?” If this is available, it is good, otherwise, he would be seized by his hands
and feet and thrown into the fire of Hell.” (This narration is reported by both
Abu Dawud and Ibn Majah).
The mixer will come on the Day of Judgement with his obligatory deeds
short, and his sins very much. So, he needs to strive to mend the obligatory deeds
and plot out his sins. This could not be done except by being sincere in doing the
supererogatory deeds. But the pious strives to increase his degrees, in a way that
if his optional deeds become fruitless, his good deeds would remain to overweigh
his evil ones, thereby he would enter the Garden.
Thus, one should not have a desire for anyone other than Allah Almighty to
know about his deeds, in order that his supererogatory deeds would be held valid.
He should abide by that also after finishing from the deed, in the sense that he
should neither show nor talk about it. If he does all of that, he should also remain
in awe of his deed, lest something of hidden showing off might have been mixed
with his intention, which stands against the acceptance of his work. Both awe and
doubt should accompany him during and after finishing from the work, but not
on assuming it. On assuming the work, he should be certain that he is sincere and
that he intends by his work only the Countenance of Allah Almighty. But a short
moment after he starts the work, and because of an unintentional heedlessness or
forgetfulness, he experiences a fear of any hidden stain of showing off or
haughtiness that might render fruitless his work. But in this way, his hope should
overweigh his fear, for he is certain that at least he has assumed the work with
sincerity. For this reason, the pleasure of private conversation with Allah and
doing the acts of worship becomes so much, for in sincerity one is certain, while
in showing off he is only doubtful. His fear caused by that doubt is to
compensate for any passing thought or feeling of showing off that might occur to
him heedlessly.
On the other hand, whoever comes close to Allah Almighty by doing his best

540
The quarter of the destructives
to fulfill the needs of people, and benefit them with knowledge, should put in his
mind the expectation of the reward for causing pleasure to whomever he fulfills
his need or teaches knowledge. Indeed, he should expect the reward for that
from Allah Almighty, and not any praise or thanks from anyone else lest his work
would become fruidess. To be sure, if he expects anything from whomever he
fulfills his need or teaches knowledge, he will be regarded to have received the
reward for his work. It is true that if he does not expect anything of that, and
does not intend but the reward from Allah Almighty, he will have the like of his
reward. But there is no blame on him if his pupil serves him, on condition that he
has no previous expectation for it. We hope this would not frustrate his work.
But in spite of that, many scholars used to beware of that. It is reported that a
man fell in a well of water and some people came and dropped a rope to raise
him. He took an oath that none to whom he has read even a single Verse of the
Qur'an or heard from him a Prophetic narration should stand with them, lest his
work would become fruitless. Shaqiq Al-Balkhi said: "I presented a dress to
Sufyan Ath-Thawri who returned it to me thereupon I said to him: "O Abu
Abdullah! I am not of those who hear the Prophetic narrations from you to
return my gift to me." He said: "I know that. But your brother hears Hadith from
me, and I fear I would incline to him more than I do to anyone else."
A man brought one or two handfuls of Dirhams to Sufyan Ath-Thawri and
his father was a friend of him, and Sufyan used to frequent him. The man asked
him: "O Abu Abdullah! Do you feel something bad about my father?" He said:
"May Allah bestow mercy upon your father. He was such and such..." and he
praised him. He said: "O Abu Abdullah! You know how this wealth has become
mine. I like that you should take this money to seek its aid in spending on your
dependents." Sufyan accepted it from him. But when he came out, Sufyan said to
his son: "O Mubarak! Catch and return him to me." He caught and invited him
and when he entered he said to him: "I like that you should take back your
money." He asked him pressingly until he took it back. Since the bond of
brotherhood that was between him and his father was for the Sake of Allah
Almighty, he seemed to have disliked to take money because of that. His son
said: When the man came out I could not help saying to my father: "May Allah
bestow mercy upon you! What kind of heart is yours? Do you not think that you
have children? Do you not show mercy to me, my brothers, and family?" When I
worried him with my questions, he said to me: "O Mubarak! You would really eat
it with pleasure and satisfaction, and I would be questioned about it on the Day
of Judgement."
The scholar then should abide by the expectation of reward from Allah
Almighty, and nothing else, whereas the learner should abide by praising and
thanking Allah Almighty for His favor on him, and seeking the high rank in
His Sight, and expecting the reward from Him, giving no care to his position
in the sight of his teacher or the people. Perhaps the learner thinks that he has
the right to make show of his obedience to his teacher in order to obtain the
high position in his heart. But this is a big mistake, for if he intends by his
obedience anyone else other than Allah Almighty, he will lose immediately.

541
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off
The knowledge might or might not benefit. He should learn for the Sake of
Allah, worship none but Allah, and serve his teacher only for the Sake of
Allah Almighty, not for the purpose of having a good position in his heart,
particularly if he likes his learning to be an act of worship to Allah Almighty.
The servants are commanded to worship none but Allah, and intend by their
obedience none but Allah. Similarly, whoever serves his parents should not do
so to seek the position in their hearts, except in the sense that Allah's pleasure
with him lies in their contentment with him. He should not make show of his
obedience to have a position in the sight of his parents, for this is an
immediate sin, and sooner or later, his showing off would inevitably be
uncovered by Allah Almighty, and his position would subsequently fall from
their eyes.
Nevertheless, the ascetic who isolates himself from the people, should abide
by the permanent celebration of Allah Almighty, and give no importance to make
his asceticism known to anyone else other than Allah Almighty, lest the seed of
showing off would be planted in his heart. Being so, the acts of worship in
solitude become easy upon him. Ibrahim Ibn Adham said: "I have learnt
knowledge from a monk called Sam'an. I entered his monastery and asked him:
"O Sam'an! How long have you been here?" he said: "Seventy years." I further
asked: "What is your food?" he said: "O Hanafi! What has caused you to raise
that question to me?" I said: "I just like to know." He said: "A single grain of pea
every night." I asked him: "Then, what is that in your heart which helps you be
satisfied only with a single pea every night?" he said: "Do you see that church?" I
answered in the affirmative, thereupon he said: "Every year, its dwellers come on
one day to adorn my monastery, circumambulate round it, and honour me. So,
every time I feel worship heavy on my soul, I soon remind it of the honour of
that hour. In this way, I endure the effort of a whole year just for the honour I
receive in that hour. So, O Hanafi, endure the effort of one hour in order to
receive honour for the whole of your lifetime." The knowledge then was inspired
to me.
He asked me: "Should I give you more or you are satisfied?" I said:" Nay, give
me more." He asked me to dismount of the monastery and then he gave me a pot
containing twenty grains of pea. He said to me: "Enter the church for they have
seen what I gave you." The Christians gathered to me and asked: "O Hanafi!
What is that which the monk has given to you?" I said: "Something of his
sustenance." They said: "What do you do with it since we have more right over it
than you?" they asked me to haggle with them over it and I suggested twenty
Dinars, which they gave to me. I took the money in exchange for the pea. I
returned to the monk who asked me what I had done. I said: "I have sold that to
them for twenty Dinars." He asked me about the price and I told him: "Twenty
Dinars." On that he said: "You have made a mistake! Had you haggled with them
to give you even as much as twenty thousand Dinars, they would have agreed to
do. That is the honour of whomever you worship not. What about the honour of
Him Whom you worship? O Hanafi! Devote yourself wholeheartedly to your
Lord, and give up going and returning."

The quarter of the destructives
The point is that the feeling of honour in the hearts is a motive to worship
in solitude. But a servant might not feel it at all. Anyway, he should abide by
caution of it. The sign of that is that men should be in the same rank as
animals in his sight. If they change their thought of him, he should not be
scared nor disturbed, except in so far as he has a weak aversion for that,
which he should repel at once by virtue of his mind and faith. Were he to be
in worship and the people to know him, that would not cause him to add
more to his worship, nor would it please him that the people know about it.
But in case he entertains a simple pleasure, it will be a sign of his weakness.
But if he is able to repel it with the aversion for it he has in his mind, and by
virtue of his faith, which causes him to hasten to reject that pleasure, his
endeavor is expected not to fail.
However, if he increases in piety and anguish in order that they would not
rejoice at him, there is no blame. But a kind of deception lies in it, for the soul
might have a hidden desire for making show of piety, and give a good reason for
seeking anguish. None is saved from that but he who has a firm faith that there is
none in existence but Allah Almighty. This causes him to do the same work
which, being even alone on the surface of the earth, would do. This means that
his heart gives no care to the people except in so far as it is in the form of passing
thoughts, too weak to remove. Being so, he never changes by the people's seeing
him.
The sign of truthfulness in this is that if he has two companions, one rich and
another poor, both would be in the same posidon in his heart, except in case one
of them has more knowledge and piety. Whoever then gets comforted with
seeing the rich more than the poor, he is a covetous maker of show, otherwise,
seeing the poor increases the desire for the hereafter, and endears neediness and
meekness to the heart, whereas seeing the rich gives a different impression. It is
reported that the rich were not seen humiliated in a gathering more than they
were seen in the gathering of Sufyan Ath-Thawri. He used to make them sit in
the rear, and bring the poor forward to the extent that they wished would that
they were poor in his gathering.
It is true that you have the right to honour the rich more if he is closer to you
in relation, or there is a bond of friendship between you and him, but in the sense
that were the poor to have the same from you, you would not give the rich
priority to him at all. To be sure, the poor is dearer to Allah Almighty than the
rich. In this way, your preference of the rich would be caused by your covet of
his richness, and desire for making show before him. But even, if you deal with
them equally in the gathering, it is feared that you might probably show wisdom
and piety to the rich more than the poor. This is evidently hidden showing off or
covet as Ibn As-Simak said to his slave-girl: "What is the matter with me that if I
come to Baghdad, the gates of wisdom would be opened to me?" He said:
"Indeed, the covet sharpens your tongue." She has told the truth. One speaks in
the presence of a rich what he speaks not in the presence of a poor; and the same
is true of piety.
Self intrigues in this respect are countless. Nothing saves you from them but
542

543
Book eight: Condemnation of majesty and showing off
to drive anything away from your heart other than Allah Almighty, live in awe for
yourself for your entire lifetime, and accept not the fire for it because of the
embittering desires and lusts. You should be like a king in this world who is wellestablished in pleasures and lusts, and he suffers illness in his body, and he fears
destruction might overtake him at any time. But at the same time, he knows well
that were he to protect himself by striving against his desires and lusts, he would
live and his kingdom would survive. Being certain of that, he comes to sit with
physicians and chemists, and gets himself accustomed to drink bitter medicines,
abscond all pleasures and keep patient on them. Although his body grows thinner
day by day, his illness decreases gradually because of self protection he abides by.
Every time his soul attracts him to a particular desire, he soon remembers the
subsequent pains and troubles he might receive, which brings him to death that is
to separate him from his kingdom, a thing at which his enemies might glee.
Similarly, every time he feels it difficult upon himself to drink a bitter medicine,
he soon remembers the cure he will get benefit from because of it, which is the
cause of enjoyment of his kingdom and abiding bliss.
Similarly, the faithful believer who seeks for the dominion of the hereafter
protects himself from all that might ruin it, i.e. the pleasures and splendor of this
world, from which he takes only the minimum requirements, and gives
preference to thinness, wilt, loneliness, solitude, grief and fear, over affability with
the people, for fear the wrath of Allah would become due upon him, thereby he
would be ruined, and in the hope of being saved from His punishment. Because
of his certainty of faith, his belief in the good end of his journey, and in the
abiding bliss that is prepared for him, under the shade of the pleasure and
satisfaction of Allah with him, all of that becomes easy upon him. He also knows
that Allah Almighty is Most Merciful and Kind to His servants who seek His
Countenance, and helps them please Him well. Had He willed, he could make
them free of such trouble. But He Almighty liked to test them, and know how
true they are to their will, out of His wisdom and justice.
If one endures the trouble in the beginning, Allah Almighty will turn to
facilitate the matter to him, remove burdens from him, make it easy upon him to
persevere, endear obedience to his heart, and bestow therefrom upon him of the
pleasure of private conversation (with Allah Almighty) what entertains him from
all other pleasures, help him deaden all desires and lusts, have the best leadership
of him, and provide him with His aid. It is the habit of the Generous not to
suffer to be lost the endeavor of the one who has hope in Him, nor to frustrate
the expectation of the lover. It is He Almighty Who says: "Whoever draws as
little as a span close to Me, I draw as much as a cubit close to him. He further
says: "The longing of the pious for meeting Me has become long, and My longing
for meeting them is greater." For this reason, a servant should be serious, faithful,
truthful and sincere in the beginning of his endeavor, and spare no effort to draw
close to Him, as it is fitting for His generosity, bounty, mercy and kindness.
End of the Book of Condemnation of majesty and showing off; and praise be
to Allah Alone.

DjMtteoj iOJ arepice anil \miSa
It is the ninth book of the quarter of destructives
In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Praise be to Allah, the Creator, the Evolver, the Bestower of Forms (or
Colours), the Sovereign, the Holy One, the Source of Peace (and Perfection), the
Guardian of Faith, the Preserver of Safety, the Exalted in Might, the Irresistible,
the Supreme, Whom none is able to turn from His Glory, the Irresistible to
Whom every strong tyrant is submissive in humiliation, and every arrogant, in the
shade of His Honour, is poor and humble, the Supreme, Whom nothing could
avert His will, the Free of Want, Who has no partner nor anyone to dispute Him,
the Omnipotent, Whose brilliance and Majesty have dazzled the sights of all the
creatures, Who has established Himself over the glorious Throne (of Majesty),
Who is beyond the description and appreciation of all the Prophets and
Messengers, that His angels and Prophets “peace be upon them” acknowledged
their failure to encompass in description and understanding His Majesty and
Glory, Whose Power and Supremacy broke the dominion of Khosraus and
Caesars, for indeed Greatness is His lower garment, and Supremacy is His upper
garment, and whoever disputes with Him over any of both would be given to
destruction: Exalted and Glorified be He, and Hallowed be His Names.
Allah's blessing and peace, as much as it is fitting, be upon Muhammad, upon
whom the light that illuminating over all the universe was sent, as well as upon
his family and companions, Allah's lovers, friends, allies, and well-chosen from
among His creatures.
Coming to the point:
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Allah Almighty says: "No doubt, Greatness represents My lower garment, and
supremacy My upper garment; and whoever disputes with Me over any of both,
would be broken by Me." (This narration is reported by Al-Hakim). The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said:
"There are three destructives: niggardliness that is obeyed, an inclination that is
followed, and self-vanity." (This narration is reported by Al-Bazzar, At-Tabarani
and AJ-Baihaqi on the authority of Anas). Both arrogance and haughtiness are
destructive diseases, and both arrogant and haughty are hateful sick in the Sight
of Allah Almighty.
If our purpose from this quarter of the revival of religion sciences is to clarify
the destructive evils and sins, it is incumbent upon us then to explain what
arrogance and vanity are. Indeed, they are among the shameful deeds. We are
going to explain them in two parts: the first part pertains to arrogance, and the
other to vanity.
544

545

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity

PART ONE
CONDEMNATION OF ARROGANCE
It includes:
Exposition of condemnation of arrogance
Exposition of condemnation of boasting
Exposition of excellence of humbleness
Exposition of the real nature and evil of arrogance
Exposition of him to whom one behaves arrogantly; and the levels of
arrogance
Exposition of constituents of arrogance
Exposition of motives of arrogance
Exposition of the manners of the humble
Exposition of remedy of arrogance
Exposition of self-discipline to acquire the character of humbleness; and
Nypraiseworthy and blameworthy extent of humbleness

CHAPTER ONE
EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF ARROGANCE
Allah Almighty has condemned arrogance and criticized every arrogant
boaster in many places of His Book. He Almighty said: " Those who behave
arrogantly on the earth in defiance of right, them will I turn away from My
Signs: even if they see all the Signs, they will not believe in them." (Al-A'raf
146)
A C|p5

^

Ijji

<4

^

He further said: "Thus does Allah seal up every heart of arrogant and
obstinate transgressors." (Ghafir 35)
He said: "But they sought victory and decision (there and then), and
frustration was the lot of every Powerful obstinate transgressor." (Ibrahim 15)
jfer
3^
He Almighty said too: "Undoubtedly, Allah does know what they conceal,
and what they reveal: verily He loves not the arrogant." (An-Nahl 23)
He also said: " Indeed they have an arrogant conceit of themselves, and
mighty is the insolence of their impiety!" (Al-Furqan 21)
All I

I JjjJ ^

He said too: "but those who are too arrogant to serve Me will surely find
themselves in Hell, in humiliation!" (Ghafir 60)

The quarter of the destructives
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"None shall enter the Garden, in whose heart there is the weight of a mustard
seed of arrogance; and none shall enter the fire (of Hell), in whose heart there is
the weight of a mustard seed of faith." (This narration is reported by Muslim on
the authority of Ibn Mas'ud). Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” said:
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Allah
Almighty says: "No doubt, Greatness represents My lower garment, and
supremacy My upper garment; and whoever disputes with Me over any of both, I
would throw him into (the fire of) Hell, and I would not care." (This narration is
reported by Muslim, Abu Dawud and Ibn Majah).
546

It is narrated on the authority of Abu Salamah Ibn Abd-Ar-Rahman that
he said: Both Abdullah Ibn Umar and Abdullah Ibn Amr “Allah be pleased
with them” met on Safa (mountain), and stopped for a while and then
Abdullah Ibn Amr went while Abdullah Ibn Umar remained and went on
weeping. They asked him: "What does cause you to weep O Abu Abd-ArRahman?" He said: "This, i.e. Abdullah Ibn Amr, pretends that he heard the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” saying: "He
who has in his heart a mustard seed's weight of arrogance, Allah would throw
him prone on his face into the fire (of Hell)." (This narration is reported by
Ahmad and Al-Baihaqi). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” further said: "A man would continue to feel self-important until
he is enrolled among the tyrants, with the result that he would receive the
same punishment they receive." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on
the authority of Salamah Ibn Al-Akwa').
It is reported that Solomon, son of David “peace be upon them” one day
ordered men, jinn, animals and birds to set out, and they set out in two
hundred thousand each. He was raised until he heard the voice of angels
glorifying (Allah Almighty) in the heavens, and was lowered until his feet
touched the sea, whereas he heard a voice saying: "If there is, in the heart of
your companion, the weight of a mustard's seed of arrogance, I would cause
him to sink down farther than I have raised him up." The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "There will come out from the
fire (of Hell) a neck having two hearing ears, two seeing eyes, and a speaking
tongue. It will say: "I have been entrusted to deal with three: every obstinate
tyrant, every one who associated partners with Allah in worship, and the
picture makers." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority
of Abu Hurairah).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "No
niggard, nor a tyrant nor a bad-mannered will enter the Garden." It is further
narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"There was a dispute between the Hell and the Paradise and it (the Hell) said:
"The haughty and the proud would find abode in me." The Paradise said: "The
meek and the humble would find their abode in me." On that Allah “Exalted and
Glorified be He” (addressing the Paradise) said: "You are only My Mercy by

I
I

1

l

547
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
means of which I shall show mercy to those whom I wish." (addressing the Hell)
He said: "You are (the means) of My punishment by which I punish those of My
servants whom I wish, but each one of you would have its fill." (This narration is
reported by both sheikhs).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"What an evil servant is he who tyrannizes and behaves arrogandy, forgetting
the Supreme Irresistible! What an evil servant is he who tyrannizes and boasts,
forgetting the Most Supreme, Most High! What an evil servant is he who
neglects and takes no heed, forgetting the graves and trials! What an evil
servant is he who transgresses and oppresses, forgetting the beginning and the
end!" (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Asma'
Bint Umais). It is reported on the authority of Thabit that he said: We have
been informed that it was said to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him”: "O Messenger of Allah! How arrogant is so and so!" on
that he said: "Is there anything after it but death?" (This narration is reported
by Al-Bihaqi).
Abdullah Ibn Amr “Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "When death approached Noah
“peace be upon him” he invited both his sons and said to them: "I order you to
do two things, and forbid you to do two things. I forbid you to ascribe partners
to Allah in worship, and to be arrogant. I order you to bear testimony to the fact
that there is no god to be worshipped but Allah. No doubt, were the heavens and
the earths and all that they contain to be placed in a scale of the balance, and the
testimony that 'There is no god to be worshipped but Allah' in the other scale, it
would overweigh; and were the heavens and the earths and all that they contain
to be a ring, and the testimony that 'there is no god to be worshipped but Allah'
to be placed over it, it would break it. I further order you to glorify and praise
Allah Almighty, for it is the prayer of all beings, and therewith all beings are given
sustenance." (This narration is reported by Ahmad and Al-Hakim, and AlBukhari in his Adab).
Jesus “peace be upon him” said: "Blessed be he whom Allah Almighty
teaches His Book and then he dies while being not arrogant." It is further
narrated on the authority of Harithah Ibn Wahb "AJlah be pleased with him" that
he heard The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
saying: "May I not inform you about the denizens of Hell-Fire?" They said:
"Yes." He said: "Every haughty, fat and proud (person)." (This narration is
reported by both sheikhs). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" further said: "Those who are the most hateful to me, that will have
their seats the farthest from mine (on the Day of Judgement) are chatterers,
loudmouths and ranters." They said: "O Messenger of Allah! Who are ranters?"
He “peace be upon him” said: "They are the arrogant. "(This narration is
reported by Ahmad on the authority of Abu Tha'labah; and At-Tirmidhi on the
authority of Jabir).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "On the Day of Judgement, the arrogant will be mustered in the form of

The quarter of the destructives
548
atoms trampled by the people, atoms in the form of men, underneath all things.
Then, they will be driven into a prison in the Hell called Bolis, where the fire of
fires will be over them. Then, they will be made to drink from Tinat Al-Khabal,
i.e. the pus of the denizens of the fire of Hell." (This narradon is reported by AtTirmidhi on the authority of Amr Ibn Shu'aib from his father from his
grandfather). Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” said: the Messenger of
Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said: "On the Day of Judgement,
the tyrants and arrogant people will be mustered in the form of atoms trampled
by all things due to their slightness in the Sight of Allah Almighty." (This
narradon is reported by Al-Bazzar).
It is narrated on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Wasi' that he said: I entered
upon Bilal Ibn Abu Burdah to whom I said: Your father reported to me from his
father (Abu Musa) that the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him” said: "Indeed, in Hell, there is a valley called Habhab, and it is
incumbent upon Allah to make it the abode of every arrogant tyrant. So, O Bilal!
Beware of being one of those who live in it." (This narradon is reported by Abu
Ya'li, At-Tabarani and Al-Hakim).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "In the fire (of Hell), there is a palace assigned by Allah to the arrogant and
it will be folded upon them." (This narration is reported by Al-Baihaqi on the
authority of Anas). The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "O Allah! I seek refuge with You from being blown with arrogance."
He “peace be upon him” said: "He, whose soul leaves his body while being free
from the following three, will enter the Garden: arrogance, debt and
misappropriation." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Ibn
Majah on the authority of Thawban).
From among the traditions and sayings, a mention may be made of the
following:
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq “Allah be pleased with him” said: "None should look
down upon a Muslim, for such as seems trivial in your sight is honoured in the
Sight of Allah Almighty." According to Wahb: "When Allah Almighty created the
Garden of Eden, He looked at it and said: "You are forbidden to every arrogant
tyrant." It is reported that Al-Ahnaf Ibn Qais used to frequent Mus'ab Ibn AzZubair and sit on his throne beside him. One day he came and Mus'ab was
stretching his legs. He did not withdraw them, and Al-Ahnaf sat down. He
pushed them a little, and the traces of disturbance were visible on his face. On
that he said: "How amazing mankind is! He proves arrogant although he is born
from the (vagina which close to the) urethra."
According to Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him": "How
astonishing mankind is ! he washes his excretion with his hand once or twice
everyday, and then comes to oppose (Allah) the Irresistible of the heaven and
the earth." One of the interpretations given to the following statement of
Allah Almighty: " As also in your own selves: will you not then see?" (AdhDhariyat 21)

549
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
"It refers to both channels of urine and excretion." According to Muhammad
Ibn Al-Hussain Ibn Ali: "No man in whose heart arrogance enters but that
something equal is reduced from his reason." Solomon “peace be upon him” was
asked about the evil deed which no good deed could remove, thereupon he said:
"The arrogance."
An-Nu'man Ibn Bashir “Allah be pleased with him” said while addressing the
people from over the pulpit: "Indeed, Satan has snares and traps (therewith to
catch mankind), and among Satan's snares and traps are to be too haughty to be
grateful to the favors of Allah Almighty, to boast because of Allah's gifts, to
behave arrogandy towards the servants of Allah Almighty, and to follow the
inclinadon but not for the Sake of Allah Almighty." We ask Allah Almighty to
provide us with wellbeing and power in the world and the hereafter, by His
bounty and generosity.

CHARTER TWO
EXPOSmON OF CONDEMNATION OF BOASTING
The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Allah never looks (with the eye of mercy) at him who drags his lower garment
out of haughdness." (This narradon is reported by both sheikhs on the authority
of Abu Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him” further said: "While a man was strutting in his Burdah since he was proud
of himself, Allah Almighty caused him to sink down into the earth and he will be
sinking deeper and deeper in it until the Day of Judgement." (This narradon is
reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Abu Hurairah). The Messenger of
Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said: "He who drags his dress out
of boasting, Allah will not look at him (with the eye of mercy) on the Day of
Judgement."
It is narrated on the authority of Zaid Ibn Aslam that he said: I came to visit
Abdullah Ibn Umar “Allah be pleased with them” and Abdullah Ibn Waqid was
passing, getting dressed in a new dress. I heard Ibn Umar “Allah be pleased with
them”, On seeing him, having said to him: "O my son! Raise your garment, for I
heard the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” saying:
"Allah never looks (with the eye of mercy) at him who drags his dress out of
haughtiness." (This narration is reported by Muslim). It is narrated on the
authority of Busr Ibn Jahhash Al-Qurashi that he said: Once, the Messenger of
Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” spat in his palm, and then he put
his index finger (on it) and said: Allah Almighty says: “How should you frustrate
me, O son of Adam, since I created you from the like of that (water), until when
I fashioned you and made you in due proportion, you walked heavily on the earth
in two garments, where you collected (wealth) and withhold it until when your
soul reaches here (and he pointed to his throat), you say: Let me give in charity!
But how should the time of charity come?” (This narration is reported by Ibn
Majah and Al-Hakim).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"When my people come to walk with haughtiness, and both Persians and
Romans serve them, then, it is time for Ailah Almighty to invest them with

The quarter of the destructives
550
authority over each other." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn
Hibban on the authority of Ibn Umar). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” further said: "He who makes much of himself and walks
with haughtiness, will meet Allah Who will be angry with him." (This narration is
reported by Ahmad, At-Tabarani, Al-Hakim and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of
Ibn Umar).
From among the traditions and sayings, a mention may be made of the
following:
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Bakr Al-Hudhali that he said: While we
were sitting with Al-Hassan, Ibn Al-Ahtam passed by us, intending the Maqsurah,
and he was wearing a garment of Khazz which he prepared neady, and he was
strutting in his walk. Al-Hassan looked at him and said: "Fi! Fi! How he is raising
his nose, twisting his body, swelling his cheek, and looking at both his sides!
Which foolish are you? You are not grateful to the favors bestowed upon you (by
Allah), which you neither take with the right of Allah, nor give what is due upon
of the right of Allah." Hearing that, Ibn Al-Ahtam returned to him and
apologized to him. On that he said to him: "Apologize not, and rather repent to
your Lord. Have you not heard the statement of Allah Almighty: " Nor walk on
the earth with insolence: for you can not rend the earth asunder, nor reach the
mountains in height." (Al-Isra' 37)
iU

It is reported that a young man came upon Al-Hassan and he had a smart
suite on him. On that Al-Hassan invited him and said to him: "Mankind is proud
of his youth, fond of his characteristics, as if the grave has covered your body,
and you have met your deed. Woe to you! Remedy your heart for Allah's need of
His servants is the soundness of their hearts." It is reported that once Umar Ibn
Abd-Al-Aziz performed Hajj before he was appointed as caliph, and when Tawus
saw him boasting in his walk, he poked his flank with his finger and said to him:
"This is not the walk of him who has excretion in his belly." On that Umar said
to him apologizing: "O my uncle! Every part of my body was struck to get
accustomed to that walk until I have been accustomed to it."
Once, Muhammad Ibn Wasi' saw his son boasting in his walk, thereupon he
said to him: "O my son! Do you know who you are? Your mother is a slave-girl
whom I buy for two hundred Dirhams, and your father (is not so good): let not
the Muslims have any more like him." Ibn Umar “Allah be pleased with them”
saw a man dragging his lower garment, thereupon he said: "Satan has many
brothers!" he said it twice or thrice. It is reported that once Mutarrif Ibn
Abdullah Ibn Ash-Shakhir saw Al-Muhallab strutting in a cloak of Khazz,
thereupon he said to him: "O servant of Allah! This is a walk which Allah and
His Messenger never like." Al-Muhallab asked him: "Do you not know me?" he
said: "Nay! I know you well. In the beginning, you were a sperm scattered (and
thrown into the womb), and in the end you will be a putrefied corpse, and in the
interval between both, you are carrying dung (in your belly)." On that AlMuhallab went away and gave up his way of walking.
In his comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: " Then did he

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
stalk to his family in full conceit!" (Al-Qiyamah 33)

551

Mujahid said: "i.e. strutting in his walk."
Since we made a mention of the condemnation of arrogance and boasting,
let's now make a mention of the excellence of humbleness; and Allah
Almighty knows best.

CHAPTER THREE
EXPOSITION OF EXCELLENCE OF HUMBLENESS
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him”
that he said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: “(Giving in) charity, in no way, decreases the wealth. No servant forgives
(others), but that Allah adds to his respect, and no one behaves humbly (towards
others) for the sake of Allah, but that Allah elevates him (in the sight of the
people).” (This narration is reported by Muslim). The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "There is no servant but that
there are two angels with him, and something like a tie over him by which they
seize him: If he elevates himself, they would soon pull it saying: "O Allah!
Humiliate him!" and if he humbles himself they would say: "O Allah! Raise him!"
(This narration is reported by Al-Aqili and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Abu
Hurairah; and Al-Baihaqi alone on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Blessed be he who behaves humbly (towards the people) without meekness,
spends wealth he has collected without disobedience, shows mercy for the people
of humiliation and poverty, and mixes with men of jurisprudence and wisdom."
(This narration is reported by Al-Baghawi, Ibn Qani' and At-Tabarani on the
authority of Rakb Al-Misri; and Al-Bazzar on the authority of Anas). It is
narrated on the authority of Abu Salamah Al-Madini from his father from his
grandfather that he said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” was in our house in Quba' and he was fasting. At the time of breaking
fast, we served him with a drink of milk mixed with honey. When he raised it to
his mouth and tasted it, he detected the sweetness of the honey, thereupon he
asked about it, and we said: "O Messenger of Allah! We have mixed some honey
with it." He put it down and said: "Behold! As for me, I do not forbid it
(although I would not drink of it). Indeed, whoever behaves humbly (towards the
others) for the Sake of Allah, Allah Almighty elevates him (in rank), and whoever
is arrogant, Allah Almighty humiliates him, and whoever is thrifty, Allah
Almighty enriches him, and whoever is extravagant, Allah Almighty impoverishes
him, and whoever celebrates Allah more often, Allah Almighty loves him." (This
narration is reported by Al-Bazzar; and At-Tabarani on the authority of A'ishah).
It is reported that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” was in his house with his companions and they all were eating when a
beggar knocked at the door, and he had a bothersome disease. The Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” admitted him and made him sit
on his thigh and told him to share food with them. A man from the Quraish

The quarter of the destructives
552
seemed as if he was disgusted by him, thereupon he did not die before he was
afflicted with the same bothersome disease. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "My Lord has given me the
freedom to choose whether to be a Messenger servant or to be a Prophet king,
and I did not know what to choose. Gabriel “peace be upon him” was my
selected angel. I raised my head towards him and he said to me: "Show
humbleness for the Sake of your Lord." I said: "Then, I have chosen to be a
Messenger servant." (This narration is reported by Abu Ya’li on the authority of
A'ishah; and At-Tabarani on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
It is reported that Allah Almighty revealed to Moses “peace be upon him”: "I
accept the prayer of him who shows humbleness for the Sake of My Greatness,
and does not regard himself superior to My creatures, i.e. he who persists in fear
of Me, celebrates Me more often during his day, and desists from desires and
lusts for My Sake." The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "Generosity lies in piety and honour lies in humbleness, and certainty
(of faith) provides one with richness." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu AdDunya). The Messiah “peace be upon him” said: "Blessed be the humble in this
world: they will be the owners of pulpits (of light) on the Day of Judgement.
Blessed be those who make peace among the people in this world: They will
inherit the Paradise on the Day of Judgement. Blessed be those whose hearts are
purified in this world: they will look at Allah Almighty on the Day of Judgement."
It is reported that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said: "Whomever Allah Almighty guides to Islam, makes good his
face, keeps him faultless, and endows him with humbleness, he is among these
selected by Allah Almighty." (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the
authority of Ibn Mas'ud). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” further said: "There are four things which Allah Almighty never
gives but to whomever He loves among His servants: silence, which is the
beginning of worship, reliance on Allah Almighty, humbleness, and abstinence
in this world." (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani and Al-Hakim on the
authority of Anas).
Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with them” said: the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "If a servant shows humbleness,
Allah Almighty raises him to the seventh heaven." (This narration is reported by
Al-Baihaqi). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: "Humbleness does not add to a servant but highness. So, behave humbly
(toward each other), perchance Allah Almighty would bestow mercy upon you."
(This narration is reported by Al-Asfahani in his Targhib on the authority of
Anas; and Ibn Adi on the authority of Ibn Umar). It is reported that once, the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” was having his
meal when a black man afflicted with variola came to share food with him. He
never came to sit beside anyone but that he stood in flight from him. On that, the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” made him sit
beside him.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "I
:

553
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
appreciate a man who carries anything in his hand in service of his family,
therewith to remove arrogance from himself." It is reported that one day, the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said to his
companions: "Why do I not see on you the sweetness of worship?" They asked:
"What is the sweetness of worship?" he said: "Humbleness." The Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "If you see the
humble from among my nadon, then, show humbleness for them; and if you see
the arrogant from among my nadon, then, behave arrogandy towards them, for
this will be a means of humiliation and disgrace for them."
From among the traditions and sayings, a mention may be made of the
following:
Umar “Allah be pleased with him” said: "If a servant shows humbleness for
the Sake of Allah, Allah Almighty raises him saying: "Refresh, may Allah
Almighty raise you!" and if he proves arrogant, Allah Almighty puts him down to
earth saying: "Be disgraced, may Allah disgrace you!" although he is great in his
sight, he seems despicable in the sight of people, and more despicable than a pig."
Jarir Ibn Abdullah “Allah be pleased with him” said: "I came to a tree and found
a man sleeping underneath it, shading himself with his sheet, and the sun had
passed over it and touched a part of his body which was exposed. I then
straightened the sheet over his body (to cover him from the heat of sun), and
when he woke up, behold! He was Salman Al-Farisi. I made a mention to him of
what I have made, thereupon he said to me: "O Jarir! Show humbleness for the
Sake of Allah in this world, for whoever shows humbleness for the Sake of Allah
in this world, Allah Almighty raises him in rank on the Day of Judgement. O
Jarir! Do you know what the darkness of fire will be on the Day of Judgement?" I
answered in the negative, thereupon he said: "It will result from the people’s
wronging each other in this world."
A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her” said: "You indeed are heedless of the best
act of worship, i.e. humbleness." According to Yusuf Ibn Asbat: "The one of
litde piety is rewarded if he does many deeds, and the one of little humbleness is
rewarded if he strives so much." When Al-Fudail was asked about humbleness,
he said: "It is to submit to the truth and accept it even if you hear it from a child,
and even from the most ignorant of people." According to Ibn Al-Mubarak:
"The head of humbleness is to lower yourself to a position lesser than him who is
inferior to you in favor of this world until you get him know that you have no
superiority over him; and to raise yourself to a position higher than him who
behaves arrogantly towards you until you get him know that he has no superiority
over you."
According to Qatadah: "Whoever is given property, beauty, knowledge, etc,
in which he does not show humbleness, this would become an evil against him
on the Day of Judgement." It is said that Allah Almighty revealed to Jesus
“peace be upon him”: "If I confer a favor on you, receive it with humility,
perchance I would perfect it upon you." According to Ka'b: "No servant was
given a favor from Allah in this world for which he gives thanks to Allah, and
shows humbleness for the Sake of Allah but that Allah Almighty endows him

The quarter of the destructives
554
with its benefit in this world and raises him a degree higher in the hereafter; and
No servant was given a favor from Allah in this world for which he gives no
thanks to Allah, nor shows humbleness for the Sake of Allah but that Allah
Almighty deprives him of its benefit in this world and opens to him a gate to
the fire of Hell in the hereafter to punish him therewith if He so likes, or
forgive him if He so likes."
It was said to Abd-Al-Malik Ibn Marwan: "Which of men is the best?" He
said: "It is he who shows humbleness in spite of his power, abstains in this
world in spite of his richness, and refrains from helping (the wrongful) in spite
of his strength." Once, Ibn As-Simak entered upon Harun Ar-Rashid and said
to him: "O Commander of Believers! Your humbleness in your honour is more
honoured for you than your honour." On that he said: "How good is that which
you have said." He said: "O Commander of Believers! A man was endowed
with beauty, high social status, and abundance of wealth, thereupon he
refrained (from evil) in regard with his beauty, spent out of his property to
console the needy, and showed humbleness in spite of his high social status,
and the result is that he was enrolled among the selected devotees of Allah
Almighty." On that Harun called for a pen and a parchment in which he wrote
it with his own hand.
It was the habit of Solomon, son of David “peace be upon him” every
morning to look at the faces of the rich and dignitaries until when he came to
the poor, he would sit with them (apart from the rich) and say: "A poor sits
with the poor like him." A wise man said: "As well as you dislike that rich
people should see you in cheap garments, you should dislike to have the poor
see you in very expensive garments." It is reported that Yunus, Ayyub and AlHassan set out and went to a particular place and started to discuss humbleness.
Al-Hassan asked: "Do you know what humbleness is? It is that if you come out
of your house you do not meet a Muslim but that you see that he has
superiority over you."
According to Mujahid: "When Allah Almighty drowned the people of Noah
“peace be upon him” all the mountains rose up and pronged themselves except
the Judi which showed humbleness, thereupon Allah Almighty rose it above all
the mountains and made the ark land on it." Abu Sulaiman said: "Allah
Almighty looked at the hearts of mankind and found no heart more humble
than that of Moses “peace be upon him”, thereupon He favored him from
among all of them with speaking direct to him." When he turned away from
Arafat, Yunus Ibn Ubaid said: "I have no doubt about the mercy (of Allah), but
that since I was with them, I fear they might have been deprived of it because
of me."
It is said that a believer becomes in the highest position in the Sight of Allah
Almighty when he becomes the humblest in his own sight; and he becomes in
the lowest position in the Sight of Allah Almighty when he becomes the loftiest
in his own sight." According to Ziyad An-Namri: "The abstinent who does not
show humbleness is like a tree which produces no fruits." According to Malik
Ibn Dinar: "By Allah, if a caller is to call at the door of the mosque that the

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity

555

worst of you should come out, by Allah, no one shall precede me except by
force or speed.” When his statement reached Ibn Al-Mubarak, he said: "It is
with that conduct that Malik has become (in such a position as fitting for none
but) Malik."
According to Al-Fudail: "Whoever loves authority never prospers."
According to Musa Ibn Al-Qasim: "We were under earthquake and stormy wind
thereupon I went to Muhammad Ibn Muqatil and said to him: "O Abu Abdullah!
You are our imam. So, please, supplicate Allah for us." He wept and said: "Would
that I should not be a cause of your destruction." Then, I saw the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” in a dream and he said to me:
"Indeed, Allah Almighty has relieved you because of the supplication of
Muhammad Ibn Muqatil." A man came to Ash-Shibli and he asked him: "Who
are you?" this was his habit. He said: "I am no more than the dot that is under the
letter Ba'." On that Ash-Shibli said to him: "May Allah eliminate your witness! Do
you assign a place to yourself?" it is said that whoever sees he has some value, has
no portion of humbleness.
It is reported that Abu Al-Fath Ibn Shukhruf said: "I saw Ali Ibn Abu
Talib “Allah be pleased with him” in a dream, thereupon I said to him: "O
Abu Al-Hassan! Give me admonition." On that he said: "How good is the
humbleness of a rich in the gathering of the poor out of their desire for the
reward of Allah Almighty; and how good is the carelessness a poor give to the
rich out of their confidence of Allah Almighty." According to Abu Sulaiman:
"No servant shows humbleness until he knows well himself." According to
Abu Yazid: "As long as a servant thinks there is among the people such as
worse than him, he then is an arrogant." He was asked: "Then, when should
he be humble?" he said: "When he thinks he has no place nor position on
earth. However, every man shows humbleness as much as he knows his Lord
Almighty and knows his own self."
According to Abu Sulaiman: "Were all the people to gather to put me
down as I put down myself, they would not be able to do." According to
Urwah Ibn Al-Ward: "Humbleness is one of the traps of evil, and man is
envied because of all favors except for humbleness." It is said that
humbleness is good if it is observed by all the people, but if it is observed by
the rich, it will be better; and arrogance is bad if it is observed by all the
people, but if it is observed by the poor, it will be worse. It is further said that
none receives honour unless he shows humbleness for the Sake of Allah
Almighty, and none receives security unless he fears Allah Almighty, and none
profits unless he sells himself to Allah Almighty.
According to Abu Ali Al-Jawzajani: "The soul is mixed with arrogance,
greediness and envy; and if Allah intends to ruin a person, He deprives him of
humbleness, advice and satisfaction ; and if Allah intends good for him, He
endows him with all of those: If the fire of arrogance is kindled within himself, it
will be extinguished by the water of humbleness with the assistance of Allah; and
if the fire of envy is kindled within himself, it will be extinguished by the water of
advice with Allah's help; and if the fire of greediness is kindled within himself, it

r4
ijl1

The quarter of the destructives
556
wall be extinguished by die water of satisfaction with Allah's aid." Al-junaid used
to sit in his gathering every Friday: "Had it not been for the statement reported
from the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” that 'A
time wall come upon my nation where the chief of people wall be the most lowly
among them’, I would not have talked before you."
It is reported that Amr Ibn Shaibah said: I was in Mecca between Marwah
and Safa (mountains), when I saw a man riding a mule and there were servants
ahead of him, pushing the people to give way for him to pass. Some time later,
I returned to Baghdad, and while being on the bridge, I saw a barefooted man,
of short clothes which left parts of his body exposed, and long hair. I kept
looking at him and in the end I said to him: "You resemble a man whom I saw
in Mecca doing such and such..." and I related to him his state, thereupon he
said: "It is I." I asked him: "What has Allah done with you?" He said: "I raised
myself in a place where people should be humble, thereupon Allah Almighty
humiliated me where people should raise." Al-Mughirah said: "We used to be in
awe of Ibrahim An-Nakh'i as a chief or a governor is feared, and he used to say:
"The time in which I have become the jurisprudent of Kufah is indeed an evil
time."
It was the habit of Ata' As-Sulami that whenever he heard the thunder he
would stand and sit and his belly would pain him as if he were a woman
suffering from the pain of childbirth. On that he used to say: "This evil afflicts
you because of me, and should Ata' (meaning himself) die, the people would be
relieved." Bishr Al-Hafi used to say: "Your greeting of the inhabitants of this
world is to give up greeting them." A man supplicated to a good effect for
Abdullah Ibn Al-Mubarak saying: "May Allah Almighty give you what you ask
for!" on that he said: "No doubt, the hope always follows knowledge: where is
the knowledge (that should have preceded your expectation)?" One day, the
Quraish people vied in glory before Salman Al-Farisi “Allah be pleased with
him” thereupon he said: "But as for me, I have been created from a despicable
sperm thrown (into the womb), and I would be a putrefied corpse, and then I
would come to the balance of deeds: if the scale of my good deeds overweighs,
, I would be honoured, and if it overweighs not, I would be wicked." Abu Bakr
As-Siddiq “Allah be pleased with him” said: "We have found out that generosity
lies in piety, richness in certainty (of faith), and honour in humbleness." We ask
Allah, the Exalted in Honour to help us with good success.

CHAPTER FOUR
EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE AND EVIL OF ARROGANCE
It should be known that arrogance is divided into internal and external. The
internal is a built-in character in the self; and the external is the acts and deeds
that issue from the organs and parts of body. The internal division is more
entitled to have the name of arrogance. But the works and deeds are no more
than fruits of that character. For this reason, if it appears on the organs, it is said
that one is arrogant, and if it does not emerge, it is said that he has arrogance
within himself. The origin of arrogance then is that character which lies in the
self. It is to get comforted and rely on regarding oneself superior to another,

557

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity

whom he regards inferior to him. Arrogance summons a second party whom the
arrogant regards inferior to him, and a thing with which he becomes arrogant. It
is with this that arrogance is distinguished from vanity as we shall see later. That
is because vanity does not summon anyone other than him who is swollen with
pride, and were he to be created alone, he would likely be a proud, whereas he
would unlikely be an arrogant unless in relation with anyone else, for as an
arrogant, he sees himself above that other person.
He regards himself superior in the attribute of perfection. At that point, he
becomes an arrogant. It is not sufficient for him to make much of himself in
order to be given the name of arrogant, for one might make much of himself,
but at the same time, he sees anyone else greater than or at least as great as
him. It is also not sufficient for him to scorn the other, for were he to see
himself more despicable than anyone else, he would not be an arrogant. He
then should place himself in a particular position, and place the other in
another position in a way that lets him see himself above him in rank and
position. Those three elements give rise to arrogance within himself. Once
those occur, he thinks himself to be self-important and overjoyed and relies
on what he has thought of himself, and those are the components of the
character of arrogance.
For this reason, the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "I seek refuge with You (O Allah) from the swelling of arrogance."
Umar “Allah be pleased with him” also said to him who sought his permission to
give admonitions after Morning prayer: "I am afraid you would get swollen until
you reach the Pleiades." If man sees himself with the eye of loftiness, he would
get swollen and over-confident. Arrogance then is that state that is stimulated in
the self by those three beliefs. It is also called self-importance and self­
magnificence. For this reason, in his comment on the following statement of
Allah Almighty: " there is nothing in their breasts but (the quest of) arrogance,
which they shall never attain to" (Ghafrr 56)

i ClJ

b.

<4 oj ^

Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with them” said: "It refers to the greatness
which they never attain." He thus explained arrogance by the greatness.
Furthermore, this self-importance requires internal and external works, which
are their fruits. This is called showing of arrogance. The more one makes much
of himself in relation to another, the more he despises the other, scorns him,
keeps him away from himself, disdains to sit with him or share food with him.
That is because he sees him in the position of his servant; and if he is more
arrogant, he would even disdain to accept him as a servant. But if he is less
arrogant, he would disdain to regard him as equal to himself, hasten to have
precedence over him in the streets, raise himself above him in gatherings, expect
him to be the first to greet him, etc. if he is in the office of teaching, he would
not be kind to the learners: on the contrary, he would humiliate them, repulse
them, put them under obligation to him, and use them in his service. Therefore,
he looks down upon the laymen as if he looks at asses, out of scorning them, and
ascribing them to ignorance. To be sure, the works springing from arrogance are

The quarter of the destructives
558 ------------------------------------------numerous, and too famous to mention.
This is the arrogance: Its evils are extremely dangerous, and its adversities are
radically tremendous, in which the private among the people would probably be
ruined, and from which none among worshippers, ascetics and scholars could be
free, let alone the laymen. Why should its adversity not be tremendous since the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "None shall
enter the Garden in whose heart there is an atom's weight of arrogance." It
becomes a veil to prevent one from the Garden for it deprives the arrogant of all
the good manners characteristic of the faithful believers. Those good manners
represent the different gates of the Garden. Arrogance and self-importance close
all of those gates. That is because one is not able to like for the other believers
the same as he likes for himself as long as he has in himself an atom’s weight of
arrogance, nor is he able to be humble, which is the fountainhead of all the good
manners characteristic of the pious as long as he feels supercilious, nor is he able
to purify his heart from rancor, envy and resentment as long as he is haughty, nor
is he able to persist in truthfulness as long as he is bigheaded, nor is he able to
give up anger as long as he is arrogant, nor is he able to curb his fury as long as
he is arrogant, nor is he able to give good advice as long as he is arrogant, nor is
he able to accept advice from others as long as he is arrogant, etc.
In short, there is no blameworthy characteristic but that the arrogant is forced
to do in order to maintain his arrogance, whereas there is no praiseworthy
characteristic but that he keeps himself from, in order not to lose his arrogance.
For this reason, none shall enter the Garden in whose heart there is an atom's
weight of arrogance.
The worst arrogance is that which prevents the arrogant from acquiring
the knowledge and accepting the truth. It is in this connection that there are
many Holy Verses in condemnation of arrogance and arrogant persons. Allah
Almighty says: " the angels stretch forth their hands, (saying), "Yield up your
souls: this day shall you receive your reward, a penalty of shame, for that you
used to tell lies against Allah, and scornfully to reject of His Signs!"" (AlAn'am 93)
If

p_£=u~ojl

£

"So enter the gates of Hell, to dwell therein. Thus evil indeed is the abode of
the arrogant" (An-Nahl 29)
He Almighty tells that the one who will receive the most severe punishment is
he who is in the worst obstinate rebellion against Allah Almighty as shown from
His statement: " Then shall We certainly drag out from every sect all those who
were worst in obstinate rebellion against (Allah) Most Gracious." (Maryam 69)
4

prJ

iXdr?

f^

He Almighty further says: " as to those who believe not in the Hereafter, their
hearts refuse to know, and they are arrogant." (An-Nahl 22)

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity

------------------------

559

4 (©)
byyyi V
jS0\ }
He also says: "those who had been despised will say to the arrogant ones:
"Had it not been for you, we should certainly have been believers!"" (Saba 31)
ilsd

iO^

y-jj

ly.jb i^iyji ’jyL >

He Almighty says too: " but those who are too arrogant to serve Me will
surely find themselves in Hell, in humiliation!" (Ghafir 60)

40

^ bJ±-^»

o* byrf^i

oj >

He says: " Those who behave arrogandy on the earth in defiance of right,
them will I turn away from My Signs." (Al-A'raf 146)
4

^ <4 0-^)Oi4J^

^

For this reason, the Messiah “peace be upon him” said: "As well as the plant
grows in the valley, and grows not on the rock, the wisdom works positively in
the heart of the humble and not in the heart of the arrogant. Do you not see that
whoever raises his head up to the ceiling injures it, and he who lowers it, the
ceiling shades him?" this is a parable given by him for the arrogant and how they
are deprived of wisdom. In confirmation of that, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” made one of the aspects of arrogance is to be
grateful to the truth (according to the narration of At-Tirmidhi on the authority
of Ibn Mas'ud).

CHAPTER FIVE
EXPOSITION OF HIM TO WHOM ONE BEHAVES ARROGANTLY;
AND THE LEVELS OF ARROGANCE
It should be known that those towards whom the arrogant behaves arrogandy
are Allah Almighty, His Messengers, or anyone of His creatures. That is because
man was created as ignorant and wrongful. He sometimes behaves arrogandy
towards the people, and sometimes towards the Creator, i.e. Allah Almighty.
From the perspective of these towards whom the arrogant behaves arrogandy,
arrogance then is divided into three divisions:
The first is to behave arrogandy towards Allah Almighty; and this is the most
odious arrogance. Its only motives are mere ignorance and transgression. A
typical example is Numrudh, who thought of fighting the Lord of the heaven.
The same is true of anyone claiming lordship, like Pharaoh, who, out of his
arrogance, claimed that he was their supreme lord, and disdained to be only one
of the servants of Allah Almighty. For this reason, Allah Almighty said: " but
those who are too arrogant to serve Me will surely find themselves in Hell, in
humiliation!" (Ghafir 60)

^oj

^

He also said: "Christ disdains not to serve and worship Allah, nor do the
angels, those nearest (to Allah): those who disdain His worship and are
arrogant, He will gather them all together unto Himself to (answer)." (AnNisa* 172)

.

The quarter of the destructives

560
t-4j iL*P ^jP

1 aSLiL*J I *)Jj 4ii I wXZ_P ^ • J |So (31

4 (@)

r*j&**~*

)I

^

3

He said too: " When it is said to them, "Adore you (Allah) Most Gracious!"
they say, "And what is (Allah) Most Gracious? Shall we adore that which you
command us?" And it increases their flight (from the Truth)." (Al-Furqan 60)
4©^

p-*^U3 l^r4^

^3

Cr~*\A IjJ^cZA p-$J J-s I5Jj ^

The second is to be arrogant towards the Messengers “peace be upon them”
out of self-conceit and refraining from submission to men belonging to mankind.
Such is sometimes diverted from reflection and consideration, and thus persists
in the darkness of ignorance which hinders him from submission, and sometimes
abstains from submission, in spite of his knowledge, since his own self does not
accept to submit to the truth and humble themselves before the Messengers and
Prophets. This is what Allah Almighty relates about them when He says: "Shall
we believe in two men like ourselves? And their people are subject to us!" (AlMu'minun 47)
p UJ
lilL
1)
ijJiii ^
"He is no more than a man like yourselves; he eats of that of which you eat,
and drinks of what you drink. "If you obey a man like yourselves, behold, it is
certain you will be lost." (Al-Mu'minun 34-35)
U'iaPj dlJi jdLSj jju 15J

I ^Uaj I (jjj

!3J

|1

$

"Such as fear not the meeting with Us (for Judgment) say: "Why are not the
angels sent down to us, or (why) do we not see our Lord?" Indeed they have an
arrogant conceit of themselves, and mighty is the insolence of their impiety!" (AlFurqan 21)
j_kj iIjj (s'y ji a5LlL*_)T uIIp IJjji yyJ ti c uu

4 © !/s/

^ oi4Ji Jiij • ^

3^3

"They say: "Why is not an angel sent down to him?" If We did send down an
angel, the matter would be settled at once, and no respite would be granted
them." (Al-Anam 8)

i 0 bjM 1 £ >Vi isjJ & uyf yj

Ji jjif Vy iyiij >

Pharaoh said as Allah Almighty related about him: "Then why are not gold
bracelets bestowed on him, or (why) come (not) with him angels accompanying
him in procession?" (Az-Zukhruf 53)
^

4

JI

c ti- jl (^a5 ^^-4

I aJLp

I S/jb ^

Allah Almighty said: "And he was arrogant and insolent in the land, beyond
reason, he and his hosts: they thought that they would not have to return to Us!"
(Al-Qasas 39)

4

’3^3

3* j&za3 ^

561
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
In this way, Pharaoh behaved with arrogance towards Allah and His
Messengers. According to the narration of Wahb: Moses “peace be upon him”
said to him: "Believe in Allah and you will keep all that is in your possession." He
said: "Give me respite until I consult Haman." When he consulted Haman the
latter said to him: "After you were a Lord to be worshipped by people, you would
then be no more than a servant to worship another." Thus, he disdained to be a
servant of Allah Almighty, and to follow Moses “peace be upon him”.
The Quraish people said as Allah Almighty related about them: "Why is not
this Qur’an sent down to some leading man in either of the two (chief) cities?"
(Az-Zukhruf 31)
i

& 0h>JI liJ> 'JjS

IjllSj »

They referred/according to Qatadah, to both Al-Walid Ibn Al-Mughirah of
Mecca, and Abu Mas'ud Ath-Thaqafi of Ta'if. They exclaimed: "How should an
orphan poor man, i.e. the Prophet “peace be upon him” be sent by Allah to us as
a Prophet apart from us?" in reply to them, Allah Almighty said: " Is it they who
would portion out the Mercy of your Lord? It is We Who portion out between
them their livelihood in the life of this world." (Az-Zukhruf 32)
4 LiujT oj^jl

llLli {j£- dXjjbJ-j

-L*' ^

He further said: "Thus did We try some of them by comparison with others,
that they should say: "Is it these then that Allah has favoured from amongst us?"
Does not Allah know best those who are grateful?" (Al-An'am 53)
L

I llxL

li)T

1

i®

fV****.

dlJ’^

< *

The Quraish further said to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him”: "How should we sit with you while your gathering includes
the poor and indigent of the Muslims?" they despised them because of their
poverty, and were too arrogant to sit with them. On that occasion, Allah
Almighty revealed: " Send not away those who call on their Lord morning and
evening, seeking His Face. In naught are you accountable for them, and in naught
are they accountable for you, that you should turn them away, and thus be (one)
of the unjust." (Al-An'am 52)

&

r

o* r# L >~
wm

i (0)

slUp L

bj^iJ

b^M

^5 ►

^ bp*

He further said: "And keep your soul content with those who call on their
Lord morning and evening, seeking His Face; and let not your eyes pass beyond
them, seeking the pomp and glitter of this Life; nor obey any whose heart We
have permitted to neglect the remembrance of Us, one who follows his own
desires, whose case has gone beyond all bounds." (Al-Kahf 28)
juy j^Lp iiulp jJc, *3)

bjX>J

pvJ

^

The quarter of the destructives
(This narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Sa'd Ibn Abu
Waqqas, but with a slight variation of wording). Then, Allah Almighty told about
their wonder when they would enter the Hell as they would not see those whom
they despised, saying: "What has happened to us that we see not men whom we
used to number among the bad ones?" (Sad 62)

562

(*■*

Jlsu

V lc*-j CSy

Ld

^

They meant both Bilal, Ammar, Suhaib and Al-Miqdad “Allah be pleased with
them,>.
Some of those disbelievers were prevented by arrogance from consideration
and knowledge, and thus ignored that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” was on the truth; and others knew that, but were
prevented by their arrogance from acknowledgement of him. Allah Almighty says
about them: " When there comes to them that which they (should) have
recognized, they refused to believe in it." (Al-Baqarah 89)
LaIs iy.j,\\ jJ-P

(Jls Q* ]jj

\Sd

4A)T JsS’ iJ*

^ LDj ^

He further said: "And they rejected those Signs in iniquity and arrogance,
though their souls were convinced thereof: so see what was the end of those who
acted corruptly!" (An-Naml 14)
^

il&ip o &L»JUg

l

i^

Although this kind of arrogance is close to the showing of arrogance towards
Allah Almighty, it is lesser in degree. But anyway, it is an arrogance to accept the
command of Allah Almighty, and submit to His Messenger “peace be upon him”.
The third is to show arrogance to the servants, i.e. to make much of himself
and despise the others, with the result that his own self rejects to submit to them,
and summons him to refrain from them. Thus, he scorns and shows contempt
for them, and rejects to regard them as equal to him. Although this kind of
arrogance is lesser in degree than the previous two, it is grievous for two reasons:
The first is that loftiness, superiority and magnificence are fitting but for
Allah Almighty, Who is the Omnipotent King. But as for the powerless and
helpless servant, who is too powerless to do anything, how should loftiness be
fitting for him? If a servant regards himself lofty, he indeed has disputed with
Allah Almighty over one of His attributes, which is not fitting but for His
Majesty. Its example is like a servant who takes the hat of the king and puts it on
his head and sits on his throne: how daring he is! How rude and wicked he is!
How disgraceful and shameful he is! How deserving of punishment and torment
he is! To this meaning, Allah Almighty refers by His statement: "No doubt,
Greatness represents My lower garment, and supremacy My upper garment; and
whoever disputes with Me over any of both, I would throw him into (the fire of)
Hell, and I would not care." (This narration is reported by Muslim, Abu Dawud
and Ibn Majah). Since showing loftiness over the servants of Allah Almighty is
not fitting but for Him, so, whoever does so has indeed committed a crime
against Him. All the people are servants of Allah Almighty, and all majesty in the

563
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
heavens and on earth belongs to Him Alone. For this reason, whoever shows
arrogance to anyone of Allah's servants has indeed disputed with Him over one
of His rights, which is fitting only for Him.
The other reason for which the vice of arrogance is grievous is that it
summons one to disagree with Allah Almighty in His commands. That is because
if an arrogant heard the truth from anyone of the servants of Allah Almighty, he
would disdain to accept it from him, and rather would reject it. Therefore, the
debaters about the religious matters claim they try to discover the mysteries of
religion, and in the course of argument, they end by rejecting each other like
arrogant; and even if the truth becomes evident on the tongue of anyone of
them, the other would disdain to accept it, and rather would strive to reject it, and
use trickery in order to avert it. That is the conduct of disbelievers and hypocrites
as described by Allah Almighty: " The Unbelievers say: "Listen not to this
Qur'an, but talk at random in the midst of its (reading), that you may gain the
upper hand!" (Fussilat 26)

A (©>
Thus every debater who debates only to gain the upper hand, and not to
obtain the truth whenever and wherever it might be, has indeed been involved
with them in that mistake.
The same is true of disdaining from accepting wisdom and admonition as
described by Allah Almighty in His statement: " When it is said to him, "Fear
Allah," he is led by arrogance to (more) crime. Enough for him is Hell; an evil
bed indeed (to lie on)!" (Al-Baqarah 206)

^ dp)

i jJUj

yu *5*-!' ^^

(3^ ^ cM i^i3 ^

It is reported that Umar “Allah be pleased with him” recited that Holy Verse
and then commented: "We all belong to Allah, and to Him we shall return. A
man stood and enjoined good thereupon he was killed. Another stood and said:
"Do they kill those who enjoin justice from among the people?" The arrogant
then killed the one who disagreed with him, and him who commanded him to do
good." According to Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him”: "It suffices man
for sin that if it is said to him: 'Fear Allah' he would say in reply: 'Advise only
yourself."
It is reported that the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him” said to a man: "Eat with your right hand." The man said: "I could not do
so." The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” ordered
him once again and he gave the same reply. On that the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said to him: "Then, let you not be able
(to eat with it) once again." The result was that he never raised it once again (as it
was paralyzed). However, nothing but his arrogance prevented him from
responding to the command of the Prophet “peace be upon him”. (This
narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Salamah Ibn Al-Akwat).
This is why one's arrogance to the people is grievous, for it would inevitably
summon him to be arrogant to the command of Allah Almighty. It is for this
state that the case of Iblis was presented as an example for the people to learn.

The quarter of the destructives
564
He said: "I am better than he: You did create me from fire, and him from clay."
(Al-A'raf 12)
40
o?
jb
>
Which caused him to abstain from falling in prostration to him. That is
because his principle is to show arrogance to Adam and envy him, which led him
to be arrogant to the command of Allah Almighty. This was the cause of his
destruction forever.
This is one of the great evils of arrogance to the servants of Allah Almighty.
However, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
explained arrogance by those two evils: it is reported that Thabit Ibn Qais “Allah
be pleased with him” asked the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him" saying: "O Messenger of Allah! I am a man to whom beauty is
endeared as you see: does it belong to arrogance?" the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "No, but arrogance is to reject the
truth and despise the people." (This narration is reported by Muslim and AtTirmidhi) it is not fitting for anyone to despise the people for they are the
servants of Allah, like him, if not better than him. This is the first evil; and the
other is to reject the truth.
So, whoever regards himself higher than his brother, despises and scorns him,
looks at him with slightness, or rejects the truth although he knows that it is the
truth, is indeed arrogant to the servants of Allah Almighty. Whoever disdains to
submit to Allah Almighty, to comply with His orders, and to humble himself
before Allah Almighty by obeying Him and following His Messengers, is arrogant
to Allah Almighty and His Messengers.

CHAPTER SIX
EXPOSITION OF CONSTITUENTS OF ARROGANCE
It should be known that one does not show arrogance unless he makes much
of himself; and he does not make much of himself unless he sees it has an
attribute of perfection. The perfection might belong to religion or the world. The
religious perfection lies in work and knowledge; and the worldly perfection lies in
good ancestry, beauty, power, wealth and number of patrons. Those are seven
constituents which represent the reasons for arrogance.
The first pertains to knowledge; and how fast the scholars become arrogant
with their knowledge! For this reason, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” said: "The evil of knowledge is haughtiness." (This
narration is reported by Al-Quda’i on the authority of Ali, but he says in it: "The
evil of knowledge is forgetfulness; and the evil of beauty is haughtiness"). The
scholar soon cherishes himself by the honour of knowledge, feels in himself the
beauty and perfection of knowledge, makes much of himself, despises the people,
and looks at them with the same eye with which he looks at animals, and renders
them ignorant. He always expects them to show great respect for him, and hasten
to greet him first. But if he himself hastens to greet anyone of the people, or at
least returns the greeting joyfully, or stands for him, he would regard it to be a
favor he has bestowed upon him, for which he should receive thanks. More

565

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity

often, he thinks that it is they who should be dutiful to him and visit him, and
inquire about his health, although it is not incumbent upon him to be dutiful to
them, to visit them, or to inquire about their health as they do with him.
Furthermore, he likes to use whomever he mixes with among them to work in his
service; and if they fall short of fulfilling any of his needs, he would disapprove
that conduct as if they were no more than his servants. That is because his
teaching knowledge to them seems to him as if it were a favor upon them for
which they should be under obligation to him. This is in regard with arrogance to
them in the world.
In regard with the hereafter, he shows arrogance to them by seeing himself
in a position higher than them in the Sight of Allah Almighty. Thus, he fears for
them more than he fears for himself, and expects for himself more than he
expects for them (from Allah Almighty). Such a person is more entitled to be
called ignorant than to be called a learned. The real knowledge is that with the
help of which one knows well himself, his Lord Almighty, the danger of the
conclusion of his deeds, the argument of Allah against the learned, in addition
to the great danger of the knowledge upon himself as we shall see later. This
kind of knowledge should make him more humble, submissive and fearful. It
requires him to see all people better than him in view of the great argument of
Allah against him by knowledge, and his failure to thank Him for the favor of
knowledge. This is the significance of the statement of Abu Ad-Darda' “Allah
be pleased with him”: "The more one advances in knowledge, the more his pain
becomes."
You may ask: "What is the matter with some people who become more
arrogant and safer by knowledge?" You should know than that there are two
reasons for that: The first is that he engages in what is called knowledge, although
it is not the real knowledge. That is because the real knowledge is that with the
help of which the servant knows well himself, his Lord Almighty, the danger of
meeting Him, and of being screened from him. Of a surety, this develops in him
more piety and humbleness, and not safe and arrogance. In confirmation of that,
Allah Almighty says: " Those truly fear Allah, from among His Servants, are those
who have knowledge: for Allah is Exalted in Might, Oft-Forgiving." (Fatir 28)
ij-;i»]T ollp ^

{J^r lL»I dXJ'jS’ /*!>'}.JI

'*L vtj

*

As regards the other sciences like medicine, poetry, arithmetic, linguistics,
grammar, jurisprudence, philosophy and logic, the more one devotes himself
to and fills himself with any of them, the more he is swollen with pride and
arrogance. Those are more entitled to be included under arts rather than
knowledge. That is because the real knowledge is that with the help of which
one knows the significance of his being a servant of Allah Almighty, and the
way of worshipping Him Alone, which develops humbleness and piety as we
have mentioned.
The other reason is that a man delves into knowledge while he is wicked,
cunning, bad-mannered and ill-behaved,. Before going on knowledge, he does

The quarter of the destructives
566
not engage in disciplining himself and purifying his heart by self-mortification,
nor does he satisfy himself in the worship of his Lord Almighty. But rather, he
remains wicked. If he is to delve into knowledge while being in such a state, and
knowledge happens to have an evil place in his heart, it becomes fruidess and
ineffective. For that state, Wahb presents the following example: "Knowledge is
like a rain that falls from the sky as pleasant and pure, and trees absorb it through
their roots and turn it, each according to its own taste and flavour. The sore
among them becomes sorer, and the sweet sweeter. Similarly, knowledge is
preserved by men and turned by them each according to his endeavour,
inclination and benefit. Thus, the arrogant becomes more arrogant, the humble
more humble, and so on."
That is because if one endeavours to be arrogant and is ignorant and then
acquires knowledge, he finds that by which he becomes arrogant, and in this
way, he becomes more arrogant. If a man is fearful and he is ignorant, and then
he acquires knowledge, he knows well that the argument of knowledge has
become established against him, and thus he becomes more fearful, scared and
humble. Knowledge is one of the greatest things by which the arrogant
becomes arrogant. For this reason, Allah Almighty said to His Prophet “peace
be upon him”: " And lower your wing to the Believers who follow you." (AshShu'ara 215)
4©
cr+1
^
$
He further said: "It is part of the Mercy of Allah that you do deal gently with
them. Were you severe or harsh-hearted, they would have broken away from
about you: so pass over (their faults), and ask for (Allah's) forgiveness for them."
(A1 Imran 159)
olC-li vilJ>>-

v__JLsJI .h.lp Ua3 O-oS* jJj jv-gl cLd

qa

j LLj ^

4 <©>
He described His friends and devotees saying: " lowly with the Believers,
mighty against the Rejecters, fighting in the Way of Allah, and never afraid of the
reproaches of such as find fault. That is the Grace of Allah, which He will bestow
on whom He pleases. And Allah encompasses all, and He knows all things." (AlMa'idah 54)
'Js- <Jii
Aiil

-oji
4a jJ 0

4

f|
■

^
Vj 4iil

£-?'5 ^13 *^4cr*

It is narrated on the authority of Al-Abbas “Allah be pleased with him” that
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "A
people will come and they will recite the Qur'an, but it will never go beyond
their throats. They will say: "We recite the Qur'an well. Who could recite better
than we? Who does have knowledge better than we have?"" then he turned his
face to his companions and said: "They will be from you O my people! They are

567
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
the fuel of the fire." (This narration is reported by Ibn Al-Mubarak). Umar
“Allah be pleased with him” also said: "Do not be tyrants of scholars lest your
knowledge would not compensate for your ignorance." Tamim Ad-Dari sought
the permission of Umar “Allah be pleased with him” to relate narrations, but he
refused to give him permission and said: "This is likely to bring you to
destruction." Another man who was the imam of his people in prayer sought
his permission to admonish them once he finished from Morning prayer,
thereupon he said to him: "I fear you would be swollen with pride until you
reach the Pleiades." Once, Hudhaifah “Allah be pleased with him” led the
prayer and when he finished he said to the people: "Seek for another imam
otherwise, pray individually, for I saw in myself that there is among the people
none better than I."
How should we find the like of Hudhaifah “Allah be pleased with him”? if
Hudhaifah “Allah be pleased with him” did not feel safe, how would the scholars
of this dme feel safe for themselves? Had it not been for the statement of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "A time will come
upon the people in which, if anyone of them sticks to one-tenth what you are on
now, he would be saved (from the fire of Hell)" (according to the narration of
Ahmad on the authority of Abu Dharr), we would have been given to despair and
hopelessness in view of our shameful deeds and wickedness, we seek refuge with
Allah. Do you see that we are able even to stick to one-tenth, if not onehundredth what they were on? How far! We ask Allah Almighty to treat us with
what is fitting for Him and not for us, and screen our shameful deeds upon us,
out of His bounty and generosity.
The second pertains to work and worship. It could hardly be free from the
vice of arrogance and self-importance, which attract the hearts of both
worshippers and ascetics. The arrogance lies in both religion and world.
As regards the world, it is that they see they are more fitting to be visited by
others than to visit them, and expect the people to hasten to fulfill their needs,
show respect for them, make it spacious for them to sit in the gatherings, ascribe
them to piety and righteousness, give them precedence over all the people, etc.
that is because they see their worship a favor upon the people.
In relation to religion, it is that such an arrogant sees that all the people would
be ruined and he is the only one to be saved, although he would be ruined if he
has such a vision. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "When you hear a man saying that the people would be ruined, you
should know that he would be ruined more than them." (This narration is
reported by Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah). This means that such an
arrogant despises the people, feels safe from the plans of Allah Almighty, and
fears not of His onslaught. Why not since it suffices him for evil to despise the
people? The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"It suffices a man for evil to look down upon his Muslim brother." (This is
reported by Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
How different is he from the person who loves and honours him for the Sake
of Allah Almighty, and expects for him more than he expects for himself. Those

The quarter of the destructives
568
who love him for the Sake of Allah attain salvation. Although they come close to
Allah Almighty by their closeness to him, he, at the same time, becomes hateful
in the Sight of Allah by refraining from them. As they love him for his
righteousness, they deserve to be moved up to his degree; and as he despises
them, he deserves to be neglected by Allah Almighty. In this respect, it is narrated
that there were among the children of Israel a man known as the Dissolute
person of the children of Israel in view of his wickedness, and another man
known as the worshipper of the children of Israel in view of his asceticism and
piety. One day, the dissolute person passed by the worshipper over whose head
there was a cloud shading him. He said to himself: "I am the dissolute person of
the children of Israel; and this is the worshipper of the children of Israel: why do
I not sit with him, perchance Allah would bestow mercy upon me." He sat with
him and the worshipper said to himself: "I am the worshipper of the children of
Israel; and this is the dissolute person of the children of Israel: how should I sit
with him?" he refrained from him and ordered him to stand and leave him. Allah
Almighty revealed to the Prophet of that time to tell them to resume their work
for 'I have forgiven for the dissolute person and made fruitless the deed of the
worshipper'. The cloud then turned to be over the head of the dissolute person
according to another narration.
This lets you know that Allah Almighty wants from His servants only their
hearts. If a disobedient ignorant humbles himself before Allah Almighty in awe
of Allah, and humiliates himself out of fear of Him, he will have obeyed Allah
Almighty with his heart. He then is more obedient to Allah Almighty than the
arrogant scholar and the conceited worshipper. It is further narrated that a man
belonging to the children of Israel came to a worshipper and trampled on his
neck while he was falling in prostration. On that he said to him: "Raise your feet
for by Allah, Allah would not forgive for you." On that Allah Admighty revealed
to him that "Allah would not forgive for you, who swears (by Allah)." (This
narration is reported by Abu Dawud on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
However, almost all the people persist in this evil, i.e. if one is harmed or
looked upon down by another, he thinks that Allah would not forgive for him,
and does not doubt that he would be hateful in the Sight of Allah Almighty. But
if another Muslim is harmed alike, he would not have the same aversion and
disapproval; and this is due to his making much of himself, and regarding himself
with arrogance and vanity. The stupidity of anyone of them sometimes leads him
to say to such a causer of harm: "You would say the evil he will receive later."
Moreover, if he is exposed to calamity, he would claim that he was afflicted
because of him, as Allah Almighty wanted to get him slake his anger by exacting
retribution from him. But even, he knows well that although many of the
disbelievers abused Allah and His Messenger, and others from among the Jews
killed their Prophets, Allah Almighty gave them respite and did not hasten on
punishment for them in this world. Moreover, some of them embraced Islam,
with the result that they received no punishment in this world as well as in the
hereafter.
This is the belief of the conceited man. But the intelligent among the

569
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
servants are those who say what Ata' As-Sulami used to say whenever there
was a stormy wind or thunder and lightning: "What has befallen them is only
because of me, and were Ata' to die, they would be relieved" and the
statement of the other after returning from Arafat: "I expected mercy for
them all had I not been among them." Consider then the difference between
those two kinds of men: One fears Allah Almighty outwardly and inwardly,
and is afraid for himself, and despises his work, no matter how much it might
be; and the other conceals of hatred, envy, arrogance, rancor and showing off
what causes Satan to mock at him. Moreover, he regards his deed a favor
from him upon Allah Almighty.
On the other hand, if one thinks that he is above anyone of the servants of
Allah Almighty, his endre work would become fruitless, by virtue of his
ignorance. To be sure, ignorance is the most odious of sins, which removes one
far from the mercy of Allah Almighty. His judgement that he is better than
anyone else is out of his ignorance on the one hand, and feeling safe of the plan
of Allah Almighty on the other hand; and none feels safe of the plan of Allah
Almighty but the losers. In this connection, it is narrated that a man was
mentioned with good before the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him”. One day he came and the people said: "O Messenger of Allah!
This is the man of whom we have already made a mention to you." The
Messenger of AJiah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” looked at him and
said: "I see in his face a slap of Satan." The man greeted and stood by the side of
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”. Then, the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said to him: "I
beseech you by Allah to tell me: have you not ever talked to your own self that
there are none among the people better than you?" he said: "Yes, by Allah." (This
narration is reported by Ahmad and Al-Bazzar on the authority of Anas). The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” saw by the light of
Prophethood what was concealed within that man in the form of a slap of Satan
on his face.
Almost all among men have this evil, except him who is protected by Allah
Almighty. But even, both scholars and worshippers are of three degrees in regard
to the evil of arrogance.
The first degree is that arrogance resides in one's heart in a way that makes
him see himself better than the others. But he strives to humble himself and
behave in a way of him who sees the others better than him. Although this man
has the tree of arrogance fixed in his heart, he has cut off its branches.
The second is that this evil is visible on his acts by refraining from the
people, giving himself precedence in the gatherings, and disapproving of him
who falls short of fulfilling his rights. This is visible on the countenance of both
the worshiper and scholar with a slight difference, forgetting that piety does not
lie in the appearance in so much as it lies in the heart. The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Piety is here", and he beckoned
to his breast. (This narration is reported by Muslim on the authority of Abu
Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”

The quarter of the destructives
570
was the most generous, the most pious and the most god-fearing, and he had
the best manners among all the people. But at the same dme, he was the most
joyful, the most cheerful and the most smiling. For this reason, Al-Harith Ibn
Juz' “Allah be pleased with him” the companion of the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "I admire from among the
reciters (of the Qur'an) the one who is cheerful and smiling." But he whom you
meet joyfully and cheerfully, and he meets you gloomily an frowningly, may
Allah create the like of him among the Muslims! Were Allah Almighty to accept
that conduct, He would have not said to his Prophet “peace be upon him”: "
And lower your wing to the Believers who follow you." (Ash-Shu'ara 215)
But anyway, those are less grievous than those of the third degree.
The third is that arrogance appears on one's tongue, and motivates him to
show pride, vie in glory, blow his own horn, and sing his own praises. As for
the worshipper, he says to the people in the course of boasting: "Who is he?
What is his deed? How does he abstain from this world?" and the like of those
questions which lead him to defame them. At the same time, he praises himself
by ascribing himself to the best of deeds, saying, for example: "I have never left
fasting for such and such days; and I have not slept the night without standing
for supererogatory prayers; and I am in the habit of reading the Holy Qur'an
entirely everyday, whereas so and so sleeps until the last portion of the night,
and does not recite the Qur'an more often." He might give prestige to himself
implicitly like saying: "So and so harmed me thereupon his son was ruined, his
wealth was lost, and he was overtaken by disease." One aspect of how he vies in
glory is that if he happens to be in the company of people who stand at night
for prayer, he would imitate them, and offer more prayers than usual, and if
they are to persevere hunger, he would force himself to keep patient on hunger
so much in order to get the better hand. He also strives himself in worship lest
it would be said that so and so worships Allah more or better than he does.
As regards the scholar, he shows pride by attempting to defame the other
scholars and praise his knowledge and understanding of facts. As to how he vies
in glory, it is that he does his best in the debate in order not to be overpowered,
and spend his day and night in acquiring such of sciences as therewith he adorns
himself in gatherings, like polemics, argumentation, devices of speech, etc. he
keeps the strange things in order to show how he excels his fellows. He also
keeps the Prophetic traditions, their bodies and chains of transmission for
nothing but to pick up the faults of the others, showing his excellence in contrast
with the shortage of his fellows. He rejoices at the mistake of anyone of his
fellows in order to be able to correct it, and grieve if anyone of them is correct
lest he would seem better than him.
All of those represent the evils and traces of arrogance that ensue from
showing pride of knowledge. Who among the people could be free from all or
at least some of them? Alas! How could one who heard the statement of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "None shall
enter the Garden in whose heart there is a mustard seed's atom of arrogance"

571
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
regard himself with greatness and boast over the people, given that the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” made such a
person from the denizens of the fire of Hell? The great is he who is free from
all of those vices and evils. The real scholar is he who understands that Allah
Almighty says to him: "You have a good posidon in Our Sight as long as you
do not regard yourself significant; and once you regard yourself significant,
you loose your posidon with Us." Whoever does not know that, does not
deserve the name of scholar. Whoever knows it is bound not to be arrogant
nor to regard himself significant. This is the arrogance that ensues from
knowledge and work.
The third pertains to arrogance because of good ancestry and high social
status. Whoever has a good ancestry and belongs to a high social class despises
him who is of no good ancestry nor belongs to a high social class, even though
the latter might be higher than him in knowledge and work. One of those might
be arrogant to the extent that he sees that the other people are but his chattels
and servants. The result is that he disdains to mix or sit with them. That is a
natural insdnct which is inherent to most people no matter how righteous they
might be. It might not be visible in normal states; but once the anger is provoked,
its darkness would soon extinguish the light of insight.
In confirmadon of that, it is narrated on the authority of Abu Dharr “Allah
be pleased with him” that he said: I was engaged in a quarrel with a man in the
presence of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
and I said to him: "O son of the black woman!" on that the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "O Abu Dharr! The son of the
white-complexioned woman has no superiority over the son of the blackcomplexioned woman." (This narradon is reported by Ibn Al-Mubarak). Abu
Dharr “Allah be pleased with him” said: I lay down and said to the man: "Tread
on my body with your foot (in retaliation)." Consider how the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” brought to his attention the fact
that he had seen superiority for himself as being the son of a white-complexioned
woman over him who was the son of a black-complexioned woman, and that this
was a big mistake. Consider also how he repented soon and removed from
himself the tree of arrogance with the toe of him over whom he was arrogant.
That is because he knew well that arrogance could be removed only by
humiliation.
It is further narrated that two men vied in glory with each other in the
presence of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
and one of them said to the other: "I am so and so, son of so and so. Who are
you, let your mother be bereaved of you?" on that the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Two men vied in glory with each
other in the presence of Moses “peace be upon him” and one of them said to the
other: "I am so and so, son of so and so..." until he counted nine of his
grandfathers. On that Allah Almighty revealed to Moses “peace be upon him”:
"Tell him who showed pride with his nine grandfathers that all of them would be
in the fire of Hell, and he would be their tenth." (This narration is reported by

i

The quarter of the destructives
572
Abdullah Ibn Ahmad in Zawa'id Al-Musnad on the authority of Ubai Ibn Ka'b;
and Ahmad on the authority of Mu'adh without tracing it up to the Prophet). The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "Let
some people cease to vie in glory with their grandfathers for they are no more
than (burnt pieces of) coal of the coal of the fire (of Hell), otherwise they would
become more trivial in the Sight of Allah Almighty than the small animals which
avert nasty excrement with their noses." (This narration is reported by Abu
Dawud, At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
The fourth is to vie in glory with beauty; and this happens most among
women. It summons them to defame and backbite each other, and make mention
of the defects of the people. It is narrated on the authority of A'ishah “Allah be
pleased with her” that she said: A woman entered upon the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and I said (with the help of a signal)
with my hand that she was such and such, i.e. she was very short. On that the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said to me: "No
doubt, you have backbitten her." This arises from the concealed arrogance, for
even if she was short as such, she had not to make a mention of her shortness.
She seemed to have admired the woman's beauty, and regarded her short in her
sight.
The fifth pertains to arrogance because of wealth. It always occurs among
the kings in their treasuries, the traders and merchants in their goods and
commodities, farmers in their farms, etc. the rich always despises the poor,
and becomes arrogant over him. That is because he regards richness with
significance and poverty with slightness, out of his ignorance of the virtue of
poverty and evil of richness. To this meaning, Allah Almighty refers in the
story of the two men: " he said to his companion, in the course of a mutual
argument: "More wealth have I than you, and more honour and power in (my
following of) men."...(His companion said): "if you do see me less than you
in wealth and sons, It may be that my Lord will give me something better than
your garden, and that He will send on your garden thunderbolts (by way of
reckoning) from heaven, making it (but) slippery sand! Or the water of the
garden will run off underground so that you will never be able to find it. III!
(Al-Kahf 34-41)
O* bL-lo- IjLk-

^ \jJ>- (joy* o'

^ {jS

\jyj> LajL

Is**3 dJS '*433
jl

LflJj I

Oy Oj ^
f LLUT

That is because he was arrogant because of his children and wealth. Then,
Allah Almighty showed to him the evil consequence of that by saying: "and he
could only say, "Woe is me! would I had never ascribed partners to my Lord and
Cherished" (Al-Kahf 42)
^

I

jiyL I yj

J>^3 ^

A mention may be also made here of the arrogance of Qarun over his people
as told by Allah Almighty about him: " So he went forth among his people in the
(pride of his worldly) glitter. Said those whose aim is the Life of this World: "Oh!

573
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
that we had the like of what Qarun has got! For he is truly a lord of mighty good
fortune!" (Al-Qasas 79)
(jj* ^

^y. jji Jli
4©

(J

(JLp

^

j*aJ AjJ 0j_/*

The sixth pertains to arrogance with power and strength. In this, the
powerful and strong always is arrogant over the weak and oppressed.
The seventh pertains to arrogance with the number of followers, adherents,
servants, pupils, clan members, tribe, folk, etc. it occurs among kings in regard to
showing pride with the number of soldiers, among scholars in regard to pupils
and students, etc.
In short, one could be arrogant with every kind of favor thought to have
something of perfection, although it is not perfect in its real nature. The
effeminate, for example, might be arrogant with his knowledge of both women
and men alike, no matter how evil his conduct might be. Similarly, the wicked
might be arrogant with his drinking wine and sexual relation with women and
youngsters, thinking this to be perfection, although it is not so. We could say that
everyone becomes arrogant over him whom he thinks to be inferior to him, or
lesser than him in the thing with which he is arrogant, although his thought might
be false: we ask Allah Almighty to provide us with good aid by His mercy and
bounty: He has power over all things.

CHAPTER SEVEN
EXPOSmON OF MOTIVES OF ARROGANCE
It should be known that arrogance in origin is an internal character, and what
emerges outwardly of acts and behaviours is its fruits and outcomes. Those acts
should belong to showing pride and haughtiness. There is one main reason for
arrogance, i.e. self-vanity and pride, for if one is proud of his moral character,
knowledge, wealth, etc, he soon makes much of himself, and behaves arrogantly
towards the people. But in regard with the outward arrogance, it has three
reasons, one pertains to the arrogant, another to the one over whom he is
arrogant, and the third to others. The reason pertains to the arrogant is the self­
vanity and pride. That which pertains to him over whom one becomes arrogant is
rancor and envy. That which pertains to others is showing off. Under that
consideration, there are then four reasons: self-vanity and pride, rancor, envy, and
showing off.
As regards self-vanity, we have already mentioned that it summons internal
arrogance, which, in turn, produces apparent showing pride and haughtiness in
terms of deeds, words and states.
As for rancor, it invites one to show arrogance without vanity, like the one
who is arrogant over him whom he sees equal if not above him in rank, but he
has become angry with him because of a lurking feeling of rancor he has
towards him due to a certain cause. This makes him reject to humble himself
before him, even though he sees he deserves to humble himself before him.
He also disdains to accept the truth once it comes from him, to accept his

The quarter of the destructives
574
advice no matter sincere he might be, and rather strives to get precedence
over him, knowing that he deserves it not, and does not apologize to him
even if he wrongs him, etc.
As for envy, it summons hatred and aversion for the envied, even he does no
harm to the envier, or there is nothing to give rise to his anger and rancor. Envy
also summons one to be ungrateful to the truth and thus reject the advice
whatever it might be, or even learn knowledge. How many an ignorant that has
remained in the darkness of ignorance for nothing other than he rejects to get
benefit of anyone of his fellows, out of envy and hatred for him: On the contrary,
he turns away from him, and behaves with arrogance towards him, although he
knows well that he deserves to humble himself before him by virtue of his
knowledge. But it is envy that motivates him to treat him with the manners of the
arrogant, even if he sees him above him in rank.
As for showing off, it also summons one to behave in accordance with the
behaviours of the arrogant. An arrogant might debate him whom he knows to
have better knowledge than him, given that he is not motivated neither by envy,
nor by rancor, nor by anger: but it is the desire of showing off that induces him
to do so. He abstains from accepting the truth from him, or getting benefit from
him just for fear the people might say that he is better than him. In this way,
nothing other than showing off instigates him to do so. Were he to be alone with
him, perhaps he would not be arrogant over him.
An arrogant also might claim a false thing to himself, like, for instance, his
belonging to a good ancestry, or a high social class, with which he becomes
arrogant over him who is lacking those things. But this arrogance is only apparent
because within himself, he is not arrogant for he knows well that he is a liar in his
false claim. But it is showing off that leads him to do the acts of the arrogant.
Arrogance then is given to anyone who does this acts because of self-vanity and
pride. We ask Allah Almighty to save us and grant us success; and Allah Almighty
knows best.

CHAPTER EIGHT
EXPOSmON OF GOOD MANNERS OF HUMBLE; AND THE TRACES OF
BOTH HUMBLENESS AND ARROGANCE
It should be known that arrogance is visible in appearance, deeds, words, the
way of doing things, walking, sitting, movement and silence, etc: in short it is
visible in all of states and acts. Some arrogant are arrogant entirely, others in part
and humble in part, and so on. One might be arrogant when he likes that people
should stand in awe and respect for him. In this respect, Ali “Allah be pleased
with him” said: "He who likes to see a man from the denizens of the fire (of
Hell), let him look at a sitting person and the people standing before him." Anas
“Allah be pleased with him” said: "No one was dearer to them than the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”. But in spite of
that, whenever they saw him, they would not stand for him, for they knew well
that he disliked that."
A second aspect of arrogance is that one does not like to walk but with
another to walk behind him. Abu Ad-Darda' “Allah be pleased with him” said:

575
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
"One is increasingly removed far from Allah Almighty so long as he has others
walk behind him." Abd-Ax-Rahman Ibn Awf “Allah be pleased with him” was
not recognizable from his servants outwardly, for he did not distinguish himself
from them. Some people walked behind Al-Hassan Al-Basri, thereupon he
prevented them. Sometimes, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” walked with some of his companions, thereupon he ordered them
to walk before him and he in the rear of them. (This narration is reported by
Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of Abu Umamah). He did so either to teach
them the good manners of humbleness, or to remove from himself the doubts
roused by Satan of arrogance and vanity. In confirmation of that, he took off the
new garment and exchanged it for an older one in prayer just for one of both
reasons.
A third one of those aspects is that the arrogant never visits him over whom
he is arrogant, regardless of the religious benefits he might obtain from those
visits. It is in opposition to humbleness. In this respect, it is narrated that Sufyan
came to Ramlah, and Ibrahim Ibn Adham sent a messenger to him that 'Come to
talk to us'. Sufyan came and it was said to Ibrahim: "O Abu Ishaq! Do you send
to him to come in that way of seemingly contempt?" he said: "I like to know to
what extent he is humble."
A fourth aspect is that the arrogant disdains to have the other sit close to
him unless he is in front of him. This is also in opposition to humbleness. It is
reported that Ibn Wahb said: "I sat beside Abd-Al-Aziz Ibn Rawwad and when
my thigh touched his, I moved aside. Thereupon he took hold of my garment
and pulled me towards himself and said: "Why do you do with me the like of
what you do with the tyrants? I do not know that there is anyone among you
worse than me."" Anas “Allah be pleased with him” said: "It happened that a
slave-girl took hold of the hand of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” and he would not withdraw his hand from hers until she
went with him wherever she liked."
A fifth aspect is to avoid sitting with the patient and destitute among people.
It is an evident arrogance. In this respect, It is reported that once, the Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” was having his meal when a
black man afflicted with variola came to share food with him. He never came to
sit beside anyone but that he stood in flight from him. On that the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” made him sit beside him.
Furthermore, it was the habit of Abdullah Ibn Umar “Allah be pleased with
them” not to prevent anyone, be he a leper, or afflicted with any disease, from his
repast of food: on the contrary, he would make such sit beside him and share
food with him.
A sixth aspect is to disdain not to do anything in his own house, for it is
also in opposition to humbleness. In this issue, it is reported that there was a
guest in the house of Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz who was engaged in writing
something. Then, the lamp was about to be off. The guest said to him: "Let
me stand to maintain it." He said: "It is not out of generosity that a man
causes his guest to serve him." He said: "Then, let me tell the servant to do

The quarter of the destructives
576
it." Umar said: "He is sleeping." Umar then stood, and filled the lamp with
oil. On that the guest said to him: "Do you do it yourself O Commander of
Believers?" Umar said: "I have gone and I was Umar, and returned and I am
still Umar, with no reduction. The best of people is he who is humble in the
Sight of Allah."
A seventh aspect is to disdain to carry his things by himself to his house.
This is counter to the habit of the humble. The Messenger of Allah “Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him” used to carry his own things by himself
(according to the narration of Abu Ya'li on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
According to Ali “Allah be pleased with him”: "Nothing decreases from the
perfection of the perfect man to carry things for his own dependents." Abu
Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarrah “Allah be pleased with him” used to carry a wood
container of water to the bathroom whenever he liked to take bath or perform
ablution, given that he was a governor at that time. Thabit Ibn Abu Malik said: I
saw Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him” who was at that time the
successor of Marwan in Medina, carrying a bundle of fire wood to his house, and
he said to me: "Give room for the governor to pass O Ibn Abu Malik!" it is
reported on the authority of Al-Usbugh Ibn Nubatah that he said: "It seems as if
I am seeing Umar “Allah be pleased with him” carrying meat in his left hand, and
the stick was in his right hand while taking a tour in the market until he entered
his house." It is also reported that Ali “Allah be pleased with him” bought meat
for a Dirham which he carried in his covering. One said to him: "Let me carry it
on behalf of you O Commander of Believers!" he said: "No, the one in charge of
dependents has more right to carry his own things."
An eighth pertains to clothes which might be a sign for arrogance or
humbleness. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: "Wearing cheap clothes is out of faith." (This narration is reported by Abu
Dawud and Ibn Majah on the authority of Abu Umamah). It is reported that
Zaid Ibn Wahb said: "I saw Umar Ibn Al-Khattab “Allah be pleased with him”
having come out to the market and the stick was in his hand, and his lower
garment had over fourteen patches, some of which were of leather. Once, Ali
“Allah be pleased with him” was blamed for putting on a patched lower
garment, thereupon he said: "It is by it that the faithful believer is guided, and
to which the heart submits." According to Jesus “peace be upon him”: "The
smart garment indicates to haughtiness." According to Tawus: "I wash those
two garments of mine, and my heart disapproves it as long as they are clean."
It is reported that before his being appointed the caliph, Umar Ibn Abd-AlAziz used to have his suite purchased for him by as much as one thousand
Dinars thereupon he would say: "How smart and pretty it is, had it not been
coarse." When he was appointed the caliph, he used to have his garment
purchased for him by five Dirhams, thereupon he would say: "How good it is,
had it not been soft." It was said to him: "Where is your smart clothes, perfume
and vehicle O Commander of Believers?" he said: "I have a good taste, and the

577
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
more my soul tasted anything, the more it had longing for what is above it until it
tasted the caliphate, the highest in this life, thereupon it had longing for what is
with Allah Almighty."
Sa'id Ibn Sawid said: "Once, Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz led us in Jumu'ah prayer
and then sat down, having over him a shirt of many patches in its front and on its
back. A man said to him: "O Commander of Believers! Allah Almighty has given
you: would that you put on good clothes!" he lowered his head for a while after
which he raised it and said: "No doubt, the best moderation is that which is
observed when one is wealthy; and the best pardon is that which is observed
when one has the power to punish." The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” said: "He who gives up adornment for the Sake of
Allah, and puts down a smart garment out of humbleness to Allah Almighty, and
seeking His Good Pleasure, it becomes incumbent upon Allah to reward him
with the rich Carpets of the Garden." fThis narration is reported by Abu Na'im
on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
But you may argue that Jesus “peace be upon him” said: "The smart clothes
brings about haughtiness", and when our Prophet “peace be upon him” was
asked about the beauty of garment, and whether it was out of arrogance, he
said: "No, but the arrogance is to reject the truth and despise the people": how
should both be combined? In reply to it, let me say that it should be known that
the new and smart garment does not cater for arrogance with everyone and at
every time and in every state. This is the same which the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” referred to. This is also the same
which the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
recognized from the state of Thabit Ibn Qais “Allah be pleased with him” who
said: "I am a man to whom the beauty is endeared as you see." It was then
known that he inclined to cleanness and smartness of clothes not to become
arrogant over the people.
But in some cases, seeking the smart garment might indicate to arrogance,
just as the satisfaction with the cheap garment to humbleness. However, the
sign of arrogance is that the arrogant seeks beauty where the people should see
him, and gives no care where he should be alone. But to love beauty in all
states, times and places, is not out of arrogance. This is why the smart garment
might bring about haughtiness in many cases according to the statement of
Jesus “peace be upon him” on the one hand, but it does not require it in all
cases as understood from the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” on the other hand. In brief, people are of
different states as to that which is loved. Nothing is dearer than the moderate
of clothes, which brings about no fame, either by extreme smartness or
untidiness in accordance with the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”: "Eat, drink, dress and give in charity, as
much as you like but with no extravagance nor haughtiness." (This narration is
reported by An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah on the authority of Amr Ibn Shu'aib from
his father from his grandfather). Bakr Ibn Abdullah Al-Mazni said: " Dress
yourselves in the dresses of kings, and wrap your harts in piety." By saying so,

The quarter of the destructives
578
he addressed people who sought arrogance by the garments of those of
righteousness. Jesus “peace be upon him” said: "What is the matter with you
that you come to me having the dresses of monks, while your hearts are the
harts of lost wolves? Dress yourselves in the dresses of kings, and wrap your
hearts in piety."
A ninth aspect is to humble himself by endurance of harm once he receives
harm and takes back his right. We have already transmitted what is reported from
the righteous predecessors in regard with endurance of harm in the Book of
Condemnation of Anger and Envy. In short, all good manners regarding
humbleness are represented in the conduct and behaviours of the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”. One should imitate him, copy
his conduct, and learn from his guidance. In this respect, it is narrated on the
authority of Abu Salamah that he said: I asked Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri “Allah be
pleased with him”: "What is your opinion about the changes made by the people
concerning the clothes, food, drink and vehicle?" he said: "O son of my brother!
Eat for the Sake of Allah; drink for the Sake of Allah; and dress yourself for the
Sake of Allah; and if vanity, or pride, or showing off, or arrogance is mixed with
anything of that, it will be a sin. Furthermore, do in your house the like of the
service which the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
used to do in his house: he used to provide the camel used for irrigation with
fodder, tie the camel, milk the sheep, stitch the sandal, patch up the garment, eat
with his servant, and grind on behalf of him whenever he fell ill, buy things from
the market by himself, and shyness did not prevent him from carrying his things
in his hand or in the end of his garment. On his way to his family, he used to
shake hands with the rich and the poor, the old and the young, and was the first
to salute whomever he met, be he old or young, black or red, free or slave. He
had no two different suits for his exit and entrance. He never felt shy of
responding to the invitation of everyone whatever he might be, nor did he look
down upon what he was invited to, no matter trivial or insignificant it might be.
Therefore, he was light-burdened, tractable, lenient, easygoing, even-tempered,
generous, bountiful, cheerful, and joyful. Whenever he smiled, he would not
extremely laugh, and whenever he grieved, he would not frown. He was strong
but without violence, humble but not with humiliation, generous but without
extravagance. He showed merciful towards everyone of kith and kin. He was
kind. He never ate his fill, nor stretched his hand covetously."
Abu Salamah resumed: "I entered upon A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her”
and told her about what Abu Sa'id “Allah be pleased with him” had related to me
regarding the abstinence of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him”, thereupon she said: "He has not been mistaken even in a single letter,
except that he fell short of telling you that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” never ate his fill, nor complained to anyone (of
his pains). No doubt, poverty was dearer to him than richness. It happened that
he spent his night in the state of severe hunger, but this did not prevent him from
observing fast in the coming day. Had he liked, he would have asked his Lord to
provide him with the treasures of this earth, the abundant living, fruits from East

579
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
to West, and his Lord would have responded to him accordingly. Many times, I
wept out of pity for him in view of the severe hunger he was suffering. I passed
my hand over his abdomen and said: "Let my life be sacrificed for you! Would
that you seek from this world what sustains you, and removes hunger from you!"
he said: "O A'ishah! My brothers from among the Messengers of determination
kept patient on what is more severe and harder than that. They went on their
way, and came to their Lord Who, in turn, honoured them, and multiplied their
reward. So, I feel shy of falling short if I get luxury in my living. So, to keep
patient for a few days in this world is better for me than to have my portion in
the hereafter decrease. However, there is nothing dearer to me than to join my
brothers and friends." A'ishah “Allah be pleased with her” said: "By Allah, it was
not a week later that Allah Almighty caused him to die."
Thus, whoever likes to adhere to humbleness, let him imitate the Messenger
of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him”, and whoever sees himself
above that rank, and does not accept for himself the same as the Messenger of
Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” accepted for himself, is indeed
an ignorant. There is neither honour nor power without imitating him “peace
be upon him”. For this reason, when Umar “Allah be pleased with him” was
blamed for the cheap garment he was wearing on his way to Sham, he said: "We
are a people whom Islam has honoured, and we do not seek the honour in
anything else."
According to Abu Ad-Darda' “Allah be pleased with him”: "It should be
known to you that Allah Almighty has servants called the Abdal (Substitutes), i.e.
the Prophets “peace be upon them”. When the Prophethood was over, they were
exchanged for a people from among the nation of Muhammad “peace be upon
him”. They excel the people not by much prayers, nor fasts nor good ornaments,
but by being sincere in piety, true in intention, faithful and loyal to all the
Muslims, sincere in advising them, and seeking the Good Pleasure of Allah
Almighty, through patience without cowardice, and humbleness without
humiliation. They are a people whom Allah Almighty chose and selected for
Himself. They are forty sincere affirmers and lovers of truth, or thirty men,
whose hearts have the same certainty of faith of Abraham, the bosom friend of
Allah Most Merciful “peace be upon him”. None of them dies before Allah
Almighty creates him who is to succeed him.
It should be known to you O my brother that they never curse, nor despise,
nor look upon down, nor cause harm, nor abuse, nor envy anyone. They are not
keen on this world. They are the best and the most kind, the most tractable, the
most lenient, the most generous, and the most bountiful of people. Their
characteristic sign is generosity, their nature is cheerfulness, and their character is
peace and safety. They are not of those who fear now and are heedless
tomorrow: but they are in the same state. They are, in their relation to their Lord,
unsurpassed. Their hearts ascend with comfort and satisfaction to Allah
Almighty, out of longing for Him, while their feet hasten to the good things.
They are the party of Allah, and behold! It is the party of Allah that will prosper."
The narrator said: I said to him: "O Abu Ad-Darda'! I have never heard a

The quarter of the destructives
580
description more difficult upon me than that. How should I attain it?" he said:
"Nothing separates you from it but to dislike this world. That is because if you
dislike this world, you will devote yourself to the love of the hereafter, and as
much as you love the hereafter, you abstain in this world, and as much as you do
so, you see what benefits you. To be sure, if Allah Almighty knows that a man is
sincere in seeking good, He grants him success and help, and covers him with
protection (from evil). It should be known to you O son of my brother that this
is in the revealed Book of Allah Almighty: "For Allah is with those who restrain
themselves, and those who do good." (An-Nahl 128)

i ©)

b1

^ oj ^

Yahya Ibn Kathir commented: "We considered that and behold! None gets
any pleasure greater than the pleasure of the love for Allah Almighty, and seeking
His satisfaction." O Allah! Make us from among the lovers of Your lovers, O
Lord of the worlds, for none is fitting for Your love but whomever You approve
“peace be upon him”.
!

CHAPTER NINE
EXPOSITION OF REMEDY OF ARROGANCE
It should be known that arrogance is one of the destructives, and there is
none but that he has something of it. But its removal is obligatory duty that is
binding upon everyone. It is not by hopes only that it might be removed: but in
order to be removed, it should be treated with medicines that are to curb it.
There are two stations to treat it: The first is to uproot it and remove its tree
from the heart entirely, and the second is to avert its symptoms, i.e. the means
with which man is arrogant.

The First Station
It is to uproot it, and its remedy pertains to knowledge and work, and no cure
is complete unless they are used in combination. In regard with knowledge, it is
to know himself and know his Lord Almighty, and this is sufficient for him to
remove arrogance from his heart. That is because if one knows himself as it
should be known, he shall learn that he is more humiliated than every humiliated,
more trivial than every trivial thing, and that it is befitting for him only to adhere
to humbleness, humiliation and submission. Moreover, if he knows his Lord and
makes estimate of Him as it should be, he will learn that greatness and supremacy
are fitting only for Allah Almighty and not for anyone else. It will be too lengthy
to explain the knowledge of one's Lord, His Greatness, Glory and Majesty. But it
is sufficient to say that it is the utmost degree of the science of disclosure.
But in relation to the knowledge of himself, let's mention what is
beneficial to stimulate humbleness, humiliation and submission. It is sufficient
for him to know the significance of only a Holy Verse in the Book of Allah,
for the Qur'an has the knowledge of the foremost and the last generations,
but for him whose insight is open. Allah Almighty says: " Woe to man! What
has made him reject Allah? From what stuff has He created him? From a
sperm-drop: He has created him, and then moulds him in due proportions;

581
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
Then does He make his path smooth for him; Then He causes him to die, and
puts him in his Grave; Then, when it is His Will, He will raise him up (again)."
(Abasa 17-22)

^ @ ,ij&f all iSj ^ @

MCip

The Holy Verse refers to the different stages of man, with its beginning,
middle and end. It tells about the source of his creation, and concludes with the
end of his journey. So, let man consider that Holy Verse in order to understand
its significance.
In the beginning, man was nothing mentioned: he was in the nonexistence.
Which thing is more despicable than nonexistence? Then, he was created by
Allah Almighty from the most contemptible thing: he was created from dust,
then from a sperm-drop, then a leech-like clot of blood, then a morsel of flesh,
then bone covered with flesh. That is the beginning of his creadon. He was not
created to be complete from the beginning: on the contrary, he was created like a
dead lifeless, having no sight, no hearing, no feeling, no sense, no movement, no
speech, no percepdon, and no understanding. In this way, he began with his
death before his life, his weakness before his power, his ignorance before his
knowledge, his blindness before his sight, his deafness before his hearing, his
muteness before his speech, his misguidance before his guidance, his poverty
before his richness, and his helplessness before his strength. This is the
significance of the statement of Allah Almighty: "From what stuff has He created
him? From a sperm-drop: He has created him, and then moulds him in due
proportions." (Abasa 18-19)
^

jAjLU- 4^jaj ijA

jAJih>-

(£\ ,ja ^

And: "Has there not been over Man a long period of Time, when he was
nothing, (not even) mentioned? Verily We created Man from a drop of mingled
sperm, in order to try him: so We gave him (the gifts), of Hearing and Sight. We
showed him the Way: whether he be grateful or ungrateful (rests on his will)."
(Al-Insan 1-3)
£-£^1 jijai {ja

LiU- bj

p

O? 0*?“

(3^ u' S* ^

^
0L*I3 !5P-i b*l
AlLjIla bj (<?|5) 1/HfH
And: "Does not man see that it is We Who created him from sperm? Yet
behold! he (stands forth) as an open adversary!" (Ya Sin 77)

i&or ^

>

And: "Among His Signs is this, that He created you from dust; and then,
behold, you are men scattered (far and wide)!" (Ar-Rum 20)
Consider the favor of Allah Almighty upon him in the sense that how He has
moved him from humiliation and scarcity to that rank and honour, thereby he
came to existence after he was nonexistent, to life after death, and was given
speech after he had been mute, sight after he had been blind, hearing after he had

582
The quarter of the destructives
been deaf, power after he had been weak, knowledge after he had been ignorant,
guidance after he had been in error, power after he had been helpless, and
richness after he had been in destitution. In short he was nothing and then turned
to be a thing by virtue of Allah Almighty. He Almighty created him from the
despicable dust that is trampled by feet in order to make him know how
despicable he is , and then perfected His favour upon him in order to know
thereby the real estimate of his Lord Almighty, His Magnificence and Greatness,
and that supremacy and majesty are fitting only for Him Alone. For this reason,
He Almighty reminds him of His favor upon him saying: "Have We not made for
him a pair of eyes? And a tongue, and a pair of lips? And shown him the two
highways?" (Al-Balad 8-10)
4
LiLlJj
-Lh ^
Allah also reminds him how he was despicable in the beginning, and how He
Almighty bestowed His favor upon him: "Was he not a drop of sperm emitted (in
lowly form)? Then did he become a clinging clot; then did (Allah) make and
fashion (him) in due proportion. And of him He made two sexes, male and
female." (Al-Qiyamah 37-39)
Whoever is in such a despicable state and contemptible condition, how
should he become arrogant and haughty, given that he is, with certainty, the most
despicable, the most distasteful, the weakest, and the most humiliated? But it is
the habit of the despicable to raise his nose to the sky whenever he is moved up
from his baseness: there is neither might nor power but with Allah. Had He
unleashed his power in the existence, it would have been possible for him to
transgress and forget his beginning and end. But along his continuous existence,
he is afflicted with diseases, calamities, conflicting conditions and states, which
cause the parts of his body to ruin each other, willingly or unwillingly. He
becomes hungry and thirsty against his will, falls ill and dies against his will. He
neither benefits nor harms himself, neither brings good nor causes evil to
himself. Whenever he likes to know anything, he becomes ignorant of it; and if
he likes to remember a thing, he forgets it, and if he likes to forget a thing and is
heedless of it, he neither forgets nor is heedless of it, and if he likes to divert his
heart to what concerns him, he is lost in the valleys of doubts and suspicions. He
might desire a thing, even though his destruction lies in it; as well as he might
dislike a thing, even though his good lies in it. He gets pleasure from food, which
might ruin him, at the same time he feels the bitterness of medicine even though
it cures him. He could not feel safe from losing all that he has of his faculties,
wealth, position, etc, even in a single moment. He is an owned slave who has no
power to avail himself and anyone else. Which thing is more despicable than him
if he is to know his real nature? How should arrogance be fitting for him unless
he is ignorant? This is his simplest condition. So, let him consider it well.
The end of his journey is death as referred to by Allah Almighty: " Then He
causes him to die, and puts him in his Grave; Then, when it is His Will, He will
raise him up (again)." (Abasa 21-22)

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
^ Q0

t.\^4 IS)

(c^}

-----

583

j*J'La I jL> ^

It means that he is deprived of his soul, sight, hearing, power, knowledge,
sense, perception, motion, and returns lifeless as he was in the beginning of
his creation. Then, he is placed in the dust and becomes stinking corpse, as he
was in the beginning a despicable sperm-drop. Then, the parts of his body
become rotten and decomposed, and consumed by insects. The dead body
itself becomes moldy corpse from whose stinking odor the animals flee, and
at the best state, it turns into dust as it was before creation. In this way, it
becomes nonexistent as it was.
Moreover, would that he should remain as such! How far! He will be raised
from death in order to suffer the severe torment for his sins and evils, and
entertain with himself the great terrors of the Day of Judgement with its sky
rent asunder, its earth ruined, its sun folded up, its light extinguished, angels
severe and strong, hell breathing out with flames, and Garden at which the
criminal looks and grieve for his being deprived of it, and spread scrolls, where
he will be asked to read his book, and when he asks about it, it will be said to
him: "During your lifetime, with which you were arrogant, haughty, pleased and
proud of its bliss and delights, two watching angels were entrusted to record all
of your deeds and acts, and if you forget all of that, Allah Almighty has taken
account of it for you. So, come to be reckoned, and be ready to be driven to the
abode of punishment." Then, his heart will be scared and frightened, even
before his book is spread and he sees what it contains of his disgrace and
shame. Once he sees that, he says: "Ah! woe to us! what a Book is this! it leaves
out nothing small or great, but takes account thereof!" They will find all that
they did, placed before them: and not one will your Lord treat with injustice."
(Al-Kahf 49)

^ (iI

1

JUJaj

That is the end of his journey; and this is the significance of the statement of
Allah Almighty: " Then, when it is His Will, He will raise him up (again)." (Abasa
22)

;ii !•>] jU }
How should he who is in such a state become arrogant or haughty? How
should he rejoice even for a single moment? he sees the beginning and the
middle of his state while being in this world, and were the end of his state to
be visible to him, he might have chosen to be no more than a dog or a pig in
order to turn into dust in the company of animals, and not a man to hear
speech and receive punishment. If he is worthy of fire in the Sight of Allah, of
a surety, the pig is honourable and higher than him, for it starts from dust and
ends into dust, far from reckoning or punishment. The people never flee from
dog and pig, whereas if the sinful and disobedient servant is seen by the
inhabitants of this world in the fire of Hell, they would be shocked by his
ugliness and repulsiveness, and if his smell is detected by them, they would die

I

The quarter of the destructives
584
out of its severe stench, and if a single drop of the pus given to him in the fire
is to fall into the oceans of this world, they would be more stinking than the
rotten corpse.
How should such a person, who expects to be delivered only by forgiveness
and excuse of Allah Almighty be arrogant or haughty? And with which thing
should he become arrogant? How should he regard himself of significance in
order to feel himself superior to others and transgress in tyranny? Who among
the people does not commit a sin for which he deserves punishment, unless Allah
Almighty forgives by His bounty and grace? This is expected from Him, due to
the good assumption of Him, by virtue of His mercy and generosity: and there is
neither might nor power but with Allah. His example is like him who committed
a sin against his king who sentenced him to one thousand lash strikes, and he was
put in jail in expectation for the punishment to be executed on him in the
presence of a great assembly of people, and he does not know whether or not he
will be forgiven: to what extent then should he be humiliated in the prison? Do
you see that he would become arrogant over anyone in the prison? There is no
sinful servant but that the world represents his prison, and he deserves
punishment from Allah Almighty, and does not know whether or not he will be
forgiven, and what the end of his journey will be. This suffices him for
humiliation and ignominy! This is the remedy of removing the roots of arrogance
in regard to knowledge.
As for the remedy by work, it is to humble oneself before Allah Almighty
through acts and deeds, and before the people by adhering to the good
manners of the humble among men, as described earlier from the states of the
righteous predecessors and from the states of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”. He was so humble that he used to eat on
the ground and say: "I am a servant and eat as a servant eats." Once, it was
said to Salman “Allah be pleased with him”: "Why do you not put on a new
dress?" he said: "I am only a servant, and when I am emancipated, surely, I
would put on a new dress." He referred here to the emancipation in the
hereafter. Humbleness will not be complete after knowledge without work to
confirm it. For this reason, the Arabs who were arrogant over Allah and His
Messenger “peace be upon him” were commanded to have faith and offer
prayer simultaneously.
That is because prayer is the fundament of religion, and it has mysteries for
which it is a fundament, including the way a praying man humbles himself before
Allah Almighty through standing, bowing and prostration. Of old, Arabs used to
disdain to bow to the extent that if the lash fell from the hand of anyone of them,
he would not bow to pick it up, and if the strap of his sandal was cut, he would
not lower his head to mend it. In confirmation of that, Hakim Ibn Hizam “Allah
be pleased with him” said: "I have given the pledge of allegiance to the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” not to fall down
but as standing." However, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” accepted from him the pledge of allegiance for that; and some time
later, his understanding of religion became deeper and his faith complete. (This

585
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
narration is reported by Ahmad). Since prostration was the utmost humiliation
and ignominy in their sight, they were invited to do it, in order for their arrogance
to get broken, their haughdness be removed, and humbleness reside in their
hearts. All the people then were commanded to do it. That is because
humbleness requires the acts of bowing, prostration and standing in submission.
Similarly, if one knows himself well, let him regard the acts and deeds
required by arrogance, and do their opposites until humbleness becomes a part of
his good manners. To be sure, hearts do not acquire the praiseworthy manners
without both knowledge and work altogether, due to the hidden reladon between
the hearts and the organs on the one hand, and the mystery of connection that is
established between the world of the visible and the dominion of the invisible on
the other hand; and the heart, as it is known, belongs to the dominion of the
invisible.
THE SECOND STATION
It pertains to the symptoms of arrogance due to the seven causes. We have
already mentioned in the book of condemnation of majesty that the real
perfection lies in both knowledge and work altogether; and apart from that,
anything, which vanishes by death, brings about no perfection. For this reason,
the learned could hardly become arrogant with his knowledge. But let's mention
the way of remedy regarding both knowledge and work in relation to these
seven causes.
The first pertains to him who feels arrogant because of his good ancestry.
The treatment is to know two important things: one thing is that it is
ignorance, for it is honour with the perfection of anyone else. If the arrogant
is of wicked characteristics, how should he repair his wickedness by the
perfection of anyone else? Were the one to whom he belongs to be alive, he
would have the right to say: "The excellence returns to me, and you are no
more than an insect produced from my sperm." Do you see that the insect
produced from the sperm of a man better than the insect produced from the
sperm of a horse? How far! Both are equal. The honour lies in man and not in
the insect. The other is to know his real ancestry, i.e. his father and
grandfather. His near father is no more than a despicable sperm-drop; and his
far grandfather is no more than dust. Allah Almighty showed to him his real
ancestry when He said: " He Who has made everything which He has created
Most Good: He began the creation of man with (nothing more than) clay,
And made his progeny from a quintessence of the nature of a fluid despised."
(As-Sajdah 7-8)

4
Cr?
Crf
How should he whose origin is the dust that is trampled by feet, mixed with
despicable water become arrogant because of that? If he sees himself closer to his
father than to his origin of dust, let's say that he vies in glory with the close apart
from the near, since the sperm-drop and morsel of flesh from which he was are
closer to him than his near father. Let him then despise himself because of that.

The quarter of the destructives
586
That is the most despicable and the basest of ancestry. The origin of man is
trampled by feet that is the real ancestry of man; and whoever knows it well
would not become arrogant because of it. This should be the state of the man of
deep insight when he reflects on his base origin and knows that he is created
from sperm-drop and dust, the most contemptible and the vilest of things on
earth.
The second cause is to be arrogant because of beauty. Its medicine is that
one should look, as a rational man, inside himself and not to his outward
appearance. Once he looks inside himself, he soon sees what spoils his honor
with his beauty. Inside his body contains all kinds of dirt: Excretion in his
intestines, urine in his bladder, sputum in his nose, dirt inside his ears, blood in
his veins, pus underneath his skin, and sweat underneath his armpits. Everyday,
he washes his excretion with his own hand once or twice, and frequents the privy
once or twice in order to excrete that which, being seen by his eyes, would bother
him so much, let alone if he touches it with his hand or smells it with his nose.
How humiliated and dirty he is then!
Let him also know how he was created from the dirty things, i.e. the spermdrop, and the blood of menstruation, and how he was taken out from the tubes
where the dirty things run, i.e. from the urethra wherefrom urine comes out and
uterus wherefrom the blood of menstruation comes out. It is reported that Anas
“Allah be pleased with him” said: "Whenever Abu Bakr As-Siddiq “Allah be
pleased with him” addressed us with his sermons, he would make ourselves seem
dirty in our sight, saying: "Anyone of you has come out from the urethra once or
twice." It is reported that once Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz performed Hajj before he
was appointed as caliph, and when Tawus saw him boasting in his walk, he poked
his flank with his finger and said to him: "This is not the walk of him who has
excretion in his belly." On that Umar said to him apologizing: "O my uncle!
Every part of my body was struck to get accustomed to that walk until I have
been accustomed to it."
If one were to leave himself without washing or cleaning only for one day, all
kinds of dirt and stench would come out of his body. If one has such a look of
himself, he would not be arrogant because of his beauty, which is inevitably
perishable. Even if his beauty is to survive as faultless and perfect, he should not
become arrogant because of it, for the ugliness of the ugly was not up to him to
remove it, nor was the beauty of the beautiful to be praised for it. But it is not
abiding: it is apt to be removed by disease, leprosy, smallpox, defacement, etc.
how many a beautiful face was distorted and the beauty and glitter vanished for
one reason or another. The knowledge of those matters deprives of the heart the
ailment of arrogance because of beauty, particularly for him who reflects it more
often.
The third is to be arrogant because of power and might. One is prevented
from that once he knows the sorts of ailments and diseases that are invested
with authority over him; and that if only a single vein in his hand is ached, he
would become more powerless than all the powerless, and more humiliated
than all the humiliated; and that if a fly takes anything from him, he would fail

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity

587

to restore it once again; and that if a mosquito enters into anyone of his
nostrils or an ant into anyone of his ears, it would kill him; and that if a thorn
enters into his foot, it would make him powerless and helpless; and that the
fever of one day takes from his power as much as he could not compensate
but after a long time: whoever is in such a state of powerlessness should not
then become arrogant because of his power. On the other hand, as strong as
man might be, he would not be stronger than a donkey, a cow, an elephant, a
horse, etc. Which kind of pride is that because of a characterisdc in which the
animals excel you?
The fourth and fifth causes pertain to majesty, majesty, wealth and the
abundance of money; and the increasing number of followers, adherents, and
allies. This kind is arrogance because of a thing that is external to man
himself, unlike beauty and power. That is the most odious of arrogance. Such
as is arrogant because of his wealth is like him who is arrogant because of his
horse and home, and if his horse dies or his home is ruined, he will become
humiliated. Similarly, if one is arrogant because of closeness and nearness to
the ruler, he indeed will be on a heart that is more turning and changing than
a cooking vessel on the fire: if the ruler changes against him, he will be the
most humiliated of people.
Every one who is arrogant because of a thing that is external to himself is
evidendy ignorant. Why not since if the one who is arrogant because of wealth
reflects his case, he will find that there is from among the Jews such as wealthier
and richer than him: how cursed then is a characterisdc in which Jews excel him
who is arrogant because of it! And how cursed is that which, being stolen by a
thief, causes its owner to become humiliated at once! Indeed, nothing of those
belongs to you: but all things belong to Allah the Grantor and if He wills, He
could take back from you what He has given you; and you are no more than an
owned slave and has no power to do anything. Whoever knows all of that, his
arrogance should vanish at once.
His example is like a heedless man who is proud of his wealth, slaves, horses,
riding mounts, vehicles, immense palaces and farms and gardens; and while being
in the midst of that pleasure, two just witnesses bear witness before a just ruler
that he is a slave belonging to so and so, and that his parents were owned by him,
thereupon the ruler passes his judgement that his owner should come and take
him with all that he has in his possession, and leaves him frightened of the
expected punishment because of his indulgence in taking care of the wealth of his
master. This man finds himself in the end in a dark prison surrounded by femalesnakes and scorpions, of which he feels afraid. He does no longer have authority
over himself, nor over is property, and does find no way to escape from that
destiny. Do you think that a person in such a state has the right to become
arrogant because of his power, wealth and property? This is the way of treating
the arrogance because of things that are external to the body. The treatment here
is easier than that of the arrogance of internal characteristics like knowledge and
work, for they are worthy of being a cause of pleasure and delight for man. But
showing arrogance because of them also is hidden ignorance as we shall mention
later.

The quarter of the destructives
The sixth is to show arrogance because of knowledge. It is the greatest
evil, the most odious ailment, and the most difficult to remedy, except with
great effort and struggle. That is because the knowledge is appreciated in the
Sight of Allah Almighty as well as in the sight of people. It is greater than
wealth and beauty. We could say that neither property nor beauty are
significant in the absence of knowledge. This is why Ka'b Al-Ahbar said:
"Knowledge brings about transgression like the transgression caused by
wealth." Umar “Allah be pleased with him” said: "If a learned slips, a whole
world will fall because of his slip." for this reason, a learned could hardly not
make much of himself and regard himself superior to the ignorant in view of
the excellence given to the knowledge in Sharia.
But in short, the learned could avert arrogance from himself only if he is to
know two important things:
The first is to know that the argument of Allah against the learned is more
confirmed, and what is accepted from the ignorant is ten dmes what might be
accepted from the learned. Whoever disobeys Allah Almighty knowingly, his
crime is more odious and grievous, for he did not fulfill the right of the favor
of knowledge bestowed upon him by Allah Almighty. It is narrated by both
sheikhs on the authority of Usamah Ibn Zaid that he heard Allah's Apostle
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" having said: “On the day of
Judgement, the learned man will be brought forward and thrown into the fire
of Hell whereas his bowels will gush out and he will be made to carry them
round and go round all over the Hell in the same way as a donkey turns a mill­
stone round and round. Then the people of Hell will ask him about the reason
of his torture and he will say: “I was wont to enjoin what is right upon others
but failed to do it myself, and to forbid what is wrong and committed it
myself." Allah Almighty likened him who learns and does not act upon his
knowledge to a donkey and a dog as shown from His statement: " The
similitude of those who were charged with the (obligations of the) Mosaic
Law, but who subsequendy failed in those (obligations), is that of a donkey
which carries huge tomes (but understands them not). Evil is the similitude of
people who falsify the Signs of Allah: and Allah guides not people who do
wrong." (Al-Jumu'ah 5)

588

o~^i 1jbLz*\

4

jt-j

^

y ATj ATIy. ^

And: "Relate to them the story of the man to whom We sent Our Signs, but
he passed them by: so Satan followed him up, and he went astray. If it had been
Our Will, We should have elevated him with Our Signs; but he inclined to the
earth, and followed his own vain desires. His similitude is that of a dog: if you
attack him, he lolls out his tongue, or if you leave him alone, he (still) lolls out his
tongue. That is the similitude of those who reject Our Signs; so relate the story;
perchance they may reflect." (Al-A'raf 175-176)

y}j (@

\jS\

Lssii;

£jJT fe

»

589

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
j\aTp
4 ©)

oj

JiuS” jiiili aj
a i i ^^a-yajt^ U^jlL ty>

^

<j£« LU'i ki-^L i-^=>

That suffices a learned for danger. Who among the learned does not follow
his own desires? Who among the learned does not enjoin good, which he himself
has not done, and forbid evil, which he himself has not abstained from? If a
learned thinks to regard himself superior to an ignorant, let him think of that
great danger which he is facing, for his danger is greater than the danger of
anyone else, just as his rank is greater than the rank of anyone else. His example
is like a king who makes himself vulnerable to the danger in his kingdom because
of the great number of his enemies: if his king is taken from him, he would wish
that if he was poor. How many a learned in the hereafter will have longing for the
safety of the ignorant! This danger alone is sufficient to prevent him from
arrogance. If he is from the denizens of the fire, to be sure, the pig is better than
him.
How should he who is in such a condition become arrogant? The learned
should not regard himself higher than the companions “Allah be pleased with
them”. One of them used to say: "Would that my mother did not give birth to
me!" another used to pick up a straw from the ground and say: "Would that I be
this straw!" or: "Would that I be a bird!" or: "Would that I be nothing
mentioned!" all of that was for fear of the danger of the consequence. They saw
themselves in a condition worse than birds and lifeless things. If one has a long
reflection on the danger he is facing, his arrogance will be removed entirely, for
he will see himself the worst of people.
His example is like a slave who was given many assignments by his master
to do; and he neglected to do some of them, and failed to do others, and
doubted as to whether or not he has done many of them. Some time later, his
master sent a messenger to arrest him, and make him stand barefooted and
naked in the scorching heat of sun for a long time. When his suffering was
aggravated, he was called to account, and then was put in a narrow prison and
severe punishment. He learned that his master had done the same with many of
his slaves like him, and forgiven others, and he does not know from which
parties he would be. If he considers all of that, his own self would get broken,
his honour would become idle, and his arrogance would be removed. He would
not become arrogant over anyone of the people: on the contrary, he would
humble himself before them in the hope of that anyone of them would be of
his intercessors at the time of punishment. Similarly, if the learned thinks of
what he wasted of the commands of his Lord, regarding the crimes and sins he
has committed, caused by showing off, arrogance, envy, rancor, hatred, vanity
and hypocrisy, and learns to what extent he is in the face of danger, of a surety,
he would abandon arrogance.
The other is that the learned knows well that supremacy is fitting only for
Allah Almighty Alone, apart from anyone of His servants, and that if he becomes
arrogant, he will be hateful in the Sight of Allah Almighty. That is because Allah
Almighty likes that he should be humble. He should do what his Lord likes him

The quarter of the destructives
590
to do. This, therefore, removes arrogance from his heart. It is by this that the
arrogance was removed from the hearts of the Prophets “peace be upon them”,
for they knew well that whoever disputed with Allah Almighty over the upper
garment of Majesty, he would be broken by Allah, and Allah Almighty ordered
them to humble themselves in order to rise in His Sight. This also instigates him
to be humble.
But you may argue: "How does a learned humble himself before a dissolute
wicked and religious innovator whose wickedness is evident? How does he see
himself inferior to such given that he is a worshipper and a learned? How does he
ignore the excellence of worship and knowledge in the Sight of Allah Almighty?
How does he satisfy himself with thinking only of the danger of knowledge,
given that the danger of the dissolute wicked is more grievous?"
In reply to it, it should be known to you that this is possible if one thinks of
the danger of the conclusion, in the sense that if he sees a disbeliever, he would
not become arrogant over him for he might probably embrace Islam, and thus
conclude his deed with faith, whereas this learned might probably err and
conclude his deed with disbelief. To be sure, the great is he who will be great in
the Sight of Allah Almighty in the hereafter; and both pig and dog are higher in
the Sight of Allah than him who will be of the denizens of the fire. How many a
Muslim considered the condition of Umar “Allah be pleased with him” before his
Islam, and despised and scorned him due to his disbelief, and later he was
endowed by Allah Almighty with Islam in which he excelled all the Muslims
barring Abu Bakr “Allah be pleased with him”.
The consequences of the future are hidden from the servants, and the
rational is he who looks over the consequence, for all virtues and good merits
in this world are intended for the consequence in the hereafter. Thus, no
servant has the right to become arrogant over anyone: on the contrary, if a
servant sees an ignorant, he should say: "This has disobeyed Allah because of
his ignorance, whereas I have disobeyed Him in spite of my knowledge. He is
then more excusable than me." If he sees a learned he should say: "It may be
that this has better knowledge than I have. How should I be then like him?" if
he sees one who is older than him, let him say: "This has preceded me to obey
Allah Almighty: how should I be equal to him?" if he sees one who is younger
than him, let him say: "I have preceded him to disobey Allah Almighty: how
should I be equal to him?" if he sees a religious innovator, let him say: "What
makes me to know? It may be that Allah Almighty would conclude his work
with Islam, and conclude my work with the same on which he is now. It is not
up to me to persist in guidance as well as it was not up to me to create it in
the beginning."
By observing the conclusion, one might remove arrogance from himself. It
is to know that the real perfection lies in the happiness of the hereafter and
the closeness to Allah Almighty and not in the seemingly good perishable
things of this world. By my life, this danger is shared by both the arrogant and
the one over whom he is arrogant. But it is incumbent upon everyone to be
mainly concerned with his own fear of his consequence, and not with the

591
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
consequence of anyone else. If some people are put in prison because of a
particular crime, and told that their heads would be chopped off, everyone of
them would be occupied from being arrogant over the other by his own fear
of his future consequence.
You may argue: "How should I dislike the religious innovator and dissolute
wicked, whom I was commanded to dislike, and at the same time, humble myself
before them? To combine both is indeed contradictory." In reply to it, it should
be known to you that this matter is suspicious and most people are put to
confusion regarding it. Your anger for the Sake of Allah in regard to rejection of
religious innovation and dissoluteness mixes with self-arrogance and haughtiness
because of knowledge and piety. How many an ignorant worshipper or a
deceived learned is disturbed by having a dissolute wicked sit besides him due to
a lurking arrogance within himself, thinking that he is angry for the Sake of Allah
Almighty, the same as was the case of the worshipper of the children of Israel
with their dissolute wicked. That is because arrogance is visible as evil on the
obedient, and it is possible for him to beware of it, whereas arrogance in relation
to the dissolute wicked and religious innovator looks like showing anger for the
Sake of Allah, and thus seems good in his sight. That is because the angry
becomes arrogant over him with whom he is angry, in the same way as the
arrogant himself grows angry with him over whom he is arrogant. One of both
brings about the other; and they are mixed and confused, and it is difficult to
make a clear distinction between them.
In order to deliver yourself from that confusion, let you present three
important things to your heart, whenever you see a religious innovator or a
dissolute wicked, or enjoin good on them and forbid evil to them: the first is to
observe your sins and mistakes in order that you would become trivial in your
own sight. The second is to observe the knowledge and piety with which you are
distinguished as a favor bestowed upon you from Allah Almighty for which you
are under obligation to Him, in order that you would not then be proud of
yourself, and once you are not proud of yourself, you would not be arrogant. The
third is to observe your undecided consequence, in the sense that your deed
might probably be concluded with evil, and his with good, in order that your own
fear would occupy you from arrogance over him.
You may ask: "Then, how should I become angry in those conditions?" in
reply to it, let me say that you should become angry for the Sake of your Master
and Lord Almighty, Who ordered you to become angry for His Own Sake and
not for your sake. But during your anger, you should not see that you would be
saved and your companion ruined: on the contrary, your fear for yourself, due to
the hidden sins and mistakes you have committed which Allah Almighty knows
well, should be more than your fear for him, given the ignorance of the
conclusion. To be sure, it is not required by the anger for the Sake of Allah
Almighty to be arrogant over him with whom you are angry.
Let me give you an example for that: suppose a man has a slave and a child,
i.e. his son, who is the cool of his eye, and that he entrusted to the slave to
watch over him, and punish him once he is impolite and behaves in opposition

The quarter of the destructives
592
to the good manners. If the slave is faithful and loyal to his master, it becomes
then necessary for him to be angry with the child once he does anything evil,
just for the sake of his master, and in compliance with his order that he should
do so, and as his child does what his master dislikes, he finds himself forced to
strike him in order to please his master. But although he grows angry with him,
and beat him, this does not require him to be arrogant over him, for he knows
well that he is higher in rank in the sight of his master than his own self, for
indeed, none is dearer to the father than his child. Similarly, you should regard
the religious innovator and the dissolute wicked, and imagine that they might be
higher in rank in the Sight of Allah Almighty in the hereafter, for they have
been doomed to conclude their deed with good, and you with evil, of which
you are heedless. But in spite of that, you should become angry with them, just
for the Sake of your Lord and in compliance with His command.
This is the case of the real faithful sincere learned. But the deceived one
becomes arrogant with his knowledge, and expects for himself more than he
expects for him over whom he is arrogant, given his ignorance of the
consequence. This is the utmost degree of decepdon and self-conceit. That is the
way to humble yourself before him who disobeys Allah or makes a religious
innovation, and grow angry with him for the Sake of Allah Almighty.
The seventh pertains to arrogance because of piety and acts of worship. It is
a cause of great temptation for the worshippers. The way of remedy is to adhere
to humbleness to all the servants, putting in mind that one should not become
arrogant over him who excels him in knowledge, in view of the superiority of
knowledge. Allah Almighty says in this respect: " Say: "Are those equal, those
who know and those who do not know? It is those who are endued with
understanding that receive admonition." (Az-Zumar 9)

*

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "The
superiority of a learned over a worshipper is like my superiority over the least of
my companions." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of
Abu Umamah).
If a worshipper argues that this applies to the learned who acts upon his
knowledge: what about the wicked learned? In reply to that, let us say that does
he not know that the good deeds remove the evil deeds? As well as knowledge
might be an argument against a learned, it might be a means and expiation for his
sins. If this is absent from his mind, it then becomes incumbent upon him not to
despised a learned whatsoever. You may argue once again that were this to be
true, then, it should be possible for a learned to regard himself above the
worshipper, in view of the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him”: "The superiority of a learned over a worshipper is like
my superiority over the least of my companions." In reply, let's say that it would
have been possible had the consequence and the end of the journey of the
learned are known to him. But the conclusion is suspicious, and he might die
while being worse in the Sight of Allah Almighty than an ignorant wicked, just
for a single sin he has committed which he thought to be trivial, although it is

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity

=
=

593

grievous in the Sight of Allah AJmighty. If it is possible, he then should feel afraid
for himself. In this way, if the learned and the worshipper fear for themselves,
and each is required to be concerned with his own self, fear then should prevail
in regard with himself, and hope in regard with the others. Anyway, this prevents
him from arrogance.
This is the case of a worshipper with a learned. As for his case with anyone
else, they are divided into screened and exposed. As for the screened, he should
not be arrogant over him, for perhaps he might probably have a fewer sins, more
acts of worship, and love Allah more than him. As to the exposed, you have no
right even to criticize such of them as whose sins are more than yours during
your entire lifetime, for it is difficult to take account of the number of sins of you
or of anyone else during your lives. It is true that you might judge his sins to be
more severe and grievous, when you see him, say, kill or commit fornication, but
even at this case, you have no right to be arrogant over him, since the sins of
hearts, like envy, hatred, rancor, showing off, doubts about the attributes of Allah
Almighty, etc, are so much grievous in the Sight of Allah Almighty. You may
become, by virtue of your hidden sins, more hateful in the Sight of Allah
Almighty than the dissolute wicked whose wickedness is evident, in view of his
sincere obedience, fear and love for Allah Almighty, that are lacking in you, by
which Allah makes expiation for his other sins; and when the veil is removed on
the Day of judgement, you will find that he is above you in rank and position.
Of a surety, this is possible. So, do not trouble yourself by what is possible
for others, and rather engage yourself in what stimulates your terrors and fears,
for in no way could a bearer of sin bear the sin of another, and the punishment
of anyone else does not lighten yours. If you reflect on that danger, you will be
occupied from arrogance and haughtiness. According to Wahb Ibn Munabbih:
"The perfection of mind is achieved only by ten characteristics." After he had
counted nine of them, he was asked about the tenth, thereupon he said: "The
tenth with which one's repute becomes high, is to see all the people better than
him in rank. That is because the people in his sight are of two divisions: one is
better and higher than him, and the other is worse and lower than him. He
should humble himself before both divisions with his heart. If he sees such of
them as better than him, he should be pleased with him, and entertain the hope
to join him; an if he sees such of them as worse than him, he should say:
'Perhaps this might be saved and I be destroyed'. He always feels afraid of the
consequence, and always says to himself: 'Perhaps, this might be inwardly
dutiful, and this is good for him, and I do not know, perhaps he has good moral
character which none knows but Allah Aimighty, by virtue of which Allah
would bestow mercy upon him, turn to him in repentance, and conclude his life
with the best of his deeds, unlike me, whose apparent acts of worship could
hardly be safe from any evils to mix with and frustrate them'. At that point, his
mind would be perfect, and he would have the authority over the people of his
own time."
In brief, he, who is likely doomed to be miserable, has no right to become
arrogant over anyone else: on the contrary, being possessed by fear and terror, he

The quarter of the destructives
594
should see all the people better than him. It is reported that a worshipper took
shelter to die top of a mountain, and during his sleep, a visitant came to him and
told him to 'go to so and so, die shoemaker and ask him to supplicate for you'.
He went to him and asked him about his deed, and he told him that he was in the
habit of fasting the day and working to gain his earnings and giving in charity
some diereof, and feeding his dependents with some thereof. He returned and
said to himself: "That is good, but it is not like the wholehearted devodon to the
worship of Allah." In his sleep the same visitant came to him and told him: "Go
to that shoemaker and ask him about the paleness of his face." He went and
asked him, thereupon he said: "I never see a man but that I think he would be
saved and I be ruined." The worshipper said: "Then, it is with this (that you have
attained felicity)."
In confirmation of the excellence of that characteristic, Allah Almighty says: "
Verily those who live in awe for fear of their Lord; Those who believe in the
Signs of their Lord; Those who join not (in worship) partners with their Lord;
And those who dispense their charity with their hearts full of fear, because they
wall return to their Lord." (Al-Mu'minun 57-60)
V

oiuJij (rgj b^ }ybs^ oitilij ggj by^
4 CjS bj^rb fyb <j] ^r1

oiAjt b\ >

pv_^J l*31* ^ Oyji btS13 ©

He Almighty further says: "They will say: "Aforetime, we were not without
fear for the sake of our people." (At-Tur 26)
uiai <4

b-^=> bj ijni y

About the angels who are deemed far from all kinds of sins and mistakes,
and wholeheartedly devoted to worship their Lord, Allah Almighty says: "To
Him belong all (creatures) in the heavens and on earth: even those who are in
His (very) Presence are not too proud to serve Him, Nor are they (ever) weary
(of His service): They celebrate His praises night and day, nor do they ever
flag or intermit... and they stand in awe and reverence of His (glory)." (AlAnbiya 19-20,28)
(£?5)

^

b * ***1 ^

<J\ y jAjl aJJ

> U-P

*JJ Jy*j (j*
{(^) -bbjy*b-i

cr*j

I

^ ^ jaJj ^

AW I

Ij

Al) I

AjA 11-

[lL*j\ Llj {ifjj Of**j*-* p-fr3 (ji* 0^
I A3

^

^

Oj

1^ b I ^1

Cr? A-5

Once the fear and terror fade away, and one is no longer cautious of what

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
595
has been preordained, he feels safe from the plot of Allah Almighty, which, in
turn, brings about arrogance; and it is the cause of destruction. To be sure,
arrogance indicates to feeling safe from the plot of Allah, and feeling safe
from the plot of Allah is destructive; whereas humbleness indicates to fear
and terror, which, in turn, brings about happiness and pleasure. The mischief
caus ed by arrogance, showing contempt for people and looking at them with
slightness is more than the good brought about by the apparent acts of
worship. It is with this knowledge and no more that arrogance might be
removed from the heart.
But even, after that knowledge, one's soul might conceal humbleness and
claim, though falsely, that it is free from arrogance. But it is false to its claim for
once it is exposed to calamity, it soon forgets and returns to its nature. For this
reason, only knowledge is not sufficient for remedy. But it should be completed
with work and put to test with the acts of the humble on the occasion where
arrogance is provoked in it. It is to test oneself with five tests in order to extract
what is lurking in it.
The first test is that if he engages in debate with anyone of his fellows, and
then the truth emerges on the tongue of his foe, which he does not accept, nor
submit to nor acknowledge of nor give thanks to him, he should know that his
heart has something of arrogance lurking in it. At that point, he should fear Allah
Almighty, and engage in treating it: in terms of knowledge, by reminding himself
of the baseness and meanness of his own self, the danger of his consequence, and
the fact that supremacy is not fitting but for Allah Almighty; and in terms of
work, by forcing himself to do what he feels heavy upon himself, such as to
acknowledge the truth, give thanks to him for it, declare his failure, and be
grateful to him for the good he has guided him to. Indeed, the wisdom is the best
thing sought by a faithfijl believer, and once he finds it, he should thank him who
has guided him to it. If he does that regularly many times, it would turn to be
integral to his disposition, in such a way that causes him not to feel the heaviness
of accepting the truth. If he feels it heavy upon himself to praise his fellows with
what they really have, he still has some arrogance. If it is heavy upon himself only
when he is in public, it is not arrogance in so much as it is showing off, which he
should strive to remove from himself. But if it is heavy upon him in both private
and public, it has both arrogance and showing off, and of no profit to him is to
get rid of one without the other. So, let him remedy both ailments for they are
destructive.
The second test is that when he is in the company of his fellows and
companions in the gatherings, let him give them precedence over himself, walk
behind them, and sit below them. If this is heavy upon himself, he is then an
arrogant. So, let him habituate himself to do it until it becomes a part of his
nature. Thus, arrogance will be removed from his heart. But here lies an intrigue
of Satan: it is that he sits in the same row where sandals are placed, thinking it to
be out of humbleness. But this is evident arrogance. Indeed, it is hidden from the
breasts of the arrogant, who think that they leave their sitting places, which they
should deserve out of bounty and generosity. That is arrogance by showing

The quarter of the destructives
596
humbleness. He should rather give precedence to his fellows and sit by their side
and not in the rear of them, in the same row where sandals are placed. It is that
which removes die arrogance from the heart.
The third test is to respond to the invitadon of the poor, and go to the
market to fulfill the needs of his companions. If it is heavy upon himself to do so,
it is out of arrogance, because those acts indicate to the noble manners, for which
one receives reward in abundance. To abstain from them means there are internal
arrogance and wickedness. The remedy is to endeavor to do those acts even
ostentatiously at first, putting in mind all items of knowledge we have already
mentioned, which are to remove the disease of arrogance.
The fourth test is to carry by himself his things, the things of his dependents
and the needs of his companions from the market to the home. If he disdains to
do so, it is arrogance or showing off. If it is heavy upon himself even in privacy, it
is arrogance, and if it is so only in public, it is showing off. Both belong to the
destructive heart diseases, which should be remedied and removed entirely. The
people have neglected the heart medicine and rather engaged in the body
medicine, given that bodies are doomed to death, whereas hearts attain happiness
only when they are sound, in accordance with the statement of Allah Almighty:
"But only he (will prosper) that brings to Allah a sound heart." (Ash-Shu'ara 89)
It is reported that Abdullah Ibn Salam “Allah be pleased with him” was seen
carrying a bundle of firewood, thereupon it was said to him: "O Abu Yusuf! Your
servants and daughter could suffice you that burden." On that he said: "Yes, but I
like to test my soul, and whether or not it would disdain to do so." It is reported
in another narration: "Whoever carries fruits or things (of himself or anyone else
on his behalf) has indeed been free from arrogance." (This is reported by AlBaihaqi on the authority of Abu Umamah).
The fifth test is to put on cheap clothes. Indeed, to abstain from that is
showing off if it is in public, and arrogance if it is in privacy. Umar Ibn AbdAl-Aziz had a coarse wool mantle, which he used to put on at night.
Furthermore, the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "He, who does not abstain to tie the camel by himself and put on
wool has indeed been free from arrogance." (This narration is reported by AlBaihaqi on the authority of Abu Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "I am no more than a servant
and I eat on the ground in the same way as a servant eats, put on wool, tie the
camel by myself, lick my fingers (to clean them from the remaining food), and
answer the invitation of the slave : whoever then turns away from my sunnah
does not belong to me." It is reported that it was said to Abu Musa “Allah be
pleased with him”: "Some people remain behind from attending the Friday
prayer because of their clothes." On that he put on a cheap mantle in which
he led the prayer.
In those situations, both arrogance and showing off gather together: What is
unique to the public belongs to showing off, and what is unique to privacy
belongs to arrogance. So, you should be acquainted with that, for indeed,

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity

597

whoever does not know evil is not able to safeguard himself from it, and whoever
does not know the disease could not be able to remedy it.

CHAPTER TEN
EXPOSITION OF SELF-DISCIPLINE TO ACQUIRE THE CHARACTER
OF HUMBLENESS; AND PRAISEWORTHY AND BLAMEWORTHY
EXTENT OF HUMBLENESS
It should be known to you that this quality, like the other qualities, has
two extremes and a middle. That which inclines to excess is called arrogance,
and that which inclines to reduction is called ignominy and baseness, and the
middle is called humbleness. The praiseworthy is to be humble but without
ignominy or baseness. To be sure, the two extremes of all things are
blameworthy, and the dearest to Allah is the middle of everything. Whoever
raises himself above his fellows is an arrogant, and whoever lowers himself to
be inferior to them is humble, in the sense that he puts down something of
his rank, which he deserves. If a shoemaker enters upon a learned who makes
him sit in his place, and then proceeds on to straighten his sandals and runs to
be at the door of the house behind him, he will have indeed humiliated
himself; and this is blameworthy.
It is moderation then that is praiseworthy in the Sight of Allah Almighty, i.e.
to give everyone his own right, which he deserves. With such standard one
should then humble himself before his fellows and those who are close to him in
rank. But the way to humble himself before the laymen is to stand and speak with
them joyfully, to be lenient in dealing with them, to answer their invitation, to
endeavor to fulfill their needs, etc. therefore, he should not regard himself better
than anyone of the laymen: On the contrary, he should fear for himself more
than he fears for anyone else. He should neither despise nor look down upon
him, given that he is ignorant of the conclusion of his deeds.
His way to acquire the quality of humbleness then is to humble himself
before his fellows and those inferior to him until the praiseworthy kind of
humbleness becomes integral to his disposition, and the vice of arrogance is
removed from his heart. If he finds it light and easy upon himself, then, he has
acquired the quality of humbleness; and if he still finds it heavy upon himself
although he does it, he then is ostentatious and not humble by nature. But if it
becomes lighter in a way that makes it difficult upon him to observe his own
rank, and rather causes him to incline to flattery and baseness, he has then gone
as far as to the extreme of reduction, which is blameworthy. At that point, he
should raise himself, until he returns to the middle that is preferred. Indeed, it is
not fitting for a faithful believer to humiliate himself to anyone else (other than
Allah Almighty).
But since that middle is always abstruse in all things, it is easier to incline to
the extreme of reduction which brings about adulation and flattery than to incline
to that of excess which brings about arrogance and haughtiness, just as to incline
to the extreme of profligacy in spending is more praiseworthy in the sight of
people than to incline to the extreme of thriftiness. As well as both extremes of

The quarter of the destructives
598
extravagance and stinginess are blameworthy, and one of them is more odious
than die other , both extremes of arrogance and humiliation are blameworthy,
and one of them is more odious than the other. What is praiseworthy then is the
moderation, i.e. to do things properly and appropriately as required, according to
what is known from Sharia and usage.
Let's then be satisfied with that amount of exposition of the qualities of both
arrogance and humbleness.

------- PART TWO-------CONDEMNATION OF VANITY
It includes the following chapters:
Exposition of condemnation of vanity
Exposition of evils of vanity
Exposition of real nature of vanity and anticipation of special treatment
Exposition of remedy of vanity
Exposition of divisions of things of conceit; and the remedy of each in
detail

CHAPTER ONE
EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION AND EVILS OF VANITY
It should be known to you that vanity is blamed in the Book of Allah
Almighty, as well as in the sunnah of His Messenger “peace be upon him”. Allah
Almighty says: " Assuredly Allah did help you in many battle-fields and on the
day of Hunain: behold! your great numbers elated you, but they availed you
naught." (At-Tawbah 25)
1

V

^>-

j&~=•

(i

^^

He remembered that by way of rejecting their conduct. He Almighty further
says: " and they thought that their fortresses would defend them from Allah! But
the (Wrath of) Allah came to them from quarters from which they little expected
(it), and cast terror into their hearts, so that they destroyed their dwellings by their
own hands and the hands of the Believers. Take warning, then, O you with eyes
(to see)!" (Al-Hashr 2)

With that He Almighty replied to the disbelievers in their pride of their strong
fortresses. He further says: "Those whose efforts have been wasted in this life.
While they thought that they were acquiring good by their works?" (Al-Kahf 104)

ib.bsjiT J

bytf>

To be sure, one might be proud of a work in which he is mistaken, as well as

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
599
of a work in which he is right.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
There are three destructives: Niggardliness that is obeyed, an inclination that is
followed, and self-vanity.” The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him said to Abu Tha'labah “Allah be pleased with him”: “You should keep
enjoining what is good upon one another, and forbidding one another to do evil
until when you see niggardliness being prevalent, the own desires and inclinations
being followed, the world being given preference (over the hereafter), and
everyone having an opinion will come to admire his own opinion, then, you just
have to protect your own soul." ^This narration is reported by Abu Dawud, AtTirmidhi and Ibn Majah).
According to Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him”: "The ruined is he who
is desperate and self-conceited." Indeed, he combined both for happiness is
achieved only when one endeavors and works hard, and the desperate never
endeavors nor works hard, and the self-conceited thinks he has attained
happiness and achieved his purpose in a way that makes him have no desire to do
more. In other words, the happiness is present in the sight of the self-conceited,
and impossible in the sight of the desperate. This is why both are combined
here. Allah Almighty says: " Therefore justify not yourselves: He knows best who
it is that guards against evil." (An-Najm 32)

In his comment on it, Ibn Juraij said: "If you do good, do not say that you
have done such and such good." According to Zaid Ibn Aslam: "Do not render it
pure." This is the concept of vanity.
It is reported that on the day of the holy battle of Uhud, Talhah “Allah be
pleased with him” protected the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” with his own body as he overturned on him and received the
arrow strikes on his behalf until his arm was paralyzed. It seemed as if his deed
elated him that he was able to redeem the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” at the cost of his hand. Umar “Allah be pleased with
him” observed that in him and said: "The traces of vanity have been visible on
the face of Talhah since his fingers were injured while sacrificing the Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” on the day of the holy battle
of Uhud." (This is reported by Al-Bukhari on the authority of Qais Ibn Abu
Hazim).
But, there is no report that he showed it or despised any Muslim because of
that. When it was the time of consultation (to choose the caliph after Umar), it
was said to Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with them”: "Where is your position
from Talhah?" he said: "This is a man in whom there is something of vanity." If
the like of them were not able to get rid of such an evil entirely, how should the
weak get rid of it unless they are cautious and take heed? In confirmation of that,
Mutarrif “Allah be pleased with him” said: "To spend the night sleeping and
become regretful in the morning is dearer to me than to spend the night standing
(for supererogatory prayers) and become self-conceited in the morning. The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Even if you

The quarter of the destructives
600
do not commit any sin, I would fear for you what is more than that, i.e. vanity,
vanity." (This narration is reported by Al-Bazzar, Ibn Hibban and Al-Baihaqi on
the authority of Anas). In this way, he made vanity one of the greatest sins.
It is reported that Bishr Ibn Mansur was in the habit of celebrating Allah
Almighty and the abode of the hereafter so often. One day, he prolonged the
prayer and there was a man behind him looking at his deed. Bishr made sense
of him and when he finished and turned away from the prayer he said to him:
"Do not admire what you have seen from me, for Iblis, may Allah curse him,
worshipped Allah Almighty with the angels for a long time after which he
turned to be as you know about him." It was said to A'ishah “Allah be pleased
with her”: "When would the man be evil?" She said: "When he thinks that he is
good." Allah Almighty says: " O you who believe! Cancel not your charity by
reminders of your generosity or by injury, like those who spend their substance
to be seen of men, but believe neither in Allah nor in the Last Day." (AlBaqarah 264)
\ \ij .>4jL (J^-4 {£teWTj

\y^\t (jij]I

^

Reminder of generosity ensues from making much of charity, as well as
vanity ensues from making much of deed. This shows to what extent vanity is
blameworthy.

CHAPTER TWO
EXPOSITION OF EVILS OF VANITY
It should be known to you that the evils of vanity are numerous. It brings
about arrogance, since it is one of its causes. This pertains to servants in their
relation with each other. But as regards the reladon with Allah Almighty, it
summons one to forget and neglect his sins. One does not care about some of
his sins under pretext that he does not need to inspect them, with the result
that he forgets them entirely, and regards with slightness such of them as he
remembers. In this way, he does not strive to plot out them, thinking they
would be forgiven for him. But the case is different regarding his deeds and
acts of worship, which he makes much of, and dares to remember, and regard
Allah Almighty under obligation to him because of them, forgetting the favor
of Allah Almighty upon him as it is He Who helps him and grants him success
to do them.
On the other hand, if one is proud of his deeds, he would be blind from their
evils; and whoever does not inspect the evils of deeds, wastes the greatest pordon
of his endeavour. Unless the apparent deeds and acts of worship are done with
sincerity and freedom from stains of showing off, they could hardly be fruitful. It
is the fearful who always inspects that, unlike the self-conceited, who is deceived
by his pride, which makes him feel safe from the punishment and plot of Allah
Almighty, under belief that he has a good position with Him, and a right due to
his deeds, which are a part of the gifts and favors given to him by Allah Almighty.
His vanity causes him to praise himself, give prestige to and justify himself. If one

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity

601

is proud of his opinion, reason and deed, he would not be able to get benefit
from others, since by so doing, he disdains to ask him who has better knowledge
than him.
Perhaps, he might admire his opinion, regardless of being wrong, and rejoice
that it is from his own thought, and at the same time reject the opinion of others
regardless of being right. That is because he always sees ail the people with the
eye of ignorance, and does not submit to the advice or the admonition of anyone
in so much as he insists on his wrong opinion. If his wrong opinion belongs to
the worldly affairs, it then might be subject to investigation; and if it belongs to
religious affairs in general, and what pertains to the foundations of creed in
particular, he would be ruined by it. But were he to have doubt in his opinion,
seek guidance by the light of the Qur'an and the Sunnah, study the religion well,
seek the aid of the learned and scholars, and continue to ask those endued with
good insight, surely, he would attain the truth. Such is among the destructive evils
of vanity.

CHAPTER THREE
EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE AND DEFINITION OF VANITY AND
ANTICIPATION OF SPECIAL TREATMENT
It should be known that vanity is that a man sees himself perfect in a
particular characteristic like knowledge, property, wealth, etc. The learned, who
regards himself perfect in terms of knowledge, wealth, property and majesty, has
two cases: the first is that he fears the loss of anyone of those, or of his being
deprived of anyone of them; and this is not vanity. The second is that he does
not fear the loss of any of those, but he rejoices at it as being a favor from Allah
Almighty and not as being a privilege attributed to him. But this also is not
vanity. There is a third case (which is blameworthy since it represents) the evident
vanity, i.e. he rejoices at it as being a privilege attributed to him, to raise his rank
and make high his repute, and not as being a favor conferred upon him by Allah
Almighty. Indeed, if he more likely thinks that it is a favor from Allah Almighty
in the sense that if He wills, He could deprive him of it, vanity is removed from
his heart.
Vanity then is to make much of a favour and rely on it, forgetting that it is a
favour conferred by the Benefactor. If, besides that, one more likely thinks that
he has a right with Allah Almighty, and that he expects for his deed a great
reward in the hereafter, and no harm to befall him in this world, it is called
anticipation of special treatment because of deed, which makes him think that
he has an intimacy with Allah Almighty. Similarly, one might give a gift to
another, make much of it, and remind him of his generosity: if he uses him,
proposes that he should do a favor to him (in recompense for it), or expects he
does not delay to fulfill his need, he then anticipates to be cherished by him. In
his comment on the statement of Allah Almighty: " And give not a thing in
order to have more (or consider not your deeds of Allah s obedience as a favor
to Him)" (Al-Muddaththir 6)

4 ((|cr^

^

The quarter of the destructives
Qatadah said: "He means anticipate no special treatment because of your
deed." It is said in a certain narration: "The prayer of him who anticipates special
treatment because of his deed is not raised even over his head (i.e. it is not
accepted by Allah); and to laugh while confessing your sins is better than to weep
while anticipating special treatment because of your deed."
To be sure, anticipation of special treatment is beyond vanity, for there is no
one anticipating special treatment because of his deed but that he should be
proud of it, and not vice versa, for how many a person who is swollen with pride
of his deed, because of which he does not anticipate to be cherished. That is
because vanity results from making much of the deed, and forgetting that it is a
favor, but without expecting reward for it, whereas anticipation of special
treatment always is related with expectation of reward for the deed. If one
expects response to his supplication, and disapproves that it be returned, and
wonders at that, he is then an anticipator of special treatment because of his
deed, for he does not wonder at the return of the supplication of the dissolute
wicked, and wonders at the return of his own supplication. This is vanity and
anticipation of special treatment; and it is one of the commencements and causes
of arrogance; and Allah knows best.
602

CHAPTER FOUR
EXPOSmON OF REMEDY OF VANITY
It should be known that the remedy of each disease is to counteract its
cause with its opposite; and the cause of vanity is ignorance, and its remedy is
to adhere to knowledge, which opposes that ignorance. Suppose that vanity is
one of the acts to be done optionally, like worship, prayer, fasting, giving in
charity, etc. That is because vanity of those things prevails over that of beauty,
power, ancestry and wealth, as well as of anything that is beyond his option and
will. Based upon that, let us say that one might be conceited by piety, worship,
god-fearingness, and work, either in themselves, or as being brought about by
his power. If he is conceited by any of those in itself, then it is an evident
ignorant, for he has nothing to do with it. If he is conceited by it as being
brought about and caused by his power and will, then, let him consider his
willpower, organs, and parts of his body, asking himself about their creator:
since all of them are but a grace bestowed by Allah Almighty upon him, in
which he has no favor, then, it is preferable for him to be grateful to the
generosity, bounty and mercy of Allah Almighty, Who conferred upon him
what he deserves not with which He favored him to anyone else. If one is to be
conceited, he should be conceited by the Benefactor, but to be conceited by
himself is of no significance.
Suppose that there is a king who has many servants, and he favors one of
them with special things apart from all the others, the beneficiary then should
appreciate the generosity and bounty of the king and not his own self. But a
servant might be conceited, saying that the king is just and fair, and he never
brings backward or forward, nor gives precedence to anyone but due to a special
privilege. Therefore, it may be said to him, that this privilege might be bestowed
upon you by the king himself or by anyone else. If it is given to you by the king,

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
603
you have no right to be conceited. It is like the case in which the king gave you a
horse, which you did not admire, and then he gave you a slave, whom you
admired, saying: "He has given me a slave for I own a horse." But it is said that
since it was he who gave you the horse, then, there is no difference whether he
has given you both simultaneously or one after the other. If both are from him,
you should then appreciate his bounty and generosity, and not be conceited. But
if this privilege is from anyone else, it is not unlikely that you could be conceited,
but this is possible in regard with the kings among men, and impossible in regard
with Allah Almighty, Who alone creates, invents and gives all things to whomever
He likes.
Furthermore, if you are conceited by your worship, saying: "He has helped
me worship Him out of loving for Him", it is said: "Who then has inculcated that
love in your heart?" of course you will say that it is He who has done so, and the
answer will be: "Then, both worship and love are graces which He has bestowed
upon you, in which you have no favor." In this way, you should appreciate His
generosity and bounty as it is He Who has bestowed on you the favor of
existence, good attributes, acts and their causes and motives. Thus, it is of no
significance for a worshipper to be conceited by his worship, the learned by his
knowledge, the beautiful by his beauty, the wealthy by his wealth, etc, for all of
this is out of the bounty of Allah Almighty.
You may argue: "I could not ignore my deeds, and as it is I who do them, I
expect reward for them; and had they not be mine, I would have expected no
reward for them. If all acts and deeds are invented by Allah Almighty, by which
thing should I deserve reward? If they are done by my power and will, then, why
should I not expect reward for them?" In reply to that, it should be known to you
that the answer to your question has two points: the one is evidently true, i.e. that
you, your power, will, movement, and all things belong to you are created and
invented by Allah Almighty. When you work, pray, do, throw, it is not your
power in so much as it is the power of Allah Almighty (which brings about the
act). This is the truth that has been disclosed to the masters of hearts. It is He
Almighty Who has crated you, your organs and parts of body, and placed in them
the power, will, and health, and created for you both reason and knowledge; and
if you want to remove anything of that from yourself, of a surety you would not
be able to do. It is He Alone Who has created the movement of your organs,
without the least effort or favor from you. But He has created all of that
according to a certain order in such a way that the movement requires power in
the organ and will in the heart; and the will requires knowledge of what is wanted;
and knowledge requires the mind, which represents its location. It is that
graduation, which makes you fancy that it, is you who bring about your work by
yourself; and this is a great mistake. The exposition of how you should receive a
reward for a work that is created by Allah Almighty will be mentioned later in the
Book of Thanksgiving.
As to the other answer, which is somewhat indulgent, it is that you think the
work is done by your power and will. But even, from where have you obtained
your power? The work could not be envisaged without the existence of you,

The quarter of the destructives
604
your work, power, will, in addition to all causes of your act. All of that comes
from Allah Almighty with no favor from you. If the work is to be done by
power, which is its key, you should know then that the key is in the Hand of
Allah Almighty, and if you are not given the key, you would not be able to
work. Works are treasures through which one attains happiness, and their keys
are power, will, knowledge and reason, and all of those are in the Hand of Allah
Almighty. Once the power is created, the decisive will is directed, the causes
and motives are moved, and the impediments and obstructions are kept away
from you, the work becomes so much easy upon you. To be sure, stimulating
the causes and motives, keeping away the impediments and obstructions, and
facilitating the means: All are done by Allah Almighty, and you have nothing to
do with any of them. It is then surprising that you are conceited by yourself,
and do not appreciate Him to Whom the whole matter returns, nor His bounty
and generosity that He has favored you over the dissolute wicked of His
servants, as He directed the causes and motives of wickedness over the
dissolute, and kept them away from you, directed the friends and callers of evil
over them and kept them away from you, kept away from them the causes and
motives of good and directed them over you, until good has been made easy
upon you and evil easy upon them. He has done all of that to you without being
worthy of it, nor because of a crime on the part of the wicked disobedient. He
has given you precedence, favored you and chosen you by His bounty, whereas
kept the disobedient away (from His mercy), and given him to wretchedness by
His justice. How amazing you are when you are conceited!
Your power then could not do an act unless the cause of that act is directed
on you from which you have no way to flee, as if you are forced to do it. In all
circumstances, thanks should be given to Allah Almighty and not to you. In the
book of Monotheism, you will see in detail the series of associated causes in a
way that shows clearly that the real actor and creator is Allah Almighty. How
amazing is he whom Allah Almighty endowed with reason and poverty, when he
sees that an ignorant is endowed with wealth and property, thereupon he says:
"How has he prevented me my daily sustenance, although I am of good reason,
and given that heedless ignorant the bliss of this world?" He sees it a kind of
wrongness, without knowing that if both reason and wealth are combined to him,
it will be evident injustice. The poor ignorant will say in this case: "O Lord! Why
have You combined to him both reason and wealth, and deprived me of them?,
why have You not combined both to me or at least bestowed one of them upon
me?" To this fact Ali “Allah be pleased with him” referred when he was asked:
"What is the matter with the men of reason that they are poor?" On that he said:
"The reason of a man is counted of his sustenance." For surprise, the poor
rational might see the ignorant wealthy better than him. But if he was asked
whether he would exchange his richness and ignorance for his reason and
poverty, he would reject it. This indicates that the favor of Allah upon him is
greater.
The same is true of the poor beautiful woman when she is allured by the
ornaments and adornments of an ugly wealthy woman, although if she was given

605
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
the freedom to choose ornaments and ugliness or beauty and poverty, she would
prefer the latter, and this indicates to what extent the favor of Allah on her is
great. To be sure, ignorance is the origination of all those false imaginations. It is
removed by the certain knowledge that the man, his acts, attributes, power and
will are created by Allah Almighty, as a favor upon him, without being worthy of
that. This alone is sufficient to remove vanity and anticipation of special
treatment, and brings about submission and humility, thanks and fear of the loss
of the favor.
Whoever knows that well is not imagined to be conceited by his knowledge
and work, since he knows for certain that all of this is from Allah Almighty. For
this reason, David “peace be upon him” said: "O Lord! No night (or no hour)
comes but that there is one belonging to the family of David doing an act of
worship, praying, fasting, and celebrating Your Praises." On that Allah Almighty
revealed to him: "O David! How do they do so without Me? Had it not been for
My aid, you would have had no power to do anything. But let me entrust you to
yourself." Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with them” said: "The great sin of David
“peace be upon him” was caused by his conceit of his deed, which he attributed
to himself and his family, in anticipation of special treatment because of it, until
he was entrusted to his own self. He thus committed a great sin which led him to
grief and regret."
On another occasion, David “peace be upon him” said: "O Lord! The
children of Israel ask you by Abraham, Isaac and Jacob." He said: "I have tested
them perchance they would keep patient." He said: "O Lord! As for me, if You
test me too, I would keep patient." In this way, he anticipated of special
treatment because of his deed. Allah Almighty said to him: "Then, I have not told
them by which thing, and in which month and on which day I would test them.
But now, I tell you that I am going to test you in this year of yours, in this month
of yours, and on the coming day, by a woman. So, be cautious." But he fell in the
sin in which he had fallen."
Similarly, when the companions of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” relied on their power and great number on the day of
the holy battle of Hunain, and forgot the favor of Allah on them, saying: "Today
we would not be defeated because of our great number" (according to the
narration of Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Ar-Rabie Ibn Anas), Allah Almighty
revealed: " and on the day of Hunain: behold! your great numbers elated you, but
they availed you naught: the land, for all that it is wide, did constrain you, and you
turned back in retreat." (At-Tawbah 25)

4

(*-^5

It is reported by Ibn Uyainah that Job “peace be upon him” said: "O Lord!
You have tested me with that trial, although I always give preference to Your love
over mine." He was called from above a cloud with ten thousand voices: "O Job!
How have you done so?" he took some ashes and put it on his head and said: "It
is by Your virtue O Lord! It is by Your virtue O Lord!" he thus recovered from

The quarter of the destructives
606
forgetfulness and attributed the favor to Allah Almighty.
In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty says: " and were it not for the grace
and mercy of Allah on you, not one of you would ever have been pure: but Allah
does purify whom He pleases: and Allah is One Who hears and knows (all
things)." (An-Nur 21)

rsicr S&'&j 4

^

>

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said to
his companions who were the best of people: "There is none of you whose
deed alone would deliver him." They asked: "And not even you O Messenger of
Allah?" He said: "And not even I, unless Allah covers me with His mercy."
(This narration is reported by both sheikhs on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
After him, his companions “Allah be pleased with them” whose hearts were
pure and deeds sincere, hoped to be dust, straw, birds, or anything else which
would not be subject to reckoning and punishment. How should a man of deep
insight be conceited by his deed or anticipate special treatment because of it,
without fear for himself?
That is the remedy which removes the vanity from the heart. If that feeling
prevails over the heart, the fear of being deprived of the grace of faith would
occupy one from conceit because of it. He sees the disbelievers and dissolute
wicked who have been deprived of the favor of faith with no crime they
committed, thereupon he says: "He, who does not care to deprive with no crime
and give with no worth does not care to take back what He has given." How
many a believer has renegaded, and an obedient has his deed concluded with evil.
Of a surety, this gives no place for vanity; and Allah knows best.

CHAPTER FIVE
EXPOSITION OF DIVISIONS OF THINGS OF VANITY AND THE REMEDY
OF EACH IN DETAIL
It should be known that one might be proud of things which are rationale for
pride, as we have already mentioned, or of other things which are unfitting like
one's vanity of his wrong opinion, which is made alluring to him falsely, by virtue
of his ignorance. In short, we could divide things of conceit into eight divisions:
The first is to be conceited by his body, in regard to beauty, health, good
appearance, due proportion between its parts, good voice, i.e. the details of his
features. By so doing, he turns to the beauty of his body, forgetting that it is a
favor from Allah Almighty, and that it is apt to perish at any moment, its remedy
is, as we have already mentioned in the remedy of beauty, to think of the dirty
things and impurities which his belly contains, the things from which he was
created, and the end to which he would be, and how the beautiful and soft bodies
have been torn to pieces in the dust and become putrefied and decomposed, until
they were disgusting.
The second is to be conceited by onslaught and might as was the case of
the people of Aad, when they said as told by the Qur’an: "Who is superior to

607
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
us in strength?" What! did they not see that Allah, Who created them, was
superior to them in strength? But they continued to reject Our Signs!"
(Fussilat 15)
\y

oy

^ ■ j'

oy iL jLii ^ i^Jiij ^

The same is true of Awj who was conceited by his power, thereupon he lifted
a mountain in order to cover up therewith the army of Moses “peace be upon
him”, thereupon Allah Almighty holed that huge portion of the mountain by
means of the clicking of a weak hoopoe until it affected his neck. Similarly, one
might rely on his power only, as is reported from Solomon “peace be upon him”
that he said: "Tonight, I would go round and have sexual relations with one
hundred women", without making exception by saying "Allah willing", and the
result was that he was deprived of the offspring he intended (from that
approach). (This narration is reported by Al-Bukhari on the authority of Abu
Hurairah). David “peace be upon him” also said, out of his conceit by his power:
"If you (O Allah) put me to trial, I would keep patient." But when he was tried
with the woman, he did not keep patient. The conceit by power summons one to
proceed to attack in wars, put himself into destrucdon, and hasten to strike and
kill such of people as causes harm to him. The remedy of it, as we have already
mentioned, is to know that the fever of a single day might weaken his power to
the extent that it takes him a very long to recover, and that if he is conceited by it,
it might be deprived by Allah Almighty with the least and weakest blight.
The third is to be conceited by intelligence, shrewdness, and making sense of
the subtleties of the benefits of religion and world. Its fruit is to depend on one's
own opinion and give up consultation and advice, regarding as ignorant all the
people who disagree with him, and give no care to the opinion of the men of
knowledge. Its remedy is to give thanks to Allah Almighty for the favor of
intelligence He has bestowed upon him, putting in mind that with the least
disease, his brain might be affected. In this way, he could not feel safe of being
deprived of his mind once he is conceited by it, and does not give thanks as it is
due upon it. Let him also regard as short both his reason and knowledge, and put
in mind that the knowledge he is endowed with is little whatsoever, and that his
ignorance of what the people know is much more than what he himself knows,
let alone what the people do not know, which belongs to the knowledge of Allah
Almighty. Let him also suspect is mind and wonder how the foolish are conceited
by their minds, and the people mock at them, and be cautious he might be like
them unknowingly, for the man of short mind does not know that he is short of
mind. Thus, one should know the real nature of his own reason and mind in
comparison with the minds of people and not himself, and from his enemies and
not from his friends. That is because his flatterers always praise him which
increases him in shortage and deficiency of mind, given that he assumes himself
nothing but good, and makes no sense of his ignorance.
The fourth is to be conceited by his noble ancestry, to the extent that such
thinks he would be saved and his sins forgiven only by virtue of his ancestry,

'«

The quarter of the destructives
608
because of which he puts in mind that all the people are no more than his
servants and subjects. Its remedy is to know that if he disagrees with his fathers
and grandfathers in their deeds and acts, and at the same time, joins himself to
them, he would be ignorant; and that if he imitates his forefathers, it should be
known to him that conceit was not a part of their conduct: On the contrary, they
used to fear for themselves, despise themselves, and think themselves inferior to
all the people round them. They were honoured by obedience, knowledge and
good manners, and not by ancestry. So, let him get honoured by the same by
which they were honoured, putting in mind that they were shared in ancestry and
belonging by those who did not believe in Allah and the Last Day, and were, in
the Sight of Allah Almighty, worse than dogs and pigs.
This is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty: " O mankind! We
created you from a single (pair) of a male and a female, and made you into
nations and tribes, that you may know each other (not that you may despise each
other). Verily the most honoured of you in the sight of Allah is (he who is) the
most righteous of you. And Allah has full Knowledge and is well-acquainted
(with all things)." (Al-Hujurat 13)

Therefore, when the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” was asked about the most honoured and the most intelligent of people, he
did not point out those who belong to his family, but rather he said: "The most
honoured of them is he who remembers death most frequently among them, and
is most ready to receive it among them." (This narration is reported by Ibn Majah
and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Ibn Umar.(
The occasion on which this Holy Statement was revealed is that when Bilal
“Allah be pleased with him” pronounced Adhan from over the surface of the
Ka'bah, Al-Harith Ibn Hisham, Suhail Ibn Amr and Khalid Ibn Usaid said: "This
black slave is pronouncing Adhan from over the Ka'bah." On that Allah
Almighty revealed: " Verily the most honoured of you in the sight of Allah is (he
who is) the most righteous of you." (Al-Hujurat 13)

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Verily, Allah has removed from you the arrogance that was characteristic of the
pre-Islamic days: All of you are offspring of Adam and Adam was created from
dust" fThis narration is reported by Abu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi on the
authority of Abu Hurairah; and At-Tirmidhi alone on the authority of Ibn Umar).
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further
said: "O assembly of Quraish! Let not the people come with their good deeds on
the Day of Judgement, and you come with (the burden of) your world which you
would carry on their shoulders, saying: "O Muhammad! O Muhammad! (Save
us)", for at that moment, I would turn away from you." (This narration is
reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Imran Ibn Hussain). He showed to

609
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
them that if they inclined to this world, of no profit will be to them their
belonging to the Quraish. It is narrated that when Allah revealed the Verse:
"Warn your nearest kinsmen" (Ash-Shu'ara' 214)
i©

jju\j »

Allah’s Aposde "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" got up and said: "O
community of Quraish (or said similar words)! Buy (Save) yourselves (from the
Hell fire), as I cannot save you from Allah's Punishment. O Banu Abd Manafl I
cannot save you from Allah's Punishment. O Abbas Ibn Abd-Al-Muttalib! I
cannot save you from Allah's punishment. O Safiyyah, (the Aunt of Allah's
Aposde)! I cannot save you from Allah's Punishment. O Fadmah Bint
Mohammad! Ask me anything from my wealth, but I cannot save you from
Allah's Punishment." (This narration is reported by Al-Bukhari on the authority
of Abu Hurairah; and Muslim on the authority of A'ishah). For this reason,
whoever knows that his real honour is in proportion to his piety and
righteousness, and that it was the habit of his fathers to humble themselves, he
should imitate them in their humility and piety, otherwise, he would be a
slanderer of his ancestry by his behaviour since he belongs to them and does not
imitate them in their humility, piety and fear.
But you may argue that the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said to Fatimah “Allah be pleased with her" in the same Hadith: "But
indeed, I cannot protect you from Allah (if He wanted to punish you). But you
have relation with me, which I would keep (and support)” (according to the
narration of Muslim on the same authority), and that the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said in another Hadith: "Should the
tribe of Sulaim expect for my intercession and the offspring of Abd-Al-Muttalib
should not?" (This narration is reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of
Abdullah Ibn Ja'far). This means that he “peace be upon him” shall give his
kinship a great portion of his intercession.
In reply to that, let's say that every Muslim person expects for the
intercession of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him”. Anyone of his relatives also is more entitled to expect for it, provided
that he should safeguard himself from the wrath and anger of Allah Almighty
with him. But once Allah grows angry with anyone, the intercession for him
will not be admitted. That is because sins are divided into those which assures
displeasure and hate, for which no intercession would be admitted, and those
which are ready to be forgiven by virtue of intercession. To this He Almighty
refers in His statement: "and they offer no intercession except for those who
are acceptable, and they stand in awe and reverence of His (glory)." (AlAnbiya 28)

400Ijhu.

is^’J

^J

^3 }yA1 cw ^ (*% >

And: " Who is there can intercede in His presence except as He permits?"
(Al-Baqarah 255) and: "No intercession can avail in His Presence, except for
those for whom He has granted permission." (Saba' 23) and: " Then will no
intercession of (any) intercessors profit them." (Al-Muddaththir 48)

610

The quarter of the destructives

That there are sins for which no intercession is accepted, and others which
might be forgiven by virtue of sins, requires fear and terror. Had all sins been
forgiven by virtue of intercession, surely, there would have been no necessity for
the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him’' to order the
Quraish to adhere to obedience, nor to forbid Fatimah “Allah be pleased with
her” from committing sins, and would rather have given her permission to follow
her desires in order for her pleasure in this world to be complete, and then in the
hereafter, he would intercede for her, so that her pleasure in the hereafter would
be complete. To be engaged in sins and give up piety out of reliance on
intercession is like the engagement of a patient in his lusts and desires depending
on the skill of a clever and well-trained physician. But even, this is evident
ignorance for the skill of a physician could not avail in removing all diseases.
Based on that, one should not leave diet absolutely depending upon the skill of
the physician, for the physician plays an important role, but it is not only his role
that removes all diseases.
It is within this framework that you should understand the care of Prophets
and righteous men in regard to intercession for their relatives and friends, which,
by no means, could remove terror and fear entirely. How should it remove terror
and fear given that the best of people after the Messenger of Allah “Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him”, in spite of their perfect piety, righteousness,
pure hearts and sincere intentions and good deeds, and the promise they
received from the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him”
of being admitted to the Garden, hoped to be like animals for fear of reckoning?
On the contrary, they did not rely on that, nor was fear removed entirely from
their hearts. So, how should such as is not equal to them in position and
precedence to faith be conceited by and rely on intercession ?
The fifth is to be conceited by belonging to wrongful rulers, governors and
their helpers and assistants, apart from belonging to religion and knowledge. To
be sure, this is evident ignorance. Its remedy is to think of their shame and
disgrace, and how they wronged the servants of Allah Almighty, caused mischief
in the land, corrupted the religion and have become hateful in the Sight of Allah
Almighty. Were he to imagine their state in the fire of Hell, surely, he would
disdain to belong to them; and were he to imagine their humiliation in the
hereafter, with the foes hanging to their necks, and the angels seizing them by
their forelocks, and dragging them prone on their faces to the fire of Hell,
because of the complaints of servants against them, surely, he would declare
himself free from them before Allah Almighty, and it would become dearer to
him to belong to dogs and pigs than to them. It is then incumbent upon the
children of wrongdoers to give thanks to Allah Almighty for protecting them
from the wrongness of their relatives, and pray for forgiveness for their fathers if
they are Muslims. But to be conceited by that is out of evident ignorance.
The sixth is to be conceited by the great number of children, offspring,
servants, patrons, supporters, helpers, allies, etc, just like the statement of the
disbelievers that they were greater in property and children, and the statement of

Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
611
the Muslims on the Day of the batde of Hunain that they would not be defeated
on that day because of their great number. Its remedy is the same remedy of
arrogance as we have already mentioned, i.e. to think of one's weakness and
powerlessness, in the sense that all the people are no more than helpless servants
who could neither benefit nor harm themselves, let alone anyone else: "How oft,
by Allah's will, has a small force vanquished a big one? Allah is with those who
steadfasdy persevere." (Al-Baqarah 249)

i©cpk

pJ=>

How should he be conceited by them given that they would inevitably leave
him once he dies, and is buried alone in the grave, in a state of humiliation and
disgrace, with none to be in his company? Similarly, how should he be conceited
by them given that they would flee from him on the Day of Judgement, on the
day a man would flee from his brother, from his mother and father, and from his
consort and children? Which good lies in him who leaves you when you are in
the direst need of him? How should you be conceited by him given that nothing
would avail you in the grave, on the Day of Judgement, and on the bridge (over
the Hell), barring your deed and the bounty of Allah Almighty? How should you
rely on him who avails you naught, and forget the graces and favors of Him in
Whose Hand is your benefit and harm, life and death?
The seventh is to be conceited by property and wealth, like the state of the
owner of both gardens when he said to his companion in the course of argument:
"More wealth have I than you, and more honour and power in (my following of)
men." He went into his garden in a state (of mind) unjust to his soul: he said, "I
deem not that this will ever perish, Nor do I deem that the Hour (of Judgment)
will (ever) come: even if I am brought back to my Lord, I shall surely find (there)
something better in exchange."" (Al-Kahf 35-36)
-L^IS 4£-\jS\

Ctj (Jfp) I Jjl LoJlLA -U-J o' O-k' ^

i gjs

^

Jj JJ

I ^Jli J-Aj

)

oj5

Once, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” saw
a rich man having withdrawn himself and drew his garment from a poor man
when he sat beside him. On that the Messenger of Ailah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: "Have you feared that his poverty would transcend him
to you?" (This narration is reported by Ahmad).
Its remedy is to think about the evil of wealth, the more rights which are due
upon it, the superiority of the poor and how they would precede the rich to the
Garden, how property and wealth are perishable, and that from among the Jews,
there are such as have more wealth than him. Let him also consider the statement
of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "While a
man was strutting in his Burdah since he was proud of himself, Allah Almighty
caused him to sink down into the earth and he will be sinking deeper and deeper
in it until the Day of Judgement." (This narration is reported by both sheikhs on
the authority of Abu Hurairah). It is further narrated on the authority of Abu
Dharr “Allah be pleased with him” that he said: While I was in the company of

The quarter of the destructives
612
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” he entered the
mosque and said to me: "O Abu Dharr! Raise your head!" I did and behold!
There was a man putting on smart clothes." Then, he said to me once again:
"Raise your head!" I did and behold! There was a man wearing shabby clothes."
On that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said to
me: "O Abu Dharr! This (poor) is, in the Sight of Allah AJmighty, better than as
many of the other as fills the earth." (This narration is reported by Ibn Hibban in
his Sahih). How should it be imagined that a believer is conceited by his property
and wealth, given that the poor is more honourable in the Sight of Allah
Almighty? A real faithful believer is he who always entertains the fear of
indulgence in fulfilling the right that is due upon property, as regards taking it
from lawful sources, and spending it properly. Whoever does not do so is
doomed to disgrace and perdition. So, how should he be conceited by his
property?
The eighth is to be conceited by wrong opinion. Allah Almighty says: " Is he,
then, to whom the evil of his conduct is made alluring, so that he looks upon it as
good, (equal to one who is rightly guided)?" (Fatir 8)

And: "Those whose efforts have been wasted in this life. While they thought
that they were acquiring good by their works?" (Al-Kahf 104)

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” told that
this conduct would be prevalent among the later generations of this nation
(according to the narration of Abu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi on the authority of
Abu Tha'labah). It is with this that the previous nations were ruined, as they were
divided into many divisions, with each conceited by and inclined to their opinions
and fancies. All men of religious innovations and heresies insisted on theirs
because of their conceit by their opinions, thinking them to be right.
But the remedy of that is more difficult than the remedy of anything else, for
the man of wrong opinion is ignorant of his mistake, and were he to know it,
surely, he might leave it. The unknown disease could hardly be treated. Since
ignorance is an unknown disease, its remedy is difficult. A learned could show to
the ignorant his ignorance and remove it from him, unless he is obstinately
persistent. So, how should it be treated? Moreover, how should he be asked to
flee from that which he thinks to be a cause of his happiness? But anyway, its
remedy is to doubt his own opinion, and not to be deceived by it, unless it is
supported by proven evidence. One could not be acquainted with the Shariabased and mental proofs and evidences without sharp intellect, shrewd
intelligence, earnest endeavor and experience in the Book and sunnah, sitting
with the learned and scholars, and studying knowledge. But in spite of all of that,
he could not be entirely safe from mistakes and errors in many respects.
The right for him who is not acquainted with religious sciences is not to delve
into the different doctrines without knowledge: but rather to have faith in the fact
that Allah Almighty is One Who has no partner, and that there is nothing like

613
Book nine: Condemnation of arrogance and vanity
Him, and He is All-Hearing, All-Seeing, and that His Messenger “peace be upon
him” is truthful in all that he brought and said. Let him also follow the tradition
of the righteous predecessors, and believe in what is brought in the Book of
Allah and Prophetic sunnah, without investigation nor inspection. Let him also
engage in piety, avoiding sins, and doing acts of worship, and show mercy to all
the Muslims. If he delves into the different doctrines and innovations without
enough protective knowledge, he would be ruined unknowingly.
This is the duty of him whose engagement is not the religious sciences. But as
for him whose occupation is the religious knowledge, first of all, it is incumbent
upon him to know the right way of acquiring supportive proof and evidence,
according to the right terms. But this is very difficult except on those strong
supported by the Light of Allah Almighty. We ask Allah Almighty to protect us
from error, and seek refuge with Him from being deceived by the fancies of the
ignorant.
End of the Book of Condemnation of Arrogance and Vanity; and praise be to
Allah Alone; and Allah suffices us for the best disposer of affairs; and there is
neither might nor power but with Allah, Most High, Most Great; and Allah's
blessing and peace be upon the Prophet, his family and companions.

It is the tenth book of the quarter of destructives
In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Praise be to Allah in Whose hand are the keys of all matters, and with Whose
Power He moves the keys of good and evil things, Who takes His allies and
devotees out of darkness to light, and brings His enemies to the afflictions of
haughtiness. Allah's blessing and peace, as much as it could be along time and
space, be upon Muhammad, who rescued the people from darkness, his family
and companions, whom the life of this world did not deceive, nor did the
deceiver deceive them about Allah Almighty.
Coming to the point: the key of happiness is alertness and shrewdness,
whereas the spring of wretchedness is haughtiness and heedlessness. There is no
favor bestowed by Allah Almighty upon His servant much greater than the favor
of faith (in Him) and knowledge (about His attributes and acts), and there is no
way to attain it unless the breast is expanded by the light of insight. On the
contrary, there is no disfavor much severe than that of disbelief and
disobedience, and nothing summons them other than the blindness of the heart
because of the darkness of ignorance. The intelligent and those endued with deep
insight have their hearts "as if there were a Niche and within it a Lamp: the Lamp
enclosed in Glass; the glass as it were a brilliant star: lit from a blessed Tree, an
Olive, neither of the East nor of the West, whose Oil is well-nigh luminous,
though fire scarce touched it: Light upon Light!" (An-Nur 35)
A

Yj>xJ^ qa J&jJ

cLSjS*

t *

^ Aj>- L>-jJ I Aj>-

j

I

^

L-yaj*

^

lJ*jy jb^V3
But the deceived have their hearts " like the depths of darkness in a vast deep
ocean, overwhelmed with billow topped by billow, topped by (dark) clouds:
depths of darkness, one above another: if a man stretches out his hand, he can
hardly see it! For any to whom Allah gives not light, there is no light!" (An-Nur

40)
*

+

j; C

/

^

^

o? £>
4 (0) jy ^ aJ lli !j_p ;aJ

9

(j* fry

i

^c

jojS £y-\

The intelligent are those whom Allah Almighty intended to guide thereupon
He expanded their breasts to faith and Islam, whereas the conceited are those
whom Allah intended to leave to stray, thereupon He made their breasts close
and constricted as if they had to climb up to the skies: thus does Allah (heap) the
penalty on those who refuse to believe. The deceived is he whose breasts has not
opened to be guided to the right path, and rather he remains in the darkness of
blindness, and takes fancy as leader and Satan as guide "and whoever remains
614

Book ten: Condemnation of conceit

615

blind in this (life of world) will remain blind in the hereafter, and more astray
from the path." (Al-Isra' 72)

4

^

Since conceit is the spring of wretchedness and destruction, then, its causes,
means and ways should be explained in detail, in order for the novice to
safeguard himself from it. To be sure, the helped among the servants is he who
knows the evils of things in order to remedy them. In the following pages, we are
going to explain the different ways of haughtiness, and the sorts of haughty
among the people who are deceived by the delights and splendor of this life,
whose outward is good and inward is evil, of which they are heedless. As many as
the sorts of deceived might be, they could be included under four main
categories: the first are from the scholars; the second are from the servants; the
third are from the Sufis; and the fourth are from the owners of property and
wealth.
Each sort has many sects, and there are many ways of haughtiness. Some of
them renders good the evildoing, like him who takes the mosque and adorns it
from unlawful wealth. Some of them do not distinguish that in which they
endeavor for their own selves from that in which they endeavor for the Sake of
Allah Almighty, like the preacher whose purpose is only to attain acceptability
and majesty among the people. Some of them leave the most important of
matters and engage in what is not necessary. Some of them leave the obligatory
duty and engage in the supererogatory deed. Let's begin with exposition of the
conceit of the learned and scholars, but after exposition of the condemnation of
conceit.

CHAPTER ONE
EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION,
REAL NATURE AND EXAMPLES OF CONCEIT
Allah Almighty says: " let not then this present life deceive you, nor let the
Chief Deceiver deceive you about Allah." (Luqman 33)
i © jj_£Ji i&tj

V3 £^& >

And: " but you led yourselves into temptation; you looked forward (to our
ruin); you doubted (Allah's Promise); and (your false) desires deceived you; until
there issued the Command of Allah. And the Deceiver deceived you in respect of
Allah." (Al-Hadid 14)
It should be known to you that those alone are sufficient for condemnation
of conceit.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "How
good is the sleep and breakfast of the intelligent, and being deprived of the
insomnia and effort of the foolish, and an atom's weight of deed to be done by
one endued with certainty of faith is better than as much deeds as fills the earth
of the deeds to be done by the deceived." (This narration is reported by Ibn Abu

The quarter of the destructives
Ad-Dunya on the authority of Abu Ad-Darda1). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” further said: "The intelligent is he who mortifies
himself and works for (the hereafter) after death, whereas the foolish is he who
follows his own inclinations and desires, and wishes good from Allah Almighty."
(This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah on the authority of
Shaddad Ibn Aws).
In brief, all that is transmitted in commendation of knowledge and
condemnation of ignorance refer to the condemnation of conceit, for conceit is
an outcome of ignorance. The ignorance is to believe that a particular thing is in
opposition to its reality, and the conceit results from that. But conceit summons a
deceiver and a deceived. If the thing in which one believes agrees with his own
inclinations, and the cause of ignorance is a suspicious and corrupt fancy thought
to be an indication and it is not really so, the resulting ignorance is called conceit.
Conceit then is to have oneself comforted with what agrees with the inclination
and disposition, by way of deception caused by Satan. Whoever thinks that he is
good, whether in this world or in the hereafter, as a result of a false suspicion, is
conceited. Since most people think they are good, and they are not really so, this
requires that most people are conceited. But they are different in the ways and
degrees of conceit in the sense that the conceit of some is more apparent than
that of others. The most severe conceit is that of the disbelievers and sinners. So,
let's present for them examples of the real nature of conceit.
616

The First Example: The Conceit Of The Disbelievers
Some of them are deceived by the life of this world, and others by the chief
deceiver about Allah Almighty. As for those who are deceived by the life of this
world, they say that cash is better and more secure than delay of payment, and
since world represents the cash and the hereafter the delay of payment, then, this
world is better than the hereafter, and it should be given preference. They also
say that certainty is better than uncertainty, and since the pleasures of this world
are certain, and those of the hereafter uncertain, they are not to sacrifice the
certain for the uncertain. Those are corrupt analogies like that made by Iblis
when he said: "I am better than he (Adam), for You have created me from fire,
and created him from clay." To those Allah Almighty refers in His statement: "
These are the people who buy the life of this world at the price of the Hereafter:
their penalty shall not be lightened nor shall they be helped." (Al-Baqarah 86)
((|v)

j_*Jl

O^sSflj Uj-Ol

Qi jjl liLiljl ^

The remedy of that conceit might be either by giving trust by mere faith, or
by evident proof. To give trust depending upon more faith is to trust Allah
Almighty in His statements: " What is with you must vanish: What is with Allah
will endure. And We will certainly bestow, on those who patiently persevere, their
reward according to the best of their actions." (An-Nahl 96)
I i_JyW3

^

(jti 4i)l JlsS* Lj

L* ^

And: " Whatever you are given (here) is (but) a convenience of this Life: but

Book ten: Condemnation of conceit
617
that which is with Allah is better and more lasting: (it is) for those who believe
and put their trust in their Lord." (Ash-Shura 36)
^

Lj UiiajT 5^13-1^
Lli ^
And: "And verily the Hereafter will be better for you than the present." (AdDuha 4)
i0

dr?

5>^&j }

And: "Know you (all), that the life of this world is but play and amusement,."
(Al-Hadid 20)

4.*^J y aJT 3_^>jT Lj ^
And: "Verily, the promise of Allah is true: let not then this present life deceive
you, nor let the Chief Deceiver deceive you about Allah." (Luqman 33)

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” told many
previously disbelievers about that, thereupon they gave trust to him, believed in
what he brought to them, and did not ask him to provide them with any
suppordve proof for that (according to many narrations in the Sunan). A mention
might be made here of the Ansar's conversion to Islam and giving the pledge of
allegiance to the Messenger of Allah “Ailah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
and the belief of others depending only upon their asking him: "We beseech you
by Allah to tell us: has Allah sent you as a Messenger?" once he answered in the
affirmative, they would soon believe in him. This is the laymen's faith which
keeps one away from conceit. This is like the child's trust in his father when he
tells him that to attend the school is better than to go to play, given that he
himself does not know the point of goodness.
The knowledge depending upon proof and evidence is that he knows the
corruption of such analogy as devised by Satan and placed in his heart. Indeed,
there is a reason for every kind of conceit, and this reason depends upon a sort of
analogy with which one gets comforted unknowingly, without being able to put it
in the same words of scholars. Indeed, there are two foundations for every
analogy devised by Satan: the first is that this world represents the cash whereas
the hereafter the delay of payment; and this is true. The other is the claim that the
cash is better than the delay of payment; and this is dissembling, for the fact is
not so. If the cash is equal to what is to be paid later in size and amount, it will be
better, and if it is lesser, then, the latter is better.
The deceived disbeliever gives a single Dirham in trade in order to gain
thereby ten on credit, without saying that the cash is better than the delay of
payment in order to leave it. If he is warned by a physician of getting the fruits
and delicious kinds of food he would leave that immediately for fear of the pain
of disease in the future. In this way, he sacrifices the cash for the delay of
payment. Almost all the traders travel aboard the sea and exert much effort by
way of cash in order to get rest and gain profit on credit. To be sure, ten to be
paid on credit are better than one to be paid immediately. If you measure the

The quarter of the destructives
618
duration of this world to that of the hereafter, the lifetime of anyone is no more
than one hundred years at maximum, and this is less than one of billions of parts
of the hereafter. By leaving it, he seems to have sacrificed a single one for the
sake of what is infinite and never-ending. As far as the kind is concerned, the
pleasures of this world are contaminated by embitterment and disturbance, in
contrast with the pure uncontaminated pleasures of the hereafter. This is then
why the statement that the cash is better than the delay of payment is mistaking.
This conceit originates from the acceptance of a famous general phrase which is
intended to refer to a particular meaning; and the deceived one forgets that
particular meaning for which it is intended. The phrase that 'The cash is better
than the delay of payment' is intended to refer to the cash which is equal in size
and amount to that to be paid later.
At that point, Satan hastens to rouse the other false analogy, i.e. that the
certain is better and more secure than the uncertain, and since the world is certain
and the hereafter uncertain, then, the world is better. This analogy is more
corrupt than the first, for both its foundations are false. The certain is better than
the uncertain if both are equal, otherwise, the trader is certain of his effort and
uncertain of the profits he is to gain; the jurisprudent is certain of his diligence,
and uncertain of attaining the degree of knowledge; the hunter is certain of
hesitation and uncertain of catching his game, etc. but at the same time, the trader
argues that if he does not practice traffic, he will remain hungry and receive much
harm, whereas if he practices traffic, he will exert little effort in order to gain
much profit. The same is true of a patient who drinks the bitter sore bothersome
medicine of which he is certain while he is uncertain of cure. But he argues that
the harm caused by the bitter medicine is little in comparison with the expected
ailment and death.
Similarly, if one doubts in the hereafter, it is incumbent upon him to say: "No
doubt, the days of patience and endurance are very little, since they are no more
than the duration of the lifetime, in comparison with what is said about the
hereafter. If what is said about it is false, then, I shall miss only the pleasure and
delights of those few days before which I was nonexistent and after which I
would return to nonexistence. But if what is said is true, then, I shall have no
power to abide in the fire of Hell."
The other foundation of the analogy is that the hereafter is uncertain; and that
is false, for the hereafter is certain in the sight of the faithful believers. In this
respect, two perceptibles bring about the knowledge of the hereafter for the
believer:
The believer has faith in and gives trust to the hereafter in imitation of the
Prophets “peace be upon them” and religious scholars. This is the faith of the
laymen and most private among the people, since with which conceit is removed.
His parable is like a patient who does not know the medicine of his ailment. But
there is consensus among all physicians and those skilled in the profession of
medicine that such and such plant is the proper treatment. He then gives trust to
their saying, without asking them for any supportive medical proof: On the
contrary, he becomes confident of and acts upon their statement; and were he to

Book ten: Condemnation of conceit

619

depend on his own mind and opinion which is in opposition to theirs, he would
be deceived and conceited.
The same is true of such as considers those who acknowledge the hereafter,
and claim that piety is the beneficial medicine to have access to the abiding
happiness. Those are the most honoured, the highest and the best in mind,
insight and knowledge among the creatures of Allah Almighty. They comprise the
Prophets, the devotees of Allah, the religious scholars, and the wise, whom the
people have followed in their varieties. But those who have deviated are
individuals that inclined to their desires and lusts, and regarded it difficult upon
themselves to give up their desires, and to acknowledge that they will be from
among the denizens of the fire of Hell. The result was that they denied the
hereafter and gave lie to the Prophets. As well as the saying of a child could not
remove the self-assurance with what has been agreed upon among the physicians,
similarly, the saying of that rich who is spellbound by his own desires and lusts
could not contradict the statements of the Prophets, the devotees of Allah
Almighty and the religious scholars. This amount of faith is sufficient for the
laymen. It is a decisive certainty which stimulates one to work for the hereafter,
and with which conceit might be removed.
The other perceptible for the knowledge of the hereafter comes from the
Divine revelation sent upon the Prophets and Messengers, and inspiration given
to the devotees and allies of Allah Almighty. Do not think that the knowledge
given to the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” of the
hereafter, and of all the religious and worldly matters was obtained only from his
imitation of and listening to Gabriel “peace be upon him” in the same way as you
might imitate him with the result that your knowledge would be like his. How far!
There is a big difference. That is, the mere imitation is not a knowledge in so
much as it is a right belief. But the Prophets “peace be upon them” are
knowledgeable, in the sense that the things were disclosed to them as they really
were in nature, which they saw with their internal insight as clear as you see the
visible things with the external sight. In this way, they told about things they
really saw and not only listened about.
It is that the matter of spirit, for example, was disclosed to them to be by the
command of Allah Almighty. But the command here is not that which
counteracts forbiddance, for this command is given by speech, and the spirit is
not speech. It is also not intended to refer to the state, for this means that it is
among the things created by Allah Almighty. Indeed, there are two worlds: the
world of the command and the world of creation; and to Allah Almighty do
belong the command and creation. The concrete bodies which have a particular
quantity and size belong to the world of creation, and every existent that is
deemed far beyond quantity and size belongs to the world of the command. This
item of knowledge belongs to the mystery of the spirit; and whoever knows the
mystery of spirit has indeed known himself, and whoever knows himself has
indeed known Allah Almighty.
Once he knows himself and his Lord Almighty, he has known that he is no
more than a Divine command, by nature, and that he is a strange in the world of

The quarter of the destructives
620
bodies, to which he did not descend by nature and disposition in so much as by
an accident which occurred to Adam “peace be upon him” in the form of a sin
he had committed, which caused him to descent from the Garden which is more
fitting for him according to the requirements of his nature and disposition. That
is because it is in the neighbourhood of the Lord Almighty, and as he is a Divine
command, he should have, by nature and disposition, longing for the
neighbourhood of his Lord Almighty, unless he is diverted from the requirements
of his nature by the accidents of this world which is strange to him, causing him
to forget his Lord and his own self. Once he does so, he has indeed wronged
himself, for it was said to him: " And be you not like those who forgot Allah, and
He made them forget their own souls! Such are the rebellious transgressors!" (AlHashr 19)
I

oii 4&I i_^o

ff

^

Although the Gnostics get pleasure from listening to those things, those who
are short of mind and intelligence disgust from them, for the harm they cause to
them is more than their benefit, and they dazzle their weak eyes in the same way
as the light of sun dazzles the eyes of bats. The openness of that door from the
heart to the dominion of the invisible is called mysticism "Ma'rifah" and alliance
"Wilayah", and the one endued with such is called a Gnostic and a Wali. This is
the first station of Prophets, and the last station of Awliya'.
The main point is that the conceit made by Satan about the uncertainty of the
hereafter might be removed either by traditional trust and faith or by an internal
insight and witness (by way of inspiration and revelation). If the believers by their
tongue and faith waste the commands of Allah Almighty, and abandon the
righteous acts of worship, and rather put on desires and sins, they will join the
disbelievers in that conceit, for by so doing, they give preference to this world
over the hereafter, with the difference that their punishment they shall receive is
less for their faith in general protects them from the abiding torment. They will
come out of the fire some time later. But at the same time, they are among the
conceited, for they, though implicitly, acknowledge that the world is better than
the hereafter. Their faith alone is not sufficient to make them attain felicity since
they incline to this world and prefer it.
Allah Almighty says in this respect: "But, without doubt, I am (also) He that
forgives again and again, to those who repent, believe, and do right, who, in fine,
are ready to receive true guidance."" ^Ta Ha 82)

And: "for the Mercy of Allah is (always) near to those who do good." (AlA’raf 56)

4 (0)

o! 4

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "To
do good is to worship Allah as if you see Him." (This narration is reported by
both sheikhs on the authority of Ibn Umar). Allah Almighty further says: " By
(the Token of) Time (through the Ages), Verily Man is in loss, Except such as

Book ten: Condemnation of conceit

621
have Faith, and do righteous deeds, and (join together) in the mutual teaching of
Truth, and of Patience and Constancy." (Al-Asr 1-3)

^JL,

i

\jLk oijJi *5j

oj 0

>

Throughout the entire Book of Allah Almighty, the promise of forgi veness is
suspended on both faith and righteous deed, and not on faith alone. Thus, those
also are deceived, who are comforted and pleased with this world, enjoy of its
delights and luxuries, like it so much, and dislike death for fear of their loss of the
pleasures and delights of this world. This is an example of the disbelievers'
conceit by this world. Let's present two further examples for the conceit of
disbelievers and sinners about Allah Almighty.
The first is about the disbelievers' conceit about Allah Almighty, and its
example is like their saying in themselves: "If there is an appointment with Allah
Almighty, of a surety, we are more entitled to it than anyone else, in which we
will be the happiest and our portion will be the greatest. Allah Almighty says in
description of their state on the tongue of the wealthy man who said to his
companion in the course of mutual argument: "Nor do I deem that the Hour (of
Judgment) will (ever) come: even if I am brought back to my Lord, I shall surely
find (there) something better in exchange." (Al-Kahf 36)

^(0

oVV (jj <jjLj ^

It is said, in comment on it, that the wealthy built a palace at cost of one
thousand Dinars, bought a garden for one thousand Dinars, and servants for one
thousand Dinars, and married a woman with a dower of one thousand Dinars.
His companion said to him: "Is it not better for you if you exchanged that
perishable palace in this world for another in Paradise which would never perish,
this perishable garden for a garden which would never perish, those servants for
others who would abide forever, and this woman for one of the houris who
would never die?" every time, the disbeliever gave the same reply: "What is said
about the hereafter is nonsense, and in case it is true, I shall have the greatest
portion there."
The same is true of Al-As Ibn Wa'il when he said: "I shall certainly be given
wealth and children." Allah Almighty said in reply to that: "Has he penetrated to
the Unseen, or has he taken a contract with (Allah) Most Gracious? Nay! We
shall record what he says, and We shall add and add to his punishment. To Us
shall return all that he talks of, and he shall appear before Us bare and alone."
(Maryam 77-80)

5gS il. yiUT^ /J

(0

i0

^

>

^

In this connection, it is narrated on the authority of Khabbab Ibn Al-Aratt
“Allah be pleased with him” that he said: Al-As Ibn Wa'il was owing me some
money and when I went to take it back he rejected. I said to him: Then, I shall
take it back from you in the hereafter." On that he said: Then, when you come

The quarter of the destructives
622
to the hereafter, I shall have much wealth and children, and at that time, I shall
fulfill you your debt." On that occasion, Allah Almighty revealed: " Have you
then seen the (sort of) man who rejects Our Signs, yet says: "I shall certainly be
given wealth and children." Has he penetrated to the Unseen, or has he taken a
contract with (Allah) Most Gracious? Nay! We shall record what he says, and We
shall add and add to his punishment. To Us shall return all that he talks of, and
he shall appear before Us bare and alone." (Maryam 77-80)
I J-g-P

£jil {£^j) I jJjJ SfU ^

<*(

LjjIj3

k*

i-jl Judl

W

(_£ jjTcuj

jaJ

Jyu L* 1(fj5)

(This narration is reported by both Al-Bukhari and Muslim).
On a similar occasion, Allah Almighty says: " When We give him a taste of
some Mercy from Ourselves, after some adversity has touched him, he is sure to
say, "This is due to my (merit): I think not that the Hour (of Judgment) will (ever)
be established; but if I am brought back to my Lord, I have (much) good (stored)
in His sight!" but We will show the Unbelievers the truth of ail that they did, and
We shall give them the taste of a severe Penalty." (Fussilat 50)
(JJ JJ

CX$i

4 ©dM*'

apLUT ^1->I Uj J Llla

aLL.

Crf

if-f^J-k>dJ JO-UP J oj

j-Jj

Jm q* li 4>j

O^J $

All of this belongs to the conceit about Allah Almighty, depending upon one
of the analogies devised by Iblis, we seek refuge with Allah from it. They regard
the favor of Allah upon them in this world, and measure the favor of the
hereafter upon it, and the delay of punishment in this world and measure the
punishment of the hereafter upon it. This is confirmed by the statement of Allah
Almighty: " and they say to themselves, "Why does not Allah punish us for our
words?" Enough for them is Hell: in it will they burn, and evil is that
destination!" (Al-Mujadilah 8)

I

I

4

y3 kjljiyaj

f

JkL>

Hj j-AJ 'jyJ

\

OjJJAJJ

Sometimes, they regard the faithful believers in their state of poverty and
destitution, thereupon they despise them saying "Is it these then that Allah has
favoured from amongst us?" Does not Allah know best those who are grateful?"
(Al-An'am 53)
:
!

!i
!
|i;

L

4 22J if-^kj 2)*? J-J1 HiL ^

2)T

j*

^

And: "If (this Message) were a good thing, (such men) would not have gone
to it first, before us!" and seeing that they guide not themselves thereby, they will
say, "This is an (old), old falsehood!" (Al-Ahqaf 11)
4

i

<-Aj Ij j: g j

jjj aJ I

^

The analogy they make goes as follows: "Allah has done good to us with the
bliss of this world; and every doer of good loves whomever he does good to, and
every lover shall do good in the future to whomever he loves." The point of
dissembling is that such a man thinks that the bestowal of pleasures and delights

Book ten: Condemnation of conceit

623
upon him in this world is out of doing good to him. This is conceit about Allah
for he thinks that he is honoured in His sight, depending upon a proof that
indicates not to honour in so much as to humility in the sight of those endued
with deep intelligence. That is because the pleasures and delights of this world are
but destructives, which remove one far from the mercy of Allah Almighty. "Allah
Almighty protects His devotees from the evils of this world, out of His love for
them, in the same way as anyone of you protects his patient from food and drink
out of love and sympathy for him." (This narration is reported by both AtTirmidhi and Al-Hakim on the authority of Qatadah Ibn An-Nu'man). This
statement is transmitted from the master of mankind, the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”.
It was the habit of the masters of insight to grieve and say whenever the
world turned to them with its pleasures and delights: "This is a sin whose
punishment has been hastened on for us in this world" seeing it a sign of Allah's
displeasure with and carelessness for them; and whenever the poverty turned to
them, they would say: "Welcome to the motto of the righteous!" on the opposite
side is the deceived who, if the world turns to him with its pleasures, thinks it is
due to his honour in the Sight of Allah; and whenever it is turned away from him,
he thinks this is due to his humiliation. This is confirmed by Allah's statement: "
Now, as for man, when his Lord tries him, giving him honour and gifts, then says
he, (puffed up), "My Lord has honoured me." But when he tries him, restricting
his subsistence for him, then says he (in despair), "My Lord has humiliated me!"
Nay, nay!" (Al-Fajr 14-17)
jjJii ajJIjI L* lij L*lj gfjL3 <Jj*Lj cIIjT C* 151
*

L*li ^

Nay! This is out of conceit. Al-Hassan said in his comment on that: "He
Almighty gave lie to them by saying 'Nay', i.e. "This is not the way of My
honouring or humiliating, but the honoured is him whom I honour with My
obedience, be he rich or poor, and the humiliated is he whom I humiliate with
My disobedience, be he rich or poor."
The remedy of that is to know first of all the portents of honour and
humiliation, either by insight or by imitation. As for the way of insight, it is to
know that the closer one comes to the desires and lusts of this world, the farther
he turns from Allah Almighty, and the farther he turns from the desires and lusts
of this world, the closer he comes to Allah Almighty. This is perceived by way of
inspiration; and exposition of it belongs to the science of Disclosure
(Mukashafah), which is not relevant to the science of practical religion. As for the
way of imitation and trust, it is to have faith in the Book of Allah Almighty, and
give trust to His Messenger “peace be upon him”. Allah Almighty says in this
connection: " Do they think that because We have granted them abundance of
wealth and sons, We would hasten them on in every good? Nay, they do not
understand." (Al-Mu'minun 55-56)

'

624

The quarter of the destructives
And: "by degrees shall We punish them from directions they perceive not."
(AI-Qalam 44)

And: "But when they forgot the warning they had received, We opened to
them the gates of all (good) things, until, in the midst of their enjoyment of Our
gifts, on a sudden, We called them to account, when lo! they were plunged in
despair!" (Al-An'am 44)
f-i'’3I

I LL> ’\y>-jb li]

ij <-~==*

I

t-Aj \jj4=o L ILlis &

In comment on the statement of Allah: "by degrees shall We punish them
from directions they perceive not" (Al-Qalam 44)

!

It is said that whenever they commit a sin, We give them a new favor in order
to increase in conceit. In confirmation of that, He Almighty says: " Let not the
Unbelievers think that our respite to them is good for themselves: We grant them
respite that they may grow in their iniquity: but they will have a shameful
punishment." (AI Imran 178)
lLi

J-L Uli
^.jjt &L&Vj &
,
* - «,,"", c
x Clpcfrfr*
(*-*j
And: "Think not that Allah does not heed the deeds of those who do wrong.
He but gives them respite against a Day when the eyes will fixedly stare in
horror." (Ibrahim 42)
4 (Qp) J-^3. VI
j*-*_»^l*ja)T UlL La-P
<J)T „ •
^
Whoever has faith in Allah Almighty gets rid of that conceit, which stems
from people's ignorance of Allah, His acts and attributes. Whoever knows
Him well does not feel entirely safe from His plan, nor is he conceited by
those false fancies. That is because he regards the kings of the earth like
Pharaoh, Haman, Numrudh, etc: How Allah Almighty did good to them in
the beginning, and in the end He destroyed them entirely, as confirmed by His
statement: " But how many (countless) generations before them have We
destroyed? Can you find a single one of them (now) or hear (so much as) a
whisper of them?" (Maryam 98)
4 dJS L£j p-frl
* Crf (*t£ o^~
dn?
^
Of His planning and seizing by degrees, Allah Almighty warns saying: " Did
they then feel secure against the Plan of Allah? But no one can feel secure from
the Plan of Allah, except those (doomed) to ruin!" (Al-A'raf 99)
4^oju^^

vj

jd=LA

Sb &\'jd=*A

^

And: "They plotted and planned, but We too planned, even while they
perceived it not." (An-Naml 50)

L
Book ten: Condemnation of conceit

625

4 CjS
^ p-*} \yd=*A
\^=l* ij^j ^
And: They plot and plan, and Allah too plans, but the best of planners is
Allah." (Al-Anfal 30)

i o 00-uiKit

ar

ojj^j >

And: "As for them, they are but plotting a scheme, And I am planning a
scheme. Therefore grant a delay to the Unbelievers: give respite to them gently
(for a while)." (At-Tariq 15-17)

i (@) Ij-oj j^1

(0)

gfj)

j^J >

Whoever then feels secure against the plan of Allah Almighty is conceited,
and it originates from taking as evidence for his honour the pleasures and delights
of this world, although this might probably be a sign of humiliation. But this
probability does not agree with one's inclinations and desires. Satan, by virtue of
fancy, causes the heart to agree with him, i.e. to give trust to its being an evidence
for honour. This is the definition of conceit.

The Second Example: The Conceit
Of The Disobedient Among The Believers
That is by their saying that "Allah is generous, and we expect for His
forgiveness", upon which they rely, causing them to neglect deeds. This kind of
conceit and deception is made alluring to them by calling it expectation and
hope, assuming it to be a station of praise in religion, saying that "the favor of
Allah is extensive, His mercy is all-embracing, His generosity is wide-ranging: so
where are the sins of the servants in the midst of the oceans of His mercy? and as
we are believing monotheists, we expect His forgiveness by means of faith."
Perhaps they depend in their expectation on adherence to the righteousness and
high rank of their forefathers. A mention may be made of the offspring of Ali
“Allah be pleased with him” who are conceited by their belonging (to Ali),
although they disagree with the conduct of their forefathers of piety,
righteousness and fear of Allah, assuming themselves to be more honoured in the
Sight of Allah Almighty than their forefathers, who, given their piety and
righteousness, were in horror, while they, given their dissoluteness and
wickedness, are in safety and peace. That is the utmost degree of conceit about
Allah Almighty. The analogy devised by Satan to Ali's offspring is that "whoever
loves a man should love his offspring, and since Allah Almighty loved your
fathers, He should love you too, in such a way that makes you not in need of
obedience."
But that conceited forgets that when Noah “peace be upon him” wanted to
take his son in his company in the ark, Allah Almighty rejected (for he was a
disbeliever), thereupon he was among those overwhelmed in flood. He said: "O
my Lord! Surely my son is of my family! and Your promise is true, and You are
the Justest of Judges!" He said: "O Noah! he is not of your family: for his
conduct is unrighteous. So ask not of Me that of which you have no knowledge! I
give you counsel, lest you act like the ignorant!" Noah said: "O my Lord! I do
seek refuge with You, lest I ask You for that of which I have no knowledge. And

S

s

The quarter of the destructives
626
unless You forgive me, and have Mercy on me, I should indeed be lost!" (Hud
45-47)
1cu»ij<3>jTi)5_pj oJ3
,

viljapl

j*-lp *-4j dJJ
i« ^

L

o?

(

't

r>» c!£3bj ^

u

'Si ^cllyD
"

oj '—’j

i*

jAjl till* I ^4

*

(

"

jAj] r*_jAlJ cJ^
^

^13 pf ^ J J~J UdJiLllo'^b ^'L^V^^^CpOik^'crf Oj^o1
Cr^1

He also forgets that when Abraham “peace be upon him” prayed for
forgiveness for his father, it was of no profit to him. When our Prophet
Muhammad “peace be upon him” sought the permission of his Lord to visit the
grave of his mother and pray for forgiveness for her, He gave him permission to
visit her grave, but not to pray for forgiveness for her, thereupon he sat weeping
on her grave, for his sympathy for her due to the tie of kinship to the extent that
he caused those round him to weep too. (This narration is reported by Muslim on
the authority of Abu Hurairah).
This is conceit about Allah Almighty, for Allah Almighty loves the obedient
and dislikes the disobedient. As well as He Almighty does not dislike the obedient
father because of His dislike for the disobedient son, He also does not like the
disobedient son because of His love for the obedient father. Were love to be
inherited from fathers to sons, the same should be true of dislike. But the right is
that no bearer of a sin would bear the sin of another. Whoever assumes he would
be delivered and saved just by virtue of the piety and righteousness of his father
is like him who assumes he would be satiated by virtue of eating and quenched by
virtue of drinking of his father. To be sure, piety is a duty which is obligatory
upon everyone and no father could suffice his son in aught. On the Day of
Judgement, every one will flee from his brother, his mother and father and seek
the reward of his own piety and righteousness, unless Allah Almighty permits
intercession for whomever He pleases as we have already mentioned in the Book
of Arrogance and Vanity.
But you may argue: "Where is the error of the statement of the disobedient
and wicked that "Allah Almighty is generous and oft-forgiving, and we expect
His forgiveness and mercy", given that He Almighty says about Himself: "I am to
fulfill the assumption of My servant about me. So, let him have but good
assumption of Me." In reply to that, let's say that this statement seems apparendy
accepted in the hearts. But at the same time, it should be known to you that Satan
always seduces man with words to be outwardly accepted and inwardly rejected;
and were it not for its good appearance, surely, the hearts would not have been
deceived by it. But our Prophet “peace be upon him” disclosed this fact when he
said: "The intelligent is he who mortifies himself and works for (the hereafter)
after death, whereas the foolish is he who follows his own inclinations and
desires, and wishes good from Allah Almighty." (This narration is reported by AtTirmidhi and Ibn Majah on the authority of Shaddad Ibn Aws).
That is the wish from Allah Almighty which Satan, by way of deception, calls
it hope. But Allah Almighty shows the meaning of hope when He says: "Those

Book ten: Condemnation of conceit
627
who believed and those who suffered exile and fought (and strove and struggled)
in the path of Allah, they have the hope of the Mercy of Allah: and Allah is OftForgiving, Most Merciful." (Al-Baqarah 218)
j'

<4

dy.AHj \yZ\l ^y.AJ i oj >

This means that hope is fitdng for them for the reward of the hereafter will
be in recompense for the deed they do in this world, as shown from His
statement: "Now no person knows what delights of the eye are kept hidden (in
reserve) for them, as a reward for their (good) Deeds." (As-Sajdah 17)
4©
\y£ Lh *]}>•
3/
Sii ^
And: "and only on the Day of Judgment shall you be paid your full
recompense." (A1 Imran 185)
4
{y
*-^13 ^
It was said to Al-Hassan: "Some people say that they hope for good from
Allah, and at the same time, they waste the deed." On that he said: "How far!
How far! Those are their own desires, for whoever has a hope for something
should seek after it, and whoever fears of something should flee from it." Muslim
Ibn Yassar said: "Yesterday, I kept prostrating (to Allah in prayer) until my two
front teeth fell down." A man said to him: "We hope for the mercy and
forgiveness of Allah." On that he said to him: "How far! How far! Whoever has a
hope for something should seek after it, and whoever as a fear of something
should flee from it." As well as anyone is mad if he has a hope for a child and he
has not got married yet, and in case he gets married he has not had sexual relation
with his wife yet, and in case he does, he has not ejaculated sperm into her vagina
yet, similarly, he is conceited who has a hope for the mercy of Allah Almighty,
given that he has not believed yet, or even if he believes, he has not worked
righteous deeds yet, or even if he works good, he has not given up sins yet. On
the contrary, as well as one is intelligent when he marries, has sexual relation with
his wife, and ejaculates sperm into her vagina, and at the same time, remains
hesitant between fear and hope for the bounty of Allah Almighty, to create the
child and avert diseases from the womb until the child becomes full, similarly,
one is intelligent if he believes, works righteousness and gives up sins, and, at the
same time, remains hesitant between fear and hope: fear lest his deed would not
be accepted from him, and hope for Allah to set him firm with the constant
words, safeguard his religion from the thunderbolts of death agonies until he dies
on monotheism, and keep his heart from inclination to desires and lusts.
Any other than those are conceited about Allah Almighty: " Soon will they
know, when they see the Penalty, who it is that is most misled in Path!" (AlFurqan 42)
b]y.

Oy^^y-J >

"And you shall certainly know the truth of it (all) after a while." (Sad 88)

4©

'oL^ o

The quarter of the destructives

628

At that time, they will say, as told by Allah Almighty: "Our Lord! we have
seen and we have heard: now then send us back (to the world): we will work
righteousness: for we do indeed (now) believe." (As-Sajdah 12)
^

^y* L]

li

\SyyzuI lLjj ^

I.e. we have indeed come to know that you are true in all things You have
told us about, and " That man can have nothing but what he strives for; and That
(the fruit of) his striving will soon come in sight." (An-Najm 39-40)
^ (J?) CS's-'-f’y* -»<**-** O'j (@)

0*3 ^

"every time a Group is cast therein, its Keepers will ask, "Did no Warner
come to you?" They will say: "Yes indeed; a Warner did come to us, but we
rejected him and said, 'Allah never sent down any (Message): you are in nothing
but an egregious delusion!"'" (Al-Mulk 8-9)
Djj l> UJjj UJuSo

ui

p b- wL3

i^Jli

li JLl I

LaJ5^
-r
4JJI

It will be said to them: Since "Then shall every soul be paid what it earned,
and none shall be dealt with unjusdy" (Al-Baqarah 281)
i «2gJ) by&H V

1iy-Ai ^ jy}

And "Every soul will be (held) in pledge for its deeds"(Al-Muddaththir 38)
What has conceited you about Allah Almighty after you had heard and
understood? they will reply: "Had we but listened or used our intelligence, we
should not (now) be among the Companions of the Blazing Fire!" They will then
confess their sins: but far will be (Forgiveness) from the Companions of the
Blazing Fire!" (Al-Mulk 10-11)

1- You may ask: "Then, when should hope be praiseworthy?" in reply to
that, let's say that hope is praiseworthy in two points: The first pertains to the
disobedient who is engaged in sin, when the idea of repentance occurs to his
mind, thereupon Satan says to him: "How should your repentance be accepted
from you?" by so doing, he causes him to despair of the mercy of Allah Almighty.
At that point, he has to curb despair by hope, and remember that Allah Almighty
forgives all sins and that He is generous and turns in repentance to His servants,
and that repentance is an act of worship which plots out sins. Allah Almighty
says: " Say: "O my Servants who have transgressed against their souls! despair not
of the Mercy of Allah: for Allah forgives all sins: for He is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful.
"Turn you to your Lord (in repentance) and bow to His (Will), before the
Penalty comes on you: after that you shall not be helped." (Az-Zumar 53-54)

Book ten: Condemnation of conceit
40

^ p kLj\ j!it

629
o1^ ^ i>4^'j

J! yi^)3

And: 'But, without doubt, I am (also) He that forgives again and again, to
those who repent, believe, and do right, who, in fine, are ready to receive true
guidance." (Ta Ha 82)
4 ©>
p-*
j cr**o
ci!3 ^
If one then expects forgiveness with repentance, he will be a hoper (of Allah's
mercy);and if he expects it without repentance, but rather with insistence on sin,
he will be conceited.
The other point is that one weakens to do the supererogatory good deeds,
and limits himself to the obligatory deeds, and, expecting the bliss of Allah
Almighty, and His promise of good to the righteous believers, he is stimulated to
do the supererogatory good deeds, and remember the statement of Allah
Almighty: " The Believers must (eventually) win through, Those who humble
themselves in their prayers; Who avoid vain talk; Who are active in deeds of
charity; Who abstain from sex; Except with those joined to them in the marriage
bond, or (the captives) whom their right hands possess, for (in their case) they are
free from blame, But those whose desires exceed those limits are transgressors,
Those who faithfully observe their trusts and their covenants; And who (strictly)
guard their prayers; These will be the heirs, Who will inherit Paradise: they will
dwell therein (forever)." (Al-Mu'minun 1-11)
0^1*1.j*-*
ptW

£ j1

}~a
f-A

p-* 0^13 0
0
r* <jSV3 0

byji

<4

0

^^
sjOt p-*

JI jU

0 byrf f-A

sixJ'3 f\33
0

0 0^0

frp

!jp ^A oiAltj 0 by>‘j

The first hope curbs the despair which hinders repentance, and the other
curbs the weakness which stands against doing the supererogatory deeds. To put
it, every kind of expectation that stimulates one to repent or do acts of worship is
a hope for the mercy of Allah; and every kind of wish that brings about indolence
in reliance on it only is a conceit. Its example is like one who gives up sin and
intends to engage in worship, thereupon Satan says to him: "Why do you harm
yourself and you have a generous forgiving merciful Lord Who forgives sins
again and again?" The result is that he weakens to repent and do the acts of
worship. This is conceit. At that level, one should resort to fear, i.e. to frighten
himself by the anger and punishment of Allah Almighty, saying to himself:
"Although He is forgives sins and accepts repentance, He also is strict in
punishment; and although He is generous, He will leave the disbelievers in the
fire of Hell forever, given that in naught does their disbelief harm Him.
Moreover, He has made many of His servants subject to afflictions, trials,
diseases and evils in this world, given that He has the power to remove them all.
If this is His way with His servants, and at the same time He has frightened me of

The quarter of the destructives
630
His punishment, how should I not fear Him, and how should I be conceited
about Him?".
Both hope and fear are to lead men to do and work, and what does not
stimulate one to work belongs to wishful conceit. To be sure, the wishful conceit
of all the people causes them to weaken and fail to do and endeavor, turn their
faces to the world, refrain from Allah Almighty, and neglect to seek for the
hereafter. That is the conceit. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” told that conceit would prevail over the hearts of the later
generations of this Muslim nation. The prophecy of the Prophet “peace be upon
him” came true.
During the first generations, the people used to do the acts of worship
regularly, and do all they did while their hearts were in awe that they would
inevitably return to Allah Almighty. They feared for themselves although they
spent night and day in worship out of obedience to Allah Almighty, strove to
safeguard themselves from the taint of suspicions and desires, and endeavored to
remain in privacy and solitude (for fear of the suspicion of showing off). But now
you see the people living in safety, pleasure, self-assurance, entertaining no fear,
given their engagement in sins, involvement in the pleasures and delights of this
world, and turning away from Allah Almighty, under pretext that they are
confident of the generosity and bounty of Allah Almighty, and expecting His
forgiveness and pardon, as if they seem to know of His bounty and generosity
what the Prophets “peace be upon him”, the companions “Allah be pleased with
them”, and the righteous predecessors knew not.
If this matter is to be attained only by hopes and desires, then, for which
thing did those righteous predecessors weep, grieve and fear? We have
mentioned those things in detail in the Book of Hope and Fear. Furthermore, the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said according to
the narration on the authority of Ma'qil Ibn Yasar “Allah be pleased with him”:
"A time will come upon the people in which the Qur'an would become old in the
hearts of men just as clothes grow old (and torn( on the bodies; and that is
because they will be seized by covet and not fear: if anyone of them does good,
he will think that Allah should inevitably accept his deed, and if anyone of them
does evil, he will think that He Almighty should inevitably forgive for him." (This
narration is reported by Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
He told that they would replace fear with covet due to their ignorance of the
threats brought in the Qur'an (of Allah's punishment).
To a similar case, Allah Almighty refers in His statement about the Christians:
" After them succeeded an (evil) generation: they inherited the Book, but they
chose (for themselves) the vanities of this world, saying (for excuse):
"(Everything) will be forgiven for us."" (Al-A'raf 169)
o 13 bd

i

4-J& l!« II VJ 4ul

tytyiL *^f qI

^ <(fp) ojifr ' Gyfc-i

oj^

^

jj

I

J*1 1

/*->•

Sm

1T3

Book ten: Condemnation of conceit
631
It means that although they inherited the Scripture, they took from this world
their own desires and lusts, be it lawfully or unlawfully, under pretext that they
would be forgiven by Allah Almighty Who says: " But for such as fear the time
when they will stand before (the Judgment Seat of) their Lord, there will be two
Gardens." (Ar-Rahman 46)

And: This for such as fear the Time when they shall stand before My
tribunal, such as fear the Punishment denounced." (Ibrahim 14)
^

The Qur'an entirely from beginning to end is full of threats and warnings
which no one reflects well but that he becomes sad and fearful in case he has
faith in what it contains. But it seems that the people nowadays deal with the
Qur'an in opposition to that, and act upon it carelessly and slightly. Is there any
conceit more grievous than that?
Those are some examples for the conceit about Allah Almighty. This is
almost the case of people who do acts of worship, in addition to sins, and
although their sins are more, they expect forgiveness from Allah Almighty, and
assume that the scale of their good deeds would overweigh that of their evil
deeds. This is, to be sure, an evident ignorance. One of those might give in
charity a few Dirhams from lawful as well as unlawful sources, although what he
illegally usurps from the property and wealth of Muslims is many times what he
gives. Some of them think their acts of worship are more than their sins, and that
is simply because they do not reckon themselves, nor inspect their sins, and
whenever anyone of them does an act of worship, he always remembers it with
pride. His example is like him who prays for Allah's forgiveness with his tongue
or celebrates the glories of Allah one hundred times a day, and at the same time,
backbites the Muslims and injures their honours, and talks with what displeases
Allah Almighty along the whole day. But even, he considers only the number of
his glorifications and prayers for forgiveness, and takes no heed of his nonsense
along the entire day which, should it be written, would be one hundred if not one
thousand times the number of his glorifications . But AJlah Almighty threatens to
punish him for every word he utters, saying: " Not a word does he utter but there
is a sentinel by him, ready (to note it)." (Qaf 18)

40

J cr?

^►

CHAPTER TWO
EXPOSmON OF SORTS OF CONCEITED; AND DIVISIONS
INTO WHICH EACH IS DIVIDED
They are of four sorts:

The First Class: Men Of Knowledge
The conceited among them are divided into many divisions:
The first are those well-versed in religious and mental sciences, which they

The quarter of the destructives
632
perfected on the exclusion of maintaining the organs and parts of body from
committing evil and sins. That is because they were conceited by their knowledge,
thinking they would have a good position in the Sight of Allah, for they attained
with their knowledge an extent at which the like of them would never be
punished, and that their intercession for people should be accepted by Allah, and
that they would not be reckoned for their sins and mistakes in view of their
honour in the Sight of Allah Almighty. But nay! They are conceited. If they
consider the matter with the eye of insight, they would know that knowledge is of
two kinds of sciences: The sciences of practical religion (Mu'amalah) and the
sciences of disclosure (Mukashafah), i.e. the knowledge about Allah, His Names,
attributes and acts.
As for the sciences of practical religion, like the knowledge of what is lawful
and unlawful, what is praiseworthy and blameworthy of manners, and the way of
treatment, they are intended only to put to practice; and were it not for the need
of practice, surely, they would have no value at all. Suppose that there is a patient
whose illness caters for a particular medicine to be learnt from a skilled physician:
Would his prescription alone suffice to remove the illness unless the patient takes
that medicine regularly and properly as defined by the physician? Of course not.
Similarly, the religious jurisprudent who perfected the science of the acts of
worship and did not act upon it, perfected the science of sins and did not avoid
sins, perfected the science of blameworthy manners and did not justify and purify
his own self from them, perfected the science of praiseworthy manners and did
not acquire them to be integral to his own character: He is, to be sure, a
conceited. Allah Almighty says: " Truly he succeeds that purifies it" (Ash-Shams
9)
*

*

And does not say that he succeeds who learns and teaches to the people how
to justify the self.
But at that point, Satan says to him, by way of deception: "Let not that
example deceive you, for although the mere knowledge of the medicine alone
does not remove the illness, your intention is to come closer to Allah Almighty
and get reward, and knowledge alone is rewardable." Moreover, he relates to him
the narrations and stories about the excellence and superiority of knowledge. If
the poor jurisprudent is conceited, this deception would agree with his fancy and
inclination, and he would rest assured on it on the exclusion of work; and if he is
intelligent, he would reply to Satan: "Do you remind me of the excellence of
knowledge, and make me forget the demerits of the dissolute learned who does
not act upon his knowledge?"
Of course, he refers to the statement of Allah Almighty: " So his example is
like that of the dog: if you chase him, he pants, or if you leave him, he [still]
pants.” (Ai-A’raf 176)
UxLjLL Iyj& S'-

Vi)?

tiU’i

*J==»J£

aIIp

Oj«ydi==Jl

^

633

Book ten: Condemnation of conceit

And: "The similitude of those who were charged with the (obligations of the)
Mosaic Law, but who subsequendy failed in those (obligations), is that of a
donkey which carries huge tomes (but understands them not)." (Al-Jumu'ah 5)

i

jL? Li.jL2-p p

iijiii- tfjt JjL. >

Which disgrace is greater than both similitudes?
Furthermore, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "He, who advances in knowledge but not in guidance, is but
removed farther from Allah Almighty." Allah's Apostle "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" further said: “On the day of Judgement, the learned man
will be brought forward and thrown into the fire of Hell whereas his bowels
will gush out and he will be made to carry them round and go round all over
the Hell in the same way as a donkey turns a mill-stone round and round.
Then the people of Hell will ask him about the reason of his torture and he
will say: “I was wont to enjoin what is right upon others but failed to do it
myself, and to forbid what is wrong and committed it myself." The Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said too: "The worst of
people are the evil learned."
Abu Ad-Darda' “Allah be pleased with him” said: "Woe once to him who
does not learn and if Allah wills, He would cause him to learn; and woe seven
times to him who learns and does not act upon his knowledge." That is
because knowledge would be an argument against him on the Day of
Judgement, and it would be said to him: "How have you acted upon your
knowledge? How have you thanked Allah Almighty for His favor of
knowledge He bestowed upon you?" the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” said: "The one who shall receive the most grievous
punishment on the Day of Judgement is a learned whom Allah Almighty
benefited not by his knowledge."
But this is in case the suggestion of Satan does not agree with the
inclination of the dissolute scholar. But since the stories and narrations about
the superiority and good merits of knowledge agree with him, Satan soon
inclines his heart to what he desires. That is an evident conceit, which
becomes clear if he considers it with the eye of deep insight. If he considers it
with the eye of faith, he should know that he who told him about the
superiority of knowledge is the same who told him about the condemnation
of the evil scholars, who would be more worse in the Sight of Allah Almighty
than the ignorant. If he, after all of that, is sure of being on the right, although
he knows well that the argument of Allah is against him, he would be
evidently conceited.
The same is true of him who claims he is knowledgeable of the sciences of
disclosure (Mukashafah), i.e. the knowledge about Allah, His names, attributes
and acts, but at the same time, he neglects work and practice, and wastes the
command of Allah Almighty: He is more conceited. His example is like one
who intends to serve a king, and limits his knowledge of him to his physical
characteristics and visible appearance, on the exclusion of his spiritual

The quarter of the destructives
634
character, what he likes and dislikes, what he accepts and rejects, etc. that
such a learned indulges in piety and neglects the command of Allah, and
rather follows his own desires and lusts indicates that what is revealed to him
of the knowledge about Allah Almighty is no more than the names without
their meanings: Were he to know Allah Almighty as it should be, He would
safeguard himself from His punishment.
It is unimaginable that a rational person knows a lion and does not
safeguard himself from it. Allah Almighty revealed to David “peace be upon
him”: "Fear me in the same way as you fear a wild animal." Indeed, whoever
knows Allah Almighty well should learn that He has the power to destroy all
the worlds and does not care, and learn that he is subjugated in service of
Him Who has the power to ruin thousands of thousands like him. For this
reason, Allah Almighty says: " Such as truly fear Allah most, among His
Servants, are those who have knowledge: for Allah is Exalted in Might, OftForgiving." (Fatir 28)
‘ijiliijl

^ '-SiT

>

The opening of the Psalms of David is: "The head of wisdom is to fear
Allah." According to Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him”: "Sufficient for
knowledge is to fear Allah Almighty; and sufficient for ignorance is to be
conceited about Allah Almighty." Once, Al-Hassan's religious verdict was sought,
and when he gave his opinion, it was said to him: "But this is not the opinion of
our religious jurisprudents." On that he said: "Is there any religious jurisprudent?
The real religious jurisprudent is he who spends his night in standing (for
supererogatory prayers), his day in fasting, and abstains in this world." He said
once again: "The real religious jurisprudent is he who neither adulates, nor
quarrels, but rather publicizes the wisdom of Allah Almighty: if it is accepted
from him, he should praise Allah, and if it is rejected from him, he also should
praise Allah." The religious jurisprudent is he who understands from Allah
Almighty His command and forbiddance, and learns what He likes and what
He dislikes: By so doing, he becomes a real learned. If Allah intends good for
a man, He gives him the faculty of religious understanding and learning;
otherwise, he will be among the conceited.
Another division perfected both knowledge and work. They did regularly
the apparent acts of worship and avoided sins. But they did not inspect their
hearts in order to plot out the characteristics that are hateful in the Sight of
Allah Almighty, like envy, arrogance, haughtiness, hatred, showing off,
seeking majesty, loftiness and fame, doing harm and evil to fellows, etc.
Perhaps, some of them do not know that those are blameworthy, and thus
they are involved in them, careless about the statement of the Messenger of
Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him”: "The least degree of showing
off is (equal) to ascribe partners to Allah in worship." And the second
statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him”: "None shall enter the Garden in whose heart there is an atom's weight

635
Book ten: Condemnation of conceit
of arrogance." And the third statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”: "Envy consumes good deeds in the same
way as fire consumes wood." And the fourth statement of the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "Love for honour and
majesty causes hypocrisy to grow in the same way as water causes grains to
grow." Those adorned their outward appearances and neglected their inward
secrets, forgetting the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him”: "Indeed, Allah never considers your faces nor your
bodies, but rather He considers your hearts and deeds." They thus fostered
the apparent works but not hearts, given that the heart is the origin for none
shall be saved unless he who will come to Allah with a sound heart.
A third division know that although those inside manners are blameworthy
under Sharia, they, being conceited by themselves, think that they are free
from them entirely, and that they are too honoured and lofty in the Sight of
Allah to put them to trial because of those things, with which Allah tests only
the laymen. But if the traces of arrogance or seeking majesty, lofdness,
honour and power of authority appear on them, they would claim that this is
not arrogance or haughtiness in so much as it is to exalt religion, show the
honour of knowledge, support the religion of Allah, and humiliate the
innovators of heresies who disagree with it. But such a conceited person
forgets that his real enemy of whom Allah Almighty warned him is Satan, who
rejoices at what he does, and makes fun of him.
By so doing, he forgets how the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” supported religion, made superior the Word of Allah
Almighty, and humiliated the disbelievers and polytheists. He also forgets how
the companions “Allah be pleased with them” were humble and modest, and
how they were satisfied with poverty to the extent that Umar Ibn Al-Khattab
“Allah be pleased with him” was blamed for the cheap clothes he was putting
on when he went to Sham, thereupon he said: "We are a people whom Allah
honoured with Islam. So, we do not seek honour in anything else." Therefore,
that conceited person seeks the honour and power of religion through the
expensive garments of forbidden silk and brocade, and graceful vehicles and
mounts, claiming that he maintains the honour of knowledge and religion.
The same is true of him who envies his fellows or his debaters, thinking it
not envy in so much as a zeal for the sake of truth, and refutadon of the
invalidator in his transgression and wrongness. He indeed makes show of his
knowledge and behaviours. If the thought of showing off occurs to his mind,
he would say: "How far! I show my deed and knowledge just so that the
people would imitate me, and be guided to the religion of Allah Almighty, and
delivered from His punishment." But he is heedless that he does not rejoice
when people imitate anyone else as he rejoices when they imitate him, given
that if his purpose is the righteousness of people in general, he would rejoice
when they become right at the hands of any person. When he remembers that,
Satan gives him no opportunity, saying: "That is because if they are guided
through me, the reward would be for me, unlike the case when they are

The quarter of the destructives
636
guided through anyone else. In this way, I rejoice at the reward given by Allah
to me, and not by the people's acceptance of my saying." That is what he
shows, which contradicts what he really conceals. Were he to be told by a
Prophet that the reward he shall receive from Allah if he remain anonymous is
more than that he shall receive if he makes show of his knowledge, he would
not submit.
Similarly, one might frequent rulers and governors, praise them so much,
adulate them with sweet talk and flattery, humble himself before them, etc;
and if it occurs to his mind that to humble oneself before wrongful rulers and
governors is unlawful, Satan would soon say to him: "How far! This is true
when you covet of their property. But your purpose is just to intercede for
Muslims, avert harm from them, and drive the evil of your enemies from
yourself." But nay! Allah Almighty knows well what is lurking within himself:
If one of his fellows is made closer to the ruler to the extent that he is able to
intercede for all Muslims and avert harm from them all, he would feel it
difficult upon himself, and if he is able to slander him and defame him in the
sight of the ruler, he would not hesitate to do so.
The conceit of many of them might lead them to take from the property
of those rulers and governors, regardless of being unlawful. But Satan says to
anyone of them: "This property has no owner, and it is assigned to the
benefits of Muslims, and you are the imam and scholar of Muslims, and with
you the religion is established: Is it not fitting for you to take what satisfies
your need?" By that dissembling, he is conceited in three things:
The first is that this property has no owner. But of course he knows that
taxes are taken from Muslims and non-Muslims who are living, and their
offspring and heirs are also living. But the point is that what is given of one's
property is mixed with what is given by others. Whoever usurps one hundred
Dinars from ten people and mixes them, there is no doubt that it is unlawful,
and it should not be said that it is a property which has no owner: but it
should be divided into ten portions, and each of the ten should take his due.
The second and third pertain to the statement that he is the imam and
scholar of Muslims, and with him the religion is established. It may be that
those who had their religion corrupted, rendered lawful the property of rulers
and governors, and turned to the world on the exclusion of the hereafter, are
more in number than those who abstained in this world, and turned their
faces to Allah Almighty. Such conceited is the imposter of religion and the
fundament on which the doctrine of Satan is established. By no means is he
the imam of religion, for the real imam is he whom the people imitate in
turning away from this world, and wholehearted devotion to AUah Almighty,
like the Prophets and Messengers “peace be upon them” the companions
“Allah be pleased with them” and the religious scholars of the earlier
generation, whereas the imposter is he whom people imitate in turning away
from Allah Almighty, and earnest devotion to this world. It may be that the
death of anyone of those is more beneficial for Muslims than his life, although
he claims he is the fundament of religion. His example is like the statement of

637
Book ten: Condemnation of conceit
Jesus “peace be upon him” about the evil scholar: "He is like a solid rock that
fell in the mouth of a river: It never drinks water, nor lets the water pass to
the plants."
A fourth division have perfected knowledge, purified organs and parts of
body, adorned them with deeds and acts of worship, avoided the apparent
sins, inspected the evil self-characteristics like showing off, envy, arrogance,
haughtiness, hatred, rancor, seeking loftiness and majesty, etc, and strove
themselves as much as they could in order to get rid of them, and removed
from their hearts their roots. But they remained somewhat conceited, for
there are still in the corners of their hearts some hidden plots of Satan and
self-deception, too abstruse to perceive. The result is that they made no sense
of them.
A learned as such might strive himself and spend long nights and days in
collecting items of knowledge and science, giving them a good form, seeing
that his motive is just to publicize the religion of Allah Almighty, and spread
His Sharia among the people. But it may be that his hidden motive is to seek a
high repute and good mention, have visitors from different parts of the earth,
and have good praise from the people describing his abstinence, piety,
devoutness, righteousness and knowledge, etc. He might also get pleasure
from being distinguished among his fellows, as combining both knowledge
and piety simultaneously. But once the people change their mind of him, and
think he is not abstinent although he strove himself to seem abstinent in their
eyes, of course, he would change his behaviours, duties and acts of worship,
and make excuses to himself in order to justify his turning, even if it were to
force him to tell lies.
Furthermore, he might give preference to some of his followers over
others, and particularly those who believe more than others in his abstinence
and piety, and at the same time, relegate those who make a due estimate of his
bounty and piety. Those given preference might think they are preferred for
their precedence in knowledge and understanding. But the fact is that they are
preferred for they are more submissive to him, more obedient to his
commands, more eager to serve him, more appreciative of his conduct, and
have more faith in his piety and abstinence as he likes to seem to others. It
may be that they come close to him in order to benefit from his knowledge,
while he thinks they do so due to his sincerity, truthfulness and fulfillment of
the rights of knowledge upon him.
He then praises Allah Almighty for the benefits He makes easy to His
creatures through his tongue, thinking this alone is to plot out his sins. But at
the same time, he does not inspect within himself in order to correct his
intention. It may be that were he to be promised of reward with anonymity
and segregation from the people, he would have no desire for it, for in
seclusion, he will lose the pleasure of acceptability, and the power of authority
and fame. Such is intended by the statement of Satan: "Whoever among the
sons of Adam claims he has fled away from me with his knowledge, should
know that (by such a claim) he has indeed fell in my snares with his

The quarter of the destructives
638
ignorance." Such a conceited might also compose many compositions in
knowledge under pretext that he preserves the knowledge of Allah Almighty
in order for the people to benefit from it, although his real intention is to gain
fame and high repute throughout the land. If somebody claims to be the
author of one of his compositions, erases his name and replaces it with his
(the latter's) name, he would feel it very difficult upon himself, although he
knows well that the reward shall return to the real author, and Allah Almighty
knows that he is the real author. He also may exert much effort to adorn the
wording of his composition and make good its syntax, under pretext that he
likes to publicize wisdom, and have it seem good in the eyes of people. But at
the same time, he is heedless of the narration that one composed three
hundred compositions in the wisdom, thereupon Allah Almighty revealed to
the Prophet of his own time to say to him: "You have filled the earth with
hypocrisy; and I never accept anything of your hypocrisy."
It may be that if a group of those conceited gathered together, they would
think their hearts are pure and safe from those diseases; and whenever they
depart, and each of them follows or even is followed by an independent party,
he would then rejoice at the great number of his followers, and the more they
increase, the more he becomes conceited and elevated. In short, when they
meet, they adulate each other, and when they depart, they behave differently
in such a way that makes them envy each other. If somebody who used to
frequent anyone of them left him for another, he would feel it difficult and
heavy upon himself, even if the other is more beneficial for him. Anyone of
them might have the commencements of envy for another in his heart which
he could not show, thereupon he starts to slander his religion and piety in
order to construe his anger as being for the Sake of the religion of Allah
Almighty and not for his own self. Whenever the defects of another is
mentioned before him, he would rejoice, and whenever he is praised before
him, he would grieve.
Those and their likes are among the hidden diseases of heart of which
none makes sense but the intelligent, and from which none could be free but
the strong among men, and of which we the weak have no covet. But the least
degree is that a man should recognize the defects of himself, for which he
grieves and becomes eager to repair. Indeed, if Allah Almighty intends good
for a man, He makes him see his own defects in order to repair them.
Whoever is pleased with his good and displeased with his evil is better than
the conceited who gives prestige to himself, and regards Allah Almighty under
obligation to him for his knowledge and deed, thinking himself to be among
the best of people. We seek refuge with Allah from conceit and heedlessness
and from seeing our hidden defects and neglecting them. This is the conceit
of those who attain important knowledge, and neglect to act upon their
knowledge. Now let's mention the conceit of those who satisfied themselves
with the unnecessary and left the important sciences, by which they are
conceited.
A party of those were satisfied with the knowledge of fatwa in passing of

639
Book ten: Condemnation of conceit
judgements and setdement of disputes among the people, as well as in the
details of the worldly treatments for the benefit and interest of people. They
limited the name of jurisprudence to that science. But even, they might waste
the apparent deeds and internal works: They neither inspected the organs and
parts of body to prevent them from doing the unlawful, nor stopped their
tongues from backbidng, nor their bellies from eadng the illegal, nor their feet
from walking to rulers and governors; and the same is true of all organs and
parts of body. Furthermore, they did not safeguard their hearts from
arrogance, envy, showing off, as well as from all the other destructive heart
diseases.
Those are conceited in two things: The first pertains to work, and the
other to knowledge. As for work, we have already mentioned the way of
conceit in it, and showed that their example is like the patient who knows the
medicine but engages in learning and teaching it to others rather than in
taking it himself. Their further example is like a patient who has a destructive
ailment, say, piles, and instead of engagement in learning the medicine of his
own disease, he is occupied by learning the medicine of another disease, say,
persistent bleeding from uterus, given that he is a man who would never have
persistent bleeding from uterus. But his argument is that perhaps a particular
woman might have that disease and ask him about its medicine. That is the
utmost degree of conceit.
Similarly, a poor religious jurisprudent might be afflicted with the love for
this world, following desires and lusts, envy, arrogance, showing off, and all
the other destructive evils, and perhaps death might take him away before
repentance, thereupon he would meet Allah Almighty while He is angry with
him. But even, in spite of that, he leaves all of that and engages in the sciences
of hiring, payment in advance, Zihar, Li'an, equality of wounds, blood-wets,
etc, given that he might not in need of any of that during his lifetime; and if
anything of that is needed by anyone, these of fatwa would be sufficient. But
he engages in that due to what it has of majesty, authority, fame, etc. by so
doing, he is deceived by Satan unfeelingly, since he thinks that he engages in
one of the religious obligatory duties, heedless of the fact that even in case his
intention is good, it is sinful to engage in the collective duties before the
obligatory duties binding upon everyone of people. That is his conceit in
work.
As for his conceit in knowledge, it is that he was satisfied with the science
of fatwa, thinking it to be the knowledge of religion, and left the Book of
Allah Almighty, and the sunnah of His Messenger “peace be upon him”. He
might slander the modern scholars, accusing them of being no more than
transmitters of narrations and stories. He also might leave the science of
morality refinement and discipline and the knowledge about Allah Almighty,
although it is that knowledge which develops fear and submission and leads
one to piety and god-fearingness, for he always feels safe from the
punishment of Allah Almighty, is conceited about him, and relies on his
assumption that He should inevitably bestow mercy upon him, for he is the

The quarter of the destructives
640
fundament of His religion, and unless he engages in the science of fatwa, the
knowledge of the lawful and unlawful would be idle.
By so doing, he has left the more important sciences, because he is
conceited and heedless. The cause of his conceit is the exaltation given to the
science of jurisprudence in Sharia, without knowing that the intended
knowledge is the knowledge about Allah Almighty, His attributes and acts,
which develops fear and piety in the heart in compliance with the statement of
Allah Almighty: " Nor should the Believers all go forth together: If a
contingent from every expedition remained behind, they could devote
themselves to studies in religion, and admonish the people when they return
to them, that thus they (may learn) to guard themselves (against evil)." (AtTawbah 122)

O*

<,

<4 14 i-olJ

J5" ^ yu

L^=> ij0<>

The purpose of the science of jurisprudence is to preserve property with the
terms of treatments and maintain bodies with property and averting crimes and
wounds; and the property, in the way of Allah Almighty, is an instrument, and the
body a vehicle. But the important knowledge is to learn how to follow the way to
Allah Almighty, remove the heart obstacles which are the blameworthy
characteristics. They are the veil which stands between the servant and Allah
Almighty. If one dies while having a taint of those characteristics, he would be
veiled from Allah Almighty.
Another party of those limited their science of jurisprudence to the
knowledge of controversial matters, and were concerned only with learning
argumentation, the way to silence foes and avert the truth just for getting the
higher hand in debate. Such a person spends his night and day inspecting the
opposites of masters of doctrines and defects of fellows and foes. They are
the wild animals among men, whose purposes are harmful. They do not
intend knowledge but to vie in glory with their fellows. In this way, they
despise all items of knowledge which they do not need in showing pride and
glory to others, like the knowledge of hearts, and how to follow the way to
Allah Almighty, by removing the blameworthy characteristics and exchanging
them for the praiseworthy ones.
They devoted themselves to the detailed ways of polemics. Although they
got what the previous scholars had got of the science of fatwa, they added to
it more, for they engaged in the unnecessary branches which do not belong to
the collective duties. Indeed, the detailed subtleties of argumentation and
disputation were strange to jurisprudence and unfamiliar to the previous
scholars. As for the proof of judgements, they are included in the Book of
AJlah and the sunnah of His Messenger “peace be upon him”. But the tricks
used in polemics were invented to show strength and victory in debate, and
publicize argumentation and disputation. This is why the conceit of these is
more odious than that of the previous scholars.
Another party engaged in scholastic theology and argumentation in

641
Book ten: Condemnation of conceit
inclinations and whims, and refutation of the claims of opponents. They
engaged in learning the best ways to do so. They believed that no servant
should have his deed written for him without faith, and the faith of a servant
should not be valid unless he learnt their way of argumentation and
disputation, and what they called the proofs of their creed. They thought none
had better knowledge of Allah Almighty and His attributes and acts than
them, and no faith is valid for him who did not adopt their doctrine, and learn
their knowledge. They were divided into many sects. Two of them are famous:
The false one which invites to something other than the sunnah, and the true
which invites to the sunnah. But both are conceited alike.
As for the false one, they are heedless of their falsehood, although they
think they would be saved. They are divided into many sub-divisions, and all
of them ascribe each other to disbelief. As for the true sect, they are conceited
for they think argumentation and disputation are among the best acts of
worship for the benefit of the religion of Allah Almighty, and that the faith of
anyone is defective unless he puts religion to scrutiny and investigation, and
whoever gives trust to and believes in Allah Almighty and His Messenger
“peace be upon him” with no mental proof has his faith incomplete, and is
not close to Allah Almighty. For this reason, they devoted themselves
wholeheartedly to learning the ways and means of argumentation and
disputation, and the profanities and heresies of religious innovators, and
neglected to maintain themselves and their hearts until they failed to see their
apparent and internal sins and misdeeds.
Anyone of them thinks his engagement in argumentation and disputation
is better in the Sight of Allah Almighty. But his pleasure with the power to
win and silence the opponents, to attain majesty and authority, and to belong
to those who avert evil from the religion of Allah Almighty, blinded his sight,
and hindered him from considering the first generation of Muslims, given that
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” bore
witness that they are the best of people. Although they joined the time of
many religious innovations and heresies, they never exposed their deeds and
religion to be a target for disputes and arguments, nor occupied themselves by
that from inspecting their hearts and parts of body. They did not speak in
religion unless they felt there was a dire need for that; and whenever they saw
a straying one insisting on his error, they would abandon him, turn away from
him, and dislike him in the religion of Allah Almighty.
That is because they said that the right is to invite to the sunnah, and it is a
part of sunnah to abscond argumentation. It is narrated on the authority of
Abu Umamah Al-Bahili “Allah be pleased with him” that the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "No people have gone
astray after the guidance on which they had been but that because they were
given to argumentation." On another occasion, the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” came out to his companions who
were engaged in argumentation and quarrel, thereupon he grew so much angry
that his cheeks became red as if the seeds of pomegranates were gouged out

The quarter of the destructives
642
on them. He said angrily: "Have you been sent with that? Have you been
commanded to strike the parts of the Book of Allah Almighty with each
other? Consider what you have been commanded to do and do it, and what
you have been forbidden to do and avoid it.” He thus scolded them to do so.
They saw that although the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” was sent as a Prophet to all peoples of the previous religions,
he did not engage with anyone of them in argumentation only for the purpose
of getting the better hand. He did not argue them but with the recitation of
the Book of Allah Almighty, and no more, for this distracts minds and hearts,
given that if he so liked, he would not fail to argue them in the same means
and analogies they used, and teach his companions the way of argumentation
and disputation. But the intelligent and those endued with sound minds did
not see that, and said: ”If all the inhabitants of the earth are saved and we are
ruined, their salvation would not benefit us; and if we are saved and they are
ruined, their destruction would cause no harm to us. We are not required but
to do what the companions did in this respect with the Jews and Christians
and others, who did not waste their lifetime in argumentation and disputation
with them. So, why should we waste our lifetime and do not utilize it in what
benefits us on the day of our bankruptcy? We are not to delve in things in
whose details we are exposed to errors and mistakes. Furthermore, the
religious innovator becomes more obstinate and insists more on his
innovation with argumentation, rather than leaving it. So, it is preferable to
engage in self-argumentation and mortification in order to abscond this world
for the hereafter. This is in case argumentation is permissible: But what
should it be given that I have been forbidden to engage in argumentation?
How should I invite to the sunnah by leaving the sunnah? It is preferable to
inspect my own soul and refrain from the things which Allah Almighty
dislikes, and adopt those which He likes."
Another sect were engaged in preaching and reminding people of the
hereafter; and the highest in rank were those who talked about the selfmorality, and the heart attributes of fear, hope, patience, thanksgiving,
gratefulness, reliance, abstinence, certainty of faith, truthfulness, sincerity, etc.
but they are conceited for they think that because they talk about those
attributes, they are inevitably characterized by them. But even, they are free
from them in the Sight of Allah Almighty except for a little amount common
to the laymen. The conceit of those is the most severe, for they are proud of
themselves, and think that they penetrated the depth of the science of loving
(for Allah) only because they are lovers for Allah Almighty, mastered the
subtleties of sincerity only for they are sincere to Him, and perceived the
hidden self-defects for they are free from them.
By those false thoughts, that poor assumes he is among these fearful of
Allah Almighty, although he feels safe from His punishment, that he is
hopeful of His reward, although he is among the conceited losers, that he is
among those pleased with the fate of Allah Almighty, although he is
displeased with it, that he is among those who rely on Allah Almighty,

Book ten: Condemnation of conceit

643

although he depends on his honour, power and property, for which he leave
the deed, that he is among the sincere, although he is a maker of show with
his deeds. He describes sincerity although he does not act upon it, describes
showing off although he acts upon it, and makes show of mentioning it in
order for people to think that were he not sincere, he would not have been
guided to its subtleties. He describes abstinence in this world, and at the same
time, he is so much covet of this world and desirous for its good things. He
places stress upon supplication for Allah Almighty, although he himself flees
away from Him. He frightens others with Allah Almighty, although he himself
feels safe from His punishment. He reminds the people of Allah Almighty,
although he himself forgets Him. He urges people to come close to Allah
Almighty, although he himself is far from Him. He motivates people to be
sincere, although he himself is not sincere. He warns them of the
blameworthy attributes, although he himself is characterized by them.

;

Those are the most conceited, and the farthest from leaving that conceit.
That is because what motivates one to stick to the praiseworthy manners and
refrain from blameworthy manners is to know the merits and demerits of
both. As for such conceited, although he knows all of that, of no profit would
it be to him to know. He is occupied by the love for calling the people to the
truth from acting upon it. Afterwards, how should he be treated? What is the
way to frighten him? It is true that if one claims those praiseworthy
characteristics, let him put himself to test about them: If somebody claims he
loves Allah Almighty, let him ask himself about what he has left in this world
for the sake of the Love he has for Allah Almighty. If he claims he fears Allah
Almighty, then, let him ask himself about what he refrained from for the sake
of that fear. If he claims he abstains in this world for the Sake of Allah
Almighty, let him ask himself about what he abstained from in this world, and
so on.
The intelligent always put themselves to test about those attributes, but the
conceited persons always have good assumption of themselves; and in the
hereafter, when the cover would be removed from them, they would be
disgraced. That is because they order people to do good, although they
themselves do not do it, and forbid them to do evil, although they themselves
do it. They are indeed conceited because the origins of those attributes, i.e.
the love for Allah Almighty, the fear of His punishment and the pleasure with
His decrees, are weak in their hearts. At the same time, they are able to
describe those attributes to the best, thereby think they are given by Allah
Almighty this ability of description and the knowledge of those things only for
they are characterized by those attributes, forgetting, or ignoring that
acceptability pertains to speech, and speech pertains to knowledge, and those
differ from the acquisition of attributes, in this way, anyone of them is
distinguished from the laymen of Muslims not in the attribute itself but in the
ability to describe it.
Another sect deviated from the right method of preaching; and they
represent the preachers of this time, except him whom Allah Almighty

The quarter of the destructives
644
protected with His protection. They are engaged in euphoric utterances and
heresies, and combination of words that are unfamiliar to religion and mind,
seeking preeminence and fame. Others are engaged in jokes and rhymed phrases
and sentences, and recitation of lyric poems of love and departure. Indeed, they
are engaged in form on the exclusion of the content. Those are the evil among
men who have gone astray and misled the others. If the former did not repair
themselves, at least they contributed to repair others. But as for the latter, they
keep off the way of Allah, and drive people to be conceited about Allah Almighty
under the name of expectation and hope for His reward. In this way, they
become more daring to commit sins and more desirous for the good things of
this world, particularly if such a preacher is adorned with smart clothes, expensive
horses and vehicles, etc: In which case, he is shown to be more covetous of this
world. Indeed, what this conceited man corrupts is more than what he repairs.
Another sect were satisfied with memorizing the words and stories of
ascetics, and their statements in condemnation of this world. They memorize
words and convey them as they are uttered, without perceiving their
meanings. Some do that over the pulpits, some in the markets, and some in
the prayer chambers. Each of them assumes that he, being distinguished from
the laymen by memorizing such words, has prospered and attained success,
and his sins forgiven by Allah Almighty, and he safe from His punishment.
Without safeguarding his outward and inward from sins, he thinks his
memorizing the words of the religious people would be sufficient to save him.
The conceit of those is more evident.
Another sect spend their time in engagement in the science of Hadith, i.e.
to listen to it, collect its different and abundant narrations and chains of
transmission. Anyone of them might be much concerned to go round towns
and cities to see different sheikhs and scholars of Hadith, in order that when
he returns, he would claim that he is narrating Hadith from so and so; and
that he has seen so and so; and that he has of chains of transmission what
others have not, etc. they are conceited for many things:

\

They are like the carriers of huge tons, i.e. they do not care to understand
the meanings of sunnah, for they are short of knowledge and deficient in
mind, and they have nothing but the transmitted texts and think this alone is
sufficient. Furthermore, since they do not understand its meanings, they
consequently do not act upon it. They also leave the knowledge which is a
collective duty, i.e. to know the way to remedy the heart, and rather engage in
collecting numerous chains of transmission as much as they could, given that
this is needless. They also, and this is unique to these of the present time, do
not fulfill the terms of listening. The listening in itself might have no benefit,
but at the same time, it is very important to prove the authenticity of Hadith.
The basic rule in Hadith is to be heard directly from the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”, memorized in the very way and
manner it was heard, and then narrated just as it was memorized. Thus,
narration ensues from memorization, and memorization from listening. But if
you fail to hear it directly from the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and

1

645
Book ten: Condemnation of conceit
peace be upon him”, you should, at least, hear it from anyone of the
companions or Tabi'is, thereby your hearing it from the narrator is like the
hearing of him who heard it from the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him”.
The point then is to devote yourself wholeheartedly to hear (and
understand), memorize in the very manner you hear, and narrate just as you
memorize, in a way that allows you not to change anything even a letter in it,
and if a slight change is made by anyone in it, you would detect the mistake
easily. There are two ways for you to memorize: The first is to keep by heart,
and persist in remembering and repeating what you keep. The other is to write
what you hear, and correct it, and preserve it in order that no hand of change
would have access to it. But if you kept it neither by heart nor by writing, and
you heard something in a gathering of which you were not well-aware, and
when you left the gathering you found a written version which you thought to
be of what you have heard in the gathering, and thought there was a probable
change from what you have heard, it would not be possible for you to claim
you heard it for you do not know, perhaps you have heard something
different. If you do not keep by heart, nor have an authendc reliable written
version to correct according to it, how should you know that you have heard
the same? In confirmation of that, Allah says: " And pursue not that of which
you have no knowledge; for every act of hearing, or of seeing, or of (feeling in)
the heart will be enquired into (on the Day of Reckoning)." (Al-Isra1 36)
i 0 ^ili jlf iLzJjl

(LLUi Oj

vlAJ J-J GGii: <jj >

The simplest requirement of hearing is to allow one to keep what he hears
by heart in a way that causes him to detect any slight change, the heedless
hearing, like that of a child, a mad, or a mentally impaired, is not fitting to rely
upon in this issue. The supportive foundation is the statement of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "May Allah
honor a man who heard my statement, understood it and reported it in the
same way he has heard it." (This narration is reported by Ibn Majah, AtTirmidhi and Ibn Hibban on the authority of Zaid Ibn Thabit). How should
one report what he has heard given that he was unaware of it? That is the
most odious conceit; and unfortunately, the people of the present time have
been afflicted with it. The sheikhs of this time are, for the most part, of those
who heard heedlessly and inattentively when they were children. But since
they feared this might reduce their position and majesty in the hearts of the
modern people, and the narrations they have decrease in number, they agreed
among themselves upon omitting that requirement, and rather made it
possible to depend upon the heedless hearing of a child.
But to be sure, the conditions of hearing should be taken from the earlier
and not the modern generations, for the science of the foundations of
religious jurisprudence belongs to men of the earlier generation. What we
have mentioned here is taken for granted in the laws of foundations of
religious jurisprudence. But it is the conceit of the conceited men who causes
them to omit it. I mean these who are conceited by spending their lives in

The quarter of the destructives
646
collecting chains of transmission as much as they could, without turning to
the more important religious task, and knowing the meanings of what they
narrate. The Hadith is intended to motivate one to follow the way of the
hereafter, and the follower of that way might be satisfied with a single Hadith
for his entire lifetime. In this respect, it is narrated that a sheikh attended a
gathering of listening, and the first Hadith he heard was the statement of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "It is out of
mans good faith in Islam to leave what concerns him not." (This narration is
reported by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
On that he stood and said: "This is sufficient for me to hear until I finish
from (understanding and acting upon) it, after which I would listen to another
one." This is the way the intelligent listen, who are cautious of conceit.
Another sect engaged in learning grammar, linguistics, philology, poetry,
prosody, and their related sciences, by which they were conceited, thinking
their sins would be forgiven for them for the sake of those sciences, and that
they were among the fundaments of this Muslim nation, under pretext that
the religion depends upon the Book of Allah and the sunnah of the Prophet,
and the Book and sunnah depend upon the sciences of language and
grammar. The result is that those who spent their lives in learning the
subtleties of grammar, art of poetry, and eccentric vocabulary. Their example
is like him who spends his lifetime in learning the handwriting and improving
the form of writing letters, under claim that sciences depend upon
handwriting, without which they would not be kept and preserved. By so
doing, he ignores that it is sufficient for him to learn just the way of writing
and reading correctly and no more, the same is true of language. All languages
are equal in learning, and if there is a superiority for the Arabic, it lies in its
representing the language of the Qur'an and Hadith. So, one should learn
from its grammar, linguistics, philology and vocabulary what enables him to
understand both well, and what is beyond that is needless surplus.
Moreover, if one is satisfied with learning the profound subtleties of
language, and takes no heed of understanding and acting upon the matters of
Sharia, he then is conceited. That is because the main crux is the work, and
the knowledge of the work, though very important, is beyond work: It is as a
husk for it, and a core for what is beyond it, i.e. the hearing of words and
sentences correctly, and memorizing them by way of transmission, and this is
the husk of knowledge and the core of what is beyond it, i.e. the sciences of
language, grammar, vocabulary, etc. those who are satisfied only with those
are conceited, except him who takes them as stations to fulfill his need until
he reaches the main core, i.e. the work itself, which he spends his lifetime
forcing his heart, organs and parts of body to do perfectly, and purify from
stains and evils. It is that which should be served by all sciences of Sharia,
which are but servants, stations and means to attain it. Whoever does not
attain the main purpose at any point or station has indeed failed. Since those
sciences belong to Sharia, they have become an object of conceit for their
masters. As for the sciences of medicine, arithmetic's, geometry, and all arts

647
Book ten: Condemnation of conceit
which do not belong to Sharia, their masters do not think their sins would be
forgiven for them for the sake of those sciences. This is why they are less
conceited by them.
Another sect became much conceited by the art of religious jurisprudence.
They thought the judgement of Allah Almighty on a man depends on the
judgement he receives from a judge in the court. They made much tricks to
avert rights, and misinterpreted abstruse words and were deceived by the
apparent meanings in which they proved mistaking. That applies to the mistake
in fatwa. Although the mistake in fatwa might occur, but what we mention has
become widespread among them, let's refer to some examples for the incorrect
fatwa they gave in this respect, like the fatwa that when a woman releases her
husband from the dower, he has become free from it in the Sight of Allah
Almighty. This is, to be sure, an evident mistake. A husband might do evil to
his wife and put her to difficulty that forces her, in the way to get rid of her
difficulty, to clear him from the dower in order for him to divorce her. That
clearance is not done with good pleasure. Allah Almighty says in this issue: "
And give the women (on marriage) their dower as a free gift; but if they, of
their own good pleasure, remit any part of it to you, take it and enjoy it with
right good cheer." (An-Nisa' 4)
4O
aHa
^
^
Such a woman does so under internal compulsion, although she might seem
to approve. It is true that the judge in this world does not know the secrets of
hearts, and thus he considers only the apparent clearance. But this would not be
the case before the Greatest of Judges on the Day of Resurrection, Who would
not hold valid that clearance.
This is why it is unlawful to take money from a man except with his own
good pleasure. If one was asked to give some of his wealth at the sight and
hearing of an assembly of people, and he gave it only for he felt shy of them, and
were he to be asked in seclusion, he would not have given it, but when he was
asked in front of people, he fell between the pain of people's condemnation in
case of abstention, and the pain of giving in case of giving, and he chose the
lighter pain, i.e. that of giving, thereupon he gave him, it would not differ from
confiscation. The confiscation is to put the body to punishment until its pain
becomes more severe than the pain of giving money, thereupon one chooses the
lighter of them, which is to give money. Begging in public depending upon fear
of shyness produces the same pain but to the heart. There is no difference
between spiritual and corporal pain in the Sight of Allah Almighty. It is the judge
of this world only who judges depending upon the outward appearance, for he
does not know the secrets of the heart.
The same is true of him who gives another to safeguard himself from the
evil of his tongue: It is unlawful. Do you not see what is narrated in the story
of the Prophet David “peace be upon him”? After he had been forgiven by
Allah, he said: "O Lord! How should I clear myself from my opponent?" He
was commanded to clear himself from him, and he was dead. He was
commanded to call him from over the rock of Jerusalem, and he called: "O

The quarter of the destructives
648
Uriya!" he said: "I am responding to your call O Prophet of Allah! You have
brought me out of the Garden: What do you want from me?" he said: "I have
done a misdeed to you, so, pardon me for it." He said: "I have pardoned you
O Prophet of Allah." He turned away relying on that pardon, thereupon
Gabriel “peace be upon him” said to him: "Have you made a mention to him
of what you did?" he answered in the negative. He said: "Then, return and
make a mention to him of what you did." He returned and called him and he
said: "I am responding to your call O Prophet of Allah!" he said: "I committed
a sin against you." He said: "Have I not pardoned you for it?" he said: "But
would you not ask me about it?" he said: "What is that O Prophet of Allah?"
he said: "Such and such..." and made a mention of the story of the woman.
Uriya gave no answer, thereupon David “peace be upon him” asked him: "O
Uriya! Would you not answer me?" he said: "O Prophet of Allah! That is not
the conduct of the Prophets, and I shall stand against you in front of Allah to
judge between us." He went on weeping and crying so much and did not cease
until Allah promised to ask him to pardon him for it in the hereafter. This
shows to you that the gift without good pleasure is pointless, and that the
good pleasure is not attained except with knowledge. The good pleasure
regarding clearance and gift is not attained unless man is left alone and given
the freedom of choice, so that he would be motivated from within himself
and not forced by external factors to do.
A mention may be made here also of the case in which a man gives as a
gift the wealth upon which almsgiving is due to his wife towards the end of
the year, and takes her wealth as a gift, in order for almsgiving to lapse from
it. As for the religious jurisprudent, he judges that no almsgiving is due upon
it in this case; and he is outwardly true, in the sense that the governor would
not ask him to pay it. But if it is thought that it would lapse from him on the
Day of Judgement, just as he who has no property at all, this would be evident
ignorance of the religious knowledge and understanding, and of the mystery
of almsgiving. The mystery of almsgiving is that it purifies the heart from the
vice of miserliness, which is destructive in itself. In this respect, The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "There are
three destructives: Niggardliness that is obeyed, an inclination that is followed,
and self-vanity." It is obeyed for he followed it when he abstained from paying
the almsgiving due upon him. In this way, it will lead to his destruction, although
he thinks by so doing, he has saved himself. That is because Allah Almighty
knows well what is lurking in his heart, and to what extent his love for wealth is,
that prompted him to deduce tricks closing on himself the way of salvation by
ignorance and conceit.
The same is true also of the case in which Allah Almighty makes
permissible the property of Muslim interests to religious jurisprudents and the
others as much as is required by their need. But the ignorant conceited
jurisprudents make no distinction between their aspirations, hopes and desires
on the one hand, and their needs on the other hand. On the contrary, all that
contributes to their unnecessary luxury belongs, in their sight, to their

649
Book ten: Condemnation of conceit
essential need, forgetting, or ignoring, that the world itself is created for the
people's need of it in their worship and following the way to the hereafter. All
that is taken by a servant to help him practice his religion and do the acts of
worship belongs to his need, and what is beyond that is unnecessary surplus
that is needless.
The Second Class: Masters Of Worship And Work
The conceited among them are numerous. Some of them are conceited by
prayer, others by recitation of the Qur'an, others by Hajj, others by fighting in
the Cause of Allah, others by asceticism, etc. the same is true of anyone of
them who is mainly devoted to a particular method or act of worship, by
which he is conceited, barring the intelligent among them, and how few they
are.
A division among them neglected the obligatory duties, and rather engaged
in supererogatory deeds, in which they were radically excessive. One of them
might be possessed by obsessive doubts about ablution, for instance, to the
extent that he is not satisfied with performing ablution from the water that is
judged permissible under Sharia, or with eating from what is judged to be
lawful under Sharia. By so doing, he forgets the conduct of the companions in
this respect: It is reported, for example, that Umar "Allah be pleased with
him" performed ablution from water that was in the jar of a Christian woman,
although the probability of impurity was possible, given that he, at the same
time, used to leave many doors of the lawful for fear it would lead to the
unlawful.
Similarly, some of them might pour water wastefully while performing
ablution, although it is forbidden (according to the narration of At-Tirmidhi
and Ibn Majah on the authority of Ubai Ibn Ka'b). he also might prolong the
time of ablution until he misses the due time of prayer, or at least delays it
from its due time; and his conceit here is self-evident for losing the superiority
of performing prayer in the first portion of its due time, or for wasting a great
quantity of water profligately, or for wasting his lifetime in what is needless.
But it is the habit of Satan to keep the people off the worship by trickery.
Since he could not keep them off except by that which he presents to them in
the form of an act of worship, thereby he takes them far from Allah Almighty.
Another division have been possessed by obsessive doubt about the intent
in prayer. Satan does not leave anyone of them to assume it with a correct
intention, but rather continues to distract his mind until the congregational
prayer escapes him, or until he delays the prayer from its due time. Even if he
assumes prayer with Takbir, he remains in hesitation about the correctness of
his intention. One of them also might resort to change the pronunciation of
Takbir in pursuit of correctness. He does so in the beginning of prayer, and
once he enters in prayer, he becomes heedless, that is because their hearts are
not fully present in prayer as it should be. They are conceited for they think,
though falsely, that if they trouble themselves in correcting the intention in
the beginning of prayer, and taking all possible precautions, by which they are
distinguished from the laymen, no matter heedless they might seem afterwards

The quarter of the destructives
650
during prayer, they would be good in the Sight of their Lord Almighty.
Another division are possessed by the obsession of the necessity of
correcting the utterance of letters of the Qur'an in prayer, in which they are so
much excessive until it causes them to forget the real essence, i.e. the
meanings and concepts of the Qur'an, and refrain from receiving admonition
from it. That is, to be sure, the most odious kind of conceit. The people are
obligated to recite the Qur'an only as required by their habits of speech, and
not to be excessive in utterance and pronunciation.
Another division are conceited by their recitation of the Qur'an, which
they do so much quickly that they conclude it at least once per day. Although
they recite it with their tongues, their hearts are grazing in the valleys of hopes
and desires. That is because one of them does not consider the meanings of
the Qur'an, so that he would be deterred by its deterrents and forbiddances,
accept its admonitions, and comply with its commands and orders, in addition
to the other purposes of the recitation of the Qur'an we have already
mentioned. Such a person is conceited for he thinks, though falsely, that the
real purpose is to move his tongue with the letters and words of the Qur'an,
no matter heedless he might be of its meanings and concepts.
It is true that persistence in recitation of the Qur'an is necessary in itself in
order that one should forget nothing of it. But the real purpose here is to
continue to memorize it, and memorizing it is required for understanding it,
and understanding it is required for acting upon it and behaving in accordance
with its principles, and getting benefit from its meanings. One might have a
good pleasant voice and he recites the Qur'an, and is pleased with his voice.
Thus, he is conceited by his pleasure, thinking it to be the pleasure of
conversation with his Lord Almighty, and listening to His Words. But nay! It
is the pleasure with his own voice and not with the Qur'an itself. Were he to
recite poetry or anything else with his melodious voice, he would have the
same pleasure. He is conceited for he does not inspect his heart in order to
know the difference between the pleasure with the speech of Allah Almighty
caused by its good syntax, structure and meaning, and the pleasure with his
own voice caused by its melodious nature.
Another division have been conceited by fasting. They might observe fasts
perpetually, or at least fast the noble days, although they do not keep their
tongues from backbiting and nonsense, their thoughts from showing off, and
their bellies from eating the unlawful at the time of breaking fast, etc. in spite
of that, such a person thinks himself good, although he neglects the obligatory
deeds, and troubles himself in pursuit of the supererogatory deeds. That is the
highest degree of conceit.
Another division have been conceited by Hajj. One of them sets out for
Hajj without relieving himself of the complaints of people against him, nor
fulfilling his debts, nor seeking to please his parents, nor gaining the lawful
provisions. He might do so after the Hajj enjoined by Islamic Sharia lapses
from him, as he has performed it. On the way, he might waste such obligatory
deeds as prayer, fail to purify body and garment, beware not of obscenity and

651
Book ten: Condemnation of conceit
quarrel. One of them might collect unlawful wealth which he spends on his
companions in the way, seeking to be heard and seen of men, thereby he
disobeys Allah Almighty first by gaining what is unlawful, and second by
spending in order to be seen of men. He neither takes it lawfully, nor spends
it lawfully. Then, he goes to the House with his heart contaminated by the evil
manners and vices, for he has not given his purification precedence to his
attendance. But at the same time, he thinks, though falsely, that he is good in
the Sight of his Lord. But nay! He is evidendy conceited.
Another division went on the way of Hisbah: They enjoin right and forbid
evil: Anyone of them forbids evil to the people although he himself does it,
and enjoins good upon them, although he himself forgets to do it. If he
enjoins good, he seeks authority and majesty, and if he forbids evil, and
somebody discusses him, he grows angry and does not accept that the like of
him should be rejected. He might seek to gather the people in his mosque,
and if anyone of them delays to come, he would speak harshly to him. That is
because his purpose is showing off and seeking authority, and no more. If
anyone else takes care of the mosque, he would antagonize him. One of those
might pronounce Adhan thinking it to be for the Sake of Allah Almighty, and
if another one comes to pronounce Adhan on his behalf once he is absent, he
would resent him bitterly. One might become the imam of a mosque, thinking
it to be good for himself, although his real purpose is to have the people say
that he is the imam of the mosque, and if anyone else proceeds to act as an
imam, given that he is more pious and knowledgeable, he would feel it
difficult upon himself.
Another division lived in Mecca or Medina by which they were conceited.
That is because they neither watch their hearts, nor purify their outward and
inward. So, their hearts remain attached to their homelands, and concerned
with the statement of those who say that so and so is living in Mecca or
Medina, i.e. anyone of those does so in order to be seen and heard of men.
Out of pride, he publicizes among the people that he has lived in Mecca or
Medina such and such years. But if he thinks it is ugly to declare that
explicitly, he resorts to the implicit expression with the intention to have the
people recognize him for that. He might live in Mecca or Medina, and at the
same time, stretch his sight to the impurities of people's wealth to gather it to
himself, and once he takes it, he, out of niggardliness, abstains from spending
it, or even some of it by way of charity. In this way, he combines
niggardliness, showing off, covet, and other destructives, of which he would
have not been in need had he stayed at home. But it is the love for praise, as
being described as one of those who have lived in Mecca or Medina, which
causes him to live there, and have those vices and evils. He is conceited.
There is no deed or act of worship but that it has evils; and unless anyone
knows well the causes and means of those evils, and depends upon them in
his attitudes towards those acts, he would be conceited. Those are known
from the books included in the Revival of religious sciences: He should know
the causes of conceit in prayer from the Book of Prayer, in Zakat from the

The quarter of the destructives
652
Book of Zakat, in Hajj from the Book of Hajj, and in anyone of the acts of
worship from its relevant book.
Another division have abstained in wealth: They have been satisfied from
clothes and food with the minimum requirements, and from residence with
living in mosques. By so doing, they thought they attained the rank of ascetics.
But at the same time, anyone of those desires for authority and majesty either
by knowledge, or by preaching, or even by just asceticism. He leaves the easier
and incurs upon himself the more destructive. To be sure, majesty is greater
than wealth, and were he to leave majesty and take wealth, he would be closer
to safety. This man is conceited for he thinks he is among the ascetics who
abstain in this world. He indeed does not understand the meaning of this
world, and that the greatest of its pleasures is the authority and majesty, and
that the one who desires for it should be a hypocrite, an envier, an arrogant,
and a maker of show of deeds: In short he should be characterized by all vices
and evil manners.
He might leave authority and majesty, and rather favors seclusion and
privacy. But he is still conceited, for by so doing, he deals harshly with the
wealthy and rich, despises them, looks at them with the eye of contempt and
slightness, expects for himself from good more than he expects for them, and
is proud of his deed. In short, he is characterized by a lot of evil manners and
vices although he might know not. He might be given property and reject to
take it, for fear he would be described to have absconded asceticism; and if it
is said to him that it is lawful, so, take it in public and return it in secrecy, he
would reject to do so, lest he would be subject to the condemnation of
people. That is because he loves to be praised, and this is one of the greatest
pleasures of this world. Although he regards himself abstinent in this world,
he is conceited. But even, he might incline to respect the rich and give them
precedence to the poor; and incline to those who follow him and praise his
good deeds, and refrain from those who follow anyone other than him from
the ascetics. All of this is deception by which Satan deceives men: We seek
refuge with Allah from it.
From among worshippers, there is such as makes it hard upon himself to
the extent that he might pray more than one thousand rak'ahs per day, and
conclude the Qur'an at least once per day. But at the same time, it does not
occur to his mind to observe and inspect his heart to purify it from all vices of
showing off, arrogance, envy, conceit, etc. he might not know that this is
destructive, and even if he is to know it, he does not think he is so, and if he
thinks he is so, he has the false impression that he would be forgiven by Allah
Almighty due to his external and outward deed, and that he would not be
blamed and reckoned for the internal states of the heart, under pretext that
the good deeds overweigh only by virtue of the external acts. But how far! An
atom's weight of heart piety and god-fearingness is better than as much
external deeds as the mountains. Therefore, such a conceited person, besides
his evil manners, could hardly be free from showing off and love for praise. If
it is said to him that he is one of the established pegs on earth, and one of the

Book ten: Condemnation of conceit

653

devotees and friends of Allah Almighty, he would rejoice at it so much, give
trust to it, and increase in conceit and arrogance, thinking that the people's
praise of him is an indication to the good pleasure of Allah with him.
Knowing not that this praise is due to their ignorance of his internal vices and
evils.
Another division engaged in the supererogatory deeds on the exclusion of
the obligatory deeds. One of them is concerned with the Duha or night prayer
more than anyone of the obligatory prayers, with which he does not have the
same pleasure, nor does he hasten to perform it in the first portion of its due
time, forgetting the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him”, relating from his Lord Almighty: "No servant comes
close to me more than he who comes close to Me with what I have enjoined
upon him." (This narration is reported by Al-Bukhari on the authority of Abu
Hurairah).
To fail to observe the order in doing the acts of worship is one of the
evils. There might be two obligatory or supererogatory deeds, one of which
would be missed if it is not performed at the moment: If one does not
observe the order in doing them, he would be conceited. Those things are
beyond calculation, the sin is apparent, and the act of worship is apparent, and
what is abstruse is to know how to put the acts of worship in order, in a way
that allows for giving precedence to some over others, like giving precedence
to all the obligatory deeds over all the supererogatory deeds, the duties that
are binding upon everyone over the collective dudes, and so on.
The mother's needs, for example, should be given precedence over those
of anyone else. In this respect, it is narrated that the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” was asked: "O Messenger of Allah!
Whom should I be dudful to most?" he said: "Your mother." He was asked:
"Then, who is next?" he said: "Your mother." He was asked for the third dme:
"Who is next?" he said: "Your mother." He then was asked: "Who is next?" he
said: "Your father." He was asked: "Then, who is next?" He said: "Then, the
next of kin." (This narradon is reported by At-Tirmidhi and Al-Hakim on the
authority of Zaid Ibn Hakim from his father from his grandfather). This
means that one should first fulfill the needs of the nearest in kin, and if they
are equal in the degree of kinship, then, let it be the more needy of them, and
if they are equal in need, let it be the more pious and righteous of them.
The same is true of him whose property is not sufficient for the
maintenance of his parents and the spendings of Hajj simultaneously. If he
gives precedence to Hajj over the maintenance of his parents, he is conceited.
That is because he should give precedence to their right over his. This is to
give precedence to a more important duty over an important duty. Similarly, if
one is to fulfill an appointment and the dme of Friday prayer has entered, it is
sinful to engage in the appointment and miss the Friday prayer, given that to
fulfill the appointment is an act of worship in itself. Similarly, the garment of
anyone might be affected by filth, and he speaks harshly to his parents
because of that. Although filth is forbidden, harming them also is forbidden.

The quarter of the destructives
654
But the forbiddance of harming them is more grievous than that of filth.
In short, whoever does not observe the order in doing the acts of worship,
is evidently conceited. This conceit is the most abstruse, for the conceited
therein in fact does acts of worship, but he does not make sense of the way
the act of worship might turn into a sin, for by doing it he has left a more
important obligatory act of worship. A mention may be made of him who
engages in the difference between juristic schools given that there are many
acts of worship that are due upon him, and sins which he has to leave. If the
real purpose of jurisprudence is to know what others need in their worship,
then, it is preferable for him to know what he himself needs to purify his
heart. But the love for majesty and authority, the pleasure of pride and glory
because of knowledge, and desire for excellence over foes and opponents
make him blind and conceited that he thinks he is engaged in the concerns
and interests of his religion.

The Third Class: Sufis
The conceited among them are of many divisions:
A division of them, and they are the Sufis of this time, except him whom
Allah Almighty protected, have been conceited by clothes, appearance and
speech. They share the truthful Sufis in their clothes, appearance, speech,
terms, vocabulary, and even manners and etiquettes and outward states of
music, dancing, purification, prayer, sitting on carpets while lowering the
heads, difficulty of breathing, lowering voice in conversation, etc. but when
they forced themselves to do those things, in which they imitated the Sufis,
they thought they were real Sufis. They did not trouble themselves in
mortification, discipline, purification of inward and outward from both
external and internal sins and mistakes, given that all of this represents the
first station of Sufism, and without them, they would not be regarded Sufis at
all; and how should they be regarded Sufis given that they do the opposite of
those? They compete each other over taking what is unlawful, envy each other
over the trivial as well as the important things, and dishonor each other once
they become different in opinion. Those are evidently conceited. Those are
called pretender of Sufism more than Sufists. But their reality which is
concealed in this world would appeared naked of veils and curtains in the
hereafter, before the Judge Whom no clothes nor appearance would concern,
other than the heart and what is lurking in it.
Another division were more conceited than those. It was difficult upon
themselves to imitate the Sufis in their cheap and ragged clothes. They wanted
to seem Sufis, and had no way but to appear in their dress and appearance.
They left silk and brocade in exchange for the pieces of expensive mantles,
thin and smooth pieces of towel, and dyed carpets, and dressed themselves in
dresses smoother than silk. By such pieces of expensive dyed mantles, Anyone
of them thought he was a Sufi, forgetting that the real Sufis dyed their
garments in order not to be engaged in washing them every time to remove
the dirt from them, and that they put on the patched garments for their
dresses were torn, and this is why they patched them. But as for those

Book ten: Condemnation of conceit

655

pretenders, they are more foolish and conceited, for although they are blessed
in the delicious kinds of food, and the expensive clothes, seek the abundance
of living, accept money from rulers, avoid not the external, let alone the
internal sins, they think they are good. The evil of those is transitive to the
people, for whoever imitates them will be ruined; and whoever does not
imitate them will have a bad assumption of Sufism at all, thinking all of them
are the same.
Another division claimed the knowledge of Ma'rifah, contemplation of the
Real, transcendence to the high stations, and abiding nearness, although they
do not know from those things except their names and related phrases. That
is because anyone of those picks up some euphoric utterances, which he
repeats, thinking them to be higher than the knowledge of the earlier and later
generations. He looks at the religious jurisprudents, exegetes, traditionalists and
scholars with the eye of contempt, let alone the laymen. A farmer or a tailor
might leave his profession and stick to them for a few days during which he picks
up some of their words which he repeats, as if he is telling about the revelation
and high mysteries, thereby looks down upon the worshippers and religious
scholars and jurisprudents. He describes the worshippers as troubled hired, and
the religious scholars as veiled from speaking about Allah Almighty. But he
claims he has access to the Real, and that he is among those made close to Allah
Almighty, given that he is among the dissolute hypocrites in the Sight of Allah,
and among the foolish stupid in the sight of the masters of hearts. That is
because he neither perfects a knowledge, nor disciplines a character, nor does
deeds in order, nor observes and purifies his heart. All he does is to follow his
inclination and pick up nonsense and euphoric utterances.
Another division announced debauchery and folded the carpet of Sharia.
They rejected rulings of Sharia, and made equality between the lawful and
unlawful. Some of them allege that since Allah Almighty is not in need of the
deeds, why should they trouble themselves by work? Others allege that since
the people were obligated to purify their hearts from desires and lusts, and
from the love for this world, and this is impossible, as learnt from their
experience, their attempt to do it is pointless. But this foolish seems to know
not that one is not obligated to remove the roots of anger and desire but
rather to eliminate their matter which strengthens them, in a way that causes
each of them to submit to the governance of mind and Sharia. Some of them
allege that the deeds with organs and parts of body are weightless, for it is the
hearts that are considered; and their hearts are filled with the love for Allah
Almighty, and they live in this world only with their bodies, while their hearts
are attached to the presence of the Lord. In this way, they fulfill the desires
outwardly and not inwardly. They further allege that as they have raised to a
station higher than the laymen, they are not in need to purify their own souls
with the bodily deeds, and that the desires never hinder them from the way of
Allah Almighty, due to their great power. In this way, they raise themselves
higher than the Prophets and Messengers "peace be upon them"
, whom
even a single sin would hinder from the way of Allah Almighty, for which they

The quarter of the destructives
656 ----------------------------would weep for long years.
Another division went as far as to leave the deed entirely, including even
the lawful, and devoted themselves to inspect the hearts. Anyone of them
might now ascribe himself to the different stations of abstinence, reliance,
contentment, pleasure and love, without knowing the real nature, conditions
and signs of each of them. Some of them claim their great love and adoration
for Allah Almighty, although they might not hesitate to commit what Allah
dislikes, and give preference to their own desires and inclinations over the
command of Allah Almighty. One of them might leave things just for he feels
shy of the people, and not of Allah, and were he to be alone, he would not
leave them. Some of them might incline to love and reliance, thereupon he
sets out on journey to the desert with no provisions to be true to his claim of
reliance, knowing not that this is a religious innovation which is not
transmitted from the righteous predecessors and companions, who knew the
reliance more than he does, and understood that reliance is not to put one's
soul to risk and abstain from taking provisions: On the contrary, they used to
take provisions and rely on Allah and not on the provisions, unlike him who
leaves the provisions and relies on a particular means rather than on Allah
Almighty.
Another division constricted the matter of food on themselves, and
endeavored to get only the pure lawful. But at the same time, they did not
engage in inspecting the heart and organs and parts of body in anything else.
One of them neglected the lawful in his food, residence and clothes, and
rather delved in it in different things, knowing not that it is not sufficient in
the Sight of Allah Almighty just to seek the lawful in some and neglect it in all
the works. So, whoever thinks that some of those would be sufficient to save
him on the exclusion of the others is indeed conceited.
Another division claimed the good manners, humbleness, tolerance,
leniency, etc, thereupon they undertook to serve the Sufis. They stuck to a
people of Sufis whom they served. But they took that as a means of authority
and majesty, and collecting money and wealth. Their purpose is arrogance and
loftiness, although they show service and humbleness. Furthermore, they
collect money from what is unlawful and suspicious and spend on them from
it, in order to increase the number of their followers, and advance in fame and
reputation. Some of them take the property of rulers and spend on them from
it. Others take money and spend it on the way of Hajj on the Sufis, claiming
that his purpose is kindness and dutifulness. But the motive that pushes them
to do all of that is to be seen and heard of men. The sign of that is clear in
their neglecting all commands and forbiddances of Allah Almighty outwardly
and inwardly, and accepting to take the unlawful to spend from it. The
example of him who spends on men from the unlawful on the way of Hajj is
like him who builds mosques and covers their walls with dung, claiming that
his purpose is to construct places of worship.
Another division engaged in self-mortification and purification of souls
and hearts from defects and evils, and discipline of manners and moral

657

Book ten: Condemnation of conceit

character. They delved in those things to the extent that they took the search
for the defects and evils of the soul as a profession. In all their states, they are
engaged in search for the defects and evils of the soul. They say, for example:
"That is a defect in the soul, and to be heedless of it is defective, and to turn
to its being a defect is defective", and so on. Whoever spends his lifetime in
search for the subde defects of the soul, just in order to know the way to treat
them rather than to treat them actually, is like him who engages himself in
inspecting the obstructions of Hajj, without following the way of Hajj. Of a
surety, this is of no avail to him.
Another division exceeded that station, and started to follow the way to
the Allah Almighty, and the gates of Ma'rifah were opened to them. But the
more they smell a good smell from a gate of Ma'rifah, the more they are
pleased with it and their hearts sdck to it. They thus engage in the way its gate
is opened to them and closed to others; in which case they are conceited. That
is because the wonders of the way to Allah Almighty are endless, and were
one to stick to every door, he would run short of realizing the purpose.
Another division exceeded all of those: They were not pleased with the
items of Ma'rifah flowed over them, nor with the gifts and grants of
knowledge given to them. But they were eagerly serious in their way until they
became at a bow-length distance close to the presence of Allah Almighty, they
were conceited, for they thought they had reached the presence of Allah
Almighty, thereupon they stopped. To be sure, Allah Almighty has seventy
veils of light, and no followers comes to anyone of them on his way but that
he thinks he has reached. To this Allah Almighty refers in His statement
about Abraham "peace be upon him": " When the night covered him over, he
saw a star: He said: "This is my Lord." But when it set, he said: "I love not those
that set." When he saw the moon rising in splendour, he said: "This is my Lord."
But when the moon set, he said: "Unless my Lord guide me, I shall surely be
among those who go astray." When he saw the sun rising in splendour, he said:
"This is my Lord; this is the greatest (of all)."" (Al-An'am 76-78)
>Ui Wj l2j

y Ois JjfllJi 03

jOIjT I'.j llii @OfUJT03

ll3 'iSy. jlSyu-z

CJis &'/1*3
05? ^
iJui 03

U

Of course, he did not mean those celestial shining bodies which he used to
see when he was a child, and knew well that none of them was a god at all. But he
meant those lights which are the veils of Allah Almighty, on the way of the
followers of the way to Allah Almighty, and it is unimaginable to reach the
presence of Allah Almighty without passing by them. Those veils of light are
different in size and power. So, when Abraham "peace be upon him" was shown
the signs of the dominion of the heavens, he moved from one light to another,
and every time he came to a particular light, he thought he had reached. But at
that time, he was shown that there was something greater beyond it which he had
to reach. He remained as such until he reached the closest veil, which he

The quarter of the destructives
658
described as the greatest. But when it seemed to him that this also was short of
perfection, he said: "I love not those that set.”
The follower of that way might be conceited by standing at a particular
one of those veils, and he might be deceived by the first veil. To be sure, the
first veil that stands between a servant and his Lord is his own soul. It is a
Divine matter, and one of the lights of Allah Almighty, i.e. the mystery of the
heart, in which the truth of the Real in entirety is clear. It extends to imply the
whole world, and the image of the whole is clear in it, and at that point, the
light of Allah shines upon it, in which the whole existence appears as it really
is. In the beginning it was veiled, but when the light of Allah shines on it, and
the beauty of the heart itself seems to him, he becomes fascinated by it. In the
face of that surprise, his tongue might hasten to utter such words as: "I am
the Real", before it is clear to him what is beyond that. In this way, he is
conceited for he has been deceived by a small star from the lights of the
Divine presence before he reaches the moon, let alone the sun and what is
beyond it.
That is the point of confusion, in which the shining light is confused with
that on which it shines, like the mirror which is confused with the colour of
the thing that is seen in it, and seems to be the colour of the mirror itself.
With that eye, the Chrisdans look at the Christ "peace be upon him": They
saw that the light of Allah Almighty shone in him, thereupon they were
mistaking in seeing it. It is like him who sees the image of a star in the mirror
or the water, and thinks that the star itself is in the water, thereupon he
stretches his hand to the mirror or the water to touch it. But nay! He is
conceited. The kinds of conceit in this respect are numerous.

The Fourth Class: Owners Of Wealth
A division of them are eager to build mosques, schools, homes of
hospitality, bridges, etc, and engrave their names on them in order to
eternalize their mendon and reputation, and their traces survive after their
death. By so doing, they think they deserve forgiveness because of their deed.
But even, they are conceited for two things:
The first is that they build those things from property which they earn
from unlawful sources. They expose themselves to the wrath of Allah when
they earn it, and also when they spend it, given that it was incumbent upon
them to abstain from getting it. But as they earn it unlawfully, they have
disobeyed Allah Almighty, and it is incumbent upon them to repent to Allah,
and return that wealth to its real owners. But if the owners are not available, it
should be given to their heirs, and in case there are no heirs, the wealth
should be spent on the most important of Muslim benefits. It should be spent
on the needy and indigent. But the conceited among men do not do so, for
fear their deed would not be shown to all people, and rather prefer to spend it
on building mosques, schools, etc, and engrave their names on them by way
of showing off to be seen and heard of men.
The other is that they think they are good for they are sincere and true in
their intenuon in spending on things which belong to the public interests. But

659
Book ten: Condemnation of conceit
even, if anyone of them imagines to spend a single Dinar on a thing on which
his name is not written, he would abstain from spending it, given that Allah
Almighty knows it well, whether or not his name is written on it. Had he not
intended the face of the people and not the Countenance of Allah Almighty,
he would not have been in need of that.
Another division might earn property from lawful sources and spend it on
mosques and schools, etc. but even, they are conceited for two things: The
first is showing off and seeking to be praised by people. Perhaps in the
neighbourhood or even in the same town, there might be poor and indigent
and to spend the property on them is more important and preferable. But to
spend money on mosques and schools is more visible to the people than on
the poor and indigent. The other is that they spend on adorning the mosques
with adornments and ornamentations that are forbidden, for they attract the
heart and divert the people from the prayer. The purpose of prayer is
submission and the presence of the heart. But such adornments spoil the
hearts of the praying people and frustrate their reward.
But such a conceited person regards it one of the good things, and a
means to draw him close to Allah Almighty. But in fact, by so doing, he
exposes himself to the wrath of Allah Almighty, although he thinks he obeys
Him and complies with His command. That is because he distracts the minds
of the praying people by those adornments, and develops in them the longing
for having the like of them in their homes. Of a surety, they are diverted by
that from the state of submission and heart presence they should have in the
mosque. Malik Ibn Dinar said: Two men came to a mosque, and one of them
stood at the gate and did not enter and said: "The like of me does not deserve
to enter the house of Allah Almighty." The two keeping angels enlisted him as
truthful in the Sight of Allah (for he was true to himself). He saw that the
mosque should be exalted and honoured from being contaminated with the
like of him to enter into it. What then about contaminating it with the
unlawful and forbidden things?
Once, the disciples said to Jesus "peace be upon him": "Look at that place
of worship! How beautiful and wonderful it is!" on that he said to them: "Let
me tell you the truth. Verily, Allah Almighty will not leave a stone built on a
stone in it but that He would destroy it because of the sins of its people. No
doubt, Allah Almighty never cares about gold and silver, nor even about
stones which appeal you. The dearest things to Allah Almighty are the sound
and good hearts, with which Allah constructs the earth, and destroys it if they
are different." Abu Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased with him" said: The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "When
you adorn your mosques and decorate your Mushafs, then, destruction
becomes due on you." (This narration is reported by Ibn Al-Mubarak). AlHassan said: When the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” intended to build his mosque in Medina, Gabriel came to him and
said: "Make it no more than seven cubits high, and do not adorn nor decorate
it."
Another division spend property on the poor and indigent, thereby they

The quarter of the destructives
660
seek fame and reputation. They indeed give in charity publicly and dislike to
do in secrecy. They are of the opinion that if a poor conceals what he takes
from them, it is a crime to be committed against them. They might be eager to
spend money on Hajj, thereupon they perform Hajj one after another, leaving
their neighbours hungry. For this reason, Ibn Mas'ud said: "Towards the end
of time, the people would perform Hajj so much with no just cause: The
journey would be easy for them, and the money abundant with them, given
that the neighbour of anyone of them might be in destitution and deprivation,
and he does not console him."
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Nasr At-Tammar that a man came to
bid farewell to Bishr Ibn Al-Harith and said to him: "I have intended to
perform Hajj: Do you order me to do anything?" he said: "How much have
you prepared for spending?" He said: "One thousand Dirhams." He asked:
"Which thing do you seek with your Hajj? Do you seek abstinence, longing
for the House, or the good pleasure of Allah Almighty?" he said: "The good
pleasure of Allah Almighty." He said: "Then, if you please Allah Almighty
while you are at home, and spend one thousand Dirhams and you are sure of
attaining the good pleasure of Allah Almighty: Would you do it?" he answered
in the affirmative. On that he said to him: "Then, go and give the money to
ten men: It may be that a debtor would fulfill his debt, a poor would sustain
himself, a guardian would maintain his dependents, and a caretaker would
please an orphan under his care. But if you are strong enough to give the
whole of it to one person, do it. To be sure, to please a Muslim, relief a needy,
remove the distress and help the weak is much better than to perform Hajj
one hundred times after the obligatory Hajj due on you by Islam. Go and give
the money in the same way as we have told you, otherwise, tell us what is
lurking in your heart." He said to him: "O Abu Nasr! My journey seems more
appealing to me." Bishr smiled and turned his face to him and said: "If the
wealth is gathered from the impurities of trade and from what is suspicious,
one's own self urges him to fulfill a particular desire therewith in the form of a
good righteous deed, given that Allah rejects but to accept the work of the
god-fearing pious."
Another division of the owners of property withhold their money out of
niggardliness. But at the same time, they engage in acts of worship in which
no wealth is needed, like observing fasts, standing at night for supererogatory
prayers, and so on. They are conceited for by so doing, they forget that the
destructive niggardliness should be curbed, by giving out money. Indeed, such
a person endeavors to seek supererogatory deeds of which he might not be in
need. It was said to Bishr: "So and so the rich offers much fasts and
supererogatory prayers." On that he said: "How poor he is! He has been
diverted from his own affair, and engaged in the affair of others than him.
The affair of such is to serve with food the indigent hungry and spend money
on the poor. To be sure, this is better for him than his much fasts and
supererogatory prayers."
Another division are possessed by niggardliness in such a way that allows

Book ten: Condemnation of conceit

661

them to give out only alms and obligatory charity. Furthermore, they give it
from the worst of their property, which they themselves disdain to get. They
choose to give it to such of people as are expected to serve and help them,
and not to anyone of the poor or indigent. All of this is to corrupt the
intention, frustrate the work and make it fruitless, and its perpetrator is
conceited. He thinks that he obeys Allah Almighty, although he is dissolute
wicked for he seeks recompense for his worship of Allah Almighty.
Another division of the laymen and owners of property limit themselves to
attend the gatherings of celebration, thinking it to be the only work they are
required to do. The gatherings of celebration are good as long as they exhort
one to do good deeds, and if one is not moved to do, they lose their
goodness. Those people are evidently conceited. It does not matter to weep or
show impression for what one hears in the gathering unless it positively
moves him to do work. It is of no profit to him to save him from Allah
Almighty to hear the description of the acts of worship without doing them.
You may argue that the causes and means of hidden conceit are numerous,
and one could hardly get rid of them all or at least most of them. What should
one do? In reply to it, let's say that if one divides his mind into different
concerns and interests, the way would seem difficult on him, and the tunnel of
darkness endless. But if one concentrates his concern and thinking on one
thing, he would be able to deduce the necessary tricks, means, instruments
and equipment to help him achieve it. Consider how man succeeded to
subjugate the things of his world to be in his service; and that is because his
main concern is focused on his world and no more, based on that, if his main
concern is focused on the affair of his hereafter, there is only one thing for
him to do, i.e. to repair his heart. But even, he failed to repair it, regarding it
impossible. But nay! This is not impossible if one's concern is true to which
he is sincere. The righteous predecessors and those who followed them with
good conduct never failed to do it. So, let him of strong determination and
true willpower not fail to do it.
You may ask: "Then, by which could man be saved from conceit?" in reply
to that, it should be known to you that one is saved from conceit by three
things: Mind, knowledge and Ma'rifah. Those three are inevitable.
The first is mind; By mind I mean the natural light by which one perceives
things as they really are. The purity of mind and intelligence should be natural
in man for it is impossible to acquire them. But once mind exists, it is apt to be
supported and strengthened by practice and exercise. To be sure, the good
reason and intelligence represent the basis for all happiness. The Messenger of
Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Blessed be Allah Who
divided mind into portions among His servants." (This narration is reported by
At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Tawus). It is also reported on the authority of
Abu Ad-Darda' “Allah be pleased with him" that it was said to the Messenger
of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "O Messenger of Allah! A
man might observe fasts by day, stand at night (for supererogatory prayers),
perform Hajj and Umrah, give in charity, fight in the Way of Allah, visit the

The quarter of the destructives
662
patient to inquire about his health, follow the funeral processions, and help the
weak. But at die same time, he knows not his position with Allah Almighty on
the Day of Judgement." On that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: "Verily, he would be rewarded as much as is equal to
his mind." (This narration is reported by Al-Khatib in his Tarikh).
Anas “Allah be pleased with him” said: A man was praised in front of the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and the people
described him as good. He asked them: "What about his reason?" they said:
"O Messenger of Allah! We tell about what seems of his worship, good merits
and manners." The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” further asked: "But what about his reason? The foolish might be, with
his foolishness, more criminal than the dissolute wicked with his wickedness.
To be sure, on the Day of Judgement, the people would be brought near (to
Allah) in proportion to their minds." It is further narrated on the authority of
Abu Ad-Darda' “Allah be pleased with him” that he said: Whenever a
mention was made to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” of a man as being strong in worship, he would ask about his mind.
If they described it as good, he would say: "I expect (good for him), and if
something otherwise was said about him, he would say: "He would attain
nothing." (This narration is reported by At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Adi). On
another occasion, a mention was made to him of a man as being strong in
worship. He asked about his mind and it was said: "It is not good enough."
On that he said: "Then, your companion would not attain (the high rank) as
you assume of him."
The second is knowledge. By knowledge I mean that he should know
four things: He should know himself, his Lord, the world and the hereafter.
As for himself, he should know that he is no more than a humiliated strange
slave, outsider to those brutal desires and lusts which are in opposition to his
nature on which Allah has created him. What agrees with his nature only is to
know Allah Almighty, and have a look at His Honored Face. This is
impossible if he limits his knowledge to himself and extends it not to imply
his Lord. As for the knowledge of both the world and the hereafter, let one
seek the aid of what is mentioned in the Book of Condemnation of World and
the Book of Mention of Death, in order to know that the world, whatever it
might be, is weightless in comparison with the hereafter. Once he knows
himself, his Lord Almighty, the world and the hereafter, his knowledge of
Allah would stimulate his love for Allah Almighty, his knowledge of the
hereafter would make him more desirous for it, and his knowledge of this
world would make him more turning from it. He would be mainly concerned
only with what conveys him to the Presence of Allah Almighty, and benefits
him in the hereafter. If this will prevails in his heart, his intention in all
matters would be good. That is because he intends, by everything he does, to
seek its aid to follow the way to the hereafter, and remove from himself the
desire and inclination to this world. To be sure, as long as one's love for the
world prevails over his love for the hereafter, and his own desires and delights

Book ten: Condemnation of conceit

663
are dearer to him than the pleasure of his Lord, he would not be able to get
rid of conceit. But the love for Allah Almighty by having good knowledge of
Him should prevail; and this leads to the third thing.
The third is Ma'rifah. I mean by Ma’rifah the knowledge of how one
should follow the way to Allah Almighty, and of what draws him close to
Allah, and what removes him far from Allah, of the evils, obstacles and
obstructions of the way, etc. all of this is mendoned throughout the different
books of the Revival of Religious Sciences. The basic rule is that the love for
Allah Almighty should prevail in his heart, and replace the love for this world,
until the will becomes strong and the intendon good.
You may argue: If one does all of that, which thing he should fear? In
reply to it, let us say that he should fear lest he would be deceived by Satan,
who might invite him to call the people to the truth, instruct them and guide
them to the right path, and spread religious knowledge. That is, when the
sincere novice finishes from his self-discipline, and purifies his heart from all
impurides and embitterment's, and sets it right on the straight path, and
concentrates his concerns on one, i.e. Allah Almighty, and gives no care to
this world which seems slight in his eye, in such a way that Satan fails to
seduce him from the direction of the world and its desires and lusts, he comes
to him from the direcdon of religion, and invites him to show pity and mercy
for the servants of Allah Almighty. The person then looks with the eye of
mercy to the servants and sees them in confusion and under the influence of
this world, deaf and blind and possessed by diseases (of ignorance)
unknowingly, to the point that they become at the threshold of destrucdon.
Feeling merciful for them, and having what is beneficial to guide them to the
truth, he is stirred up to respond to his invitadon immediately.
Once he responds to his invitadon, Satan finds a field to tempt him. He
first invites him, as slyly as is the creeping of the ants, to seek authority and
majesty. Then, he invites him to be ostentadous and get adorned to the people
in his speech, clothes and appearance. The result is that the people turn to
exalt him, show respect and honour to him more than they show to kings and
rulers. That is because they see him willing to cure their ailments just out of
mercy and pity for them, and without asking him to do so. He becomes dearer
to them than their parents, children, and anyone else. They favor him with
themselves and their property, and become to him like servants to their
master. At that level, he gets comforted, and tastes the greatest worldly
pleasure one could ever taste during his life, with which he despises any
pleasure. He had previously left the endre world with its pleasures and
delights; and now he has fallen in one of its greatest pleasures. That is the
expected opportunity of Satan. He stretches his hand to his heart, and uses it
in the very way and manner he likes, under the claim of saving for him all that
maintains his pleasure.
The sign of this state is that if anyone else undertakes the mission of
guiding the people to the truth, and taking them out of darkness to the light
of faith, he would feel it difficult and heavy upon himself. That is because

The quarter of the destructives
664
Satan makes him imagine that it is he and not anyone else who should take the
lead of guidance. But if one is sincere to his purpose of guiding the people
and delivering them from the fire, and he finds such as suffices or at least
assists him in that, he would not feel it difficult on himself. But once this is
found in his heart, Satan avails himself of that opportunity to invite him to all
majors sins of heart and shameful deeds of organs, which leads to his
destruction: We seek refuge with Allah from that.
You may ask: "Then, when should one engage in advising and guiding the
people?" let me say that he should do so once he finds that he has no purpose
but to guide the people to the truth just for the Sake of Allah Almighty, in
such a way that if he finds anyone else to assist him or suffice him, he would
rejoice and not grieve with that. This means that he should have no covet of
their wealth and praise, and it is the same to him whether they would praise or
dispraise him. He should give no care to their dispraise since Allah Almighty
praises him, nor should he rejoice at their praise unless Allah Almighty praises
him.
He should look at them indifferently in the sense that he should neither
become arrogant over them, and rather see all of them better than him, due to
his ignorance of the conclusion of deeds, nor should he have covet of seeking
position and rank in their hearts. This means that he should not be
ostentadous, nor should he get adorned for them, to be sure, the real purpose
of the shepherd is not to get adorned for the cattle and sheep in so much as
to look after them, graze them, and protect them from the wolves and all
harmful animals, careless of the eye with which the catde and sheep might see
him. Unless one sees all the people whom he guides with the same eye a
shepherd sees the catde and sheep, he would not be safe from the evils of
engagement in reforming them, it is true that he might succeed to reform
them, but he would surely impair himself. In this way, he becomes like the
lamp that illuminates for the others and burns itself.
You may argue: "If the preachers are to leave preaching unless they attain
that high degree, the world would fall short of preaching, and the hearts
would go astray." In reply to that, let me say that the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Love for this world is the
head of every sin." (This narration is reported by Al-Baihaqi on the authority
of Al-Hassan). But had it not been for the fact that people love this world, the
world would have been destroyed, living would have become idle, and the
hearts and bodies would have been ruined. But the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” knew well that the love for this
world is destructive, and that telling that it is destructive does not remove it
from the hearts of the majority. But an exception is made of a very few,
whose leaving the world would not lead to its destruction. This is the reason
that lies behind his advice. So, the preachers would condnue to have love for
authority and majesty, and would not leave it because of the claim that
preaching for the purpose of seeking authority is unlawful.

■

1

’

-

T|

QUARTER OF DESTRUCTIVES.........................................................................................

3

THE THIRD QUARTER OF REVIVAL OF RELIGIOUS SCIENCES.......................................

3

BOOK ONE: EXPOSITION OF WONDERS OF HEART........................................................

3

INTRODUCTION....................................................................................................................

3

CHAPTER ONE: EXPOSITION OF MEANING OF NAFS (SOUL), RUH (SPIRIT),
QALB (HEART), AND AQL (MIND); AND THEIR RELATED SIGNIFICANCE....................

4

CHAPTER TWO: EXPOSITION OF ARMIES OF HEART......................................................

8

CHAPTER THREE: EXPOSITION OF SIMILITUDES OF HEART WITH ITS INTERNAL
ARMIES................................................................................................................................

10

CHAPTER FOUR: EXPOSITION OF SPECIAL PROPERTIES OF HEART OF MAN..........

13

CHAPTER FIVE: EXPOSITION OF QUALITIES AND SIMILITUDES OF HEART................

18

CHAPTER SIX: EXPOSITION OF SIMILITUDES OF HEART REGARDING SPECIAL
SCIENCES...........................................................................................................................

22

CHAPTER SEVEN: EXPOSITION OF CONDITIONS OF HEART REGARDING
DIVISIONS OF SCIENCES: INTELLECTUAL AND RELIGIOUS, AND PERTAINING
TO THIS WORLD AND THE HEREAFTER.........................................................................

28

CHAPTER EIGHT: EXPOSITION OF DIFFERENCE BETWEEN GENERAL INSPIRATION
AND LEARNING; AND DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SUFI WAY OF SEEKING THE
UNVEILING OF REALITY AND THE WAY OF SPECULATIVE PHILOSOPHERS............

32

CHAPTER NINE: EXPOSITION OF DIFFERENCE IN RANK BETWEEN BOTH
POSITIONS BY A TANGIBLE EXAMPLE............................................................................

35

CHAPTER TEN: EXPOSITION OF TESTIMONY OF DIVINE LAW TO VALIDITY
OF METHOD OF MYSTICS IN GAINING EXPERIENTIAL KNOWLEDGE, NOT THROUGH
INSTRUCTION NOR BY THE ORDINARY WAY.................................................................... 40
CHAPTER ELEVEN: EXPOSITION OF DOMINATION OF SATAN OVER HEART
THROUGH PROMPTING EVIL SUGGESTIONS; MEANING OF SUCH EVIL
SUGGESTIONS; AND MEANS OF OVERCOMING THEM.................................................... 46
CHAPTER TWELVE: EXPOSITION IN DETAIL OF WAYS BY WHICH SATAN
ENTERS HEART..................................................................................................................... 56
CHAPTER THIRTEEN: EXPOSITION OF THAT FOR WHICH MAN IS HELD ACCOUNTABLE
AND THAT FOR WHICH HE IS PARDONED IN FIELD OF EVIL SUGGESTIONS TO
HEARTS, THEIR DECISIONS, INVOLUNTARY THOUGHTS AND PURPOSES

71

CHAPTER FOURTEEN: EXPOSITION OF WHETHER OR NOT EVIL SUGGESTION COULD
BE IMAGINED TO BE ENTIRELY CUT OFF DURING DEVOTIONAL EXERCISES

665

76

666

CONTENTS

CHAPTER FIFTEEN: EXPOSITION OF HOW SWIFT HEARTS TURN, AND
ARE CLASSIFIED IN RESPECT TO CHANGE AND STABILITY..................................

79

BOOK TWO: SELF-DISCIPLINE AND IMPROVEMENT OF MORAL CHARACTER AND
REMEDY OF HEART DISEASES.....................................................................................

85

CHAPTER ONE: MERIT OF GOOD CHARACTER; AND DEMERIT OF BAD CHARACTER. 86
PROPHETIC NARRATIONS.................................................................................................

86

TRADITIONS AND SAYINGS...............................................................................................

90

CHAPTER TWO: EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE OF GOOD AND BAD CHARACTER.... 92
CHAPTER THREE: EXPOSITION OF CHANGEABILITY OF MANNERS BY WAY OF
DISCIPLINE.............................................................................................................

96

CHAPTER FOUR: EXPOSITION OF WAY OF ATTAINING GOOD CHARACTER

100

CHAPTER FIVE: EXPOSITION OF DETAILED WAY OF IMPROVING MORAL CHARACTER

105
CHAPTER SIX: EXPOSITION OF SIGNS BY WHICH HEART DISEASE IS KNOWN,
AND SIGNS BY WHICH RECOVERY IS KNOWN........................................................

108

CHAPTER SEVEN: EXPOSITION OF WAY BY WHICH MAN KNOWS HIS DEFECTS...... 111
CHAPTER EIGHT: PROOFS HANDED DOWN FOR INSIGHTFUL; AND EVIDENCES OF
RELIGIOUS LAW FOR THE FACT THAT WAY OF REMEDY OF HEART DISEASES LIES IN
ABANDONING DESIRES, AND HEART DISEASES LIE IN FOLLOWING DESIRES........ 113
CHAPTER NINE: EXPOSITION OF SIGNS OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER

120

CHAPTER TEN: EXPOSITION OF WAY TO DISCIPLINE KIDS FROM THEIR EARLY YEARS;
AND WAY TO IMPROVE THEIR MANNERS........................................................................ 125
CHAPTER ELEVEN: EXPOSITION OF CONDITIONS OF WILLPOWER AND
COMMENCEMENTS OF SELF-MORTIFICATION; AND NOVICE'S GRADUATION IN
FOLLOWING WAY OF SELF-DISCIPLINE........................................................................... 130
BOOK THREE: CURBING TWO APPETITES......................................................................... 138
CHAPTER ONE: VIRTUE OF HUNGER AND REJECTION OF SATIETY............................. 139
CHAPTER TWO: BENEFITS OF HUNGER AND EVILS OF SATIETY.................................. 144
CHAPTER THREE: EXERCISING TO CURB LUST OF STOMACH...................................... 152
OBLIGATIONS TO BE OBSERVED........................................................................................ 152
CHAPTER FOUR: DIFFERENCES CONCERNING IMPACT OF HUNGER; ITS VIRTUES;
AND HOW IT AFFECTS DIFFERENTLY CONDITIONS IN PEOPLE.................................. 163
CHAPTER FIVE: IMPACT OF AILMENT OF DISSIMULATION ON SUCH AS ABANDON
LUSTFUL APPETITES AND EAT LESS............................................................................... 167
CHAPTER SIX: SAYINGS CONCERNING LUST OF GENITAL............................................ 168
CHAPTER SEVEN: MARRIAGE AND ABSTINENCE FOR NOVICE..................................... 171
CHAPTER EIGHT: VIRTUE OF ONE WHO DEFIES LUST OF
GENITAL AND EYE............................................................................................................... 177
BOOK FOUR: EVIL OF TONGUE............................................................................................ 182

CONTENTS

667

CHAPTER ONE: EXPOSITION OF GREAT DANGER OF TONGUE AND VIRTUE
OF SILENCE...........................................................................................................

183

PROPHETIC TRADITIONS.......................................................................................

183

SAYINGS...................................................................................................................

186

CHAPTER TWO: DIFFERENT EVILS OF TONGUE................................................

188

THE FIRST EVIL: SPEAKING IN WHAT CONCERNS YOU NOT............................

188

THE SECOND EVIL: SURPLUS TALK.....................................................................
THE THIRD EVIL: ENGAGING IN FALSEHOOD.....................................................

192
194

THE FOURTH EVIL: DISPUTATION AND ARGUMENTATION...............................

195

THE FIFTH EVIL: DISPUTE......................................................................................

199

THE SIXTH EVIL: LOUD-MOUTHING......................................................................

201

THE SEVENTH EVIL: SHAMELESSNESS AND FOUL LANGUAGE.......................

202

THE EIGHTH EVIL: CURSING.................................................................................

205

THE NINTH EVIL: SINGING AND POETRY.............................................................

210

THE TENTH EVIL: JOKING.....................................................................................

211

THE ELEVENTH EVIL: RIDICULE AND MOCKERY................................................

217

THE TWELFTH EVIL: DISCLOSURE OF SECRET..................................................

218

THE THIRTEENTH EVIL: THE FALSE PROMISE....................................................

219

THE FOURTEENTH EVIL: TELLING LIES IN WORD AND OATH...........................

221

THE PROPHETIC NARRATIONS.............................................................................

221

THE TRADITIONS AND SAYINGS...........................................................................

225

EXPOSITION OF ALLOWABLE LIES.......................................................................

226

EXPOSITION OF AVOIDANCE OF TELLING LIES BY WAY OF IMPLICIT REFERENCES. 230
THE FIFTEENTH EVIL: BACKBITING............................................................................

233

EXPOSITION OF MEANING AND DEFINITION OF BACKBITING................................

237

EXPOSITION OF THE FACT THAT BACKBITING IS NOT EXCLUSIVE TO TONGUE

239

EXPOSITION OF MOTIVES OF BACKBITING...............................................................

241

EXPOSITION OF REMEDY THAT IMPEDES TONGUE FROM BACKBITING..............

244

EXPOSITION OF PROHIBITION OF BACKBITING WITH HEART................................

248

EXPOSITION OF EXCUSES THAT JUSTIFY BACKBITING..........................................

250

EXPOSITION OF EXPIATION TO BE MADE FOR BACKBITING..................................

253

THE SIXTEENTH EVIL: TALEBEARING........................................................................

255

EXPOSITION OF DEFINITION OF TALEBEARING AND THE WAY TO REPEL IT.....

257

THE SEVENTEENTH EVIL: THE SPEECH OF TWO-FACED.......................................

261

THE EIGHTEENTH EVIL: PRAISE.................................................................................

263

EXPOSITION OF DUTIES OF PRAISED........................................................................

266

THE NINETEENTH EVIL: HEEDLESSNESS OF TONGUE SLIPS................................

266

THE TWENTIETH EVIL: LAYMEN'S ASKING ABOUT ATTRIBUTES
AND SPEECH OF ALLAH.............................................................................................

268

668

CONTENTS

BOOK FIVE: CONDEMNATION OF ANGER, RANCOR AND ENVY..................................... 271
CHAPTER ONE: ANGER......................................................................................................... 272
EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF ANGER.................................................................. 272
EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE OF ANGER....................................................................... 276
EXPOSITION OF WHETHER OR NOT IT IS POSSIBLE TO REMOVE ANGER
THROUGH SELF-DISCIPLINE.............................................................................................. 280
EXPOSITION OF CAUSES OF ANGER................................................................................. 284
EXPOSITION OF TREATING ANGER AFTER BEING PROVOKED.................................... 285
EXPOSITION OF EXCELLENCE OF RESTRAINING ANGER.............................................. 289
EXPOSITION OF EXCELLENCE OF FORBEARANCE......................................................... 291
EXPOSITION OF THE EXTENT TO WHICH IT IS PERMISSIBLE TO SLAKE ONE'S
ANGER WITH SPEECH......................................................................................................... 297
CHAPTER TWO: MEANING AND CONSEQUENCES OF RANCOR; AND EXCELLENCE
OF FORGIVENESS AND KINDNESS.................................................................................. 300
VIRTUE OF FORGIVENESS AND KINDNESS...................................................................... 301
VIRTUE OF KINDNESS........................................................................................................... 307
CHAPTER THREE: CONDEMNATION OF ENVY; ITS REAL NATURE AND CAUSES;
ITS TREATMENT; AND THE EXTENT TO WHICH IT SHOULD BE REMOVED............... 310
EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF ENVY..................................................................... 310
EXPOSITION OF THE REAL NATURE OF ENVY, ITS RULING, DIVISIONS
AND LEVELS......................................................................................................................... 315

EXPOSITION OF CAUSES OF ENVY AND HARMLESS JEALOUSY............................ 321
EXPOSITION OF REASONS FOR CIRCULATION OF ENVY AMONG FELLOWS, PEERS,
MATCHES, BROTHERS AND COUSINS IN CONTRAST TO OTHERS....................... 325
EXPOSITION OF MEDICINE THAT REMOVES ENVY FROM HEART........................... 328
EXPOSITION OF THE EXTENT TO WHICH IT BECOMES INCUMBENT TO REMOVE
ENVY FROM HEART......................................................................................... 334
336
CHAPTER ONE: EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF WORLD..................................... 337
EXPOSITION OF ADMONITIONS PERTAINING TO CONDEMNATION OF WORLD........ 353
BOOK SIX: CONDEMNATION OF WORLD...........................................................................

CHAPTER TWO: EXPOSITION OF ATTRIBUTES OF WORLD THROUGH MANY OF ITS
EXAMPLES: CHAPTER THREE..........................................................................................

365

EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE AND ESSENCE OF WORLD.......................................... 365
CHAPTER FOUR: EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE OF THIS WORLD IN ITSELF; AND ITS
OCCUPATION THAT DIVERTED PEOPLE FROM THEMSELVES, THEIR CREATOR,
THEIR COMING AND DEPARTURE...............................................................................

.
373

BOOK SEVEN: CONDEMNATION OF NIGGARDLINESS AND GREED FOR WEALTH..... 383
CHAPTER ONE: EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF WEALTH AND REJECTION
OF LOVING IT

384

CONTENTS

--------------- ----------------- ------------------------------------------

669

CHAPTER TWO: EXPOSITION OF PRAISE AND CONDEMNATION OF WEALTH
SIMULTANEOUSLY..............................................................

388

CHAPTER THREE: EXPOSITION OF MERITS AND DEMERITS OF WEALTH................. 390
CHAPTER FOUR: EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF MISERLINESS AND COVET;
AND PRAISE OF CONTENTMENT.................................................................................... 392
CHAPTER FIVE: TREATMENT OF MISERLINESS AND COVET; AND MEDICINE BY
WHICH CONTENTMENT IS ACQUIRED............................................................................ 397
CHAPTER SIX: EXPOSITION OF EXCELLENCE OF BOUNTEOUSNESS........................ 401
CHAPTER SEVEN: STORIES ABOUT BOUNTEOUS.......................................................... 406
CHAPTER EIGHT: EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF NIGGARDLINESS................ 414
CHAPTER NINE: STORIES ABOUT NIGGARDS................................................................. 421
CHAPTER TEN: EXPOSITION OF ALTRUISM AND ITS EXCELLENCE............................ 422
CHAPTER ELEVEN: EXPOSITION OF DEFINITION AND REAL NATURE OF
BOUNTEOUSNESS AND NIGGARDLINESS...................................................................... 425
CHAPTER TWELVE: EXPOSITION OF TREATMENT OF NIGGARDLINESS.................... 429
CHAPTER THIRTEEN: EXPOSITION OF MAN'S DUTIES REGARDING HIS WEALTH..... 432
CHAPTER FOURTEEN: CONDEMNATION OF RICHNESS AND COMMENDATION
OF POVERTY...............................................................................................................

433

BOOK EIGHT: CONDEMNATION OF MAJESTY AND SHOWING OFF.......................

451

PART ONE: CONDEMNATION OF MAJESTY...............................................................

452

CHAPTER ONE: EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF FAME AND REPUTATION....... 452
CHAPTER TWO: EXPOSITION OF EXCELLENCE OF ANONYMITY....

454

CHAPTER THREE: EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF MAJESTY

456

CHAPTER FOUR: EXPOSITION OF MEANING AND REAL NATURE OF MAJESTY......... 457
CHAPTER FIVE: EXPOSITION OF REASON WHY MAJESTY IS DEARER THAN
WEALTH; AND DIFFICULTY OF REMOVING IT FROM HEARTS EXCEPT BY
SELF-MORTIFICATION...................................................................................................... 458
CHAPTER SIX: EXPOSITION OF THE FACT THAT MAJESTY GIVES ILLUSORY
AND NOT REAL PERFECTION.......................................................................................... 463
CHAPTER SEVEN: EXPOSITION OF THE EXTENT TO WHICH MAJESTY AND
WEALTH MIGHT BE PRAISED OR DISPRAISED.............................................................

467

CHAPTER EIGHT: EXPOSITION OF CAUSES OF LOVE FOR PRAISE AND DISLIKE
FOR DISPRAISE.................................................................................................................

468

CHAPTER NINE: EXPOSITION OF REMEDY OF LOVING MAJESTY..............................

470

CHAPTER TEN: EXPOSITION OF REMEDY OF LOVE FOR PRAISE AND DISLIKE
FOR DISPRAISE................................................................................................................

472

CHAPTER ELEVEN: EXPOSITION OF REMEDY OF DISLIKING DISPRAISE..................

475

CHAPTER TWELVE: EXPOSITION OF DIFFERENT CASES OF PEOPLE REGARDING
PRAISE AND DISPRAISE...................................................................................................

476

670

CONTENTS

PART TWO: CONDEMNATION OF SHOWING OFF...................................................

479

CHAPTER ONE: EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF SHOWING OFF..............

479

CHAPTER TWO: EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE OF SHOWING OFF..................

486

CHAPTER THREE: EXPOSITION OF LEVELS OF SHOWING OFF...........................

492

THE FIRST PILLAR: THE PURPOSE OF SHOWING OFF..........................................

492

THE SECOND PILLAR: THE OBJECT OF SHOWING OFF........................................

493

THE THIRD PILLAR: THAT FOR WHICH ONE MAKES SHOW (OF DEEDS)...........

496

CHAPTER FOUR: EXPOSITION OF CONCEALED SHOWING OFF THAT IS MORE
HIDDEN THAN CREEPING OF ANTS.......................................................................

498

CHAPTER FIVE: EXPOSITION OF THE EXTENT TO WHICH SHOWING OFF
FRUSTRATES WORK................................................................................................

501

CHAPTER SIX: EXPOSITION OF MEDICINE AND REMEDY OF SHOWING OFF....

505

THE FIRST STATION IS TO REMOVE ITS ROOTS AND ORIGINS..........................

505

THE SECOND IS TO AVERT WHAT OCCURS OF IT.................................................

509

CHAPTER SEVEN: EXPOSITION OF CONCESSION TO DISCLOSE ACTS
OF WORSHIP..............................................................................................................

516

THE FIRST DIVISION: TO DISCLOSE THE DEED ITSELF.........................................

517

'i

THE SECOND DIVISION IS TO TALK ABOUT HIS DEED AFTER FINISHING FROM IT ... 518
CHAPTER EIGHT: EXPOSITION OF CONCESSION TO CONCEAL SINS......................... 520
CHAPTER NINE: EXPOSITION OF LEAVING SOME ACTS OF WORSHIP FOR FEAR
OF SHOWING OFF AND EVILS............................................................................................ 524
THE FIRST DIVISION.............................................................................................................. 524
THE SECOND DIVISION......................................................................................................... 526
CHAPTER TEN: EXPOSITION OF WHAT IS VALID FOR A SERVANT TO DO TO
PRACTICE HIS ACTS OF WORSHIP BECAUSE OF PEOPLE'S SEEING HIM............... 535

(

CHAPTER ELEVEN: EXPOSITION OF WHAT IS BINDING UPON A NOVICE TO
DO BEFORE AND AFTER AN ACT OF WORSHIP............................................................. 538
BOOK NINE: CONDEMNATION OF ARROGANCE AND VANITY........................................ 544
PART ONE: CONDEMNATION OF ARROGANCE................................................................ 545
CHAPTER ONE: EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF ARROGANCE............................ 545
CHAPTER TWO: EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION OF BOASTING................................ 549

i

CHAPTER THREE: EXPOSITION OF EXCELLENCE OF HUMBLENESS.......................... 551
CHAPTER FOUR: EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE AND EVIL OF ARROGANCE........... 556
CHAPTER FIVE: EXPOSITION OF HIM TO WHOM ONE BEHAVES ARROGANTLY; AND
THE LEVELS OF ARROGANCE............................................................................................ 559
CHAPTER SIX: EXPOSITION OF CONSTITUENTS OF ARROGANCE............................... 564
CHAPTER SEVEN: EXPOSITION OF MOTIVES OF ARROGANCE..................................... 573
CHAPTER EIGHT: EXPOSITION OF GOOD MANNERS OF HUMBLE; AND THE TRACES
OF BOTH HUMBLENESS AND ARROGANCE..................................................................... 574

|

-------------- ---------------------------------------

671

CHAPTER NINE: EXPOSITION OF REMEDY OF ARROGANCE

580

THE FIRST STATION....................................................................

580

THE SECOND STATION...............................................................

585

CONTENTS

CHAPTER TEN: EXPOSITION OF SELF-DISCIPLINE TO ACQUIRE THE CHARACTER OF
HUMBLENESS: AND PRAISEWORTHY AND BLAMEWORTHY EXTENT OF
HUMBLENESS...................................................................................................................... 597
PART TWO: CONDEMNATION OF VANITY......................................................................... 598
CHAPTER ONE: EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION AND EVILS OF VANITY................. 598
CHAPTER TWO: EXPOSITION OF EVILS OF VANITY........................................................ 600
CHAPTER THREE: EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE AND DEFINITION OF VANITY AND
ANTICIPATION OF SPECIAL TREATMENT....................................................................... 601
CHAPTER FOUR: EXPOSITION OF REMEDY OF VANITY................................................. 602
CHAPTER FIVE: EXPOSITION OF DIVISIONS OF THINGS OF VANITY AND THE
REMEDY OF EACH IN DETAIL........................................................................................... 606
BOOK TEN: CONDEMNATION OF CONCEIT...............................................................

614

CHAPTER ONE: EXPOSITION OF CONDEMNATION, REAL NATURE AND
EXAMPLES OF CONCEIT.............................................................................................

615

THE FIRST EXAMPLE: THE CONCEIT OF THE DISBELIEVERS.................................

616

THE SECOND EXAMPLE: THE CONCEIT OF THE DISOBEDIENT AMONG
THE BELIEVERS..........................................................................................................

625

CHAPTER TWO: EXPOSITION OF SORTS OF CONCEITED; AND DIVISIONS INTO
WHICH EACH IS DIVIDED...........................................................................................

631

THE FIRST CLASS: MEN OF KNOWLEDGE.................................................................

631

THE SECOND CLASS: MASTERS OF WORSHIP AND WORK....................................

649

THE THIRD CLASS: SUFIS............................................................................................

654

THE FOURTH CLASS: OWNERS OF WEALTH............................................................

658

CONTENTS

665

