Imam Abu Hamed AL-GHAZALI
(450-505 H. = 1058-1111 A.D.)

ram
c?

sciences

(IHYA' ULUM AD-DIN)

Translated by
Mohammad Mahdi al-Sharif

Volume IV
The quarter of the saviors

Dap Al-Xotob AHlmiyaH
I
1971 '-0^-\+ZuL.\
Est. by Mohammad All Baydoun 1971 Beirut - Lebanon
Stabile par Mohamad Ali Baydoun 1971 Beyrouth - Liban

/7ftp^v\\Nv.aS4niyah.com

info@al-ilmiyah.com

sales @al-i!miyah.com

baydoun@al-ilmiyah.com

*

v

Title

REVIVAL

x

OF RELIGION'S SCIENCES
(IHYA' ULUM AD-DIN)
fjlii

x

*
V

xg

£
>::
x

4
-?

Classification: Jurisprudence and sufism
Author

: Imam Abu Hamed AL-GHAZALI

Translator

• Mohammad Mahdi al-Sharif

Publisher

: Dar Al-Kotob Al-llmiyah

Pages

: 2784 (4 volumes)

Size

:17* 24

Year

: 2011

Printed in

: Lebanon

Edition

: 1*

car Ai-Koton
Al-ilmiyah

Est. by Mohamad Ali Baydoun
1971 Beirut - Lebanon
gj

3

Aramoun,

Exclusive rights by © Dar Al-Kotob Al-llmiyah
Beirut-Lebanon No part of this publication may be
translated,reproduced,distributed in any form or by any
means,or stored in a data base or retrieval system,without
the prior written permission of the publisher.

al-Quebbah,

Dar Al-Kotob Al-ilmiyah Bldg.
Tel : +961 5 804 810/11/12
Fax:
+961 5 804813
P.O.Box: 11-9424 Beirut-Lebanon.
R/yad al-Soloh Beirut 1107 2290

3

Tous droits exdusivement reserves a© Dar AHCotob Al-llmiyah i r
Beyrouth-Uban Toute representation,edition,traduction ou reproduction ? £
meme partielle,par tous procedes, en tous paysjaite sans autorisation 2 "
prealabJe signee par I'editeur est iflidte et exposerait le contievenant a ~ des poursuites judioaires
<n
z

<xdx]l V.Tvll jlj

a

+\11 0 A-IA1*/11/1Y

+w\ o A-tAir
11*YYY\-

t ■>“«* II jIjJ
U**

11-UYl:
w->II

cjI^JI

ijUl jl

—

ioSUI jji,.
jl

jl
.Lkk

5

o
o
o
o
cn

C-J

•Z

u>

-

cn

jl pJo

jl 1^. jl Suis
iiil^VI

®

OUI^I Jc’

jl

IN THE NAME OF ALLAH, MOST GRACIOUS, MOST MERCIFUL
REVIVAL OF RELIGIOUS SCIENCES
QUARTER OF SAVIORS
THE FOURTH QUARTER OF REVIVAL OF RELIGIOUS SCIENCES

It is the first book of the quarter of saviors
In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Praise be to Allah with whose praise every book is prefaced; with Whose
invocation every discourse is commenced; by whose praise the people of felicity
shall abide with ease in the abode of recompense; and by Whose Name the
wretched are consoled, even if the bar is set down before them, and they are
separated from the bliss by a portal wall, inside which there is Divine Mercy,
while outside there is Divine Chastisement.
We turn unto Him in repentance, are convinced that He is master of all
masters and originator of all causes. We look to Him in anticipation, are certain
of His being the King, compassionate, forgiving and ready to accept repentance.
We blend dread with hope, and have no doubt that while forgiving of
transgression and receptive to repentance He is stern in inflicting punishment.
We pray for His prophet Muhammad "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" and for his family and companions, a prayer that will rescue us from the
terror of the place whence one will look down on the day of resurrection and will
secure for us nearness to and safe refuge with Allah.
Coming to the point: Repentance from sin, by recourse to the Concealer of
defects and Knower of secrets is the starting point for the followers of the
spiritual path, the capital of the successful, the first step of the aspirants, key to
the straightening of the bent, the prelude of the selection and election for those
who are brought close to Allah, and for our father Adam "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" and all the other prophets. How appropriate it is for children
to emulate their fathers and ancestors. There is no wonder if a son of Adam sins
and does wrong, a disposition recognizable as a hereditary trait, For whoever
resembles his father (even in sin) is not wrongful. However, if the father is
restored after failing and is revitalized after aging, let the emulation of him be at
both poles, of the negative and the positive. Adam has been smitten with
remorse, filled with repentance over his past deeds. Anyone who follows him as a
model of sinning (only), and not in repentance, has stumbled.
Devotion to pure goodness is a trait of the angels close to Allah. Devotion to
uncorrected evil is the nature of devils. But, return to good after stumbling in evil
is inevitable in human beings. The devotee of absolute good is an angel intimate
of the King (who is) Judge. The devotee of evil only is a devil. But he who
rectifies evil by returning to good, is, indeed, a human being. So, in man's nature

3

£

The quarter of the saviors
4
there is a duality of disposition, two traits joining in him.
Every human being verifies his relationship with the Angel, Adam or the
Devil. The repentant, by keeping to the definition of Man, truly proves that he is
related to Adam, whilst he who persists in iniquity proves that he is related to the
Devil. Confirmation of relationship to the Angels, however, by dedication
exclusively to the good, is beyond the realm of possibility. For evil is firmly
kneaded with good in the nature of man, and it cannot be refined except by one
of die two fires: fire of repentance, or fire of Hell. Burning in fire is necessary to
purify the human essence from the Satanic pollution. It is up to you now to
choose the easier fire, and to be prompt in embarking on the lesser discomfort
before die choice is withdrawn to give way to the inevitability of either Paradise
or Hell.
Since repentance occupies such a place in religion, it must be put first in the
Quarter of saviors with explanation of its true nature, requisites, motivation,
manifestation and benefit, the difficulties barring it and the remedies facilitating
it. This wall become clear by discussing four pillars.
The first pillar: on the nature of repentance:
Explication of its definition and true character; that it is obligatory, at
once, on all men, under all conditions and that, if properly carried through, is
accepted.
The second pillar: On the context of repentance (injustice):
Explication of sin's, their division into trivial and major sins, some toward
one's fellow man others toward Allah; how higher and lower states (in the
hereafter) are distributed according to good and evil deeds (in this life); the
circumstances that turn the trivial into major sins.
The third pillar: On the requisites and perseverance of repentance. How past
iniquities may be corrected, and sins atoned; the categories of men according to
their perseverance in repentance.
The fourth pillar: On the stimulus of repentance and the way of treatment for
the dissolution of the knot of persistence.
The goal of exposition will be attained through these four pillars by Allah's will.

£

FIRST PILLAR
ON NATURE OF REPENTANCE; EXPLICATION OF REPENTANCE
AND ITS DEFINITION

*
>
V

i
V
*
*
*
*
*

3
>:
£

£
K

t
r

&

l
£
k

tc

;

It should be known to you that repentance is a concept that consists of three
successive and joined elements: Knowledge, state (of regret) and action.
Knowledge is first, state second and action third. The first necessitates the
second, and the second necessitates the third, in accordance with the continuity
of the divine way in kingdom of visibles and dominion of invisibles.
As for knowledge, it is the realization of the magnitude of the harm caused by
sins and its being a barrier between man and the Beloved. If he realizes this wath
utter and decisive certainty, overwhelming his heart, this realization will stir
heartache on account of losing the Beloved. For whenever the heart perceives the
withdrawal of the Beloved, it is pained. If the withdrawal is through man s own
action, he is regretful of that alienating behaviour. Such grief of the heart over

i

i

!

!

5
Book one: Repentance -----------------------------behaviour alienating the Beloved is called Regret.
When this anguish becomes overpowering, another inner state is induced,
termed volition and aspiration towards (new) behaviour connected with the
present, the past, and the future. Its connection with the present consists of the
repudiation of the sin with which he was entwined. For the future, it involves the
determination to abandon forever the sin which causes alienation from the
Beloved. With regard to the past, it involves correction of what was omitted by
(doing) good and performing (the omitted act), if it is susceptible to be corrected
and compensated.
Thus, knowledge is prerequisite and is the starting point of these blessings.
By this knowledge, I mean faith, and certitude. To have faith is to accept as
true the fact that Sins are a deadly poison. Certitude is to confirm the
acceptance of this truth, and to remove all doubt about it leading to its
mastery over the heart, so that whenever the illumination of this Faith shines
upon the heart it produces the fire of Regret. It, in turn, will bring forth
anguish as the heart perceives, through this illumination of the light of the
faith, that it has become veiled from its Beloved. As one who was in darkness
and on the verge of ruin, and, with the dispersal of clouds and the rending of
a veil, the illumination of the sun shone and radiated upon him, and he saw
his Beloved. Then the flames of love burn in his heart and these flames flare
up in his will to rise to correct his ways.
Knowledge, Regret and intent connected with abandonment (of sin) in the
present and future, and correction of the (sin perpetrated in the) past are three
successive concepts within this process. Repentance (Tawbah) consists of them
all. But repentance, more often, is used for the concept of Regret alone, as if
making knowledge a precondition, and abandonment a result and later
consequence. It is in this sense that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” said: "Regret is Repentance." (Ibn Majah, Ibn Hibban
and Al-FIakim on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud; and Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim
on the authority of Anas). That is because Regret is hardly void of knowledge
which necessitates and evokes it, and of determination which follows it. Regret
is surrounded by both ends, i.e. its result and its cause.
In this sense, it is said about Repentance that it is the melting of the entrails as
a result of previous offense for this exposes to sheer agony. It is therefore said:
"It is a fire raging in the heart, a fissure within the liver that does not recover."
With respect to the meaning of Abandonment as an element of Repentance, it is
said: "It is to take off the garment of alienation and put on the garment of
fidelity." Sahl Ibn 'Abdullah At-Tastari said: "Repentance is the change from
reprehensible acts to commendable acts. This can be accomplished only in
solitude and silence, and eating from what is lawful." He seems to have pointed
to the third element of Repentance.
The sayings about Repentance are innumerable. Yet, if you have understood
these three aspects in their junction and sequence, you will know that all that has
been said regarding it falls short of encompassing all its aspects. The search for
the knowledge of the true essence is more important than the pursuit of mere
verbalizations.

6

The quarter of the saviors
Explication Of Obligation And Excellence Of Repentance

*

V

£

5
V

2
:•
V.

3
£

a
a
>£

£

"S

It should be known that obligation of repentance is evident in the Qur’an and
the Prophetic Tradition, and it is manifest in the light of discernment to him
whose discernment has developed and whose heart Allah has laid open to the
light of faith, so that he is capable of advancing in this light amidst the murk of
ignorance, without need of a guide in every step.
A follower of the way (to the hereafter) may be blind, and must have a guide
to direct his steps; or his vision may be good enough, and he will be guided to the
beginning of the way whence he will guide himself. In the way of religion, men
are similarly divided. There is the limited who are unable to transcend blind
imitation of past authority, and require, at each step, a text from Allah s book or
the tradition of his prophet “peace be upon him” and in the absence of such a
passage he may become perplexed, and, though he lives long and be most
diligent, such a man's progress may be limited, and his steps failing. Another is
the happy man whose heart Allah has opened to an acceptance of Islam, and who
is illumined by Allah. He will respond to the slightest indication to follow a
difficult path and overcome tiresome obstacles. The light of the Qur'an and the
faith will glow in his heart, and, due to the intensity of his inner illumination, the
slightest explanation will suffice him. It is as if his oil would shine even if no fire
touched it; and if the fire touched it then it would be light upon light. Allah
guides to his light whom he will. Such a man has no need for a traditional text at
every turn.
A person like that, if he desires to understand the obligation of repentance,
examines, through the light of discernment, what is the nature of repentance,
then he scrutinizes what is the meaning of Obligation, then he combines these,
and there will be no doubt as to his perseverance therein: That is, he knows that
the meaning of the obligatory is that which is obligatory for attainment of eternal
bliss and deliverance from everlasting damnation. For unless 'happiness and
misery are dependent on some action or its Omission, describing the act as being
obligatory would be meaningless. The statement, 'it became obligatory by being
given obligation (in some impersonal way)', is mere verbiage. For, in the case of
an act where we have no purpose, near or distant, in doing it or leaving it undone
and so has no meaning in busying ourselves with it, whether or not someone else
made it obligatory for us.
If man understands the concept of obligation (of repentance), that it is the
means to eternal bliss; that there is no bliss in the Hereafter except in the meeting
with Allah Almighty; that everyone barred therefrom is no doubt suffering,
feeling separated from the object of his desire, and seared by the flame of
separation and hellfire; that what keeps him away from meeting Allah is following
the desires and lusts and fondness for this ephemeral world and the pursuit of
affection for something which he inevitably must leave; that nothing can bring
near the presence of Allah except the severance of his heart's attachment to the
vanity of this life, complete responsiveness to Allah, in search of intimacy with
Him by constandy remembering Him and by love for Him, in the knowledge of
His Majesty and Beauty, to the extent of man's capability; and that the

.

!
i

i

7
Book one: Repentance
transgressions which constitute turning from Allah and following the delights of
the devils, those enemies of Allah that keep one away from His presence, are the
cause of man's being shut off, kept out from (the presence) of Allah; then there is
no doubt that renunciation of the path leading away (from Allah) is obligatory in
order to achieve closeness to Him.
Renunciation, however, is achieved by Knowledge, Regret, and
Determination. As long as man knows not that sins are the causes for the
remoteness of the Beloved, he will neither, regret nor grieve over his traveling on
the path of withdrawal. As long as he has not grieved, he will not turn back, given
that retreat is abandonment and determination. No doubt, these three elements
are necessary in reaching the Beloved. Such is then Faith that derives from the
light of perception.
As for the (ordinary) man who is not qualified for such a station, whose
climax transcends the bounds of most people, he has ample scope, through the
blind imitation of convention and example, to attain salvation from damnation.
Let him take heed of the statements of Allah Almighty, His prophet “peace be
upon him” and the righteous predecessors.
Allah says: " And O you Believers! turn you all together towards Allah, that
you may attain Bliss." (An-Nur 31)

4©

^

jj Ir£3 ^

He further says: "O you who believe! Turn to Allah with sincere repentance:
in the hope that your Lord will remove from you your ills and admit you to
Gardens beneath which Rivers flow." (At-Tahrim 8)

^

^3till

ol

Is**

4 Qjffi

$ jj l^

o*

The meaning of 'sincere' in the verse is to be sincere to Allah, free of
blemish. The word is derived from 'sincere advice'. The excellence of
repentance is stated by Allah in His saying: " For Allah loves those who turn
to Him constandy and He loves those who keep themselves pure and clean."
(Al-Baqarah 222)

4©

vis o^jSJTv^iT oj >

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "The
repentant is dear to Allah, and he who repents of sin is as the one who has no
sin." (Ibn Majah on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud). The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” also said: "Allah is happier with the
repentance of His faithful servant than the man who is accompanied by his camel
carrying his provisions, and when he came to an arid desert, he laid down his
head and napped. He awoke and his camel has gone. He searched for it until the
heat and thirst overcame him. He said: "I will return whence I started and sleep
until I die." He proceeded to place his head upon his arm so as to die. Then, he
awoke, and lo, his camel stood before him, provisions intact. Allah's joy at the
repentance of the faithful servant is more intense than that of the man on
account of (the return of) his camel." (Muslim on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud

>
5>

8
:>
>
>

!>
*
*
*
*
>

*
>'
>

£
>.
£

*
*;j

The quarter of the saviors

and Anas). According to another version, he said, out of his great joy and desire
of thanking Allah: "I am your lord and you are my servant."
It is narrated on die authority of Al-Hassan Al-Basri that he said: When Allah
forgave Adam, die angels congratulated him. Gabriel and Michael descended to
him and said: "O Adam, may you delight in Allah's forgiveness!" Adam peace be
upon him” replied: " O Gabriel, if a question remains after this pardon, what is
my standing?" Allah, then, revealed to him: " O Adam, you have bequeathed your
descendants toil and hardship but also repentance. Whoever of them shall call
upon Me, I shall respond to him as I did to you. Whoever shall seek pardon, I
shall not withhold it from him, for I am nigh and responsive! O Adam, I shall
gather up the repentants from their graves happy and laughing, with their
supplication answered."
There are innumerable traditions on the subject, and there is within the
community a general consensus on its obligation. For its meaning is the
recognition that sins and iniquities are destructive and remove Man from Allah.
This sense is part and parcel of the obligation of Faith. At times, however,
disregard of it may occur. Knowledge means the elimination of this disregard.
There is no doubt of the obligatory nature of repentance. Among the various
aspects of repentance are the abandonment of iniquities in the present; resolve to
abstain in the future; and correction of previous shortcomings. Of the obligation
of these, there is no doubt. As for regret and sadness of past offenses, surely this
is obligatory. It is the very spirit of repentance which includes full rectification.
How could this not be obligatory? Nay, it is a sort of pain one suffers following
the realization of how much of lifetime has passed and was wasted in the wrath
of Allah.
You may ask: "Heart anguish is a necessary state about which one has no
choice. How then can it be classified as an obligation?" in reply to that, it should
be known that such anguish is caused by the certain knowledge of having missed
the Beloved. Man has a path by which to grasp its cause. In this
sense, knowledge can be classified as obligatory. It cannot, however, be
understood as a self-induced creation of man, for this would be absurd. Rather,
Knowledge, Regret, Action, Volition, Capacity and the carrier are all creations
and deeds of Allah. "Allah has created you and (all) that you do." (As-Saffat 96)

m

1

This is what men of insight consider true, and all else is wrong.
You may also ask: "Does man, then, have no choice in action and
abandonment?" The answer is in the affirmative. Yet this does not contradict our
previous statement that everything stems from Allah's creation. So, also, does
choice. Man is compelled in that choice which is his. Indeed when Allah creates
the right hand, delicious food and the appetite for food in the stomach, He also
creates the innate awareness that this food would appease the craving. He also
produces the opposing notions: Does or does not this food, while appeasing the
craving, also contain harm and, perhaps, there is some objection to it, making its
consumption objectionable. Further, He creates the knowledge that there is no
obstacle. When these factors converge, there emerges a resolve motivating

:
;
■

9
Book one: Repentance
consumption. The emergence of the resolve, then, after vacillating between
contradictory notions, and following on the intense appedte for the food, is
called choice. It is inevitable that it should set in upon the convergence of all
these conditions. Then, as resolve emerges through Allah's creation of these
conditions, the right hand duly rises towards the food. For after volition and
ability are attained, the following of the act is necessary so that the movement is
produced. Thus, the movement is by Allah's creation, following the attainment of
ability and the emergence of the resolve, both also of Allah's creation. The
emergence of volition follows real appetite and the recognition that there are no
objections, again by Allah's creation. But some of these creations follow others in
an order habitual in Allah's creation: "you shall not find for the way of Allah
aught of change." (Al-Ahzab 62; Al-Fath 23)
Allah does not create the movement of the hand in orderly writing so long as
He has not created in the hand the quality of capacity, life and emerging will, nor
does He create a firm resolve as long as He has not brought forth desire and
inclination in the soul. This inclination is not fully induced until there is
knowledge that it suits the soul either immediately or ultimately. Knowledge, also,
comes about only by other elements going back to movement, will and
knowledge. Knowledge and natural disposition, then, always entail firm resolve.
Movement always follows power and resolve. Such is the order of each action.
All of it derives from divine origination.
Some of His creatures are preconditions of others and, therefore, some will
have to precede others, e.g., will appears only after knowledge, which comes only
with life, which emerges only after the creation of the body. The creation of the
body is, therefore, requisite for the incidence of life but not in the sense that life
is generated from the body. Likewise, the creation of life is a condition for the
creation of knowledge, but not in the sense that knowledge is born of life. Yet,
there is no ready receptacle for knowledge except it be alive. The creation of
knowledge is then a requisite for the emerging resolve but not in the sense that
knowledge engenders resolve. But only a live and knowing body is receptive of a
state of volition.
Nothing exists except that which is possible, and possibility is an ordained
order which does not tolerate change, for such would be an absurdity. As soon as
the precondition of a quality exists, the carrier endowed with it is created to
receive the quality. This quality, then, is attained through divine grace and eternal
power, once the disposition has set in. Inasmuch as the disposition, on account
of the preconditions, has (preordained) order, the flow, by Allah's directives, of
events has a set order, and Man, then, is the arena of these divine preordained
successive events. These events are regulated by divine decree, which is as the
twinkling of an eye, in a universal and unchangeable order. Their manifestation is
so predestined in detail that man cannot transcend them. This is referred to by
Allah's statement: "We have created all things according to a fixed decree." (AlQamar 49)

■

1

>
N

5s

The quarter of the saviors

10

>

5S

5s

*
>
*
*
55*

*

Concerning the absolute and eternal decree He says: " And Our Command is
but a single (Act), like the twinkling of an eye." (Al-Qamar 50)

4

>

Men are subject to the flow of fate and divine decree. Part of destiny is the
creation of the movement in the hand of the writer after the creation of a special
quality in the hand which quality is termed capacity. This follows the introduction
of a strong and definite inclination, called Intent, in man's soul. This succeeds
knowledge of the object of his inclination, which is called Awareness and
Perception.
When, from the hidden reaches of the invisible dominion, these four
elements appear upon the body of a man, who is subject to the compulsion of
fate, the people of the visible world, barred as they are from the invisible and
sublime dominion, come and say: "O man, you who have moved, aimed and
written." But proclaimed from behind the veil of the transcendental and the
whirlwind of majesty, it is announced: "when you have aimed it is not you that
has aimed but Allah." (Al-Anfal 17)

>
*

5*

>S
*
*
5-

*

*
v

ji
■r

J

5
=?

“

When you have killed, it is not you that have done it But "fight them, Allah
chastises them at your hands."
The minds of those sitting in the middle of the sensible world are confused.
Some call it mere predestination (jabr Mahd), others pure indeterminism (Ikhtira’
Sirj). Yet others mediate and tend towards the theory of acquisition (Kasb). If the
gates of heaven were opened to them and they looked into the transcendental
world, it would become apparent to them that each one is right in a sense, and
yet all share in failure, and not one of them had fathomed the matter in all its
aspects. Complete perception of it is attained by illumination through an aperture
reaching into the invisible world. Allah knows the hidden world and the manifest.
He reveals this hidden realm only to such a messenger with whom He is wellpleased. The manifest may be perceived by one who has not come within the
scope of (His) satisfaction. To him, who sets into motion the chain of causes and
results, and knows the manner of its sequence and the nature of its connection to
the primal cause, the secret of destiny is disclosed, and he acquires certainty that
there is no creator and originator barring Allah.
If you say: "As you have concluded that each of these respective advocates of
predestination, free will and acquisition is correct, to some degree, but also falls
short of truth, are you not positing a contradiction? How can such a situation be
understood? Is it possible to explain this through a parable?" In reply to that, it
should be known to you that its example is like a group of blind men who heard
that a strange animal, called an elephant, had been brought to the town but none
of them had seen its shape nor had they heard its name. They said: "We must
inspect and know it by touch of which we are capable." So, they sought it out,
and when they found it they groped about it One of them grasped its leg,

11
Book one: Repentance
another its tusk and the third its ear. Then they said: "Now we came to know it."
When they departed, the other blind men questioned them but the three differed
in their answers. The one who felt the leg said: "The elephant is similar to a
coarse cylinder outside although it appears to be softer than that." The one who
had felt the tusk said: "It is not as he says. It is solid without any softness on it. It
is smooth, not coarse. It is not at all stiff but rather it resembles a column." The
third man, who had grasped the ear, said: "By my life, it is soft and somewhat
coarse. One of them is right but it is not like a column or a cylinder. It is rather,
like broad, thick hide." Now, each of these presented a true aspect when he
related what he had gained from experiencing the elephant. None of them had
strayed from the true description of the elephant. Yet, together, they fell short of
fathoming the true appearance of the elephant. Ponder this parable and learn
from it. It is the pattern of most human controversies. If these words touch the
sciences of Disclosure (Mukashafah) and provoke ripples therein, this was not
our intention. Let us, then, return to our present concern, i.e., the fact that
repentance with its three elements: Knowledge, Regret and Renunciation is
obligatory. Regret comes within the scope of obligation as this occurs in all of
Allah's actions that are interposed between man's knowledge and his will and
power. That which answers this description is included in the term 'obligation.
Explication That Promptness Is (Essential In Fulfilling) Obligation
Of Repentance
There is no doubt that promptness is (essential in fulfilling) this obligation,
since perception of sins' destructive nature is out of faith, which is immediately
obligatory. Its obligation is profoundly grasped by him whom this keeps from
reprehensible action. Indeed this perception is not of the Disclosure
(Mukashafah) sciences which are independent of action. Rather, it is of the
sciences of practical religion. Every (item of) knowledge that is intended to be a
stimulus to action has not been fully perceived as long as it has not become such
a stimulus. The knowledge of sins' harm was intended to be a stimulus to
renouncing them. He, then, who has not abandoned sin is failing in this part of
faith. Such is the intent of the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”: "The adulterer does not commit adultery at the
time of fornication while he is a believer." (both sheikhs on the authority of Abu
Hurairah).
His intent is not the denial of the faith which pertains to the Mukashafah
sciences, such as knowledge of Allah, His unity, His attributes, His scriptures and
Apostles. Indeed, adultery and sin do not preclude that. Rather, he thereby means
denial of the belief that adultery alienates (one) from Allah and leads to
abomination. It is similar to the case in which a physician says: "This is deadly
poison, do not take it." If the patient then takes it, it can be said (that) he took it
as a non-believer, not in the sense that he lacks belief in the existence of the
physician or in his being a physician, nor due to the patient's distrust of the
physician. Rather, what is meant is that the patient distrusts the physician's
statement that the compound is a lethal toxin. Indeed, he who knows (the nature
of) the toxin will not take it at all.

!
*
*
5-

:>

:>
*
>
*

>
>.
>
>
-J
>
r-

>

9*

J,

2
“

■

=

12

The quarter of the saviors

The sinner, of necessity, lacks in faith. Faith is not one variety but rather over
seven ty the highest point of which is to bear testimony that there is only one
God, and the lowest point of which is to remove harm from the road. It is similar
to the statement that man is not one creature but rather over seventy the highest
of which is die heart and spirit, and the lowest is keeping harm from the outer
skin so that die mustache will be shaven, the nails cut and the skin free of scum
so that he is set apart from die beasts soiled by their detestable dung, with their
long claws and hooves. This is a proper simile.
Faith is similar to man. The loss of the affirmadon of (God's) unity produces
total futility like the loss of die spirit. He who has nothing save the affirmation of
Allah's unity and of (Muhammad's) mission is like a man whose limbs are cut off,
whose eyes have gouged out, and who has lost all his organs, both internal and
external, except the spiritual element. Just as he, who is in this condition, is close
to deadi, the weak and solitary spirit, bereft of the limbs which support it and
give it strength, abandoning him, so he, who is deficient in works, has naught
save die root of faith is near to having the (whole) tree of his faidi uprooted
when, preceding the approach and arrival of the Angel of Death, the tempest
which dislocates faith strikes the tree.
Any faith that is not firmly rooted in certitude nor branched out in action will
not withstand the stormy terror of the Angel of Death, and may be in danger of
an evil end, unlike faith that is tempered continuously with pious deeds until faith
is firmly anchored. The statement of the disobedient to the obedient (servant): "I
am a believer just as you are a believer" is like the statement of the pumpkin tree
to the stone pine: "I am a tree and you are a tree." How apt is the pine's retort
w-hen it says: "When the autumn winds blow you will surely realize your
foolishness in including (us both under the same) nomenclature, for then your
roots will be severed, your leaves will fall away, and your conceit in sharing the
name 'tree', as well as your heedlessness of the conditions of a tree's stability, will
be made apparent." When the dust settles, you will see, If it's a horse you're
riding, or an ass. This matter will become apparent at the end. The arteries of
Gnostics collapse in fear of the vicissitudes of death and its terrible
foreshadow-ing which only very few will withstand.
The sinner, fearless of eternal hellfire because of the evil consequence of his
disobedience,is like the healthy man who, addicted to injurious passions, is not,
while in his healthy state, afraid of death. Indeed death does not usually occur
suddenly. He may be told: "The healthy man fears sickness, then, if he takes ill he
fears death. So, the sinner fears a bad end, then, when, Allah forbid, his end is
bad, he is consigned to eternal hellfire."
Sins are to faith like toxic foods to the body. They keep accumulating inside
(the body) until the component elements change, imperceptibly, and the
composition deteriorates and suddenly the man falls ill, then, suddenly, dies. So is
the sinner. If a man afraid of ruination in this passing world must, immediately
and constantly, abandon toxic substances and harmful foods, so too, and even
more so must he who fears eternal perdition. If a man who consumed poison,
then felt regret, would need to vomit and discontinue the consumption of poison
by invalidating and removing it from the stomach in the quickest manner, to save
his body which is on the verge of death, the loss merely of this ephemeral world,

13

Book one: Repentance

then, he who consumes what is toxic to religion, that commits sins, is even more
obliged to desist from these sins by correcting whatever is possible so long as
there remains time for correction, namely (the remainder of his) lifetime.
For, what is feared from this toxin is the loss of everlasting life which
contains lasting bliss and the great kingdom; its loss entails the fire of Hell and
lasting chastisement which is so much that multiples of life in this world are less
than one tenth of a tenth of its duration, given that it has no end at all. Hurry,
hurry, then, to repent before the toxic sins do their work on the spirit of faith,
and the matter will transcend physicians and their knowledge After which seeking
shelter will avail naught nor will counsel and admonition, and man may be
included in the damned, as He Almighty says: " We have put yokes round their
necks right up to their chins, so that their heads are forced up (and they cannot
see). And We have put a bar in front of them and a bar behind them, and further,
We have covered them up; so that they cannot see. The same is it to them
whether you admonish them or you do not admonish them: They will not
believe." (Ya Sin 8:10)
ill
4

Oy*ji ^

oh ^

((|Jby**-**
jb

oiii'i/i jj isp
O

^a-A.pl ^
^ yt3 p

bj ^
lu.1

a 1>-

Do not be deluded by the word 'faith', claiming that the verse pertains to the
unbeliever, since it has been explained to you that faith is of over seventy
branches, and that 'the adulterer does not fornicate at the time he is committing
adultery while he is a believer', he then who is barred from faith which is bough
and branch, will be barred, in the end, from that faith which is the root. Just as
the man who, bereft of limbs, which are the branches, will be led to final death of
that spirit which is the root. That is because the root has no continuity without
the branch, nor has the branch existence without the root. There is no difference
between the root and the branch except in one point: the existence and
continuity of the branch requires the existence of the root while the existence of
the root does not require the existence of the branch. The continuity of the root,
then, lies in the branch, and the branch draws its existence from the root.
Likewise the sciences of Disclosure and the sciences of practical religion
are as inseparable as the root and branch. Neither can dispense with the other
even though one of them has a primary status and the other is secondary. If
the sciences of practical religion have not become a stimulus to action, their
non-existence is preferable to their existence. If they have not carried out
their intended function, they turn into a supportive argument against their
student. Therefore, the chastisement of the immoral learned is greater than
that of the immoral ignorant, as can be seen from the Traditions we cited in
the Book of Knowledge.

Explication Of Universality Of Obligation Of Repentance From
Which None Is Free.
It should be known to you that the apparent meaning elicited from the text
of the Qur'an has already indicated this, as shown from the statement of Allah
Almighty: " And O you Believers! turn you all together towards AJlah, that you
may attain Bliss." (An-Nur 31)

J

*
*
*

r;
*
*

I

The quarter of the saviors

14

40

^

4^ jj jfc ^

Thus He universally addressed all believers. The light of the mind also advises
so, as the meaning of repentance is the retreat from the road which leads away
from Allah and draws (man) nigh unto Satan. That is conceived only by one
endowed with reason. The natural disposition of the intellect is fulfilled only after
the fullness of the instincts of desire, anger and the rest of the negative qualities
which are Satan's instruments for the enticement of man.
The perfection of the intellect comes at the age of about forty; its foundation
becomes complete only at puberty and its rudiments appear at the age of seven.
The passions are the soldiers of Satan, and the minds those of the angels. When
they come together, combat, of necessity, breaks up between them, as one does
not yield to the other, they being adversaries.
The strife between them is like the struggle between night and day, light and
darkness. Whenever the one gains ascendancy, the other is, necessarily, roused. If
the desires mature during childhood or adolescence, before the perfection of the
intellect, then the Satanic forces have preceded and mastered the situation.
Familiarity and intimacy with Satan befall the heart, no doubt, as usual requisites
of the desires. This overcomes man and makes it difficult to abstain therefrom.
Then the intellect, which is Allah's troop and force, emerges to save, gradually,
those favoured by Allah, from the hands of His enemies. But if the mind is not
strong and perfect, the kingdom of the heart surrenders to Satan, and the Evil
One carries out his promises: "I shall verily master his progeny, save a few." (AlIsra' 62)

But if the intellect is perfect and strong enough, its first occupation is to
suppress the Satanic forces by breaking the appetites and habits and by forcefully
reverting the natural disposition to acts of worship. Only this is the meaning of
repentance. It is the return from that road whose guide is lust and whose sentry is
Satan, to Allah's path.
In every human being passion prevails over intellect; the impulse which is a
device of Satan prevails over the impulse which is an instrument of the angels.
Every human being, be he Prophet or fool, must abandon the steps taken to
promote desire. On no account should you suppose that this is peculiar to Adam
“peace be upon him”. It has been said: "Do not suppose that only Hind (shows)
treachery as a personal temper. Every songstress is like Hind." Rather, it is an
eternal rule, the fate of humankind, which no decree can alter so long as there is
no variance in the immutable divine way.
Consequently, anyone who has come of age as an ignorant disbeliever must
repent from his ignorance and disbelief. If he has come of age as a Muslim,
following his parents, yet negligent of the real meaning of Islam, he must repent
from his negligence by comprehension of the meaning of Islam. Indeed, his
parents Islam is of no avail to him so long as he himself does not turn Muslim. If
he has understood that, then he must turn from his practice and propensity for
following the desires, without anyone to divert him, and turn toward the pattern

-

15

Book one: Repentance

of the divinely set limits in prevention, release, absolution and renunciation. This
is of the hardest kinds of repentance, and it is the ruin of most, as they fail
therein. All this is retreat and repentance. It points to (the fact) that repentance is
an obligatory duty binding upon every person. It is unimaginable that anybody
can be exempted from it, as Adam was not either. The constitution of the
progeny cannot accommodate that which the original constitution of the
progenitor could not.
As for the explanation of the constancy and universality of this obligation, it
is that no man is free from sins by his limbs; for even the prophets were not free
of them, as is mentioned in the Qur'an and Prophetic Traditions about the sins of
the prophets: How the prophets got rid of, and repented from them. If a man, in
some cases, is free of sin by commission, he is not free of thinking about sin in
his mind. If he is free, sometimes, from such thought, he is not free of Satanic
temptation by instigation of sporadic thoughts distracting from invoking Allah's
name. But even if he is free therefrom, he would not be free from heedlessness
and shortcoming in the knowledge of Allah, His attributes and acts. All this is a
shortage which has its causes. Abandonment of its causes, by taking refuge to
their opposites, is a turning from a path to one leading to the opposite direction.
The intent of repentance is (such a) turning.
Freedom from this shortage in humans is inconceivable, but they differ as to
the extent of shortage. Yet, basically there is no escape from it. That is why the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Verily my
heart is beclouded so that I pray for forgiveness of Allah seventy times per day."
(Muslim and Abu Dawud on the authority of AJ-Agharr Al-Muzni with a slight
variation of wording). For this reason, Allah honoured him, by saying: "that Allah
may forgive you that which has preceded of sin and that which shall follow." (AlFath 2)
^

B

lLL-j 3

^ JJL3 L* 4JJI dll

^

If such was the case of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him”, what could another person expect?
You may say: "It is obvious that the concerns and thoughts that overtake the
heart are a blemish, and that perfection consists of freedom from them; that the
defective cognition of the essence of Allah's sublimity is a deficiency, and as
cognition grows, so does perfection increase; that the transition from the sphere
of deficiency toward perfection is also a turning away and that turning away is
repentance. These, however, are virtues not (religious) precepts. You have made a
statement on the obligation of repentance under all conditions. Yet, repentance
of these matters is not obligatory, as the attainment of perfection is not
obligatory under Islamic law. What then is intended by your statement:
"Repentance is obligatory under all conditions"?"
In reply to that, it should be known, as it has already been stated, that
basically, by his very nature, man cannot but follow his desires. The meaning of
repentance is merely not to abandon them. Rather, full repentance includes the
correction of that which has passed. From each desire that a man pursues, a
darkness rises onto his heart, as a dark spot is picked up from man's breath by the

s

:
!
'
5

The quarter of the saviors
16
surface of a polished mirror. If the darkness of the desires accumulates, it forms a
stain, as die gathering vapor of breath becomes dross on the surface of the
mirror. As it is stated in die Qur’an: "no indeed, but that which they were earning
has rusted upon dieir hearts." (AI-Mutaffiffin 14)

>

i

!

t

i

When die rust collects it becomes characterisdc and it is imprinted onto the
heart, like the dross on the surface of the mirror, when the dross accumulates
over a long time, becomes immersed in the iron and corrupts it: the metal will
not take furdier polishing, and becomes imprinted with the slag. In correcting
(the evil consequences of) following the appedtes, it is not enough to abandon
diem in the future. It is necessary to wipe out those stains that impressed
themselves upon the heart. Likewise, the future eliminadon of breath and vapor
that darken the mirror's surface will not suffice for clear reflecdon in the
mirror, as long as no effort is made to wipe out the stain that had imprinted
itself in the mirror.
Just as darkness will arise onto the heart from (the commission) of sins and
(the pursuit of) appetites, so a light will arise upon it from acts of obedience and
abstention from the appetites. The darkness of sin will then be eradicated by the
light of obedience, as referred to by the statement of the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "Follow an evil deed with a good
deed, perchance it would wipe it out." (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu
Dharr). Consequendy, in any given situation, man will not be free of the need to
eliminate from his heart the traces of evil by pursuit of good deeds, whose
influence would contravene the effects of those evil deeds. This is applicable to a
heart which has first had its purity and clarity, and then became dark due to
obstructive factors. As for the initial burnishing, it is a protracted affair, because
polishing to remove rust from the mirror is unlike the initial work of producing
the mirror. Such operations are long lasting, never ending. All this applies to
repentance.
As for your statement that this cannot be called obligatory, but is rather a
virtue and search for perfection, it should be known to you, then, that (the
term) 'obligatory' has two meanings. One of them is that which falls within
the scope of a legal decision and which applies to all the people. It is the
measure with which, if all mankind were to observe it, the world would not be
destroyed. If all men were truly bent on fearing Allah, they would abandon
(the pursuit) of livelihood and would forsake the world totally. That would
lead to the total nullity of piety. For whenever livelihood is impaired, no one
has the leisure for piety. Rather, occupation in weaving and cultivation and
(baking) bread absorbs everyone's life totally, according to his needs. From
this point of view, none of these stages (freedom from sinful thought in quest
for perfection) is obligatory.
The other meaning of the obligatory is that which is essential for attaining
the sought after closeness to Allah And the good abode among the righteous.
Repentance from all we have mentioned (of sins) is necessary to attain it, As it
is said: purification is obligatory for a voluntary prayer for anybody who desires

17
Book one: Repentance
to perform it. Indeed, he will not come by it without that purification. On the
other hand, for him who is satisfied with the omission of and preclusion from
the virtue of voluntary service, purification, on its account, is not obligatory.
This is the same when we say that The eye, ear, hand and leg are a requisite for
the existence of man. That is to say, it is a requisite for him who desires to be a
complete man, enjoying his humanity and seeking thereby to attain the noblest
rank in this world. But he who is content with basic life and is satisfied to be
like meat on the block and like a cast off rag, for such a life the eye, hand and
foot are not requisite.
The root of the obligations, which enters the general mandate, brings one
merely to the root of salvation. The root of salvation is like the root of life. The
bliss beyond the root of salvation which shapes life flows through the limbs and
tools by which life perfection is being prepared. It is this that the prophets, the
saints, and the scholars sought, each according to his rank. That was their
aspiration and quest, and it is for this that they totally rejected the pleasures of
this world. Jesus “peace be upon him” came to rest his head on a stone to sleep.
Satan then came to him and said: "Were you not (resolved) to forsake this world
for the next?" Jesus “peace be upon him” answered: "Yes. What now?" Satan
said: "Your use of this rock as a pillow is a worldly enjoyment. Why do you not
place your head on the ground?" Jesus “peace be upon him” cast away the stone,
and placed his head on the ground. His casting off of the rock was out of
repentance from that (worldly) enjoyment.
Are you, then, of the opinion that Jesus “peace be upon him” did not know
that placing the head on the ground is not, by general mandate, obligatory? Do
you further think that our Prophet Muhammad “peace be upon him”, when the
marks of the garment he had on distracted him from his prayer until he removed
the garment, or when the lace of his shoe, which was new, distracted him until he
replaced it with an old one, did not know that such is not obligatory, according to
the revelation he brought to all mankind? And, if he knew that, why did he repent
through abstention from his deeds? Was that not because he saw (the amenities)
acting upon his heart (in such a way as to) prevent him from reaching the station
of praise which had been promised for him? Similarly, after Abu Bakr “Allah be
pleased with him” had drunk some milk and was informed that it was improper,
he inserted his finger in his throat, gagging almost to the point of death, so as to
bring (the milk) up. Do you think that he was so unaware of the rule of (Islamic)
law by which anything eaten (of improper food) through ignorance (of its state),
is not (an object of) guilt, and the food need not, according to jurisprudence, be
evacuated? Then why did he repent from his drinking, by attempting, to the best
of his ability, to empty his stomach of it? Was it not the conscience embedded
within him which informed him that the general mandate is one thing and that
the gravity of the path to the next world is (another) known only by the
righteous?
Contemplate the state of these who, of Allah's creation, are most cognkzant of
Allah, of His path, of His scheme and of the hiding places of the Deluder.
Beware lest the life of this world should delude you even once. Beware, beware a

*
\

<

S

2
*
£
£
£

*
£

*
*
£

>
>
5*

>
>
>
>!
>

>
-

The quarter of the saviors
18
million times of the Deluder's guile concerning Allah. These are mysteries. He,
who sniffs them out early, knows that the need of sincere repentance with every
breath, clings to the man who follows Allah's path, even if he lives as long as
Noah “peace be upon him” does. He also, knows that this (repentance) is
obligator)' immediately and with no delay.
Indeed, Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani has told the truth when he said: If the
sensible man kept weeping for what remains of his life only over what he
missed in breach of piety, this would be apt to aggrieve him unto death. How is
it then for him who receives the remainder of his life with the same (behaviour)
of his past ignorance?" He said this because if the sensible man possessed a
precious gem and it was lost senselessly, certainly he would cry over it; if its loss
were the cause of his own destruction, his weeping would be yet greater. Each
hour of life, if not each breath, is a precious stone for which there is no
substitute or exchange. It is beneficial for it leads you to eternal bliss and saves
you from endless misery. Which gem is more precious than this? If you have
lost it through negligence, you have suffered patent damage and if you have
expended it in sin, then you have already perished repugnantly. If you do not
weep over this sin, it is because of your ignorance. Your misfortune through
ignorance is greater than any other. Ignorance, however, is a calamity in which
the one stricken is unaware of his misfortune. Indeed, heedless slumber
intervenes between man and his perception. Men are asleep, but when they die
they awaken. At that time to every wretch his destitution is revealed, and to
every afflicted person his misfortune. Yet correction is already out of their
reach.
One of the mystics has said: "If the Angel of Death “peace be upon him”
appeared to a man and informed him, "there remains one hour to your life,
and you cannot be reprieved for even one moment", the man would
experience such sorrow and grief, that if the whole world were all his, he
would (be ready to) leave it for another hour to be added, just to enable him
to seek Allah's pleasure and correct his own remissness. He will, however,
find no way to accomplish this. This is the first meaning to appear from the
statement of Allah Almighty: "and a barrier is set between them and that
which they desire." (Saba' 54)

i {©

oso

3}

This is also referred to by the His statement: " before Death should come to
any of you and he should say, "O my Lord! Why did You not give me respite for
a little while? I should then have given (largely) in charity, and I should have been
one of the doers of good." But to no soul will Allah grant respite when the time
appointed (for it) has come; and Allah is well-acquainted with (all) that you do."
(Al-Munafiqun 10-11)

0^-3 v—jj
i0

XV

Sjji 0* Sb ^

^j>Syi Jj 0

JlJjT

It is said that the meaning of the 'The little while' the man requests (according
to the verse) is that when the matter is disclosed to him, man says: "O Angel of
Death, grant me an additional day, to plead to be excused by Allah, repent and

19
Book one: Repentance---------------------------------------------------------------provide a good record for my soul." But the Angel replies: "The days have come
to an end, and there is not a single day." The man says: "Then give me a respite
for an hour." The Angel says: "The hours have lapsed and there is no additional
hour." The gate of repentance is then closed to man, thereupon he gags, and
breathes heavily in his bitter regret. He suffers the agony of despair about
correction, and bitter sorrow over the waste of his lifetime. The very foundation
of his faith will be (surely) shaken under these blows. When a man dies in Allah's
grace, his soul expires with the words of the creed, and that (is to be considered)
the good end. If he, Allah forbid, is doomed to wretchedness, he expires in doubt
and confusion, and that is the bad end. In regard with him, it is said: "but Allah
shall not turn towards those who do evil deeds until, when one of them is visited
by death, he says, 'indeed now I repent." (An-Nisa' 18)
4

cr^' ^-4“’ (jd

jJ>- i jv=L>~ lij

^

And: "Allah shall turn only towards those who do evil in ignorance, then
shortly repent." (An-Nisa' 17)
4 OyV Cft TL>y.&
J* <jyS\ llj] ^
'Shortly' refers to temporal closeness in time to the offense, so that he repents
from it and erases any trace of it through good works, substituting such for (the
bad) before a stain beyond removal can accumulate upon the heart.
This is the significance of the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”: "Follow an evil deed with a good deed,
perchance it would eliminate it." Of this too, Luqman “peace be upon him”
said to his son: "O My son, do not delay repentance for death comes suddenly.
He who has put off the effort to repentance finds himself between the two
great perils: one of them is that darkness, brought on by his sins, will
accumulate upon his heart until it becomes deeply embedded grime beyond
elimination; and the other is that sickness or death may befall him swifdy,
giving him no time to engage in correction." That is what is narrated in a certain
Prophetic tradition, that "most of the cries from those consigned to hellfire
result from procrastination (of repentance from sins).'" It is this that accounts
for perdition. Blackening of the heart is cash while purging it by obedient action
is credit, until death snatches man, and he comes before Allah with an impaired
heart. But only he is saved who comes before Allah with a sound heart. The
heart is a trust left by Allah with man. So is a lifetime. The same is true of the
other acts of worship. He who breaches this trust and does not make amends is
in sore peril.
A mystic has said: "Indeed, Allah has entrusted to man, through inspiration,
two secrets. Firstly, when man comes out of his mother's womb Allah says to
him: "O My servant, I have brought you into the world clean and pure, and have
consigned you life and entrusted it to you. Heed how you keep this trust safe, and
consider how you shall meet Me (later)." Secondly, at the time of death He says:
"O My servant, what have you done with my trust? Have you kept it safe until
you would meet Me under the covenant, so that I would meet you as faithful? Or,
have you forfeited it, so that I would meet you with claim and punishment?" This

>
The quarter of the saviors
20
is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty: "Fulfill my covenant and I
shall fulfill your covenant." (Al-Baqarah 40)
<
V

X

>
>
>
\

>
*
s
A

$
>
£
*
S3

i
>
9

>
*
>
>
>
>
>
>
£
>.
>
it

40
'yj'i}
And: "And who protect their trusts and covenant." (Al-Mu'minun 8; AlMa'arij 32)
4 © bj*'j

^ c*y 13 >

Explication Of The Fact That Repentance Is Surely Accepted Once
Its Requisites Are Available
It should be known to you that if you have understood the concept of
acceptance, you will not doubt that every correct repentance is accepted. Those
who contemplate through the illumination that stem from the lights of the
Qur'an know that every sound heart is received well by Allah, is enjoying in the
next world nearness to Allah, and its master, through his immortal eye, is
prepared to perceive Allah's countenance. They also know that, originally, the
heart was created sound, since every creature has such a nature. This soundness,
however, eludes man because of a murkiness which overcomes the surface of
his heart from the pollution and darkness of sins. They are aware that the fire
of regret can burn this pollution, and that the light of good deeds can obliterate
the darkness of evil from the heart's surface, and that the darkness of
transgressions has no power against the light of pious acts, just as the gloom of
night is helpless in the face of the light of day; nay, just as the turbidity of filth
cannot exist with the whiteness of soap; and as a king would not accept a dirty
garment as his attire, so Allah does not admit a darkened heart into His
presence; and just as the use of a garment for vile labor will soil it, and to clean
it one needs to wash it with soap and warm water, so exposure of the heart to
the desires fouls it, and to clean, purge and purify it, one needs to wash it in the
flow of tears and the burning of regret. Every clean and pure heart is well
received, just as every clean garment is. The purification and cleansing,
however, are up to you.
As for acceptance, it is freely granted as irrevocably preordained. This is
the so-called 'prosperity' in the statement of Allah: "Prosperous is he who
purifies it." (Ash-Shams 9)

40

Cr4

^^

Fie who does not know, strictly speaking, with a perception greater and
clearer than that achieved through eyesight, that the heart is affected contrarily
by sins and good deeds, using for the former, the metaphor 'darkness', as it is
used also for ignorance, and for the latter, the metaphor 'illumination', as it is
used also for knowledge; and that between illumination and darkness there
exists a necessary unbridgeable contradiction; then he is as one to whom only
the husk of religion was left with nothing attached save appellations. His heart
is in a dense wrap (barred) from the essence of religion, if not even from his
own essence and attributes. But he who is ignorant of himself, surely is yet
more ignorant of another. I refer, in this, to his heart. Since knowledge of

Book one: Repentance

21

another (lies) within his heart, how can he have (such) knowledge when he has
no knowledge of his own heart?
He who fancies that the sound repentance could not be accepted is like him
who imagines that the sun will rise but the darkness will also persist, or that a
garment will be laundered with soap but the dirt will persist, unless it be that
lengthy accumulation of filth penetrated into the interstices of the garment and
spoiled it so that the soap will lack the strength to extricate it. Likewise the
accumulation of sins may become stained and imprinted upon the heart. Such a
heart cannot return and repent. Certainly, at times, a man says, with his tongue:
"I have repented." Yet, that is like the fuller saying, with his tongue (alone): "I
have cleaned the garment." But this will never clean the garment so long as he
does not change the disposition of the garment by use of something effective
against the filth ingrained in it. In this case repentance is fundamentally
impossible. This is not unlikely but rather prevailing among all those creatures
who devote themselves to this world and completely renounce Allah Almighty.
This explanation of the acceptance of repentance should be sufficient for
men of discernment. But we shall support it by quoting Holy verses, Prophetic
traditions and sayings of the Companions, for any reflection not attested to by
the Book and the Prophetic tradition is not reliable:
Allah Almighty says: "It is he who accepts repentance from his servants, and
pardons evil deeds." (Ash-Shura 25)

He also says: "Forgiver of sins, accepter of repentance." (Ghafir 3)

There are many more Verses in this connection.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Allah rejoices in the repentance of (even) one of you more..." Joy is behind
acceptance, and it indicates to acceptance, if not more than acceptance. The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said:
"Indeed, Allah extends His hand with repentance until morning to him who
sins at night, and to him who sins during the day He extends His hand until
nightfall (and so on) until the sun would rise from its setting (putting an end to
the acceptance of repentance)." (Muslim and At-Tabarani on the authority of
Abu Musa). Such Extension of the hand amounts to a call for repentance and
the (attribute of) seeker is behind (the attribute of) accepter. Many are the
receivers who do not seek but one does not seek unless he is (willing to) accept.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "If
you sinned until your sins reached the heaven, and then you repented, surely
Allah would turn to you in repentance." (Ibn Majah on the authority of Abu
Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
also said: "Indeed a man can commit a sin and enter paradise with it." It was said
to him: "How can this be, O Messenger of Allah?" He replied: "He will direct his
attention to repent from it, in flight (from sin) until he enters paradise." (Ibn AlMubarak on the authority of Al-Hassan; and Abu Na'im on the authority of Abu

The quarter of the saviors
22
Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him
said: "The expiation of sin is repentance." (Ahmad, At-Tabarani and Al-Baihaqi
on die authority of Ibn Abbas). The Messenger of Allah “Allah s blessing and
peace be upon him” said too: "He who repents from sin is like one who has
never sinned."
It is narrated diat an Abyssinian said to the Messenger of Allah Allah s
blessing and peace be upon him”: " O Aposde of Allah, I used to commit
shameful deeds, do I have (a chance) of repentance?" the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” answered in the affirmative. The
Abyssinian turned away and then returned saying: "O Apostle of Allah, did He
see me when I committed them?" He “peace be upon him” answered in the
affirmative. (At tiiis point) the man uttered a shout with which his soul departed.
It is narrated that when Allah cursed Iblis, he asked for a respite. Allah granted
him a respite until the Day of Judgement. (Iblis) said: "By Your glory, I would not
leave the heart of the son of Adam so long as he lives." Allah replied: "By My
glory and majesty, I would not bar repentance from (man) so long as he lives.
(Ahmad, Abu Ya'li and Al-Hakim on the authority of Abu Sa'id). The Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Good deeds remove evil
as water (washes away) dirt."
The Prophetic traditions in this matter are beyond calculation.
As for the sayings of the Companions and righteous predecessors, a mention
may be made of the following:
Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab said: "Allah's statement: "Indeed he is forgiving of
those that return" (Al-Isra' 25)
Refers to man who sins, repents, sins and repents again. Al-Fudail said: Allah
has said: "Announce to the sinners that if they repent I will accept their
repentance; and warn the righteous that if I applied to them My justice, I would
punish them." Talq Ibn Habib said: Allah's rights (upon man) are greater than
man's capability; yet repent day and night." 'Abdullah Ibn 'Umar “Allah be
pleased with them” said: "If a man calls to mind an offense he perpetrated, then
is afraid in his heart on account of that offense, then that sin is erased from him
in the (celestial) Register."
It is narrated that one of the prophets of the Children of Israel sinned. Allah
revealed to him: "By My glory, if indeed you do it again, I shall chastise you." The
prophet replied: " O my Lord, You are You and I am I. By Your majesty, if You
do not grant me immunity I will surely do it again." Thereupon Allah granted him
immunity. One said: "If a man sins and does not cease to regret it until he enters
paradise, Iblis says: "Would that I had not plunged him into sin." Habib Ibn
Thabit said: "A man is confronted with his sins on the Day of Resurrection. Then
he passes by a sin and says: "Verily, I was afraid of it." That man is forgiven."
It is narrated that a man asked Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him”
about a sin he committed: "did I have a chance of repentance?" Ibn Mas'ud
“Allah be pleased with him” turned away from him, and when he turned back
to him he saw tears flowing from his eyes. Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with

23
Book one: Repentance
him” said to the man: "Indeed paradise has eight gates which open and close
but the gate of repentance, guarded by a special angel, does not close. So, do
(repent), and do not despair." 'Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Abu Al-Qasim said: "I
conferred with 'Abd-Ar-Rahim about the repentance of an unbeliever and
Allah's saying: "If they cease ( what has already passed, it will be forgiven for
them." (Al-Anfal 38)
4
^U
*1_hA! oj ^
On that he said: "I indeed expect that a Muslim will be better off with Allah.
Yet, I have learnt that the repentance of a Muslim is like a (second and new)
embracing of Islam after the original adherence thereto."
'Abdullah Ibn Salam “Allah be pleased with him” said: "I would not report to
you except of a (duly) charged prophet or a revealed book. Indeed, when a man
sins, then feels remorse because of it for as short as a twinkle of an eye, the sin
falls away from him quicker than the twinkling of an eye." 'Umar “Allah be
pleased with him” said: "Sit in the company of repentants. Indeed, they are the
most delicate of hearts." One said: "I know when Allah forgives for me." He was
asked: "When?" he said: "When He turns to me in repentance." Another said: 'I
am more afraid of being deprived of repentance than of being denied forgiveness.
That is because forgiveness is certainly among the requisites and results of
repentance."
It is narrated that there was among the Children of Israel a young man who
had served Allah for twenty years, then defied Allah for another twenty years.
Afterwards he gazed in a mirror and saw a gray hair in his beard. This aggrieved
him and he said: "O My Lord, I obeyed You for twenty years, and disobeyed You
for another twenty. If I return would you accept me?" He then heard a voice,
although he saw no one: "You loved Us and We loved you; you abandoned Us
and We abandoned you; you defied Us but We granted you respite; if you return,
We will accept you."
Dhun-Nun Al-Misri said: "Allah has servants who planted trees of sins that
were like guardians of the soul. They watered the trees with the water of
repentance; the trees then produced regret and sadness. They became possessed
without madness and idiotic without faltering or muteness. They are the
profound, the eloquent, who knew Allah and His Messenger. They drank from
the cup of purity and achieved forbearance throughout tribulation. They lost their
hearts in the spiritual world and their thoughts roamed among the palaces veiling
(Allah's ) omnipotence. They sought shelter under the portico of regret, and read
the ledger of sin. Then they were seized with anguish until they reached the
height of asceticism on the ladder of piety. They found sweet the bitter (taste) of
abandoning this world, and found supple the coarse bed, until they seized the
thread of salvation and the grip of security. Their spirits roamed freely in the
heights until they attained the gardens of pleasure. They plunged into the sea of
life; filled in the trenches of anxiety and forded the bridges of passion until they
descended to the courtyard of knowledge. They drank from the stream of
wisdom; traveled on the ship of sagacity, and set sail, under the breeze of
salvation, on the sea of security, until they reached the gardens of comfort, the
source of glory and nobility."

%!
:
5

.

:
;
5

i

i
*
>
2
s

The quarter of the saviors
This is sufficient to confinn that all true repentance is surely accepted.
But you might say: "Do you adopt what the Mu'tazilah have taught that the
acceptance of repentance is obligatory upon Allah?"
In reply to that, let me say: In what I have mentioned of the necessity of
Allah's acceptance of repentance I intend only what is intended by him who says:
"Indeed, when a garment is cleansed with soap, the dirt must vanish; When the
thirsty drinks water the thirst must cease; When he is, for awhile, denied water, he
must become thirsty; if the thirst continues, this must lead to death.' There is
nothing in this of what the Mu'tazilah intended by the concept of obligation as
regards Allah's actions. I would rather say that Allah created obedience as an
atonement for sin, and good as an antidote to evil, as He created water as a
remedy of thirst. His omnipotence is sufficient for the opposite should it have
been His pleasure. There is, then, no obligation upon Allah but what His eternal
Will has anticipated must, certainly, come to exist.
You might argue: "Every repentant doubts the acceptance of his repentance,
while he who drinks water is certain of the abatement of thirst. Why then does he
(the repentant) doubt?"
In reply to that, let me say that his doubt about acceptability (of his
repentance) is like the doubt about the presence of the conditions of health.
Repentance has delicate requisite props and conditions as will be mentioned later.
The presence of all its requisites cannot be ascertained as if it were the case of
one who doubts a laxative he took, i.e., will it work? That is because of his doubt
in getting the requisites for relief by the medication in the given case, time,
manner of mixing and preparing the remedy, and the potency of its various
component drugs. Such and the like lead to fear even after repentance and,
certainly, necessitate doubt about its acceptability, as will be seen, Allah willing,
from the discussion of conditions of repentance.
24

SECOND PILLAR
ON CONTEXT OF REPENTANCE, SINS: TRIVIAL AND MORTAL
£

*
*
£
5
A

5

*
S
2
5
5
}

5

>

It should be known that repentance is the abandonment of sin. But it is
impossible to abandon a thing unless it is perceived. Now since repentance is
obligatory, it follows that anything, without which it cannot be achieved, must be
obligatory. Sin is the deviation from Allah's command by omission or
commission. A detailed exposition of this calls for an explanation of the whole
range of Obligations. Such is not our intent. Yet, we shall indicate to their general
principles and the interconnections of their constituent parts. Allah is the one
who, with His mercy, helps to (reach) what is correct.

Exposition Of Divisions Of Sin In Relation To Qualities Of Man
First division
It should be known to you that man possesses many qualities and
characteristics, as explained in the Book of Wonders and evils of Heart. The
stimuli of sin, however, are included under four qualities: supremacy, devilry,
bestiality and predatory. Such is the case, for man's substance is molded of
different ingredients, each one resulting in a (different) effect, just as sugar,

Book one: Repentance -—------------------------------------

25

vinegar and saffron exert, in oxymel, different influences.
The bent for the supremacy qualities, encourages such traits as prestige, glory,
power, love of praise, appreciation and wealth, the desire for perpetuate life, and
quest for superiority over all until it seems that man wishes to say, "I AM YOUR
LORD, THE MOST HIGH." From these some of the greatest sins result, of
which men are heedless, and which they do not reckon as sins, yet they are the
great ravagers which are the source of most transgressions, as we have explained
in detail in the Quarter of Destructives.
The second is the Satanic quality from which derive envy, injustice,
subterfuge, perfidy, instruction to immorality and deception, including
corruption, hypocrisy, and the urge to (unlawful) innovation and error.
The third is the bestial quality from which derive gluttony, greed and desire
for the fulfillment of the carnal appetites. From it derive also adultery,
homosexuality, robbery, misappropriation of the property of orphans and all the
other vanities for the sake of the appetites.
The fourth is the predatory quality from which derive anger, malice, assault,
vilification, murder and waste of wealth. From these, various sins branch off.
These qualities have (a certain) gradation in human nature. The bestial quality
is first predominant. It is followed by the predatory quality. Then, when the two
get together and apply the mind to deceit, scheming and subterfuge, this is the
satanic quality. Then, finally, the supremacy qualities prevail such as (the bent for)
glory, power, arrogance, grandeur and control over all creatures.
These are the sources and origins of sin, from which the spring of sin gushes
forth to the limbs. Some of them (pertain) especially to the heart, such as
unbelief, heresy, hypocrisy and harboring evil designs; others (pertain specifically)
to the eye and ear, or to the tongue, or the stomach and genitals, or the hands
and feet; some to the entire body. As this is clear, there is no need to go into
details.
Another division
It should be known that sins are divided into that which is between man and
Allah, and that which pertains to the relation of man to man; that which concerns
an individual man, such as abstention from prayer, fast or obligations particular
to him; and that which concerns inter-human relations, such as abstention from
almsgiving, murder, usurpation of property, vilification of people's honour, and
anything that infringes on the rights of others, whether of life, limb, property,
honour, belief or dignity; infringement on belief by leading astray and calling to
heresy; incitement to transgression and to defiance against Allah, as practiced by
certain preachers who cultivate hope over fear.
Sin that pertains to men is graver. In that which is between man and Allah
(alone), unless it be polytheism, pardon is more expected. It is narrated in a
tradition: "There are three accounts: one which is forgiven, one which is never
forgiven, and one which is not neglected. The account which is forgiven is
that of the sins between man and Allah. The account which is never forgiven
is that of polytheism. The account which is not neglected is that of the
injustices toward humans." (Ahmad and Al-Hakim on the authority of

The quarter of the saviors
26
A'ishah). That is, man must be called to settle them before he is forgiven.
Third division
Sins are divided into trivial and mortal. There is much disagreement about
them. Some say that there is no trivial or mortal (sin), rather, every transgression
of Allah's command is mortal sin. This position is weak since Allah said: If you
avoid the heinous sins that are forbidden you, we will acquit you of your evil
deeds and admit you by the gate of honour." (An-Nisa' 31)
ilp 0}^

^

And: "Those who avoid great sins and shameful deeds, only (falling into)
small faults; verily your Lord is ample in forgiveness." (An-Najm 32)

4©

y$ &i> U V1'

>

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"The five (obligatory) prayers and (performance of) Friday (congregative
prayer) to the next, atone for the sins that are committed between them, if
mortal sins are avoided." (Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
According to another version, "They are expiations for such (of sins as
committed) between them except the mortal sins." It is further narrated on the
authority of 'Abdullah Ibn 'Amr Ibn Al-'As “Allah be pleased with him” ,that
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
"Ascribing partners to Allah, undutifulness to parents, murder and willful
perjury are among the mortal sins." (Al-Bukhari).
The Companions and Tabi'is differed about the number of mortal sins,
ranging from four, to seven, to nine, to eleven or more. Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be
pleased with him” said: "They are four." Ibn 'Umar “Allah be pleased with them”
said: "They are seven." ’Abdullah Ibn 'Amr “Allah be pleased with him” said:
"They are nine." When Ibn 'Umar's statement, that they are seven, reached Ibn
'Abbas “Allah be pleased with them” he said: "They are closer to seventy than
seven." He once said: "All that Allah has forbidden constitute mortal sins."
Another said: "Any (action for which) Allah has threatened hellfire is of the
mortal sins." One of the righteous predecessors said: "Anything which
necessitates (the execution of) legal punishment in this world is a mortal sin." It
has been said that it is an obscure point, the number of which is not known, like
the Night of Power or the hour of the Friday (at which the supplication receives
answer), when Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him” was asked about this, he
said: "Read from the beginning of the Surah of An-Nisa' to verse thirty where
Allah says: "If you avoid the heinous sins that are forbidden to you." (An-Nisa'
31)
4 (jp) ^ bjhr3 ^

Oj ^

Everything that Allah has prohibited in this Surah to this point is a mortal sin."
Abu Talib Al-Makki said: "The mortal sins are seventeen. I collected them
from all the traditions and from all that is gathered of the sayings of Ibn 'Abbas
“Allah be pleased with them”, Ibn Mas'ud “Allah be pleased with him”, Ibn
'Umar “Allah be pleased with them”, and others. Four are of the heart:

27
Book one: Repentance
polytheism, persistence in disobedience, despair of divine mercy, and false
security from divine plot. Four are of the tongue: false testimony, false charge
against chaste, willful perjury i.e., that which justifies a falsehood or perverts the
truth, by which the property of a Muslim is seized wrongly, even a toothpick, and
it is called 'plunger' (Ghamus) because it plunges its perpetrator into hellfire), and
sorcery which through any speech alters man or other substances from the states
fixed at Creation. Three are of the stomach: drinking wine or getting any
intoxicating drink, eating illicitly, and from the property of an orphan, and
conscious usury. Two are of sexual nature: adultery and homosexuality. Two are
of the hands: murder and theft. One is of the feet: flight (from the enemies) in
the batdcfield, one from two and ten from twenty. One is of the entire body:
undutifulness to parents." He resumed: "The peak of undutifulness is that if they
justly adjure (the son) he does not respect their appeal; if they ask something
from him, he does not give it to them; if they rebuke him he hits them; if they are
hungry he does not feed them."
This is what he said, and it is plausible. Complete satisfaction, however, will
not be gleaned from it, since it is possible both to add to it or subtract from it.
Thus he has listed usury and embezzlement of an orphan's property as mortal
sins, given that they are misappropriation of property. But of criminal acts he
mentioned only murder as a mortal sin. Yet, gouging the eye, cutting off the
hands and torture of Muslims by beating and types of punishment, did not
occur to him. Surely, beating and torturing an orphan, and amputating his limbs
are graver than embezzling his property. It is narrated in a certain tradition:
"Excessive reviling, and detraction from the reputation of a fellow Muslim are
mortal sins." (Ahmad and Abu Dawud, according to Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami,
on the authority of Sa'id Ibn Zaid). This is graver than slander of the chaste.
Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri “Allah be pleased with him” and other Companions said:
"Indeed you are doing things which are, in your eyes, finer than a hair, even
though in the time of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him" we used to reckon them as mortal sins." (Ahmad and Al-Bazzar).
A faction said: "Any premeditated (evil act) and anything that Allah has
forbidden are mortal sins." To clarify this, take the case of the investigator of
theft: as to whether or not it is a major crime, will not be sound so long as one
does not understand the meaning of mortal sin. What is intended by this is like
the statement: Is theft prohibited or not? There is no hope of clarifying this
without first establishing the essence of 'prohibition, and then, finding out
whether that essence is present in theft.
Major sin', then, is lexically vague and has no specific connotation, either in
(Arabic) lexicography or in (Islamic) law. This is due to the fact that 'major' and
'minor' are modifiers. Any sin is major in comparison to what is beneath it and
minor in comparison to what is above it. To lie down with an alien female is a
major sin relative to gazing (at her), and a minor sin in comparison to fornication.
Amputation of a Muslim's hand is a major sin relative to beating him and minor
in comparison to killing him.
It is true that the action for which hellfire was set can be called a mortal sin.

The quarter of the saviors
28
By this appellation we mean to say that the punishment of hellfire is grave, an
can also apply the term 'mortal to that action which necessitates a legal
punishment, for that which hastens a necessary punishment in this world is grave.
He may also apply (the same term) to that which is mentioned in the text of the
Book as interdicted, for he can say that its specificadon in the Quran indicates
die act's gravity. Then, again, since die Qur'anic stipulations also differ in their
gradation, it wall certainly be both grave and mortal by comparison. To these
applications there is no objection, and preserved expressions of the Companions
vacillate between these points. Possibly they can be reduced to one of these cases.
It is true then, that it is important to know the meaning of Allah s saying: If
you avoid the heinous sins that are forbidden you, we will acquit you of your evil
deeds and admit you by the gate of honour." (An-Nisa' 31)
And (the meaning of) the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah s
blessing and peace be upon him”: "'Prayers are atonement for such (of sins as
committed) between them except mortal sins." Indeed, this is the ruling principle
on mortal sin. The truth of the matter is that sins are divided, according to the
view of Sharia, into those known as grave; those known to be counted among the
trivial sins; and those in which there is doubt and the rule about them is
unknown. To strive for a comprehensive definition or a definite figure is to strive
for the impossible. For this is impossible unless it is heard from the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "By mortal sins I meant ten or
five..." listing them. But as this is not reported, though in some versions "three
or seven are among the mortal sins "or "blasphemy is one of the mortal sins", it
becomes clear that no specific number was meant. How could one then aspire to
set a specific number when the divine law does not? Perhaps Sharia intended to
obscure it so that men would be in dread, as they are on the Night of Power, to
increase (thereb}r) men's diligence in searching for it.
Surely, we have an overall method which enables us to know the categories
and types of mortal sin, upon investigation. As for its main manifestations we
know them by contemplation and approximation. We also know the greatest of
mortal sins. But, as for the most minor of the trivial sins, there is no way of
knowing it. The point is that we know, by the testimony of both the Divine law
and the illumination of insight, that the purpose of all the precepts is to lead men
into the closeness of Allah and the bliss of meeting Him; and that men can attain
this only through perception of Allah, His attributes, books and prophets. This is
indicated by the verse: "I have not created jinn and mankind except to serve Me."
(Adh-Dhariyat 56)

That is, to be My servitors. Yet, man (the servitor) cannot be a servant so
long as he has not perceived his master in His mastery, and himself in his
servitude. Man must know himself and his Master.
This, indeed, is the ultimate purpose of the mission of prophets. But it could
be fulfilled only in the life of this world. This is the meaning of the statement of

29
Book one: Repentance
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "This world is
a place to cultivate for the hereafter." Maintenance of this world thus becomes
the domain of religion, inasmuch as the world is a means of fulfilling religion.
Two things of this world are connected with the hereafter: human beings and
possessions. Anything which stands in the way of the perception of Allah is the
gravest of mortal sins, the next being that which is destructive of human life, and
the next is that which impedes the livelihood of men. These are three stages. The
intent of all the creeds is that the hearts must hold the perception (of Allah), the
bodies preserve life, and humans preserve possessions. It is unimaginable that
these three matters would be debatable among the various creeds. It is, then,
inconceivable that Allah would send a prophet, desiring thereby the improvement
of His creatures in their affairs, both spiritual and material, and then He would
command them to do what impedes them from perceiving Him and His
messengers, or that He would command them to destroy life and property.
It follows that mortal sins are of three levels. The first level is that which
prevents (man) from perception of Allah and His Messengers. This is disbelief,
and there is no mortal sin greater than disbelief, for it is ignorance that is the
barrier between Allah and man, and man's means to draw nigh to Allah is
knowledge and perception. Man's closeness (to Allah) corresponds to the
measure of man's perception while his remoteness (from Him) corresponds to
the measure of his ignorance. That ignorance called disbelief is followed by
(man's feeling of) security from Allah's plots and despair of His mercy. This,
indeed, is also of the very essence of ignorance. For he who perceives Allah could
not conceive himself to be secure or despairing.
This stage is followed by the various heresies connected with (the concepts
of) the essence of Allah, His attributes and acts. Some of these are graver than
others. The disparity among them is commensurate with people's varying degrees
of ignorance, and with their holding on to the belief in Allah, His acts and
revelations, His commands and prohibitions. The gradations of this are
unlimited. They are divided into what one knows to be included within the
mortal sins mentioned in the Qur'an; what is known not to be included; and what
one is in doubt about. Seeking to dispel the doubt about this middle category is a
hopeless aspiration.
The second level pertains to human beings, since on their survival and
maintenance depend the continuity of life and attainment of perception of Allah.
Consequently, murder, even though beneath (the gravity) of disbelief, is certainly
of the mortal sins. For, while one strikes at the goal (of religion) itself, the other
strikes at the means to the (fulfillment) of that goal. For life in the world is
intended only for the sake of the hereafter and the attainment thereof by means
of human perception of Allah. This mortal sin is followed by amputation of limbs
and whatever leads to death, even beating, with some acts being graver than
others.
The prohibition of adultery and homosexuality falls within this category
because if all men were to be content only with males to fulfill their carnal
desires, procreation would cease. Rejection of the existence is close to cutting off

:

The quarter of the saviors
30
existence. As for adultery, it does not negate the principle of existence but rather
distorts the lines of kinship and nullifies inheritance, mutual aid and many of
those matters without which life cannot be well ordered. How can good order be
achieved together with the permission of adultery? Animal life is not well thriving
so long as the male is not with his particular females, set apart from the other
males. For this reason it is inconceivable for adultery to be permissible according
to a religion whose aim is the improvement of life. Adultery must be on a level
beneath murder as it does not threaten the continuity of human existence, nor
does it prevent its principle. It only threatens the distinction of familial
relationships, and stimulates factors that lead to strife. It (adultery) must be
considered graver than homosexuality as the natural desires spur it on both sides,
its frequency is greater, and with frequency its impact becomes more harmful.
The third level pertains to property, which is the life stuff of man. Men
cannot control its acquisition chaotically, even through seizure, theft and the like.
Rather it must be preserved, so that its continuity might insure the continuity of
human beings. Nevertheless, property, when it is seized, can be regained, and if it
has been disposed of, restitution is possible. The affair, then, cannot become as
grave (as is the previous level). It is true that when its acquisition occurs in a
manner that would make correction difficult, such (usurpation) should be
considered a mortal sin. This can be in four ways. The first is hidden, which is
theft. If it is not generally controlled: how can it be corrected. The second is
consumption of an orphan's property. This too is covert. I refer to a guardian or
custodian, entrusted with (the property), who has no possible opposition save the
orphan who is a minor unaware of the matter. This must be considered grave.
Different is the case of extortion which is overt, and that of breach of a normal
trust where the consignor can oppose the action and seek justice for himself. The
third is its alienation by false witness. The fourth is seizure of a trust and the like
by willful perjury.
Indeed these methods are not open to correction and it is unimaginable that
religions should differ at all as to interdicting them. Some (cases) are graver
than others, but they all are beneath the second level which is concerned with
life. These four are worthy of being assigned as mortal sins even though canon
law does not invoke legal punishment in some cases. However, Divine threats
in their regard are numerous, and in the affairs of this world their impact is
evidendy great.
As for usury it is only the consumption of another's property by mutual
consent, along with the breach of a condition imposed by canon law. It is not
unlikely that there should be a variance among the religions in a matter like this.
If extortion, which is the taking, of another's property without his consent and
without the law's permission, has not been deemed a mortal sin, then usury, done
with the assent of the owner, albeit without legal sanction, should preferably not
be considered a mortal sin. Even though the canon law rebukes usury, it has done
so also with regard to the iniquity of extortion and the like, and to breach of trust,
with the result that it merits consideration whether a Daniq's worth of
embezzlement and extortion is mortal sin, yet this is an area of doubt, and the

=

31
Book one: Repentance
trend of thought is against including such deeds under the heading of mortal sin.
Rather, it is appropriate to limit mortal sin to that which is legally so indisputable
that it be religiously obvious.
Thus, of what Abu Talib Al-Makki mentioned, only false charge, intoxication,
witchcraft, flight in the batdefield (from the enemies) and undutifulness to
parents remain.
As for drinking, inasmuch as it removes reason, it is appropriate that it be a
mortal sin, as attested to by both the severity of the law and rational
considerations. For indeed, the intellect is a gift just as life, nay, life is worthless
without the (faculty of) reason. Depriving reason of its faculty is a mortal sin.
This does not follow, however, from a drop of wine. No doubt, if a man
drank water containing a drop of wine, that would not constitute a mortal sin.
It is merely drinking polluted water. The drop itself is an object of doubt.
That the law lays down legal punishment for it (only) indicates how grave it
views the matter of intoxication. For it is counted as a mortal sin under the
law. It is beyond human ability to grasp all the subtleties of the divine law. If
there is consensus that it is a mortal sin, this line must be pursued. If not,
there is room for hesitation.
As for false charge, it involves only hurting (people's) honor, and this falls
below the level of ruining property. Harming honour is serious, its most severe
being false accusation regarding committing fornication. The canon law views
this gravely. I think that the Companions used to count any (action) which called
for legal punishment a mortal sin. From this viewpoint, it is not expiated by the
five prayers, and this is what we mean by mortal sin'. But, inasmuch as it is
possible that the (scriptural) laws would differ about this, while analogy alone
does not point to the magnitude and gravity (of this false charge), nay, it would
be possible for the Law to stipulate that one just witness, upon seeing a man
committing adultery, may bear testimony, in which case the accused is flogged by
virtue of this testimony. But, if his testimony is not accepted, then the other
man's punishment is not evident, even if it is one of the actually occurring affairs
in the category of needs. Then, this too is appended to the mortal sins for him
who knows the rule of canon law. As for he who thinks that he must testify
himself or that another may join him in support, it is not necessary that it be
counted as a mortal sin for him.
As for witchcraft, if it contains disbelief, it is a mortal sin, otherwise, its
gravity depends upon the damage which results from it, such as loss of life,
sickness or the like.
As for flight in the battlefield and undutifulness to parents, this too should be,
by virtue of analogy, subject to hesitation. Thus we conclude that since any
accusation, except adultery, assaulting people, oppressing them by usurpation of
their property, evicting them from their dwellings and villages and ousting them
from their homelands, does not involve a mortal sin, for it has not been
mentioned among the seventeen, the highest listing given, so that hesitation in
this too is not unlikely. The Tradition, however, indicates its designation as
mortal sin, and so it may be appended to such sin.

32

The quarter of the saviors

In conclusion, the matter reverts to the meaning we attached to mortal sin,
i.e., that which the five prayers never expiate, according to the rule of canon
law. That again is divided into what one knows will not, at all, be expiated;
that for which people should atone; and that which is open to doubt. Of the
last, some cases may be presumed to be solved positively or negatively, and
others are so doubtful that only a text from the Book or (prophetic) tradition
can resolve them. In the absence of such a text' there is no point in seeking
resolution of the doubt.
You might argue: "This proves the impossibility of perceiving the definition
of a mortal sin, and how can the Law deal with what cannot be defined?"
In reply to that, it should be known to you, then, that anything in connection
with which there is no judgment in this world can be open to ambiguity. Yet it is
this world that is the sphere of obligation. About mortal sin, as such, there is no
rule in this world. Rather, anything necessitating legal punishment is known by its
(distinctive) name, such as theft, adultery and the like. But the rule of mortal sin is
merely that the five prayers do not atone for it. This is a matter relating to the
hereafter, and ambiguity about it is appropriate in order that man be fearful and
cautious, and should not venture, relying on the efficacy of the five prayers, into
trivial sins. Thus, avoidance of mortal sins atones trivial ones, in accordance with
the statement of Allah Almighty: "If you avoid the mortal sins that are forbidden
you, we will acquit you of your evil deeds." (An-Nisa1 31)
But, avoidance of mortal sin atones for the trivial sin only when man abstains
despite his ability and volition, like one who has power over a woman and could
cohabit with her but restrains himself from intercourse and limits himself to
gazing or touching. His internal struggle to abstain from sexual relation has
greater effect in the illumination of his heart than his audacity in gazing has in the
darkening of his heart. This is the meaning of his atonement. If, however, he was
sexually impotent, or he abstained only because of disability, or refrained in fear
of another superfluous matter, then such would, by no means, serve the purpose
of atonement. Whoever, by nature, had no desire for wine, and even were it
permitted to him he would not drink of it, his abstention would not atone for the
auxiliary trivial sins like listening to the playing of musical instruments. Certainly,
he who craves wine and listening to music, yet restrains himself with great effort
from wine and rather settles for music, his internal struggle in abstention may
erase from his heart the darkness which accrued to it through the sin of listening
to music. All of these judgements pertain to the hereafter, and it is conceivable
that some of them will remain in a state of uncertainty and doubt. Their
particulars can be known only from a text. But no text nor comprehensive
definition has yet been presented, and only varying versions have reached us.
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah “Allah be pleased with him”
that he said: the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: "One prayer to the next and one Ramadan to the next is an atonement (for
sins to be committed between them), except in three matters: polytheism,
abandonment of sunnah and breach of contract." (Al-Hakim and Ahmad). He was

33
Book one: Repentance
asked: "What is meant by abandoning sunnah?" He said: "to secede from the
community." The breach of contract is that a man swears allegiance to (a ruler)
and then goes out with sword against him. This and similar expressions do not
indicate a total number, nor do they point to a general rule. Thus the matter
certainly remains obscure.
You might argue: "Testimony is accepted only from him who avoids the
mortal sins, and caution from trivial sins is not a requisite for its acceptance.
This is according to the rules of this world." In reply to that, it should be
known that we do not restrict the rejection of testimony to the mortal sins.
Indisputably, one who listens to the playing of musical instruments, dresses in
silk brocade, wears a golden ring, and drinks from gold and silver vessels, his
testimony is not accepted, yet no one has concluded that these matters are
mortal sins.
Ash-Shafi'i said: "If a Hanafite drank Nabidh, I should impose legal
punishment but would not reject his testimony." By obligating legal punishment
he made it a mortal sin, yet he did not reject the testimony. This shows that
neither acceptance nor rejection of testimony depends upon either trivial or
mortal sins. Rather, all sins damage integrity except those which man obviously
cannot escape, such as slander, snooping, evil assumption, falsehood in some
statements, listening to gossip, abandoning the enjoinment of good and
forbidding the evil, eating doubtful food, abuse of a child and slave, beating
them, in anger, more than due, deference to tyrannical rulers, friendship with
profligates, and indolence in instruction of household and child in all their
religious needs. It is inconceivable that the witness could avoid, more or less,
these sins except by withdrawing and devoting himself exclusively to the affairs
of the hereafter, and curbing himself for awhile to the extent that he would be
able to stick to his path even after he has rejoined society. If only the word of
such a man were to be accepted, then it would be so scarce that all litigation and
testimony would prove untenable.
Dressing in silk, listening to music, playing backgammon, social intercourse
with the drinking set at the time of a party, intimacy with alien women, and the
like of these trivial sins are not of this kind. In accepting or rejecting testimony
one must look into these ways, not into mortal or trivial sins.
Then again some of these trivial sins, because of which testimony is not
rejected, surely may bring on the rejection of testimony if a man persists in them,
e.g., habitual gossip and slander, keeping company and friendship with
profligates. The trivial sin grows by persistence, just as the permissible but
indifferent act, like playing chess, singing constantly, etc., may become, through
persistence, a trivial sin.
That is enough to explicate the ruling on mortal and trivial sins

Explication Of How Higher And Lower States, In The Hereafter Are
Distributed According To Good And Evil Deeds In This Life
It should be known to you that This life belongs to the material world of
visibles while the hereafter to the transcendent dominion of invisibles. By 'this
life' I refer to your state before death, and by the 'hereafter' to your condition

■

i

!

The quarter of the saviors
34
after death. For your (temporal) existence and afterlife are your attributes and
states: that which is near is called 'this life' and that which follows later is called
the hereafter. We speak now while being in this life about the next world.
Because, we speak in this life, it being the sensible world, but our purpose is the
explanation of the hereafter, which is the world beyond the senses, and it is
inconceivable to describe the transcendent world within the sensible world except
by adducing parables. That is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty:
"And those parables, we set them forth for the people, but none understands
them save those who know." (Al-Ankabut 43)
4^/j 14UL Cj ^uiJ
}
This is because the temporal world, compared to the transcendent world, is
like slumber. That is meaning of the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him”: "men are asleep, and when they die they
awaken." (This statement is attributed to Ali Ibn Abu Talib and not to the
Prophet). That which will occur in the state of wakefulness becomes clear to you
during sleep only through parables which are in need of interpretation. Likewise,
that which will take place in the state of wakefulness in the hereafter cannot be
explained in the slumber of this life except through a multitude of parables, by
which I mean that we know from the science of dream interpretation. Of these
similitudes three should suffice if you are sagacious.
A man came to Ibn Sirin and said: "In my dream I saw as if I had a seal in my
hand with which I sealed men's mouths and women's pudenda." Ibn Sirin said:
"You are a Mu'adhdhin (pronouncer of call to prayer) who pronounces the call to
the prayers during Ramadan before the break of dawn." He said: "You have told
the truth."
Another man came to him and said: "I saw myself pouring oil into olives."
Ibn Sirin said: "If you have a female slave whom you bought, examine her case
closely, for, indeed, she is your mother who was taken as a captive while you were
an infant For the olives are the source of the oil, and now (in your dream) it is
restored to the source." The man looked into the matter, and behold! the slave
was his mother who had been taken captive while he was an infant.
A third man said to Ibn Sirin: "I saw myself adorning the necks of pegs with
pearls." Ibn Sirin said: "You teach wisdom to these unfitting for it." It was really
as he said.
Dream interpretation, from first to last, consists of parables that guides you to
the way of setting forth parables. By a parable we mean the rendering of meaning
in such a way that if one considers its meaning he will find it true, but if he looks
at its form he will find it false. Thus the Mu'adhdhin , looking at the form of the
seal and the imprinting of it upon the pudenda, would consider it false. Indeed,
he did not seal with it at all. But, if he considered its meaning he would find it
true since from it issued the spirit and sense of sealing, which is the prevention
intended by sealing.
The prophets address humans only by use of parables, for they are obligated
to speak to men according to their level of understanding. But men are as in
sleep, and nothing is revealed to a sleeping except through parable. When they

|

35
Book one: Repentance
die they awake and realize that the parable is true. That is the significance of the
statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him”:
"The heart of the believer is between two of the fingers of (Allah) Most
Merciful." This is of the parables that only those that know can understand. As
for the ignorant, his level (of understanding) does not go beyond the literal sense
of the parable, because of his ignorance of interpretation ^Tafsir) which is called
allegorical interpretation (Ta'wil) just as the interpretation of the parables seen in
sleep is called 'dream interpretation' (Ta'bir). Thus he affirms to Allah a hand and
a finger, exalted be Allah far above this view! Similar to this is the statement of
the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him”: "Indeed, Allah
created Adam in His image." The ignorant understands image as no more than
color, form and shape. He attributes these to Allah. That is why some people
stumbled in the matter of divine attributes, even in the divine speech, which they
represent as voice and letter etc. It would take too long to discuss it.
Parables might be set forth concerning the hereafter, which the atheist,
whose view rigidly sticks to the literal sense, renders contradictory and rejects.
For example, the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "On the Day of judgement, Death will be brought in the form of a
beautiful ram and killed." (both sheikhs on the authority of Abu Sa'id). The
stupid heretic revolts, deems it a falsehood, and infers from it the falsity of
the prophets, saying: " Glory be to Allah! Death is an accident and the ram is
a body. How is an accident transformed into a body? Is this not absurd?" But
Allah keeps the knowledge of His secrets out of reach of those fools, as He
says: "None understands it save those that know." (Al-Ankabut 43)

4©

*5)

Cj ^

The poor fool does not understand the significance when a man said: "I saw
in my dream that a ram was brought and it was said that it was the plague which
ravaged the village. Then, it was slaughtered." The interpreter said: "You have
told the truth. It is as you have seen it. It indicates that the plague will cease and
never recur, for the slaughtered was the source of desperation." Both are right:
the interpreter in his explanation, and the dreamer in his vision. The truth here'
goes back to the fact that the angel in charge of dreams is the one who informs
spirits during sleep of that which is (written) on the Preserved Tablet, instructing
the dreamer, by means of a parable which he set forth for him, of what is on the
preserved tablet. That is because the sleeper is more apt to grasp the parable, and
the parable is true and its meaning sound.
The prophets, also, when they address men in this life, which, compared to
the hereafter, is as slumber, convey meanings to men's minds through similitudes,
out of divine wisdom and kindness to men, facilitating the comprehension of that
which they would fail to grasp without parables. The statement that death is
brought in the form of a beautiful ram is a simile coined to convey to the mind
that death brings on despair. The heart is predisposed to being influenced by
similes and establish their meanings. The Qur'an expressed the utmost degree of
power when it stated: ""Be", and it is" (Al-Baqarah 117)

:

i

The quarter of the saviors

36

4©

'

The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” expressed
die alacrity of transformation when he said: "the heart of the believer is between
two fingers of (Allah) Most Merciful." We have already indicated the sense of that
in the Book of the Foundations of the Ardcles of Faith in the quarter of Acts of

Worship.
Let us now return to the matter at hand. The point is that the indicadon of
the distribution of high and low degrees for good and evil works is impossible
except by giving similes. Let us, then, understand our simile as to its meaning,
not its form. Just as men differ in (the attainment) of happiness or misery in
this life, so are they divided in the hereafter into classes and their difference in
the high and low degrees of happiness or misery is beyond calculation. The
hereafter is not at all different in this respect. For the ruler of (both) the
temporal and the transcendent worlds is one, and no associate has He. His
order, which originates from His eternal will, is constant and unchangeable.
While we are unable to enumerate the individual levels, we can at least calculate
die (broader) categories.
In the hereafter, men are divided into four categories: the ruined, the
chastised, the redeemed and the blessed. The analogy in this world is the
following. A king captures a region. He kills some of the (natives): they are
destroyed. He chastises some for awhile but does not kill them: they are
chastised. He frees some: they are redeemed. He confers honours on some: they
are successful. If the king is just he will divide them stricdy on their merits. He
will slay only those who deny the king's right, and resist him politically. He
chastises only those who fell short in his service while acknowledging his
dominion and lofty rank. He would free only those who, following recognition of
his power, have not failed to the extent of deserving chastisement, nor have
rendered service to the extent of deserving reward. He honours only those who
have spent their lives to serve and support him.
It is proper that honours granted should vary in rank in accordance with the
degrees of service; that the destruction of the ruined should be, either by
beheading or infliction of an exemplary punishment, in accordance with their
degree of opposition; that the severity, duration and type of punishment for the
chastised should be in accordance with the degree of their failing. Each of these
categories is subdivided into innumerable groups.
It is thus to be understood that, in the hereafter too, men are variously
disposed. One will be destroyed, another chastised for awhile, one redeemed to
reside in the abode of security, and another blessed. Moreover, the blessed are
divided into those residing in the gardens of Eden, the gardens of sheltering
retreat, or the gardens of Paradise. Among the chastised, also, there are those
punished for a while, those tormented for one thousand to seven thousand years.
These latter are the last to leave hellfire, as it has been reported in a certain
tradition. The destroyed despairing of Allah's mercy are also of different
categories. All these variations correspond to the differences in their acts of
obedience and disobedience. Let us mention the way of distribution.

i

i

37
Book one: Repentance
The first level is that of the ruined, by which we refer to those who despair
of Allah's mercy. Do not be heedless of the meaning of our simile in which the
slain was he who despaired of the king's pleasure and deference. This level is only
for heretics, disdainers, those devoted solely to temporal existence, and those
who deny Allah, His Messengers and scriptures. Yet, uldmate happiness lies in
nearness to Allah and gazing at His countenance. Such is attained only through
that perception which finds its expression in faith (in Allah) and acceptance (of
His prophets). The heretics are those who deny, and the disbelievers are those
who despair of Allah's eternal mercy. It is they who disbelieve in the Lord of the
Universe and His appointed prophets. But upon that day they shall be veiled
from their Lord most certainly. Yet whenever someone is veiled from his
beloved, a bar is set between him and that which he desires, he certainly is seared
as by hellfire by the fire of separation.
The Gnostics therefore say: "Our fear is not of hellfire, nor is our yearning
for the houris of paradise. Nay, what we seek is only the meeting (with Allah),
and what we flee from is the Veil, they Also said: "The one who worships Allah
seeking compensation is ignoble. He worships Allah as if out of the quest for
paradise or for fear of hellfire." The Gnostic, however, serves Him for His own
sake, and seeks naught save Allah Himself. He desires neither a houri nor a
Paradisaic fruit, and fears not hellfire. For the overwhelming fire of separation is
likely to prove more painful than the fire which consumes the body. Indeed, the
fire of separation is the fire of Allah kindled roaring over the hearts. The fire of
Hell affects naught save the body, but, in relation to the affliction of the heart,
the torment of the body is scorned. Therefore, it has been said (in the form of a
poetic verse): "The hottest fire of Hell is cooler than The flame of passion in the
lover's heart."
One should not ignore this (phenomenon) of the hereafter as there exists a
visible parallel in the temporal world. It has been observed that a man
possessed by the ecstasy of love runs over fire and on the roots of reeds that
injure his feet, yet he feels it not due to the intensity of that which fills his heart.
You can see, in combat, how fury overwhelms a man, so that he remains
unaware of injuries sustained. That is because The rage is a fire filling his heart.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Rage
is a portion of hellfire." (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu Sa'id). The
burning of the heart is more potent that the burning of the body. As you can
see, the stronger nullifies sensitivity to the lesser. Death by fire and sword is
merely due to the separation of two components connected in a union feasible
in bodies. But that which separates the heart from its beloved, to whom it is
joined in a union more perfect than that (found) in bodies, is far more painful.
(This is clear) if you are a man of heart and insight.
It is not unlikely that one who has no heart will not grasp the intensity of
this pain and will regard it lighdy in comparison to the pain of the body. If a
youth were given the choice between the pain of doing without ball and mallet
and the pain of missing the rank of a ruler, he would, by no means, be sensitive
to the deprivation of power, nor would he reckon that as painful. He would
exclaim: "(Running) with the mallet on the playing field is dearer to me than
occupying a thousand royal thrones." Likewise, one who is dominated by

I

The quarter of the saviors
38
gluttony, if given the choice between pastry and sweets and a good action by
which he would triumph over his enemies and delight his friends, surely would
choose the pastry and sweets, as a result of the loss of that stimulus by which
glory becomes desirable, and the presence of the faculty by which food
becomes delightful.
This applies to one who has been dominated by bestial and predatory
traits, in whom the angelic qualities have not appeared, those traits which tally
with the delight exclusively in nearness to the Lord, and are aggrieved only by
remoteness and concealment (from Him). Just as taste resides only in the
tongue and hearing only in the ears, so this quality is only of the heart. And,
just as one who is bereft of hearing and sight cannot appreciate the delight of
melody nor the beauty of form and colour, so a man who has no heart cannot
have this (spiritual) sensation. Not every man has a heart, otherwise, the
statement of Allah: "Surely in that there is a reminder to him who possesses a
heart" (Qaf 37)
It would not have been true. In this verse Allah qualified one unmindful of
the Qur'an as one who is bereft of the heart.
I do not mean by 'heart' that which is encased by the ribs. Nay, I mean the
conscience which is of the world of dominion, that piece of flesh which is of the
world of creation, is its throne, the chest (cavity) its seat and the other limbs are
its sphere and its realm. Both creation and dominion are the Lord's. Yet, that
conscience about which Allah said: "Say, the spirit is of the command of my
lord",(Al-Isra' 85)
Is the commander and king. For between the world of creation and that of
dominion there is a certain relation, the world of dominion commanding the
world of creation. It is that spiritual substance which, if it is sound, brings
soundness to the rest of the body. One who perceives it, knows himself and
one who knows himself knows his Lord. Then man can have the first inkling
of the spiritual wisdom implied in the statement of the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” that "Allah created Adam in His
image."
Allah views with compassion those who attribute to Him the literal meaning
of His expression and those who stray in the method of (allegorical)
interpretation. If His compassion for the former is greater than for the latter, it is
because compassion comes in accordance with the measure of the error, their
error being greater even though they share in the common misfortune of being
deprived of the truth. For the truth is the bounty of Allah, which He gives to
whom He will, and Allah is of bounty abounding. It is His wisdom: " He grants
wisdom to whom He pleases; and he to whom wisdom is granted receives indeed
a benefit overflowing; but none will grasp the Message but men of
understanding." (Al-Baqarah 269)

39

Book one: Repentance ----------------------

4 ©)
l>>- (jj1 L*j a.^.4=>»JTJl2o^ ** 4*=JT
^
Let us return to the matter 'at hand. We went to all that length and dwelt
extensively on a matter which is higher than the study of practical religion which
we pursue in this book. It has become evident, then, that the degree of
destruction is visited only on the ignorant deniers. As the evidence of this from
Allah's book and suntiah of His Messenger is too extensive, we have not cited it.
The second level is that of the chastised. On it are those who are endowed
with the basic faith but have failed in corresponding fidelity. Indeed, the
beginning of faith is monotheism (Taivbid), that is, that one serves only Allah. But
a person who pursues his own whim, takes his whim to be Allah, and
consequently pays lip-service to being monotheist and not so in fact. However,
the meaning of the profession, 'there is none worthy of worship save Allah ', is
the same as the Qur'an states: "Say: "Allah", then leave them alone, playing their
game of plunging." (Al-An'am 91)
u

u

Jp“ <4

^

That means: abandon completely everything save Allah. The significance of
the statement: "Those who have said 'our lord is Allah', then have gone straight..
(Fussilat 30; Al-Ahqaf 13)

i©

p ST ifc

oyJi oj > * 4 ©

p 5W ifc iIjfii

oj >

The straight path, following of which is the only means to complete
monotheism, is, like the bridge (over Hell) in the description of the hereafter,
thinner than a hair and sharper than (the blade) of a sword. No man can escape
deviation from it, even in an easy matter, as he is yet not free of following his
whim, even if it be in a trifling. That detracts from the completeness of
monotheism according to the (degree) of deviation from the straight path. Such
certainly necessitates a defect in the degree of nearness to Allah. With each (such)
defect, two fires attend: the fire of separation resulting from that elusive fullness
of faith, and the fire of hell as described in the Qur'an.
Everyone who deviates from the straight path is punished twice in two
respects. The severity or leniency, however, and the varying duration of that
punishment is decided by two factors: the intensity of his faith and the degree of
his pursuit of whim. Since man, in most cases, is not devoid of failing in one of
the two respects, Allah said: "Not one of you there is, but he shall go down to it:
that for your lord is a thing decreed, determined. Then we shall deliver those that
were god-fearing: and the evil doers we shall leave there, hobbling on their
knees." (Maryam 71:72)
T^^l’lalT jjSj \jaia

(jp)

L*l>- ti-Lj 'J*

^Jojj ^

The pious among the righteous predecessors said: "Our fear is caused by our
being sure that we are destined for the fire, and we have doubts about salvation."
When Al-Hassan reported the tradition of the one who leaves hellfire after a
thousand years crying: " O Compassionate One! O Benefactor!", Al-Hassan said:
"Would that I be that man!"

40

The quarter of the saviors

It should be known to you that some traditions indicate that the last to leave
hellfire will do so after seven thousand years, and that the duration differs
between a moment and seven thousand years, so that some pass over hellfire like
a fleeting bolt of lightning without any sojourn. Between the single moment and
the seven thousand years there are varying degrees of duration: A day, a week, a
month, and so forth. There is also a diversity in the intensity with the maximum
limitless, and die minimum an accounting, just as die king who sometimes
punishes, by rebuke, diose who have fallen short in their works, then grants
pardon; sometimes by flogging and at other times he inflicts a different sort
punishment. A diird difference beyond duration and intensity, pertains to
chastisement; diat being variety of type. For one is punished by mere confiscation
of his property7; anodier by loss of his property and the slaying of his children and
seizure of his women, chastisement of his kinsfolk, flogging, amputation of
tongue, hand, nose, ear and so forth. Such variations exist also in the
chastisement of the hereafter. These are indicated in the trenchant propositions
of the law (of Islam).
These are in accordance with the strength or weakness of faith and the greater
or lesser quantity7 of good and evil deeds. The intensity of chastisement is
according to the intensity7 and frequency of the evil deeds, while its quantity is in
proportion to the quantity7 of evil, and The variety of type to the variety of deeds.
This has been disclosed to those who possess hearts, through Qur’an statements,
by virtue of illumination of faith. This is the meaning of the statement: "Your
Lord wrongs not His servants even in the least." (Fussilat 46)
4 © A=7^1j
3^
And: "And that man has naught save as he has labored." (An-Najm 39)
And: "Who so has done an atom's weight of good shall see it; and who so has
done an atom's weight of evil shall see it." (Az-Zalzalah 7:8)
4©
*5^" V*
Cr^ ^
There are other such statements in the Book and Hadith as to reward and
punishment being recompense for man's acts, all this injustice without iniquity7.
The trend toward pardon and mercy is preponderant as related by our Prophet
"peace be upon him" from Allah as saying "My mercy outweighs My wrath."
(Muslim on the authority7 of Abu Hurairah). Allah Almighty said: "And if it be a
good deed he will double it, and give from himself a mighty wage." (An-Nisa' 40)
Thus these general points, therefore, pertaining to the relation of high
ranks and low degrees to good and evil works, are known through the
trenchant statements of revelation and the illumination of gnosis. As for the
particulars, they can be known only as (probable) opinion relying on the literal
sense of the traditions and the type of intuition drawing upon the lights of
contemplative scrutiny.

41
Book one: Repentance
We assert, then, that anyone who absorbs the principle of faith, avoids all
major sins and fulfills all religious obligadons, i.e. the five pillars, with only
sporadic minor transgressions, his punishment will, it seems, be merely a
reprimand. When he is brought to account, his good works outweigh his evil
ones, according to tradidons that the five prayers, Friday prayer, and the fasdng
of Ramadan atone for that which (is committed) between them. Also, according
to the Qur'an text, avoidance of major sin plots out minor ones. The minimum of
atonement is that the punishment be averted though the accoundng was not.
Anyone in this posidon, with his scales heavy in the balance (of deeds), shall,
after the favourable balance is evident and the accoundng disposed, inherit a
pleasing life. Mow excellent is his joining the Companions of the Right Hand or
the near-stadoned, and his entering the gardens of Eden or the Supreme Paradise.
The same applies to the classes of faith. For faith is of two types: imitadve, as
is the faith of the laymen who believe in what they are told and persist therein;
and the revelatory faith which is achieved through the enlarging of the breast by
divine illuminadon until all reality is exposed as it is. It then becomes clear that
everything originates and ends in Allah for naught is real save Allah, His
attributes and works. It is the people of this class that are the near-stadoned ones
who abide in the Supreme Paradise. They enjoy the utmost degree of closeness to
the heavenly host. They too, however, are of various categories. Some are more
advanced, others less, the disparity dependent upon the differences in their
knowledge of Allah. The Gnosdcs' degrees of gnosis are innumerable inasmuch
as fully fathoming Allah's glorious essence is impossible. The sea of gnosis has no
coast nor bottom and, therefore, men dive in it according to their strength and
according to what they have been granted by Allah throughout the ages. The
stadons on the road to Allah are endless, and innumerable are the levels of those
who travel on Allah's path.
One who believes by imitadon is of the Companions of the Right Hand but
on a level lower than the near-stadoned. The Companions of the Right Hand are
further subdivided. The level of the highest among them approaches the lowest
level of the near-stadoned. This is the posidon of one who avoided all major sins
and performed all religious obligadons, i.e. the five pillars: the verbal utterance of
the profession of faith, prayer, alms, fast and pilgrimage. One who perpetrated
one or more major sins or neglected some of Islam's pillars, if he truly repents
before his dme came due, joins those who sinned not. For he who repents is as
one who has never sinned, like a washed garment which is as one which was
never soiled.
If he died before repentance, it is a risky matter, for he may die while
persisting (in sin) and this may be the cause of wavering in his faith, and he may
be assigned to a bad end. This is especially so when his faith was imitative. For
imitadon, though resolute, is apt to disintegrate at the least doubt or distortion.
The insightful Gnostic is less likely to be afraid for a bad end. Both of them, if
they died in faith, would be chastised, except that Allah may forgo, with
chastisement beyond rebuke at the accounting. The duration of the punishment
is commensurate with the duration of persistence in sin; its intensity with the

p ■

The quarter of the saviors
42
ignominy of the major sins; the variety of type with the variety of evil works. At
the termination of the period of punishment the conformists will abide in the
levels of the Companions of the Right Hand while the Gnostics of insight will
abide in the highest heights.
It is narrated : "The last to leave hellfire will be given ten times the like of this
whole world
(both sheikhs on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud). Do not imagine
that the intent is the calculation of the physical area, as one parasang compares to
two parasangs or as ten compares to twenty. This would be ignorance of the way
parables are coined. Rather, it is like the saying: "One took from him a camel and
gave him ten like it" or, "the camel was worth ten dinars but someone gave him a
hundred."
If one understands die simile only in terms of weight, surely then, the
hundred dinars, if placed on one balance of a scale, would not register onehundredths die weight of the camel on the other balance. Nay, it is a comparison
of the meanings of bodies and spirits not of their individual existences. The
camel is not wanted for its weight, length, breadth or area, but for its monetary
worth. Its spirit is its monetary worth, and its body is its flesh and blood. One
hundred dinars are equal to its tenfold on the spiritual balance, not on the bodily
balance. This can be seen as true by anyone who knows the concept of monetary
worth of gold and silver.
If one gave him, however, a jewel whose weight was a Mithqal though whose
value a hundred dinars, and said: "I gave him ten times the like of it", he would
be right. Only jewelers, however, would grasp his veracity. For the jewelry's spirit
is not comprehended by mere eyesight but by a different sense beyond the eye.
Therefore, a youth, especially a villager or Bedouin, would deny the statement
saying: "This jewel is but a stone weighing a Mithqal"; the camel weighs a million
Mithqals; hence the man lied when he said: "I gave him tenfold thereof." In truth,
however, it is the youth who is wrong but there is no way to prove it to him, until
he be left to mature and become refined, or until he attain in his heart the
illumination with which he may grasp the inner worth of gems and other
valuables. Then only would the truth be revealed to him.
The Gnostic is unable to make the conformist, lagging behind, understand
how right is the Prophet "peace be upon him" in this comparison, as the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” says, according to
traditions: Paradise is in the heavens." (Al-Bukhari on the authority of Abu
Hurairah). The heavens are of this world. How can this world hold ten times the
like of it? This incapacity is like that of the adult who is unable to make the boy
grasp the above-mentioned comparison. The same is true of explaining the
matter to the Bedouin.
Just as one may pity the jeweler when he attempts to enlighten the Bedouin
and villager concerning the parable, so the Gnostic may be pitied when he
attempts to enlighten the dull-witted. It is for this reason that the Prophet "peace
be upon him said: Have mercy on three: a learned man among the ignorant; the
rich man who became poor and the mighty man who was humbled ." (Ibn Hibban
on the authority of Anas; and also on the authority of Ibn Abbas with a slight variation of

i

43
Book one: Repentance
wording). For this reason the prophets are pitied from among the people. Their
tribulations, because of the people's lack of understanding, are a trial and test for
them from Allah. Such tribulation is assigned to them, by eternal preordained
decree. This is the meaning of the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”: "Tribulation is assigned to the prophets, then
the saints, and then others rank by rank." (At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah
on the authority of Sa'd Ibn Abu Waqqas).
Do not surmise that the tribulation is like that of Job, an affliction of the
body. Indeed, Noah's trial was also great. He suffered from people who the more
he called them to turn to Allah, the more they fled. Therefore, when the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” was troubled by
the speech of some he said: "God had mercy on my brother Moses. Indeed, he
was troubled by more than this, yet he endured." (Al-Bukhari on the authority of
Ibn Mas'ud). Thus, the prophets are not free of being afflicted by the unbelievers.
Nor are the saints and the learned free of being afflicted by the ignorant.
Therefore, the saints are seldom free of types of harm and tribulation: by
expulsion from the land, or their being denounced before the authorities, or by
accusation of their unbelief and heresy. It is inevitable that the men of gnosis be
viewed as unbelievers by the ignorant just as that he who substitutes a small gem
for the large camel should be viewed, by the ignorant, as a squanderer and loser.
When you are aware of these points, trust the statement of the Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "The last to leave hellfire will
be given ten times the like of this world." Beware lest you limit your belief to
that which is perceived through the sense alone, and become a two-legged ass.
For the ass shares with you the five senses; you, however, differ from the ass in
a divine conscience which has been offered to the heavens, the earth and the
mountains, but they refused to carry (the trust) and were afraid of it. Yet,
understanding of that which is beyond the sensible world occurs only within the
scope of that conscience which distinguishes you from the ass and the other
animals. He who overlooks that, disregards and neglects it, and is content with
the bestial level, does not transcend the (level) of sensual perceptions, is the one
who destroys himself by wrecking his soul, forgetting it by ignoring it. "Be not
as those who forgot Allah, and so he caused them to forget their souls."
Anyone who knows no more than what is grasped through the five senses has
forgotten Allah, inasmuch as His not being encompassed, in this world, through
the senses. But anyone who has forgotten Allah, is certainly made to forget his
own soul, and is lowered to the animal level, and abandons the ascent to the
higher horizon. He betrays the trust which Allah placed with him and bestowed
upon him, is ungrateful of His blessings and is risking His rancor, nay his state
is worse than that of the beast. For, the beast is redeemed by death.
But man has a trust which shall, certainly, be returned to its consignor. He is
the source and end of the consignment. The trust is like the radiant sun, yet, it
falls into this evanescent mold and sets in it. At the destruction of this mold this
sun will rise from its setting place and return to its creator, either in eclipsing
darkness or with brilliant radiance. The brilliant and radiant are not barred from

The quarter of the saviors
44
the divine Presence. The darkened will also return to the Presence for Allah is the
source and end of ail; only that (the darkened soul) turns its head from the
highest heights to the lowest depths. That is the significance of the statement of
Allah Almighty: "If you could see the guilty handing their heads before their
lord." (As-Sajdah 12)

4 (2?

„rr-jV

>J Is? jfc >

It is clear, then, that they are, before their Lord, in confusion, with their faces
turned back and their heads lowered. Such is the divine rule for all to whom He has
denied success and whom He has not guided on His path. We seek refuge with
Allah from error and from descent to the station of the ignorant.
Such is the fate of him who leaves hellfire and is given ten times or more the
like of diis world. But only a (true) monotheist will leave hellfire. By monotheism
I do not refer to the verbal profession: ’there is none worthy of worship but
Allah'. The tongue is of the temporal world and avails only in the temporal world.
(Such verbal profession) removes the sword from man's neck and repels the
hands of plunderers from his wealth. Security of limb and property extends only
along the duration of life. But as limb and property do not remain, verbalization
avails not. On the contrary, sincerity in monotheism avails, and its perfection is
that man sees all things as coming only from Allah. Its sign is that he does not
become angry at any creature in what befalls him, inasmuch as he sees not the
means but the Prime Cause, as will be shown in the Book of Reliance on Allah.
This monotheism is variegated. There are those whose monotheism is like
mountains; others like only the weight of an ounce; and others like the weight of
a mustard seed or grain. He who has in his heart a dinar's weight of faith, will be
the first to leave hellfire. It is said in a tradition: "Get out of hellfire those in
whose heart there is a dinar's weight of faith." The last to leave is he in whose
heart there is only a grain of faith. The amount of degrees between the dinar's
weight and the grain determines the order of exit from hellfire in between the
two extremes. The comparison between the ounce and the grain is, in terms of
simile, as we have mentioned in the comparison between property assets and
species.
For the most part, what leads monotheists into hellfire is injustices toward
men, since the account of men is that which will not be neglected. As for the
remainder of evil deeds, they may be quickly pardoned and atoned. As a tradition
puts it: "Man is brought before Allah. The man has good deeds (to his credit) the
likes of mountains; if they be admitted he is of the people of Paradise. Then the
examiners of interpersonal injustices rise: he may have abused someone's dignity,
misappropriated someone's property, assaulted someone. These deeds are
subtracted from his good deeds until none remain. Then the angels declare: ' O
Lord, this man's good deeds are gone and many claims against him remain.' Allah
proclaims: 'Heap their grievances upon his account, and make out his ticket to
hellfire. Just as he is destroyed by the evil done to another, by way of
retribution, so the wronged one is saved by the good deed of the evildoer who
committed the injustice against him. For, it is transferred to him in exchange for
the wrong he suffered at the other's hand.

45

Book one: Repentance

It is narrated from Ibn Al-jalla' that one of his brethren slandered him, then,
requested his forgiveness. He said: "I cannot. My ledger has no good in it better
than this. How can I erase it?" He and others said: "My brethren's transgressions
are of my good deeds with which I intend to adorn my ledger."
It is this that we desired to mention of the variation of man's degrees of
happiness and misery in the hereafter.
All this is judgement of external causes, like the decision of the physician
about a particular patient that he will certainly die and no treatment will avail, and
about another patient that his disease is slight and his cure easy. Indeed, that
notion is correct in most instances. Yet, sometimes, unexpected by the physician,
the soul's soundness may return to man close to death. Sometimes, however, the
end comes unexpectedly to one who suffers from a light disease. These are
Allah's mysteries, concealed in the living and in the obscurity of causes
determined with a certain measure of the Prime Cause, for it is not given to
human power to fathom them.
Likewise, salvation and bliss in the hereafter have secret causes beyond the
capacity of human comprehension. That concealed cause leading to redemption
is called pardon and favour, and that leading to destruction is called wrath and
vengeance. Behind this mystery is the eternal divine volition which no creature
can comprehend. Thus we must admit the pardon of the rebellious, even if his
apparent evil is great, and the wrath upon the obedient, even if his apparent acts
of obedience are many.
Indeed, we rely on piety, which is in the heart and it (the heart) is too obscure
to be grasped by its possessor, the more so by another. It has already, however,
been revealed to the masters of hearts that forgiveness comes to man only
through a secret reason which accounts for it. Wrath also comes only because of
a hidden cause which draws man away from Allah. If not for that, pardon and
wrath would not be recompense for acts and qualities. Were it not recompense it
would be unjust, and, if it were unjust, the verses: "Your lord wrongs not his
servants" (Fussilat 46)

^0

Lj ^

And: "Surely Allah shall not wrong so much as an atom's weight " (AnNisa' 40)
u

Would not be correct. Yet all of this is true: And that a man shall have to his
account only as he has labored, and that his labouring shall surely be seen. Every
soul shall be pledged for what it has earned. When they swerved, Allah caused
their hearts to swerve and, when they change what is in themselves, Allah
changes that which is in them. This confirms the significance of the statement of
Allah: "Allah changes not what is in a people until they change what is in
themselves." (Ar-Ra'd 11)

All this has been revealed to possessors of heart in a manner clearer than

The quarter of the saviors
46
visible evidence, inasmuch as eyesight can err, as when, at times, it perceives a
distant object as near and a large one as small. But the evidence of the heart
cannot err. The point is the opening of the eyesight of the heart and not to
imagine falsity in the heart after this development. This is referred to in the
statement of Allah: "The heart lies not of what he saw. (An-Najm 11)

The third level is that of the saved. By salvation I mean security only,
without felicity or bliss. They are people who have neither rendered service to be
rewarded, nor have they failed (so as) to deserve punishment. It seems that this is
the state of the insane, the youngsters of the unbelievers, the feeble-minded and
those whom the call to Allah has not reached due to geographical isolation. They
live in ignorance without perception. Their portion is neither knowledge nor
unbelief, neither obedience nor rebellion. There is no means that can bring them
close to Allah nor any offence which can turn them away from Allah. They are
not of the people of paradise nor of the people of hellfire. Rather, they are
stationed midway between the two. The revelation calls this A'raj (the Heights)
The existence of some people in this stage is known with certainty from Qur’an
verses, traditions and the lights of various considerations. Essentially, the
judgement, for example, that the youth are in this category, is presumed and not
known with certainty. Learning about it truly belongs to the sphere of prophecy,
and it is unlikely that (men in) the grade of the saints and the scholars would rise
to it.
The traditions as regards the youth are also contradictory. When one of
the youths died, A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her” said: "A bird from among
the birds of Paradise." On that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” denied this saying: "How do you know?" (Muslim).
Ambiguity and obscurity, therefore, prevail about this station.
The fourth level is that of the blessed. They are the Gnostics, as distinct
from the mere imitators. They are the successful, and their station is close (to
Allah). The imitator, even if he attains, on the whole, a station in Paradise, is
of the Companions of the Right Hand, but these are the near-stationed, and
what they experience is beyond description. The extent of possible
explanation is what is described in the Qur'an. There can be no explanation
beyond Allah's. That which cannot be expressed in this world is summed up
in the Holy statement: "No soul knows what comfort is laid up for them
secredy" (As-Sajdah 17)

And also in the Prophetic tradition: "I have prepared for my righteous
servants that which no eye has seen, which no ear has heard of, and which has
not occurred to the human mind." (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of
Abu Hurairah).
The desire of the Gnostics is that state which could not conceivably have
occurred to the human mind in this world. As for the houris, palaces, fruits, milk,
honey, wine, and jewelry of Paradise, the Gnostics do not covet of them.

47
Book one: Repentance
Moreover, if these were given to them, they would not be content. They seek
only the ecstasy of gazing at Allah's countenance. This is the utmost of felicities
and the uldmate delight. That is why, when Rabi'ah Al-Adawiyyah was asked:
"What do you long for in Paradise?", she answered: "first the Neighbour and then
the House." For these are people whose preoccupation with the love of the
Master deflects them from taking interest in the house and its embellishment,
indeed in anything other than He, even in themselves.
They are like the lover who is blindly devoted to his Beloved, whose mind is
riveted to gazing at His countenance and thinking of Him. He is in the state of
immersion, he is neglectful of himself, not aware of what affects his body. This
state is called the self-annihiladon. That means that he becomes immersed in
another, and all his concerns become one concern, namely his Beloved. There
remains no room in him for anything but his beloved undl he pays no attendon
to either himself or others. This is the state through which, in the hereafter, one
attains such delight as inconceivable in this world, in anyone's mind, as it cannot
be imagined that one deaf and blind would form the notion of colour and melody
unless the bar was lifted from (the impairment of) his faculties of hearing and
sight. At that point he might understand his condition and know, assuredly, that
earlier it was impossible for him to have formed such notions. This life is a veil to
realization, and with its removal the hidden is revealed. At that point, the flavour
of the good life is perceived. "Surely the last abode is life, did they but know."
(Al-Ankabut 24)

This suffices for explication of the distribution of degrees (in the hereafter)
according to good deeds. May Allah, in His benevolence, grant success.
Explication Of How Minor Sins Are Increased
It should be known that there are circumstances by which minor sins are
magnified. Among them are persistence and assiduity. That is why they say: "A
sin persisted in cannot be minor, and a sin followed by the quest for forgiveness
cannot be major." A major sin can go by and, if it can be imagined that it is not
followed by the like, then pardon for such is more likely than for a minor sin in
which man persists. A model for this is drops of water falling continuously upon
a stone until they wear it away. The same amount of water, poured onto the stone
all at once, would not produce a like effect. That is why the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "the best of deeds is that to be
done regularly no matter how little it might be." (both sheikhs on the authority of
A'ishah).
Matters are clarified through their opposites. If the useful work is the
constant, even if it be minor, then the intermittent though numerous works are
of little advantage in the illumination and purification of the heart. Likewise, a
few evil deeds, if they persist, have great influence in corrupting the heart. Yet, it
is hardly imaginable that man storms for the major sin suddenly without
antecedents and accessories from the category of minor sins. Rarely does the
adulterer fornicate without enticement and plotting. Rarely, also, does one kill

The quarter of the saviors
48
abruptly without previous rancor and enmity. Thus every major sin involves
previous and dependent minor ones. If we could imagine a major sin
independent and sudden, without recurrence, perhaps pardon of it would be
more likely than of a minor sin in which a man persists throughout his life.
Another (cause of augmenting the minor sin to be major) is to consider sin
minute. Indeed, whenever man himself deems the sin as major, it becomes, in
Allah's view, minor, because the apprehension of its magnitude stems from the
heart's aversion to it and loathing of it. This aversion to it restrains the intensity
of its influence upon the heart. On the contrary, considering a sin insignificant
stems from habitude which makes, for an intense influence on the heart. The
heart must be illumined through acts of obedience, and its blackening through
evil deeds must be avoided. It, therefore, will not be censured for what befalls it
inadvertently. Indeed, the heart is not impressed by what occurs inadvertently,
according to a certain tradition: "The believer considers his sin (as huge as) a
mountain, suspended above him, and fears it may fall upon him; whilst the
hypocrite considers his sin (as trivial as) a fly which passed by his nose, and is
swatted away." (Al-Bukhari on the authority of Al-Harith Ibn Suwaid from Ibn
Mas'ud). Somebody said that the sin which is not forgiven is man's saying: "Were
all my sins to be like this."
The sin waxes in the heart of the believer because of his awareness of Allah's
majesty, and when he contemplates the greatness of Him against whom he
rebelled, he sees a minor sin as major. Allah has revealed to one of His prophets:
"Look not at the insignificance of the gift but rather at the greatness of the giver;
look not at the smallness of the offense, but rather at the majesty of Him whom
you confront with it." In this sense a Gnostic has said: "There is no minor sin,
but ever)' offense is major."
Likewise, one of the Companions “Allah be pleased with them” said to
Tabi'is: "Surely you do things which, though in your eyes they are finer than a
hair, we, in the time of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him”, would reckon among the major sins." Since the Companions'
perception of Allah's majesty was more sterling, they considered the minor sins,
with regard to Allah's majesty, as major sins. For the same reason what is a minor
sin in the case of an ignorant, becomes a major sin in the case of a learned man.
Matters which are disregarded in the case of a common person, are not so
disregarded in the case of an enlightened one, for sin and offense grow in
proportion to the perception of the transgressor.
Another cause of augmenting the minor sin is to be delightful in the minor
sin, take pride in it, consider its realization as pleasure, and disregard of its being
the cause of misery. The more the sweetness of the minor sin overcomes a man,
the more a minor sin becomes major, and its impact in blackening the heart is
growing. There are sinners who pride themselves on their sins and boast of them,
because of the intensity of their joy at having yielded to them, one might say:
Have you not seen how I rent his dignity?" A disputant might say: "Have you
now seen how I exposed him, how I brought out his shortcomings to the point
of shame, how I scorned him and how I duped him?" A trader might say: "Have

:
49
Book one: Repentance
you not seen how I sold him the spurious, how I deceived him, how I cheated
him of his wealth and how I made a fool of him?" By such deeds, minor sins are
magnified. But sins are destructive. When man is led to them, and Satan has
succeeded in inducing him to act that way, then he should be in trouble and
incurs regret on him by the triumph of the Enemy over him and his own
remoteness from Allah Almighty. If a sick person rejoices in the destruction of
the botde containing his medication, just to escape the bitterness of drinking it,
his cure is not expected.
A further cause of increasing a minor sin is that man disdains Allah's
protection of him, His forbearance, and the respite He grants to him. Man does
not grasp that he is given respite out of intense dislike, so that the offense might
increase. He thinks that his ability to sin is a sign of Allah's concern for him. This
is because of his feeling secure from Allah's planning, and his ignorance of the
pitfalls of delusion about Allah. In confirmation of that He says: "And they say
within themselves: "Why does Allah not chastise us for what we say?" sufficient
for them shall be Hell, at which they shall be roasted - a wretched lot." (AlMujadilah 8)
f

++

» ,

^

^

c

Another cause is that he commits a sin and exposes it by mentioning it after
committing it, or that he commits it in another's presence. Indeed, such is an
offense against the protection Allah lowers upon him and an incitement of the
craving for evil in him whom he tells of his sin or whom he makes witness his
action. Two offenses join into his offense to harden it. If encouraging another
person to commit that sin, inducing him and involving him, are added, it goes
into a fourth crime, and it becomes a monstrous affair.
It is narrated in a tradition: "All men are excused except the declarers. One of
them spends the night in sin, and Allah conceals it, yet he arises and removes
divine concealment, and speaks of his sin." (both sheikhs on the authority of Abu
Hurairah). This is because one of Allah's attributes and favours is that he reveals
the good deed, conceals the unsightly and does not rip the protective veil. But
man's exposure (of sin) is a repudiation of this grace. Somebody said: "Do not
sin, but if you cannot avoid sin, awaken not such a desire in another, for then you
will have sinned twice." That is the reason why Allah Almighty states: " The
Hypocrites, men and women, (have an understanding) with each other: they
enjoin evil, and forbid what is just, and are close with their hands." (At-Tawbah
67)
Cr?

i (0) pr-^1

cf

It is narrated that somebody said: "The gravest violation of a man's reputation
is to assist him in committing a sin, and then make him regard it slight."
Another cause of magnifying a sin is the case in which the sinner is a
learned having followers. If his sin is displayed, it increases, e.g., the scholar's
putting on silk, riding golden carriages, taking doubtful money from rulers,

The quarter of the saviors
50
frequenting the company of rulers, encouraging them by abstention to
disapprove (of their evil), reckless slandering, intemperance in controversy, by
way of scorning, and occupying himself with such learning as leads only to
glory, like the art of controversy and argumentation. For these are sins in which
the learned will have a following. He dies but his evil remains spreading in the
world indefinitely. Blessed is he whose sins die with him. According to a
pardcular tradition: "He who enacts an evil practice bears its burden and the
burden of anybody practicing it, reducing nothing of theirs at all." (Muslim on
the authority of Jarir lbn Abdullah). Allah Almighty says: "And We write down
what they have forwarded and what they have left behind." (Ya Sin 12)
What "is left behind" refers to diose acts which continue after the expiration
of the deed and die perpetrator.
lbn 'Abbas "Allah be pleased with both" said: "Woe to the scholar from his
followers; he slips but goes right yet people carry the error far away."
Somebody said: "The error of the learned is like a ship, it sinks and its
passengers drown." In the Israelite tales "There was a scholar who misguided
people into unlawful innovation, then was overtaken by repentance and acted
toward correction over a lifetime. Allah then revealed to their prophet: "Say to
him: 'If your sin were only in that which is between Me and you, I would surely
forgive it. However, what about those of My servants you have misled and
plunged into hell fire?"'
Thus it becomes clear that the position of the learned is grave. They have two
duties: first, abandonment of sin, and second, concealment of it. Just as their
responsibility for sins is compounded, so is their recompense for good deeds
emulated by their following. If the learned abandons pursuit of affectation and
the affection for the mundane world, is satisfied with little thereof, as well as with
little food and apparel against the elements, and is followed in this by leading
scholars and laymen, he will enjoy the likes of their reward. If, however, he leans
toward affectation, they consequently would lean to imitate him. they would be
able to attain success only in the service of rulers and the gathering of scraps
from unlawful wealth. For all this he will be responsible. Thus the behaviour of
the scholars is compounded manifold, be it in merit or demerit, in gain or less.
This is sufficient for the details of the sins from which repentance is effective.

THIRD PILLAR
ON PERFECTION, REQUISITES AND PERMANENCE OF REPENTANCE
We have already mentioned that repentance consists of regret which leads to
determination and resolution. This regret is itself caused by knowledge that the
offenses are a barrier between man and his Beloved. Each of these, knowledge,
regret and determination, has permanence and perfection. Its perfection has a
sign, and its permanence has requisites, all to be clarified.
As for knowledge, it is to know the cause of repentance; its strengthening and
its perfection by factors such as the company of the virtuous, attendance of the
gatherings of celebration (of Allah), questioning about the fatal impact of

Book one: Repentance

51

transgressions and about the punishment they may bring on in this world. But
cleaving to a sheikh is more useful than all this; indeed it is the efficacious
remedy. It will be discussed later in more detail.
As for regret, it is the heartache, when man discerns that the Beloved has
been lost. It is marked by long grief and sorrow, tears flowing and much weeping.
When one becomes aware of torment afflicdng his child or one of his dear ones,
his grief and weeping are protracted. And, who is dearer to a person than himself,
what punishment is severer than hellfire, what is more indicative of the descent
of punishment than sins, and what announcer is more reliable than Allah and His
Messenger?
If a man is told by a physician that his child would not recover from his
illness and would die thereof, surely his grief would be aroused. Yet, his child is
not dearer than himself, nor is the physician more knowledgeable or more
reliable than Allah and His Messenger, nor is death more severe than hellfire, nor
is sickness more indicative of death than sins are of Allah's wrath and the risk of
hellfire. The stronger the anguish of regret is, the more the expiation of sin
through it is expected. The sign of the sincerity of regret is the mellowness of the
heart and the profusion of tears.
It is said in a particular tradition: "Sit with the contrite, for their hearts are the
most mellow." (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya from the saying of Abdullah Ibn Abu Awn).
A sign thereof is that instead of the sweetness of those sins, their bitterness seizes
man's heart, and inclination turns- into loathing, desire into aversion. It is stated
in the Israelite tales that Allah Almighty said to one of His prophets who had
asked Him to accept the repentance of a certain man after he had strived in vain
for years in worship: "By My power and majesty, if the inhabitants of heaven and
earth interceded, I would still not accept his repentance, for the sweetness of that
sin, from which he repents, yet lurks in his heart."
You may argue: "Sins by nature are agreeable acts. How, then, can one find
bitterness in them?" in reply to that, let me say that one who eats honey
containing poison, and does not discover it by taste, and relishes it, but
afterwards falls ill, his illness and its pain progress, his hair falls out and his limbs
are left paralyzed, should honey containing a like substance, be set before him,
even if he is in an extreme state of hunger and urge for sweetness, would his soul
shun such honey or not? If you answer in the negative, such answer would be a
denial of the evident and of experience.
Rather, it is possible that even uncontaminated honey would be shunned
because of its resemblance to the other. That is how the repentant may have the
sensation of the bitterness of sin. This is brought on by his knowledge that the
taste of every sin may be the taste of honey, but its effect is that of poison.
Repentance is not sincere or true without such belief. As such belief is rare,
repentance and repentants are rare. You see only such as turn away from Allah,
think lightly of sins, and persist in them. This is a requisite for the perfection of
regret, and must be constant unto death.
Man must find such bitterness in all sins, even if he has never committed
them before, just as one who consumed poison contained in honey feels aversion

The quarter of the saviors
52
to fresh water as soon as he learns that it contains a similar poison, since the
harm was not from the honey but rather from what it contained. Likewise, the
damage that afflicts the repentant from his theft or fornication does not stem
from the nature of die act itself but rather from its being a transgression and
violation of Allah's command. This applies to every sin.
As for the resolution which emerges therefrom, it is the will to correction and
it has a connection with the present, the past and the future. As far as the present
is concerned, it entails renouncing anything prohibited which he practices, and
the fulfillment of every obligation which faces him in the present. As far as the
past is concerned, it is the correction of what has preceded. As for the future, it is
the continued obedience and permanent renunciation of sin unto death.
The requisite of the sincerity of repentance, as far as the past is concerned, is
that man should turn his thought back to the first day when he came of age or
attained the age of puberty, and scrutinize his past life, year by year, month by
month, day by day and moment by moment. He should review, in what acts of
obedience he was negligent and to which sins he yielded.
If he missed a prayer or performed it while wearing an impure garment or not
with the proper intent because he was unaware that the intent is a requisite of
prayer, he should perform it in full. If he has doubts as to the number of prayers
missed, computing from the period of his attaining maturity, subtracting the
number of prayers which he feels sure he had performed, he should perform the
remainder. He may use common sense, and he will attain the right figure by way
of inquiry and careful reckoning.
As for fasting, if he neglected it during a journey, or if he broke the fast
intentionally or forgot the proper intention at night and did not make it up, he
should, after most careful computation, busy himself with making it up.
As for alms, he should compute his total wealth and the number of years that
elapsed since he acquired it, and not from the time of his attaining maturity, for
alms are due even on the property of the child. He then discharges that which he
feels he most likely owes. Further, if he discharged it in a manner inconsistent
with his rite, as not having disbursed to all the eight categories or discharged an
alternate while he is of the Shafi'i school, he should execute all that; otherwise it
is not fully satisfactory. The computation of alms and the knowledge of this
matter is protracted, and requires lucid consideration: He may have to consult the
jurists on how to settle the matter.
As for pilgrimage, if one had been able, over the years, but his departure did
not come to pass, and presently he has become destitute, he still should go on the
pilgrimage. If, considering his destitution, he is unable, he must acquire, by lawful
means, enough for provisions. If he has no means of acquisition, he should
request people to grant him from the Zakat or charitable funds, the necessary
sum for the pilgrimage. If he dies before performing the pilgrimage, he dies in
transgression. The Messenger of Ailah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "If one dies without having performed pilgrimage, it is the same to him to
die as a Jew or a Christian." Accidental inability succeeding a state of capacity
does not cancel man's obligation of pilgrimage.

Book one: Repentance -------------- ------- -—-----------------------------------------

53

Such is the way for one to examine acts of obedience and to correct them.
As for sins, he should trace his hearing, eyesight, tongue, stomach, hand, foot,
pudendum and the rest of his limbs, from the beginning of his maturity, then
look through all his days and hours and detail to himself a record of his
transgressions until they all are established, the minor and the major, and he
should sift them. Some of them are between Allah and himself, i.e., do not entail
injustice to others. This includes such acts as gazing at a woman unlawful for him
to look at, sitting in a mosque despite a major ceremonial impurity, touching the
Mushaf before performing ablution, entertaining a heresy, drinking wine, listening
to entertainment, etc. in other words, all that is unconnected with harm to
another person.
Repentance from these comes through regret and grief. Let him also
reckon their measure as regards magnitude and duration, and seek for each of
these sins a corresponding good deed. He performs good deeds in proportion
to the measure of the transgressions in compliance with the statement of the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "Fear Allah
wherever you be and follow an evil deed with a good one to wipe it out." (AtTirmidhi on the authority of Abu Dharr). In confirmation of that, Allah said:
"Surely the good deeds will drive away the evil deeds." (Hud 114)

Listening to entertainments is atoned by listening to the recitation of the
Qur'an and Dhikr gatherings. Sitting in a mosque in an impure state is atoned by
I'tikaf in a mosque for engaging in worship. Touching the Qur'an while unclean is
atoned by esteem for the Qur'an, extensive reading from it, kissing if often, and
by preparing a copy of the Book and making it an endowment. The consumption
of wine is atoned by charitable donation of a lawful beverage which is better and
liked by him.
It is impossible to enumerate all the transgressions. The point is to tread the
opposite path. Illness is cured by its opposite. Every stain, which arose upon the
heart through transgression can be erased only by an illumination raised upon it
through an opposite good deed. These opposites are proportionate to one
another. Therefore, each evil should be expunged with a good of its own kind but
opposite in effect. White is cancelled by black, not by heat or cold. This
classification and verification are subtleties toward expunging transgression.
Expectation is so justified, trust so great that one should not persist in one kind
of worship, even though this too is effective in erasing sin.
Such is the rule concerning sins of man towards Allah. That a thing is atoned
by its opposite is indicated by the fact that the love of the mundane is the
beginning of all error, and that the effect, in the heart, of the pursuit of the
mundane is delight in it and craving for it. Since faced with anxieties and worries,
the heart shuns the world, certainly any hurt which befalls the Muslim and draws
his heart away from the mundane, will serve as an atonement. The Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "There are sins for which
only anxieties atone (or, according to another version: 'only the anxiety in search
for livelihood')." (At-Tabarani, Abu Na'im and Al-Khatib on the authority of Abu

The quarter of the saviors
54
Hurairah). It is further narrated on the authority of 'A'ishah "Allah be pleased
with her": "When man's sins multiply and he has no works by which to atone for
them, Allah brings upon him anxieties, that should become atonement for his
sins." (This is reported by Ahmad). It is said that the anxiety which enters the
heart, while man is unaware, is the strain of sins, and the worry about them, the
feelings of the heart at the eve of Reckoning and terror of the day ofJudgement.
You might say: "Man worries mostly about his wealth, children and status.
This is an error. How will it be an atonement?" in reply to that, you should know
then that love for these is an error, and deprivation of these is an atonement. If
man savored it, the error set in. It is narrated that Gabriel "peace be upon him"
entered unto Joseph "peace be upon him" in the prison. He asked him: "How
was my poor father when you left him?" he replied: "He grieved for you with the
sorrow of a hundred bereaved mothers." He asked: "What does he have, then,
with Allah Almighty?" he said: "The reward of one hundred martyrs." Thus,
anxieties also atone for sins against Allah. This is the rule concerning sins against
Allah.
As for injustices towards one's fellow-men, they too include felony and
transgression of Allah's limits. For Allah has also forbidden the wronging of
one's fellow. The correction of such, insofar that they pertain to Allah's limits,
is to show remorse, contrition, renunciation of similar acts in the future, and
the performance of good deeds counted as opposites of the sins. The repentant
will requite with benevolence toward men for the hurt he may have caused
them. He will atone illegal usurpation of their property by charitable gifts from
his lawfully earned property. Degrading their dignity by slander and vilification
will be atoned through praise for those of religiousness, telling people of what
he knows of the good qualities of one's fellow, etc. The taking of life is atoned
by manumission of slaves. For this is like giving life, since the slave is lost to
himself and exists only for his master. Manumission is a creation, the maximum
of creation man is able to do. The destruction (of life) is countered by the
creation (of life).
By this you learn that what we have discussed of following the path of
opposites in atonement and annulment is attested to in the Law, as the
atonement for slaying is the manumission of slaves. But, even if he did all that, it
would not be sufficient so long as he has not turned away from injustice to men,
be it against life, or property, or dignity, or heart, I mean sheer hurt.
As for matters of life, if a man happens to kill by mistake, then his repentance
is by compensation, through conceding the blood money, either from him or his
closest relatives from the side of his father, and it should reach the entitled party.
Such is his responsibility until the delivery would be executed. If the murder is
committed intentionally, and legal retribution is due, then repentance is through
(being ready to suffer) retaliation. If he was not identified, he must reveal himself
to the avenger who will decide about his life: he may forgive him if he so likes or
kill him if he so likes. Only by such means is the killer's responsibility fulfilled.
Concealment is not permitted.
This is not like fornication, drinking wine, stealing, robbery or taking part in

!

■ 1

Book one: Repentance

55

an illicit affair for which legal punishment under the divine law had been
stipulated, for these cases do not require that the repentant should publicly
compromise himself, disclose himself or seek the application of the sacred law
from the ruler. Rather, he should avail himself of Allah's protecdon, and carry out
Allah's declared punishment upon himself by various sorts of mortification and
chastisement. Pardon, in the case of sins toward Allah alone, is nigh unto the
regretful repentant.
But even, if he submits his case to the authorities and the prescribed
punishment is imposed, he will have done his duty, and his repentance is sound
and accepted by Allah. This is attested by what is narrated of Ma'iz Ibn Malik,
who came to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
and said: " O Messenger of Allah, I have stained my soul and fornicated, and I
desire that you cleanse me!" The Prophet "peace be upon him" then turned him
away. The next day he approached the Prophet "peace be upon him" and said to
him: " O Messenger of Allah, I have fornicated!" the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" turned him away. When Ma'iz came for the
third time, the Prophet "peace be upon him" took up his case, and a pit was dug
for Ma'iz, and the Prophet "peace be upon him" gave the order that the man be
stoned to death. People, in this matter, were of two opinions. Some said: "He was
ruined as his crime engulfed him." Others said: "No repentance is more sincere
than his." But the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "His repentance surely would, if divided, suffice for a whole people."
(Muslim on the authority of Buraidah).
It is further narrated that a woman from the Ghamid tribe came to the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and said: "O
Messenger of Allah, I have committed adultery, cleanse me!" The Prophet "peace
be upon him" turned her away. On the next day, she came and said: "O
Messenger of Allah, why do you turn me away? Do you reject me as you did to
Ma'iz? By Allah, I am pregnant!" The Prophet the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "As for now, go away until you bear the
child." When she gave birth she came with an infant boy wrapped in a tatter and
said: "Here, this is the child I bore." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said to her: "Go away and nurse him until he is
weaned." Then, when she weaned him she came with the infant, having in his
hand a piece of bread. She said: "O Messenger of Allah, I have weaned him and
he has already got food." The child was given over to a man from among the
Muslims, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" gave
command that a bit be dug for her to be buried unto the chest, and stoned to
death. Khalid Ibn Al-Walid approached with a stone and cast it upon her head.
The blood splashed upon his face and he cursed her. The Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" heard him insulting her, and said: "Be
quiet O Khalid, for indeed, by Him in whose hand my soul is, she has certainly
repented in such a way that if the tax collector repented like her, he would be
forgiven." After that he issued instructions to establish funeral prayer on her
and she was buried. (Muslim on the same previous authority).

The quarter of the saviors
As for retaliation and the punishment of false accusation, die one responsible
must expiate his guilt before the one in the right. If the subject is property
unlawfully usurped, treachery, or swindle in business matters by means of fraud,
such as sale of spurious goods, concealing a defect in the sold goods,
undercutting a workman's wages or withholding his wages, all this requires
investigation, not from the limit of a man's maturity but from the beginning of its
occurrence. That which is due from a youth's property, the youth, upon his
attaining maturity, must pay, if the trustee failed to do so. If he does not do this,
he becomes a transgressor liable for it. For the youth and the adult are equal as
regards monetary claims.
Let man, then, be careful of the smallest sums from the first day of his life
until the day of his repentance, before he is held responsible on the Day of
Judgement. Let him examine his own self before he is examined. One who is not
careful of this world, his accounting is protracted in the next. If his total
obligation is, most plausibly and with all possible effort, summed up, let him
write it down. Let him, also, record the names of the wronged, one by one, and
travel around the world seeking them, to expiate his guilt before them or give
them satisfaction. Such repentance is hard on the wrongdoers and the merchants,
as they are unable to seek out all their business contacts or the heirs of these.
Each one must do as much as is within his capacity. If he is unable, there remains
for him only the way of profusion of good works that, on the Day of
Resurrection, will prove abundant, so that they will be taken and placed on the
scales of the wronged claimants. The abundance of his good deeds is measured
against his wrongdoings. But if his good works do not counterbalance them, he
will be saddled with some evils of the wronged claimants, so that he will perish by
the evil of others.
This is the way for every repentant of repelling the claims of the wronged.
This necessitates the investment of a lifetime in good deeds, commensurate
with the duration of unjust behaviour. How is this possible when it involves
an unknown quantity? And perhaps the end is near? Time being limited, he
must be more energetic in accumulating good deeds than he was in gathering
sin over extended time. Such is the rule concerning injustices to which he is
under obligation.
56

As for his actual possessions, let him return to the rightful owner that which
is known to belong to that owner. The property whose rightful owner is not
known should be given in charity. If lawful possessions become mixed up with
unlawful ones, he must do his best to learn the amount of the illicit property, and
give in charity that amount, as has already been clarified in the Book of the
Lawful and the Unlawful.
As for such verbal offense against the heart, like tormenting or defaming
people, he must seek out everyone who suffered from his tongue or whose heart
hurt by his actions, and seek to expiate his sins with each, one by one. If one has
died or disappeared, that matter is forfeit, and correction is possible only through
augmenting good deeds to be accepted as substitutes on the Day of Judgement. If
he finds a claimant who releases his guilt in good faith, then that is his atonement.

Book one: Repentance

57

The repentant must put his offense and opposition before the claimant, for
ambiguous pardon is insufficient. Perhaps, if the wronged were to know all that,
and the magnitude of the offense against him, he would not be inclined to forgive
him, and would rather store that until the Day of Judgement, in order to take it
from the repentant's good deeds or loading his own evils upon his evil record. If
the repentant's offense against others includes anything that, were it mentioned
or made known, would hurt the wronged person, such as the fornication with the
wronged person's slave girl or female relative, or verbal reference to some secret
failings, the pain may be increasing should the repentant seek to stimulate him,
then the repentant's way in search of pardon is blocked. There remains but to
seek release from his guilt. Still a guilt will remain. Let him seek to compensate
for it through good deeds as in the case of the injustices against those now dead
or missing.
Harmful remark and characterization also represent a new evil from which
expiation must be sought. Whenever the repentant mentions his offense and
announces it to the aggrieved, who does not permit expiation, the repentant's
guilt remains. Such is the right of the aggrieved. The repentant must, therefore,
subdy win him over, act in his interests, and show love and solicitude such as
would take sway over his heart. Indeed, man yields to beneficence. Everyone who
feels aversion to an evil may be swayed by a good deed. When the heart of him
(the aggrieved man) recovers, through the abundance of (the wrongdoer's)
affection and solicitude, he will permit himself pardon. If he persist in refusal, the
sinner's solicitude and pleas are counted among his good deeds which, on the
Day of Judgement, will possibly make good for his offense. Let his effort to
gladden the other's heart through tenderness be as much as it was in inflicting
harm, or surpass it. On the Day of Judgement, this will be taken as his
compensation, according to the divine judgement. This is similar to one who, in
this world, has damaged property, then offered the equivalent (in maintenance),
but the owner declined to accept it or absolve him, and the Judge then ordered
the owner to accept willingly or unwillingly. That is how Allah, the Judge of all
judges, and the Fairest of all the fair, will decree on the Day of Judgement.
It is narrated in both Sahihs on the authority of Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri "Allah
be pleased with him" that the Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "There was,
among those who were before you, a man who had killed ninety-nine persons.
He inquired after the wisest man upon the earth, and was directed to a monk. He
came to the monk and asked: 'One has killed ninety-nine people, is there (a
possibility) of repentance for him?’ he answered in the negative, thereupon The
man killed him, thereby completing the number of his victims one hundred. Then
he again sought after the wisest man in the land, and was directed to a learned
man, to whom he said: 'One has killed a hundred men, is there repentance for
him? he answered in the affirmative and said: 'Who prevents him from repenting?
Go to such and such a land, where people serve Allah, worship with them, and
do not return to your land, for it is an evil land.' He set out on the road but
midway death overtook him. Then the angels of mercy argued over him with the
angels of chastisement. The angels of mercy said: 'He came as a repentant, with

The quarter of the saviors
58
his heart directed toward Allah.' The others said: 'He has never done any good.'
An angel appeared to diem in a human form, and they appointed him to judge
between them. He said: 'Measure die distance to the two lands; he belongs to the
one which is nearer.' They measured, and found him nearer to the land he sought.
So die angels of mercy took hold of him." According to anodier version, "he was
a span closer to the righteous city, so he became one of it." In a third version,
"Allah urged diis side to move away and the other side to draw near, then said:
'Measure what is between diem.' They found the man closer to the one by a span;
and he was forgiven."
From this you may learn that there is no salvation except through the
preponderance of good deeds even as little as an atom's weight. The repentant
must show an abundance of good deeds. Such is the rule of intent as far as the
past is concerned.
As to the determination linked to the future, it is that one should give a
firm pledge to Allah, and contract with Him a firm covenant not to repeat
such sins nor their like. This is like the man who, in his sickness, knows that
a certain kind of fruits, for example, will cause him harm. He resolves, with
determination, that he will not get the fruit so long as he remains ill. This
resolution is immediately imperative, even though it can be imagined that
craving will overcome him next. One is not, however, a repentant so long as
he has not firmed up the resolution in the present. It is inconceivable that a
repentant should succeed therein, at the start, except by means of solitude,
silence, reducing food and sleep to a minimum, and sticking to lawful
sustenance.
If he has lawfully inherited wealth, or a craft by which he can earn a sufficient
amount, let him be content with it. The beginning of all sin is the consumption of
the forbidden. How can one be repentant while persisting therein, not content
with the lawful nor abstinent from the doubtful, unable to give up the cravings
for food and raiment? Someone said: "He who is sincere in giving up desire and
conquered himself for Allah's sake seven times, would never be afflicted by that
desire." Another said: "He who has repented from sin and kept to the straight
seven years, will never return to it." If the repentant is not learned, he should
learn what is incumbent upon him in the future and what is forbidden, so that he
would be able to stick to uprightness.
Unless man chooses solitude, his uprightness is incomplete, even though he
may have renounced some sins. Such is the case of him who renounces, for
instance, drinking wine, fornication or usurpation, yet this is not full repentance.
Some people said that this repentance is not valid, while others said that it is
right. Validity, in this context, is a vague expression. We would say to one who
holds it invalid: "If you mean by this that his abstention from certain sins is of no
avail at all, and that its presence is the same as its absence, then great indeed is
your error. We know that the more the sins are, the more the punishment
increases, and vice versa." To one who asserts the validity (of such repentance)
we say: "If you mean thereby that renunciation of some sins is necessarily
accepted and will inevitably lead to salvation or bliss, this, also, is an error.

Book one: Repentance

59

Salvation and bliss come with total abstention from sin." Such is the apparent
sense. We are not speaking of the subtle secrets of divine forgiveness.
If he, who takes the position that such repentance is invalid, says: "I mean
thereby that repentance amounts to remorse; man feels remorse for theft, for
instance, as a transgression and not as theft per se. It is impossible that he regret
for it without (regretting also for) fornication, so long as his grief is due to sin
being a transgression, for both have a common cause. A man who grieves over
the murder of his child by sword would also grieve over the child's death by
knife, because his grief is due to the death of his beloved, whether by sword or
knife. Likewise man grieves over missing his Beloved, which occurs through
transgression, be it by theft or fornication. How does he grieve over one but not
the other? Remorse is a state brought on by the knowledge that transgression, as
such, alienates the Beloved.
It is inconceivable that it would be so in the cause of some transgressions
and not of others. For, if this were possible, it would be conceivable that one
could repent from drinking wine from one jug but not from another. Yet,
such is impossible, for the transgression, in both cases, is one, and the jugs are
no more than receptacles. In the same way, the particular transgressions are
(mere) tools of sin per se, while sin, insofar as it is disobedience, is one and
the same. The meaning of the invalidity is that Allah has promised the
repentants a rank, and this rank can be achieved only through remorse, but
remorse over only some and not all of these sins is not imaginable. It is like
the 'case of a property which is predicated upon offer and acceptance: if the
offer and acceptance do not take place, we say that the contract is not valid,
i.e., that the result, which is the disposition of property, does not occur. This
is confirmed by the fact that the fruit of mere abstention is the elimination of
the punishment for the sin given up. The fruit of remorse is the atonement of
past sin. abstention alone could not atone theft in the absence of Remorse
over it. Remorse can only be conceived (as referring to) a transgression. This
applies to all sins. This is an exposition of the opinion of those who deny the
validity of (partial abstention from sin). It is a clear opinion, which a fair man
examines in detail to eliminate obscurity thereby.
We also assert that repentance of some sins might be to repent either from
major sins without regard for the minor ones, or from minor without regard for
the major, or from one major sin rather than another.
First: as for the repentance from major sins without regard for the minor, it is
possible. It is known that the major sins are greater in Allah's view and are more
apt to arouse Allah's displeasure and wrath. But it is easier to obtain pardon for
minor sins. It is not inconceivable, then, for one to repent from the greater and
feel remorse about them. This is as he who commits an offense against the family
of a king and his women and also an offense against his animal. He is more
fearful about the former offense in comparison with the latter. Remorse follows
in proportion to the notion about the magnitude of the sin and the conviction
that it alienates from Allah. It is possible to find this in Sharia. Many were the
repentants among the past generations and not one of them was infallible.
Repentance does not call for infallibility.

i

The quarter of the saviors
The physician might caution the patient strongly about honey, and, to a
lesser degree, about sugar, in a manner that the padent will feel that the harm
of sugar might never occur. The padent might then give up, by doctor's order,
honey but not sugar. Such a situation is not at all impossible. If he consumed
them both, because of his craving, he might regret for consuming the honey
but not the sugar.
Second: it is possible that one could repent from some major sins and not
others, due to hi belief that some sins of that degree are more severe and
vicious in Allah's eyes. One may renounce murder, robbery, tyranny and
injustices to men because he knows that the human record is not neglected,
while pardon for acts which are between man and Allah is readily achieved.
Just as there is disparity between major and minor sins, so it is also possible to
make differentiation among the major sins themselves, and in the evaluation
of the perpetrator for them. For that reason one might renounce some major
sins which are not directed against his fellow-men. For example, one may
renounce drinking wine but not fornication, since it becomes clear to him that
wine is the key to vice, and that after drinking it he loses his mind, and
becomes apt to commit all sins unknowingly. As drinking wine is graver in his
opinion, a fear is aroused in him which forces him to renounce wine in the
future and to regret for drinking it in the past.
60

Third: one may renounce a minor sin or some minor sins while persisting in a
major sin, with full knowledge of its being a major sin. One may renounce
slander, glancing at a woman unlawful for him to look at, or something of the
same class, while persisting in drinking wine. The way this is possible is that any
believer is afraid of his sins and more or less regretful of having committed them.
Yet, the delight in that sin can be stronger than the heartache brought on by this
fear, as factors of ignorance and neglect lead to the weakening of the fear, or
there may be factors which strengthen craving. Contrition exists but it is neither
constant nor strong enough to actuate resolution. If, however, he is free from a
craving stronger than himself, and is able to master the drives encountered, fear
overcomes the craving, conquers it, and it imposes renunciation of that
transgression.
Perhaps the voracity of the sinner for wine intensifies and he is not able to
endure it. He also might have rather a desire for slander and defamation of
people or for glancing at females. But in this case, his fear of Allah has reached
the point of taming this weaker drive, although not the stronger one. The
element of fear then forces the emergence of determination toward abstention.
This sinner says to himself: "If Satan vanquishes me through the overpowering
desire for some sins, it is not proper that I throw off all restraint or let down the
reins totally; rather, I shall fight him in some sins, and perhaps I shall prevail over
him, and my victory over him in resisting some sin will be an atonement for some
of my sins." Were we not to imagine this, we would not be able to conceive of
the sinner as praying or fasting. One would have to say to him: "If your prayer is
to other than Allah, it is of no avail, and if it is to Allah, renounce your depravity.
Allah's command, in all this, is one. It is inconceivable that your prayer intends to

61
Book one: Repentance
achieve closeness to Allah so long as you do not draw near through abandonment
of depravity."
It would be impossible for him to say to Allah : "I am under two
commandments and, upon disobedience, I face two penalties. I am able to
vanquish Satan over one but am failing to do so about the other. I shall
vanquish him as far as I can, expecting, with my mortification, that this may
atone for some of my failure due to my excessive craving." But how is such
absurd when it is the condition of every Muslim? Any Muslim combines
obedience to Allah and disobedience for no other reason than this. If one
understands this, he would understand that the victory of fear over craving
for some sins is quite possible.
When fear pertains to past action, it causes remorse. Remorse, in turn,
induces resolution. The Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "Remorse is
repentance." He did not stipulate contrition of all sin. He "peace be upon him"
also said: "One who renounces a sin is like him who has never sinned." He did
not refer to the one who renounces all sins. These concepts clarify the wrongness
of the claim that partial repentance is impossible due to the essential similarity of
the appetites and the equal exposure to the displeasure of Allah. Yes, it is possible
that one renounces drinking wine and does not renounce drinking Nabidh
because of the disparity between them in the exposure to displeasure. One might
renounce many sins and not renounce a few, for the more the sins are numerous,
the more severe the punishment is. He thus fulfills the desire inasmuch as he fails
to renounce, and give up a part of his desire for the Sake of Allah Almighty. Man
then is like the ill person who was warned, by the physician, of fruits. He might
take some little amount without doing so in excess. It follows from this that he
cannot renounce a thing and does not renounce anything similar. It is inescapable
that this which he renounces is in opposition to what he continues to do, either
in the severity of the transgression or the victory of the craving. When this
discrepancy affects the belief of the repentant, one can conceive his various states
of fear and remorse as well as of renunciation. Even though he has not obeyed
Allah in all command and prohibitions, his contrition over that sin, and his
loyalty to his resolution to abstain, sets him in the category of him who has not
sinned.
You might argue: "Can an impotent repent from fornication to which he
yielded before the incidence of impotence?"
I would answer in the negative, for renunciation means remorse which
induces the determination to abstain from that action which he is able to
commit. But the deed a man cannot execute is gone of itself, not as a result of
abstention from it. Let me say that if, after impotence, illumination and
realization occur to him, he is convinced of the harm of fornication to which he
yielded, and heartache, remorse and suffering are so aroused in him, that had a
desire for coition remained in him, searing remorse would have tamed and
mastered that desire, I would hope that such would atone for his sin, and wipe
out his evil deed. Undoubtedly, had he repented before the onset of impotence
and died following repentance, he would be among the repentants, even if a

The quarter of the saviors
62
situation did not arise in which his craving was stimulated, and in which it could
be readily satisfied. But, he is repentant in that his contrition has attained such a
level as would deflect him from fornication were his desire to surface. It is then
not unlikely that the strength of contrition should, in the case of an impotent
man, reach such a level, though it might not be known to himself. Everyone
who does not crave for something considers himself capable of renouncing it,
through minimal fear, while Allah is aware of his conscience and the measure of
his contrition. Perhaps Allah will accept it from him; nay, it seems He will do.
The truth in all this goes back to the fact that the stain of transgression is
effaced from the heart by two things: the searing contrition and the intense
mortification to abstain from sin in the future. With the termination of
craving, mortification ceases. Yet, it is not inconceivable that contrition would
wax to such an extent that it obliterates the craving without self-struggle. Had
it not been for this, we would have said that repentance is not accepted unless
the repentant lives for a period enough to struggle with that same craving
many times after repentance. But the apparent sense of Sharia does not
substantiate such a condition.
You might say: "If we assume two repentants, one having lost all urge to sin,
and the other retaining it while fighting against it and blocking it, which of them
would be better?" in reply to that, it should be known that this is debatable
among the learned. Ahmad Ibn Abu Al-Hawari and the companions of Abu
Sulaiman Ad-Darani said: "The fighter is better since, in addition to repentance,
he has the merit of striving." The learned of Basra said: "The other one is the
better, for, if he becomes lax in his repentance, he will still be nearer to being
faultless than the struggler who is liable to relax in his struggle." Each school's
opinion contains some truth but fails to encompass the full truth.
The truth of the matter is that one whose urge has been discontinued is
subject to two states:
The first is that the discontinuance of the longing is due merely to a
relaxation in the craving itself. Then the struggler is better than the one in this
state inasmuch as his abstention through struggle is indicative of self-control
and the conquest of his drives by his faith, which is a trenchant proof of the
strength of conviction and belief. By strength of belief I mean the willpower
emerging at the direction of certainty, and taming the craving which emerges at
the direction of Satans. The struggle decidedly points to these two powers. The
statement (of the Basra learned) that this one is more secure, since if he is lax
he will still not return to sin, is correct, but the use of the term 'better' in this
context is a mistake.
This is like saying that the impotent is better than the virile for he is secure
from the risk of lust, or, that the youth is better than the adult for he is more
secure (from sin), or, that the weakling is better than the king, who overpowers
his enemies, for the weakling has no enemies while the king, though having been
victorious many times, might, sometime, be defeated. These are the words of a
man, though sound of heart, but lacking in understanding of worldly affairs,
unaware that glory lies in facing risks and grandeur is suspended on confronting

i

,

i
i

'

f

63
Book one: Repentance
dangers. One may say that the hunter who has no horse nor dog is better in the
art of hunting and of higher rank than one who possesses a horse and a dog, for
he is safe of the bolting of his horse, which may result in breaking his limbs when
he falls on the ground; he is safe, also, from being bitten and attacked by the dog.
This is indeed an error. On the contrary, the owner of a horse and dog, being
strong and knows how to control them, is better off and more likely to attain the
felicity of hunting.
The second is to thwart the longing by virtue of the strength of convicdon
and the sincerity of the preceding struggle as it reaches the point of taming the
fury of the craving until it is controlled by the discipline of Sharia, so that it is
activated only by a directive from the faith and, because of the dominance of the
faith over it, it lies inactive. This is a higher grade than that of the struggler who
endures the fury of desire and of curbing it. The statement that such a person has
not the merit of striving fails to grasp the goal of striving, as if striving were an
end unto itself. But the end of striving is the elimination of the greed of the
enemy lest it should drag you into his cravings. If he fails in his effort to involve
you, he will not impede you from following the path of religion. Once you have
subdued him and attained the goal, you are victorious, while so long as you
continue to strive you are yet in the pursuit of victory.
Compare one who has vanquished the enemy and enslaved him, as against
one who is engaged in fighting on the battle line and does not know how he will
fare. Or, take a man who has taught a dog to hunt, and trained a horse, both
staying with him after the dog has lost its voracity and the horse its recalcitrance,
and compare him with one who is yet engaged in the difficult animal training.
Some people have gone astray on this point, and considered that the struggle is,
itself, die ultimate goal. They did not grasp that the struggle is conducted in order
to get rid of the impediments on the Way. Others considered that the total
curbing and elimination of the desires is an end unto itself, to the extent that one
tried that, and when he failed he said: "This is absurd." He then rejected Sharia,
and followed the road of licentiousness giving himself to the pursuit of passions.
All of that is ignorance and error, as we have stated in the Book of the selfDiscipline in the quarter of Destructives.
You may ask: "What do you say of two repentants, one who forgot sin, did
not engage in sinful thoughts, and the other who held sin in full view of his eyes,
constantly reflecting on it, and then burning in contrition. Which of the two is
better?" in reply to that, it should be known that this is also subject to
controversy. One says: "True repentance is that you set your sin before your
eyes." The other says: "True repentance is to forget your sin." We consider each
school correct but in relation to two situations.
The speech of Sufis is always deficient. Indeed, the usage of each of them is
to relate only his own mystic experience, another's does not concern him. The
answers they give differ according to the variation in their mystic experiences.
This is a shortcoming as regards mood, will and depth, inasmuch as the person in
question is limited in view to his own experience, the other's state being of no
concern to him. For his way is to Allah Himself and to mystic experiences. Man's

.
!

The quarter of the saviors
64
way to Allah may be knowledge. But there are many ways to Allah, even though
they differ as to closeness to or remoteness from Allah. Although they share
divine guidance, only Allah knows who is the best guided of them.
I argue that To ponder about the sin, remember it, and be distressed by it is
an accomplishment in the case of the novice. If he were to forget it, his vexation
would not increase nor would his will and urge to follow the Way be
strengthened, for then he would be left without the grief and the fear which
impedes his reverting to similar sins. For the heedless, this is an accomplishment,
but for the mystic traveler a deficiency. It is an occupation which prevents from
following the Way. The mystic must not swerve from the way, and if he makes
progress, and the illumination of gnosis and the shimmering of the mystery is
revealed to him, it will engross him, and no scope will remain for attention to
previous experiences. This is an accomplishment. But if the traveler to a certain
town is hampered on the road by an obstructing river, his trouble, in fording it, is
prolonged because he had previously destroyed his bridge. Should he sit on the
banks of the river after fording it, and weep, lamenting his destruction of the
bridge, this would constitute an additional hindrance engaging him after coping
with the first. Truly, if the time is not fitting for departure, either because it is
night and the going is impractical, or because there are rivers on the road, and he
is fearful of crossing them, let his weeping and sadness, over the destruction of
the bridge, go on through the night, so that in the prolonging of grief, his
determination not to return to such a situation, will be confirmed. If such
admonition has produced in him inner strength not to revert, then it is more
appropriate for him to follow the path rather than engage in recounting the
destruction of the bridge and weeping over it. This is known only to one who
understands the way, the goal, the barrier and how to pursue the way. We have
already referred to this in the Book of Knowledge and in the quarter of
Destructives.
We must say that the prerequisite for the constancy of repentance is that man
should meditate much on the delights of Paradise to increase his longing. If he is
a youth, he should not ponder and think about all that parallels worldly things,
such as the heavenly maidens and palaces, for such reflections may perhaps
stimulate his longing, with the result that he will pursue transitory worldly
delights rather than the deferred hereafter. Nay, he should reflect, solely, on the
delight of gazing exclusively at Allah's countenance, which has no worldly
parallel. Thus, even recalling sin may arouse desire. The novice might be
provoked, and forgetfulness, in such a case, is preferable.
You should not be dissuaded from believing this examination by what you are
told of David's weeping and lamentation. Drawing analogy between yourself and
the prophets is an utter distortion, because they may have descended, by word
and deed, to the levels befitting their peoples to whom they were sent to give
guidance, and they were not sent but to act in a way which may benefit their
people, even if it detracts somewhat from the peak of their station. Some masters,
whenever they assigned their disciples any type of spiritual exercise, would join
them therein, not because they were in need of it after having accomplished their

Book one: Repentance

65

struggle and soul-training, but in order to facilitate the matter for the disciple.
This is why the Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "1 do not forget but I forget
to prescribe laws." or, in another version, "but I neglect to prescribe laws." (Malik
in his Muwatta' but without tracing it up to the Prophet himself). Do not wonder
at this. Peoples under the protective wing of the prophets’ compassion, are as
youth under the loving wings of their fathers, and as the cattle under the care of
the shepherd. Do you not see how a father, when he wishes to talk to his young
child, comes down to the child's level of articulation? Thus the Prophet "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said to Al-Hassan: "Kakh, Kakh!", when the
child took a date, from those assigned to charity, and put it in his mouth. (AlBukhari on the authority of Abu Hurairah). The Prophet "peace be upon him"
did not lack the fluency to say: "Drop that date for it is forbidden." Yet when he
realized that the child would not understand his locution, he abandoned
eloquence and sank to the child's usage. He who trains an ewe or a bird must
make sounds for it, using as a device of instruction chattering or whistling like an
animal or bird. Beware lest you neglect such intricacies, the stumbling block of
the Gnostics, let alone the heedless. We ask Allah, in His tenderness and
generosity, good success.
Exposition Of How People Differ In The Perseverance Of
Repentance
It should be known that those who turn unto Allah in repentance are of four
categories.
The first category: the sinner repents and keeps his repentance intact for all
his remaining days. He corrects that in which he was remiss, and it does not
occur to him to revert to his sins, except for those lapses of habit from which
man cannot disengage himself as long as he is not on the level of Prophethood.
This is integrity of repentance. He who has it goes ahead with good, and
substitutes good deeds for evil. Such repentance is called 'sincere repentance.'
The name of this calm soul, which returns to its Lord well-pleased, well-pleasing
is the serene self. These are the people referred to in the statement of the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": “The solitary who
are totally devoted to the invocation of Allah, the invocation frees them of their
burden so that they appear on the Day of Judgement light (of the burden of
sins).” (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu Hurairah). Indeed, in this lies an
indication that they were oppressed by burdens which the invocation of Allah
removed from them.
The people of this category are divided into different levels with respect to
their leaning towards appetites: from the repentant, there are such as whose
desires subsided under the domination of gnosis, upon whom their pressure
abated, and who follows the Way undisturbed by fighting them; the one who
incessantly is struggling with the soul but is able to contend with it and deter
it. The differentiation also pertains to the levels of struggle as regards
quantity, duration and type. Men differ also as regards the length of lifespan.
One is grabbed, dying soon after his repentance, and is gladdened by that for
his escape and death before debility. Another is granted time, continues a long

The quarter of the saviors
66
strife and endurance, his integrity continuous and his good deeds multiplying.
The state of this one is higher and better since every evil is wiped out by a
good deed.
A scholar said: “The sin, which the offender committed, is atoned only when
it overcomes man ten times as true desire, but he renounces it, and breaks his lust
out of fear of Allah.” But even, it would be implausible to stipulate this, though
the great impact of such a rule, if imposed, is undeniable. However, the weak
disciple should not follow this path lest the appetites be aroused, the
circumstances brought on for the sin to overcome man, but when he aspires to
desist, he may not be able to escape the reins of desire at will. Consequendy he
will proceed with the sin and he will break his repentance. Rather, the path of
repentance is to flee from the outset elements of sin, thus barring to man the
paths of sin. At the same time, he will seek to conquer his lust as far as possible.
Thereby his repentance will be safe from the outset.
The second category: the repentant follows the path of integrity in the
major acts of obedience and abandons all mortal abominadons, yet is not free
of sins which grip him unawares and without premeditation. He suffers from
them in the course of his affairs, without intention to commit them. But
whenever he commits them he censures himself, regrets, is sad, and renews
his resolution to be most careful to avoid circumstances which expose him to
such acts. This soul is worthy of being the 'upbraiding soul' as it rebukes man
for the objectionable matters he pursues though with no strong will or
calculation or intention.
This is also a high rank though inferior to the first category. It is the state of
most repentants, as evil is so kneaded into human substance, that rarely is man
free from it Yet, the goal of man's effort is that the good in him should prevail
over the evil, so that the scale of good deeds will be heavier and favour his
record. But it is hardly imaginable that the scale of evil deeds would be altogether
void. Men of this category hold the good promise from Allah as shown from His
statement “Those who avoid the heinous sins and indecencies, save lesser
offenses.” (An-Najm 32)

p)T vj

ySij

^ oii'»

That is because surely your Lord is wide in His forgiveness. As each lesser
offense results in a minor sin, without man being accustomed to it, it is proper
that it be among those lesser offenses which are forgiven. Allah said: “And who,
when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves, remember Allah and pray
forgiveness for their sins.” (A1 Imran 135)
4

ijjA*z**\l 4jjf iijjfi

ijjlk jl 4j^s>x.19 ijixi lil ^ jjJJl\ ^

Their recompense is forgiveness. Because of their regret and self censure,
Allah commends them in spite of their wronging themselves.
To those of this class, refers the statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" on the authority of Ali "Allah be pleased with
him": “The best of you all are those who are subject to temptation and are
contrite.” (Al-Baihaqi). In another tradition he "peace be upon him" said: “The

i

i

67

Book one: Repentance

believer is like a spike of grain, at times he recovers, and at times he is swayed.”
(Abu Ya’li and Ibn Hibban on the authority of Anas; At-Tabarani on the
authority of Ammar Ibn Yasir; and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of AlHassan).according to a third tradidon: “It is unavoidable that the believer should
sin from time to time.” (At-Tabarani and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Ibn
Abbas).
All these statements prove decisively that this amount (of minor offenses)
does not invalidate repentance, and does not put the perpetrator in the
category of the persistent sinners. To deprive a man of this kind of hope to
reach the level of the repentant, is to act like the physician who induces a
healthy person to despair of remaining healthy if he eats fruit and hot dishes
from time to time, though not persistently and condnuously; or like the
religious jurisprudent who induces in the student a despair of ever attaining
the degree of a religious jurisprudent, because, at rare and sporadic intervals,
he may be lax in repetition and let up taking notes. This points out the fault of
the physician and the religious jurisprudent. On the contrary, a (real) religious
scholar is he who does not induce people to despair of attaining the grades of
felicity because of temporary failures and the yielding to fleedng seizures of
evil. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“All human beings are sinners, and the best of the sinners are the repentant
who pray for forgiveness.” (At-Tirmidhi and Al-Hakim on the authority of
Anas). Allah said: “These shall be given their wage twice over for that they
padendy endured, and avert evil with good.” (Al-Qasas 54)

4 {(Js

b

it/-** lL* osv

1

^

He has not described them as totally devoid of evil.
The third category: the one who repents and, for some time, persists in
uprightness. Then, the appetites involve him in some sins, and, unable to curb
the desire, he commits them with intent and premeditation. Yet, along with that,
he persists in acts of obedience and avoids some sins despite drive and
opportunity (to commit them). But as this desire or two may overcome him, he
wishes only that Allah would enable him to curb it and that He protect him from
its evil. Such is his aspiration as he satisfies the desire, but in the end he is
contrite and says: “Would that I had not done it. I will repent from it and strive
to subdue it.” But, he is tempted and puts off repentance, time after time, day
after day. This soul is called the ‘tempted soul’, about which Allah said: “And
others have confessed their sins; they have mixed a righteous deed with another
evil.” (At-Tawbah 102)

4

^

On account of his assiduity in obedience and his aversion to the sins he
perpetrates, his case is hopeful. Perhaps Allah will turn to him. Yet, his end is
perilous because of his procrastination and postponement. Perhaps he will be
snatched (by death) before the repentance, and his case will come under (Allah’s)
pleasure. If Allah, in His generosity, corrects him, cures his defect and grants him
repentance, he will join the preceding categories. But if his misfortune overcomes

The quarter of the saviors
68
and his desire overtakes him, dien it may be feared that in the end he will
eternally abide in what was predesdned for him (i.e., hell fire).
If it is impossible for the student to avoid the distractions from learning, this
difficulty indicates that he is predestined to be an ignorant, and the hope, in his
case, becomes weak. But if diligence facilitates learning, it indicates that he was
predestined to be one of the learned. Similarly the relation of the joys and
attainments of the hereafter to good and bad deeds, according to divine
preordainment, is like the relation of sickness and health to the consumption of
food and drugs, and like the relation of the attainment of soul comprehension, by
which die high dignities in this world are merited, to the abandonment of
indolence and diligence in soul training. Just as no soul but that, which has
become understanding through prolonged training, lends itself to the dignities of
leadership, judgeship and advancement in knowledge, so none but a sound heart,
which has become pure through prolonged purification and refinement, is fit to
gain the hereafter, and closeness to the Master of the Universe. Thus has it been
preordained by Allah's direction. That is why Allah said: “By the soul, and that
which shaped it and inspired it to lewdness and god-fearing! prosperous is he
who purifies it, and failed has he who seduces it.” (Ash-Shams 7-10)
4 ($) 14^ Cr4
O
O*
^®
1^
When man falls into sin, and the sin becomes a debit, repentance'a credit,
this is then one of the signs of a setback. That is the significance of the
statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him": “A man can perform for seventy years the deeds of the people of
Paradise, until others say that he is one of the Paradise dwellers, and there
remains between him and Paradise only a span. Then, what is written
overtakes him, and he performs an act of the people of hellfire, and enters
hellfire.”(both sheikhs on the authority of Sahl Ibn Sa’d, with a slight variation
of wording; and Ahmad on the authority of Abu Hurairah). Fear of the end is
prior to repentance. Each breath is an end to that which was prior to it
inasmuch as death might be contiguous to it. Let man, then, be attentive to
each moment lest he fall into the perilous. Long is regret when it is of no
avail.
The fourth category: the repentant who proceeds, for a time, in uprightness
but then reverts to the temptation of sin or sins without admonishing his soul to
repent and without regret for his action. Rather, he becomes heedlessly absorbed
in following his appetites. Such a person is among those who persist in sin. Such
is called 'the soul that commands to evil' and flees from good Therefore the evil
end may be feared, and his affair is in Allah's pleasure. If he is destined for an evil
end, he suffers endless misery; and if he is destined for the reward most fair, so
that he dies on monotheism, then deliverance from hellfire can be expected for
him, at least after some time. Possibly he will be included in the broad pardon
because of a hidden inscrutable cause. His is like the case in which it is not
impossible for a man to enter a ruin to find a treasure, and quite accidentally, find
it; or to sit at home and be made learned by Allah without study, as it happened
to the prophets "peace be upon them".

69
Book one: Repentance
Seeking forgiveness through acts of obedience is like searching for knowledge
through effort and repetition, or like seeking wealth through trade and travel.
Seeking forgiveness through sheer hope, despite corrupt acts, is like seeking
treasures in ruins or knowledge from angelic teaching. If only the one who
worked hard could learn! If only the one who traded would gain wealth! If only
one who fasted and prayed would be forgiven! All men are deprived (of ultimate
happiness) except those who know. Those who know are all debarred except
those who act. Those who act are all precluded except for the righteous, and the
righteous are in great peril. Just as one destroyed his house, squandered his
wealth, and left himself and his dependents hungry, claiming that he anticipates
Allah's generosity in providing for him a treasure to be found under his destroyed
home (even though it is not beyond Allah's power and generosity), is considered,
by the sensible, as an ignorant and deluded man, likewise, , one who expects
pardon from Allah's generosity, while he is negligent in obedience, persisting in
sin, and not treading the path of forgiveness, is considered, by sensible people, as
demented.
One can only be astonished at the reasoning of this idiot and his propagating
his foolishness in a nice form when he says: "Allah is generous, His paradise is
not too narrow for one like me, nor does my sin injure Him." Then you see him
traveling overseas and hurtling perils in search of dinars. Should he be told:
"Indeed Allah is generous, the dinars of His treasury do not fall short of your
need, and your indolence in abandoning commerce will not harm you; sit, then,
in your home and perhaps He will provide for you in an unanticipated manner",
he would consider the speaker stupid and would mock at him. He would say:
"What is this nonsense? The heavens do not rain gold and silver. That must be
earned. Thus Allah ordained it, and set His process in motion. Allah's usage is
immutable."
Fool is he, when he does not grasp that the Master of the hereafter and the
Master of this life is one and the same, and that His usage in both worlds does
not vary. This was announced when Allah said: "And that a man shall have to his
account only as he has labored." (An-Najm 39)

How, then, can the man believe that Allah is generous in the hereafter but
not so in this life? How can he say that laxity in acquiring wealth is not a
requisite of divine generosity while laxity in works for (attaining) abiding
possession and eternal felicity is such a requisite, and, further, that Allah, by
virtue of generosity, will give him in the hereafter without (human) effort, but
usually will hold back, despite man's effort, in this world? He forgets Allah's
statement: "And in heaven is your provision, and that you are promised."
(Adh-Dhariyat 22)
4

Oj^-y

jU-UT 43 ^

O Allah, save us from blindness and going astray.
This is nothing save standing on one's head and immersion in the darkness of
ignorance. To such a man may apply Allah's statement: "Ah, if you could see the

!

The quarter of the saviors
70
guilty hanging their heads before their Lord (saying): 'our lord, we have seen and
heard; now return us, diat we may do righteousness."' (As-Sajdah 12)
r

^ £jp
That is, we have seen that You were right when You said: "And that man
shall have to his account only as he has labored." (An-Najm 39)
4
l/— ^
cr-^^4 c0'3 ^
So turn us back, we shall labour. At that point no alteration is possible and he
deserves chastisement. We seek refuge with Allah from the urges of ignorance
and doubt, and of suspicion that necessarily leads to an evil fate in the hereafter
and resurrection.

Exposition Of What Must The Repentant Hasten To Do If He Sins
Either With Intention And Dominant Desire Or By Chance
It should be known that repentance, contrition and action toward atonement
through good deeds to counter the sin, as we have mentioned, are incumbent
upon him. If the soul, because of the triumph of desire, does not assist toward
the resolution to abstain, then he has failed in one of the two imperatives. He
should not abandon the second which is to ward off the evil deed with a good
one so as to obliterate the former, that he may be of those who mix a righteous
deed with an evil one. The good deeds which atone evil, are through the heart,
the tongue or the limbs. Let the good deed stand in the stead of the evil with its
ramifications.
In his heart let him atone by entreating Allah for pardon and forgiveness, and
by humbling himself with the self-abasement of the fugitive slave. His
humiliation should be manifest to others in reducing his rank among them. The
sinful fugitive has nothing to be proud of among other people. Likewise, he
should harbor in his heart benevolence toward Muslims, and the resolve to
perform the acts of worship.
His tongue should confess the sin and ask for forgiveness by saying: "O my
Lord, I have stained my soul and have done evil, forgive my sins." Thus he
should multiply the kinds of apology we have cited in the Book of Invocations
and Supplications.
The limbs should be engaged in acts of worship, charity and various acts of
obedience. Some sayings of the Companions indicate that pardon of sin is
expected if the sin is followed by eight acts, four of which are acts of the heart:
repentance or resolution to repent, wish to desist from sin, fear of sin's
punishment, and desire for forgiveness. Four are acts of the limbs: that following
sin you should offer a two-rak'ah prayer, then seek Allah's forgiveness after them
seventy times, say one hundred times: "Exalted be Allah the Great, with Whose
Praise I exalt Him", then give alms, and then fast for a day. According to the
saying of a Companion: "You should perform ablution perfectly, enter the
mosque and offer a two-rak'ah prayer." (those of Sunan on the authority of Abu
Bakr As-Siddiq). Or a four-rak'ah prayer for atonement according to a certain

I

71
Book one: Repentance
tradition (by Al-Baihaqi, Ibn Mardawaih on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
According to another tradidon: "When you have done an evil, follow it with an
atoning good deed. A secret (evil act) should be followed by a secret (good act)
and a public (evil act) by a public (good act)." (Al-Baihaqi and At-Tabarani on the
authority of Mu'adh). It is said that charity given in secret atones the sins of night,
and charity given in public atones the sins of day.
It is narrated in an authentic tradition that a man said to the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "I have taken up with a woman
and I have done with her all save sexual relation. Judge upon me with the
judgement of Allah." The Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "Have you not
prayed with us the early morning prayer?" The man answered in the affirmative.
The Prophet "peace be upon him" then said: "Indeed, good deeds cancel the evil
ones." (This narration is reported as abridged by both sheikhs on the authority of
Ibn Mas'ud; and Muslim alone on the authority of Anas and Abu Umamah, with
a slight variation of wording). This indicates that approaching women save
fornication is a minor sin, which prayer atones, in accordance with the statement
of the Prophet "peace be upon him": "The five (obligatory) prayers are an
atonement for all that happens between them save the major sins." Under all
circumstances, man should every day take himself to account, sum up his evil
acts, and strive to cancel them out with good deeds.
You might say: "How can the prayer for pardon be beneficial without untying
the knot of persistence? In a particular tradition it is narrated: "One who prays
for pardon from sin, while persisting in it, is as one who mocks at the verses of
the Qur'an." (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Ibn Abbas). One used to
say: "I pray for Allah's pardon for my saying: 'I pray for Allah's pardon'." It is
said: "Prayer for pardon with the tongue is the repentance of liars." Rabi'ah Al'Adawiyyah said: "Our prayer for pardon needs much apology."
In reply to that, it should be known that innumerable Prophetic narrations
have been handed down on the merit of prayer for pardon, we have mentioned in
the Book of Invocations and Supplications, to the point that Allah connected the
prayer for pardon with the life of the Messenger "peace be upon him", as shown
from His saying: "But Allah would never chastise them, with thee among them;
Allah would never chastise them as they begged forgiveness." (Al-Anfal 33)

i©oJ %\

1.3 }

One of the Companions used to say: "We have two assurances of
clemency. One of them, the Prophet's being among us, is gone, and only the
prayer for pardon remains. Were that to disappear, we would perish." (Ahmad
on the authority of Abu Musa; and Ibn Mardawaih on the authority of Ibn
Abbas).
We say, then, that prayer for pardon which is the repentance of liars, is
that which pertains merely to the tongue, with the heart having no share, like
the utterance of a man who, by habit and with utmost neglect, says: "I pray
for Allah's forgiveness", or when he hears the description of hellfire, says:
"We seek refuge with Allah from it", without his heart being affected. This
refers to the mere movement of the tongue and is of no avail. Yet, if the heart

The quarter of the saviors
implores Allah and prayer to Him is added in the request of pardon, with
sincere will, pure intent and desire, then it is, in itself, a pious deed, and may
succeed in cancelling out the evil deed. Such is understood by the traditions
handed down on the merit of seeking pardon. The Prophet "peace be upon
him" said: "One who prays for pardon does not persist (in sin), even if he
reverts (to sin) seventy times during a day." This is tantamount to prayer for
pardon with the heart.
Repentance and prayer for pardon have various stages. Even their beginnings
are not devoid of benefit, though the initial benefit is not like the final benefit.
Sahl said: "Never can man do without his Lord. The best man can do is return to
Him in every matter. If a man transgresses he should say: "Lord! Forgive me."
When man is through with his sin, he should say: " Lord! Grant me immunity
from sin." If man acts in repentance, he says: "Lord! Accept it from me."Sahl was
also asked about the prayer for pardon which atones sins. He said: "The
beginning of the prayer for pardon is response, then turning (to Allah), and then
(full) repentance. Response consists of acts of the limbs, turning (to Allah) of acts
of the heart, and repentance is man's approach to his Master, promising to
renounce his evil nature. Then he prays for Allah's pardon for his actual failings,
his ignorance of divine grace and his ingratitude. At that point he will be forgiven
and he will attain refuge with Allah, which leads to a shift to solitude, stability,
elucidation, contemplation, gnosis, confidential conversation, purity, friendship,
and then secret discourse which is intimacy. This does not establish itself in a
man's heart until knowledge is his nourishment, supplication his sustenance,
contentment his provision and reliance on Allah his companion. Then Allah will
gaze upon him, raise him unto the throne. His station will be that of the throne
bearers."
Sahl was also asked about the statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him": "The repentant is Allah's beloved." He said:
"He is beloved when he becomes of " Those that turn (to Allah) in repentance;
that serve Him, and praise Him; that wander in devotion to the Cause of Allah;
that bow down and prostrate themselves in prayer; that enjoin good and forbid
evil; and observe the limits set by Allah; (these do rejoice). So proclaim the glad
tidings to the Believers." (At-Tawbah 112)

72

4©

^=uL)T ^

J

£ 4*

hJlj

Further, he said: "The beloved is he who does not engage in that which his
beloved abhors."
The point is that repentance has two effects. The first is the atonement of
evil so that man becomes as one who has never sinned. The second is the
attainment of high degrees so that he becomes a friend. Atonement, also, is of
(various) stages. It may be a total obliteration of the sin, or a reduction
thereof. The difference depends on the different grades of repentance. The
prayer for pardon through the heart, and correction by good deeds, even if
man is not yet free from persistence in sin, is of the initial stage and is not

Book one: Repentance

73

without some benefit. You must not think it is irrelevant whether it is present
or absent. For men of vision and masters of hearts know beyond doubt, that
the statement of Allah: "And whoso has done an atom's weight of good shall
see it" (Az-Zalzalah 7)
1

Is true and that, just as a grain cast upon the balance is not without effect, so,
also, a grain's weight of good is not without effect. If the first grain has no
consequence, surely the second would be like it, and the balance would not be
upset by the load of them. That is, evidendy, impossible. But the scale of good
deeds is given preponderance by the atoms of good until it carries weight and lifts
away the scale of impious deeds. Beware, lest you belittle the smallest measure of
transgression, without disavowing it. You will be like the stupid woman who
neglects her spinning excusing herself by the fact that she is unable to produce
more than one thread per hour. She said: "What is the benefit of one thread?
What impact does it have upon a garment?" Fool is she, for she does not
comprehend that a worldly garment is achieved threat by thread, and that worldly
bodies, despite the expansion of the world's areas, are collections of individual
atoms. Supplication and apology with the heart, therefore, are a good deed that
does not at all get lost before Allah.
I say that prayer for pardon only with the tongue is also a good deed
inasmuch as such movement of the tongue, even heedlessly, is better than
wagging of the tongue, at the same time, in slander against a fellow Muslim or
useless chatter. Nay, it is better than to remain silent (without uttering the prayer
for pardon). Its merit is manifest in comparison to silence while, on the other
hand, it is a shortcoming in comparison to the action of the heart. That is why
one disciple said to his master, Abu 'Uthman Al-Maghribi: "My tongue, at times,
flows with the supplication of Allah and the recitation of the Qur'an, even though
my heart is heedless." The master said: "Give thanks to Allah, since He engaged
one of your limbs in the good cause, accustomed it to supplication, and used it
not in evil nor accustom it to wasteful chatter."
What he mentioned is true. If the limbs become conditioned to good, to the
point that this becomes part of their nature, this will repel much sins. If one who
accustomed his tongue to prayer for pardon hears another person lie, his tongue
reverts spontaneously to its conditioning and utters: "I ask for Allah's
forgiveness!" If one has been conditioned to chatter, his tongue proceeds to say:
"How stupid you are!, or, how ugly is your lie!" If he who has been conditioned
to utter "I seek refuge with God" happens to be present at the very beginning of
an evildoer's evil, he says, by reflex: "We seek refuge with Allah." But if the
tongue is conditioned to chatter, he hastens to say: "May Allah curse him!" Man
then sins in one of those two expressions, and is safe with the other. His safety is
a consequence of the good habituation of his tongue. Such is one of the
meanings of the Allah's statement: "Allah suffers not to be lost the wage of the
good-doers" (At-Tawbah 120)

74

The quarter of the saviors

And: "And if it be a good deed, He will double it, and give from Himself a
mighty wage." (An-Nisa* 40)
Consider how it is doubled when he makes die heedless prayer for
forgiveness a habit of the tongue until, with that habit, he repels the evil of
disobedience involved in slander, malediction and officiousness. This is the
doubling, in this world, of minor acts of obedience; the doubling in the hereafter
is greater, did they but know. Beware lest you discern, in acts of obedience, only
hardships, with the result that your longing for worship wanes. Indeed, this is an
intrigue spread out by Satan, in his accursedness, for the deluded. He made them
believe that they are insightful and understanding about hidden things and
mysteries. QTiey say:) "So what is the benefit of our supplication with the tongue
while the heart is heedless?" By this those people are divided into three kinds:
one who wrongs himself; one who adopts a middle course; and one who
proceeds in doing good.
As for him who proceeds in doing good, he says: "You are right, cursed one,
but it is a right saying with which you seek a wrong intent. Certainly, then, I
should doubly chastise you. I shall defy you in two respects, by adding the
movement of the heart to that of the tongue." He is like one who treats Satan's
wound by sprinkling salt on it.
As for the deluded wrongdoer, he feels, in himself, the conceit of sagacity
for this minor intricacy. Then, he is incapable of sincerity in the heart,
abandoning at the same time the habituation of the tongue in the supplication
of Allah. In this way, he aids Satan, and is hung by the rope of his own
delusion, so that there is complete collaboration and harmony between the two.
This case is like the statement: "The water skin fits its (skin) cover, it fits it and
adjusts to it."
As for the one who follows a middle course, he is unable to defy Satan by
associating the heart in (his) practice. But at the same time, he understands the
deficiency of the movement of the tongue as compared with that of the heart,
and its completion in comparison to silence and chatter. The result is that he
follows the right course persistently, and asks Allah to involve the heart, with the
tongue, in habituation of the good.
The one who proceeds (to do good) is like the weaver whose weaving was
faulted, so he abandoned it, and became a scribe. The failing wrongdoer is like
the one who abandoned weaving totally and became a street cleaner. The one
following the middle course is like a man who fails to become a scribe but says:
"I do not deny that weaving is unpleasant, but, the weaver can be faulted (only)
when compared to the scribe and not when compared to the street cleaner. If I
am incapable of being a scribe,- I will not abandon the weaving."
That is why Rabi'ah Al-'Adawiyyah said: "Our prayer for pardon needs much
apology." Do not think that she faults the movement of the tongue as
supplication of Allah. Rather, she faults the heedlessness of the heart. Man must
apologize for the negligence of the heart, not for the action of his tongue. If he
also refrains from asking for pardon verbally, he needs two entreaties to pardon,

I

75
Book one: Repentance
. not one. That is how you should understand the fault of what is faulted and the
praise of what is praised. Else you will remain ignorant of the meaning of the
statement of the righteous: "The good deeds of the pious are the misdeeds of the
Near-Stationed."
These matters are established relatively, and should not be taken absolutely.
Nay, the smallest measures of obedience or rebellion should not be regarded with
slightness. That is why Ja'far As-Sadiq said: "Allah Almighty has concealed three
in three: His pleasure in an act of obedience: so that you should not disdain any
such act, as perhaps that one solely pleases Him. He concealed His anger in an
act of transgression: so do not belittle any such act, as perhaps this one solely
arouses His wrath. He concealed His allies among His worshipers: so, do not
disdain any one of them, for perhaps it is he who is Allah's ally." He added: "and
he has concealed His response to supplication: so, do not cease to supplicate
Him, perhaps the response will follow it."

FOURTH PILLAR
ON REMEDY OF REPENTANCE; AND THE WAY OF TREATMENT FOR THE
DISSOLUTION OF KNOT OF PERSISTENCE
It should be known to you that men are of two types. Firstly, there is the
young man who has no sensual desire, having grown up in (the pursuit of)
good and the avoidance of evil. He is the one about whom the Prophet said:
'Your Lord is delighted by a youth who has no sensual desire.'0 This, however,
is extremely rare. Secondly, there is the man who is not without sin. Further,
this second group is divided into the persistent and the repentant. It is our
aim to explain how the knot of persistence is to be treated, and to indicate the
remedy therefore.
Know, then, that the cure which is repentance is attained only by the remedy.
One cannot, however, prescribe the remedy without diagnosing the malady, for
remedy means to counteract the causes of the malady. For every disease results
from a cause, and the remedy for it consists of dissolving the cause, removing it
and cancelling it. A thing is cancelled only by its opposite. The cause of
persistence is only heedlessness and appetite. Heedlessness is only opposed by
knowledge and appetite - by forbearance in eliminating the factors leading to
appetite. Heedlessness is the beginning of error. Allah has said: and those - they
are the heedless ones; without a doubt, in the world to come they will be the
losers . There is, therefore, no medication (conducive) to repentance except a
compound' of the sweetness of knowledge and the bitterness of endurance. Just
as oxymel combines the sweetness of sugar and the acidity of vinegar, aiming,
with each, at a different end in their combined impact, in order that the causes
that provoke the bile be curbed, so you must understand the treatment of the
heart against the measure of the malady of persistence present in it. Now, this
remedy has two roots: Knowledge and endurance. These must be explained.
You might ask: Does every knowledge avail in breaking down persistence or
is some specific knowledge necessary?
Know, then, that all kinds of knowledge are remedies for the heart's maladies.
Yet, for each malady there is a specific knowledge. Just as the science of medicine

The quarter of the saviors
76
is effective in the treatment of disease in general, yet each malady requires
specific (specialized) knowledge, so also (is the case of) the treatment of
persistence. Let us, then, discuss the specificity of that knowledge by comparison
with die diseases of die body so that it be more readily understandable. We say,
therefore, diat the padent must believe certain propositions.
Firsdy, he must believe, in general, that sickness and health have causes
which he arrives at by the (exercise of) selection in accord with what Allah has
determined. This belief is at the very root of medicine. For, one who has no faith
in it will not engage in therapy, and is sure to perish. What corresponds to this, in
our context, is the belief in die root of revelation, namely, that felicity in the
hereafter has a cause, obedience, while wretchedness (also) has a cause,
transgression. This is the faith in the root of the revelations. This must be secured
either by inquiry or conformism - both varieties of faith.
Secondly, the patient must trust a certain physician, i.e., that he is learned in
medicine, skilled, and trustworthy in his judgement, not deceiving or lying. Faith
on the basis of medicine wall not avail the patient, in itself, without this belief. In
our context, the corresponding element is the knowledge of the Apostie's
veracity, and the belief that all of what he said is true and right, with no falsehood
or discrepancy.
Thirdly, the patient must heed the doctor's warning as regards the
consumption of fruit and harmful substances in general, so that the fear of
deficient protection overcomes him. The intensity of the fear, then, will
motivate him to seek protection. In religion the corresponding element is - a)
attentiveness to the Qur'an verses and the traditions which include the call to
piety and warning against the commission of sins and the pursuit of cravings,
and b) the belief in everything he hears on the subject, without doubt or
distrust, so that the fear is aroused in him which reinforces for endurance,
that other pillar of treatment.
Fourthly, he must listen to the physician concerning the malady and what to
beware of, so that (the physician) might inform him in detail, in the first instance,
which of his actions, conditions, food and drinks, may harm him. Not every
patient need avoid everything, nor will just any medication avail him. Rather, for
each specific malady there is specific information and specific treatment. The
corresponding element in religion is that not every person suffers from every
craving or sin. Rather, every believer (has a propensity towards) a certain sin or
certain sins. But then, he is an immediate and pressing need to recognize that
these are sins, that they are injurious, what the measure of their harm is, how to
arrive at desisting from them, and, finally, how to atone for such of them as have
occurred.
Such knowledge is dealt with by the doctors of religion, the learned, who are
the heirs of the prophets. The sinner, then, if he is aware of his transgression,
must seek treatment from the doctor, that is, from the '-slim. If the sinner does
not know that what he is doing is a sin, the learned should inform him thereof.
Each learned should be responsible for his area, town, quarter, mosque or
shrine. He should instruct his folk in their religion, and distinguish that which

1
Book one: Repentance

77

may harm them from that which may benefit them, that which will make them
miserable from that which will make them happy. The 'slim must not wait to be
asked about this. Rather, he must devote himself to rallying the people, as the
learned are the heirs of the prophets. The prophets did not abandon the people
to their ignorance but, instead, the prophets called upon the people in their
assemblies and, originally would go from door to door, seeking the people one
by one in order to give them guidance. The sick of heart "Are not aware of their
illness, just as he, upon whose face leprosy has broken out and who has no
mirror, does not know of his leprosy as long as another person does not inform
him thereof. Such is the personal duty of all the learned.
All rulers must appoint, in each village and quarter, a devout jurisprudent to
instruct the people in their religion. People are born ignorant and bringing the
call (of Islam) to them, in both root and branch, is imperative. This world is the
abode of the ill inasmuch as only the dead are in the bowels of the earth and only
the sick on its face. The ailing in heart are more numerous than the ailing of
body. The learned are the physicians, and the rulers are the custodians of the
abode of the ill. Just as the physician surrenders the patient who does not take
care of himself or who has been overcome by insanity to a custodian, to confine
the patient in fetters, forestalling his damaging himself or others, so every patient
that does not respond to the scholar's treatment is surrendered to the ruler, in
order that the ruler restrict possible evil to and from the ailing.
The sickness of the hearts became more widespread than that of the body for
three reasons. Firstly, the one who suffers from such is not aware of his being ill.
Secondly, its consequence is not visible in this world. This differs from the
disease of the body whose end is death (which is) visible and which people
naturally shun, while, what follows death is not visible. The consequence of sins
is the death of the heart, which is not witnessed in this world. The shunning of
sins, therefore, is rare, even though the perpetrator is aware of them. For this
reason you will see him, in case of the disease of the heart, relying on Allah's
generosity while striving diligently in the treatment of bodily ailment without
reliance on Allah Thirdly, and this is the calamitous affliction, there is the loss of
the physician. For, it is the learned who are the physicians, yet in these times they
have been stricken by a sore affliction, the treatment of which is beyond their
capabilities. They have found solace in the wide spread of the disease, so that
their deficiency is not apparent. They have been forced to mislead the people
instructing them in a manner bound to compound their illness. For the
destructive affliction is the love for this world. This disease has overcome the
doctors. They are, therefore, incapable of cautioning the people against it, for
they fear they would be told: "How do you prescribe treatment (to others), while
forgetting yourselves? For this reason the affliction spread throughout the people,
the plague grew, remedy has run out, and, because of the loss of the physicians,
the people have perished. Nay, the physicians have engaged in various kinds of
misleading. Would that they did not cure, at least they would not aggravate the
malady. Would they only remain silent, for when they speak, they care in their
sermons only about what may please the masses or win their hearts. They

.

!

;

The quarter of the saviors
78
succeed in that only through demoting fear and promoting hope, and speaking of
the signs of (divine) mercy, because that is more pleasant to the ear and easier on
the tempers. The people, then, leave the exhortatory sessions further emboldened
to sin and with greater trust in divine generosity.
Whenever the physician is ignorant or perfidious he destroys with the remedy
as he applies it in the wrong place. Hope and fear are two remedies, but for two
persons of opposing symptoms. One who was overcome with fear, to the point
that he completely renounced the world and charged himself beyond endurance,
made his life totally miserable, the severity of his intemperance in fear is broken
by talking about the reasons for hope, so that he might return to a proper
balance. Likewise, one who persists in sin, yet though desirous of repentance, is
held back because of despondency and despair, thinking his previous sins too
great, is also treated by the reasons for hope, so that he may aspire to the
acceptance of repentance, and finally repent.
On the other hand, treating the deluded, who is devoted to sin, by speaking
about the reasons of hope, resembles treating with honey the patient who
developed a higher fever. That is the practice of the ignorant and the fools. It is
the corruption of the physicians, therefore, that is the real problem, totally
beyond cure.
You might say: Speak of the way which the preacher should follow in
admonishing the people.
Know, that this is an involved and protracted matter. Yet certainly, we will
indicate the types beneficial in breaking down persistence in sin, and inducing
people to renounce sin. These are of four types.
The first is that men should mention those verses of the Qur'an which strike
fear in sinners and rebels, as also (similar passages) from the traditions going back
to the Prophet and sayings of the Companions . Such, for example, as this
statement of the Prophet*. "Dawn does not rise on any day nor does twilight
disappear any night but that two angels echo in four voices. One says: "Would
only that these creatures had not been created." The other ways: "Since they were
created would they know what they were created for." The first says: "Would
that, since they learned not why they were created, they acted as they were
taught."0 (In some versions: "Would that they sit together and discuss what they
learned). Finally, the last voice says: "Since they do not act as they were taught,
would that they repent their deeds."
One of the old masters said: "When a man sins the Master of the Right
orders the Master of the Left, who is in charge of that man, to hold back the
pen (about the man) for six hours. If the man repents and seeks forgiveness,
the sin is not recorded against him. If, however, he does not seek forgiveness,
it is recorded."
Another of the old masters said: "Whenever a man transgresses, his place
upon earth seeks permission to swallow him, and his roof seeks leave, from the
heavens, to fall onto him in fragments But Allah says to the heaven and earth:
"Desist from my servant and grant him respite. You did not create him, and if
you did you would be compassionate towards him; perhaps he will turn to Me

Book one: Repentance

79

1

and I will forgive him; perhaps he will change to righteousness, and I will change
his sin for him into pious deeds." That is the meaning of the verse: Allah holds
the heavens and the earth, lest they remove: did they remove, none would hold
them after him."
The tradition of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab: "The seal is attached to the foot of
the Throne. When the sacred is violated, and the forbidden permitted, Allah
sends the seal and it is impressed upon the hearts and their contents." In the
tradition of Mujahid: "The heart is Like the open palm. Whenever man sins, a
finger contracts until all the fingers contract and the heart is obstructed. That is
the sealing.' Hassan said: "Between man and Allah stands a certain boundary of
sin. When man reaches it, Allah seals his heart, and afterward no longer promotes
him towards good fate."
The traditions of the Prophet and the sayings of the Companions on the
censure of transgression and the praise of the repentant are innumerable. The
preacher should draw from them constantly if he is the heart to Allah's Apostle.
The Prophet bequeathed no dinars or Dirhams but knowledge and wisdom
which the scholar inherits according to the measure of his attainment.
The second type is the stories of the prophets and the righteous forebears and
what misfortunes befell them because of their sins. Such have a strong impact,
and are of manifest benefit to the hearts of men. For example, the story of Adam
in his rebellion and banishment from Paradise. It is related that when he ate of
the tree, the garments vanished from his body and he was left naked. The crown
and the diadem were so embarrassed that they sought to disappear from him.
Gabriel then came to him, took the crown from his head and loosened the
diadem from his forehead. It was announced from above the throne: "Descend
(Adam and Eve) from My Presence! One who has transgressed against Me
cannot be close to Me!' Adam turned to Eve weeping, and said: "This is the first
misfortune of the transgression, we have been removed from the presence of the
Beloved."
It is related that when Solomon was punished for his error, because of the
idol which was worshipped in his home (for) forty days, - (It is said: because a
woman asked him to give judgement in favour of her father and he said yes but
did not do so; or, that because of his attitude toward her he wished in his heart
that the judgement be for her father against his opponent.) - his kingdom was
taken away for forty days. He fled, forlorn. He would beg, with palm out, but
would not be fed. If he said: "Feed me, for I am Solomon, son of David', he was
taken up, driven off and beaten. It is told that he asked for food from a woman's
household. She, however, chased him away and spat in his face. Another version
says: An old woman brought out a jar containing urine and emptied it on his
head. (All this happened) until, after the end of the fortieth day of chastisement,
Allah dislodged the seal ring from the belly of the whale, and Solomon put it on
The birds then came and perched on his head. The jinn, devils and beasts also
came and assembled round him. Some of those who had offended him
apologized. Solomon said: 'I do not blame you for what you have done before,
nor do I praise you for your excuse now. Indeed, this affair was (ordained) in the

<

I

The quarter of the saviors
80
heavens and was inevitable It is related in the Israelites that a man married a
woman from another town, then sent his servant to bring her to him. She sought
to tempt and seduce him. He, however, fought her and resisted the temptation.
Allah made him a prophet, for the blessing of his piety, and he became a prophet
among die children of Israel. In the stories of Moses (it is reported) that he said
to Al-.Khadir: "For what deed has Allah revealed to you knowledge of the
Hidden?' It is related that the wind was carrying Solomon, and he glanced at his
gown, and it was new. He seemed to like it. The wind put him down. He said (to
the wind): "Why did you do diis though I did not order you?' It said: "But we
obey you only when you obey Allah."
It is also related that Allah communicated to Jacob: "Do you know why I
have separated you from your child Joseph? Fie said no. Allah said : because you
told his brothers: I fear the wolf may eat him, while you are heedless of him. Why
did you fear the wolf and not appeal to Me? Why did you consider his brothers'
heedlessness, and not consider My guarding him? Do you know why I returned
him to you?" Jacob replied: "No!" Allah said: "Because you appealed to Me and
said: haply Allah will bring them all to me and because you also said: depart, my
sons, and search out tidings of Joseph and his brother. Do not despair (of Allah's
comfort)." Thus, also, when Joseph said to the king's attendant: "mention me in
thy lord's presence,' Allah said: Satan caused him to forget to mention him to his
master, so that he continued in the prison for certain years Such stories are
innumerable. The Qur'an and traditions have not adduced these just for evening
entertainment. Rather, their object is contemptation and pondering so that you
may learn that even the prophets are not forgiven their minor sins. How, then,
can others be forgiven major sins? Certainly, they were fortunate that they were
swiftly overcome with punishment in this, world, so that it was not put off to the
hereafter. The wretched, however, are those given time to increase their
misdeeds, for the chastisement of the hereafter is graver and greater. These kinds
of stories should also be told, frequendy, to those persisting in sin; for it is
effective in stimulating the urge for repentance.
The third type is that the preacher should make them realize that one may
expect that chastisement for sins is to be expedited in this world, and that the
afflictions of man come as a result of his offenses. Many a man, however, is
indulgent in the matter of the hereafter, and, because of his ignorance, fears more
Allah's punishment in this world. It is necessary, therefore, to frighten him
therewith. In most cases, the chastisement for all the sins (of a person) is
expedited in this world, as is related in the story of David and Solomon. Because
of his sins a man may become poor, his rank among people may decline, and he
may fall into the hands of his enemies. The Prophet said: "Indeed, a man is
deprived of sustenance on account of a sin he commits.' Ibn Mas'ud, "Allah be
pleased with him" said: "I reckon that a man forgets knowledge through a sin he
commits, and this is the meaning of the Prophet's word: "One who perpetrates a
sin, intelligence withdraws from him, and never returns." An old master said:
"The curse is not the black face or loss of wealth; nay, the curse is that you
disengage yourself from a sin only to fall into another which is like it or. worse.' It

1
Book one: Repentance

81
is as he said, for the curse is expulsion and alienation. Unless he is assisted toward
the good, evil comes easily to him, and he is removed (from the divine grace). To
be without divine assistance toward success (in acting righteously) is the greatest
deprivation. Each sin invites another and it is compounded. Man is then deprived
thereby of the beneficial nourishment of social intercourse with the learned who
rebuke sin, and with the righteous; nay, he is detested by Allah so that the
righteous may detest him.
It is related about one of the Gnostics that he was walking in mud, holding
his clothes, wary of his foot slipping, but he slipped and fell. He got up and was
walking in the middle of the mire, crying and saying: "This is the image of man.
Continuously he is wary of sins and avoids them until he tumbles into one and,
then, two, after which he plunges into sinning.' This is an allusion that the
punishment of sin is expedited by the drift into another sin. That is why Fudail
said: 'That which you have blamed on the vicissitude of time and the brutishness
of brethren, is the result of your sins.' Somebody said: "I certainly recognize the
punishment for my sin in the ill nature of my ass.' Another said: "I recognize the
punishment even in a mouse in my house.' One of the Syrian Sufis said: 'I noticed
a Christian lad of handsome countenance. I stopped and stared at him. Then, Ibn
AJ-jalla' ad-Dimashqi passed me. He seized hold of my hand, and I felt
embarrassed before him. I said: " O Abu Abdullah! By Almighty Allah, I was
amazed by this beautiful form and this masterful piece of workmanship and (by)
how it was created for hellfire!" He squeezed my hand and said: "You shall
encounter the punishment (for this staring) after awhile." ' The Syrian said: "I was
punished for it thirty years later.' Abu Sulaiman ad-Darani said: "Sexual
maturation is a punishment,' and 'no one misses the communal prayer except
through the commission of sin.' In a tradition (it is said): "What you blame on
your time is really due to your deeds which are corrupt." A tradition: "Allah
says: "The least that I shall do to a man, if he prefers his craving to obedience
to Me, is that I shall deprive him of the delight of My discourse."" It is told of
Abu 'Amr Ibn Al-Ala', in a story that would take too long, that he said: "One
day, as I was standing in prayer, my heart was seized by desire. It continued in
my mind until a craving of men was born from it. I fell to the ground, and my
entire body turned black. I hid myself at home, and did not emerge for three
days. I was purging my body with soap, in the bath. The blackness, however,
was only compounded, until, after three nights, it was undone. I then
encountered Al-Junaid who had sent for me, summoning me from Ar-Riqa.
When I came to him he said to me: "Were you not ashamed before Allah? I
stood before Him but then your soul concealed a craving until it tenderly
overpowered you and removed you from before Allah. Had I not prayed to
Allah for you and turned to Him in repentance on your behalf, surely you
would have met AJiah with that colour." I wondered how he knew of that, for
he was in Baghdad while I was in Ar-Riqa."
Know, that whenever man sins be blackens the face of his heart. If he is
happy, the blackness becomes apparent upon his exterior so as to rebuke him. If
he is wretched, it is concealed from him, until be becomes engrossed in sin and

!

!
i
I

The quarter of the saviors
82
liable to hellfire. There are numerous traditions concerning the injurious
(consequences) of sin in this world, such as poverty, sickness, et cetera. But the
calamity of sin; in this world, in general, is that man acquires following it another
sin. If he is tempted by a tiling, it becomes a punishment, and he is deprived of
sustenance to compound his wretchedness. Even if bounty comes his way to win
him over, he is denied the feeling of gratitude, so that he is punished for his
ingratitude. But in the case of the obedient, it is part of the blessing of his
obedience that any bounty, for him, is a reward for his obedience and he is
divinely assisted toward gratitude for it; while each tribulation becomes an
atonement for his sins, and adds, thereby, to his stature.
The fourth type is (for the preacher) to talk of the punishments that befell
individual sins such as wine imbibing, fornication, theft, murder, slander,
arrogance and envy. These sins are innumerable. To talk of them to the wrong
people, is like applying the remedy to the wrong spot. The learned should be
like the skilled physician, diagnosing first, by the pulse, the external
appearance and the reflexes, the internal maladies and, then, engaging in their
treatment. By concatenation of circumstances he infers the hidden qualities.
In facing what he has learned let him emulate Allah's Apostle. When someone
said to the Prophet "peace be upon him": " O Apostle of Allah, counsel me
but do not overburden me!', the Prophet said: 'Do not be angry." Another
man asked the Prophet: " Aposde of Allah, counsel me." The Prophet said:
"You must renounce (the aspiration) for other people's wealth. Indeed, such is
(true) wealth. Beware of greed, it is the ever-present poverty. Pray a final
prayer." Beware of what one has to apologize for." A man said to Muhammad
Ibn Wasi': "Counsel me!' He said: "I advise you to be an angel in this world
and the next!' The man asked: "How do I (achieve) that?' He said: "Practice
asceticism."
It seems that the Prophet discerned, in the first questioner, the signs of
anger, and restrained him therefrom. In the second questioner he discerned the
signs of greed and perseverance in this expectation of the wealth of others.
Muhammad Ibn Wasi' discerned in his petitioner, the signs of preoccupation
with this world.
A man said to Mu'adh: "Counsel me!' He said: "Be merciful, and I will
guarantee you Paradise.' Apparently he detected in the man traces of coarseness
and harshness.
A man said to Ibrahim Ibn 'Adham: "Counsel me!' He said: 'Be careful about
people! You need people, and must be with others. Men are human. But not all
men are human. Gone are the human beings (rids) what remains is the monkey. I
do not consider them as people, nay, they have plunged into the water of
despair." It seems, then, as if Ibn Adham discerned in him the damage of
(excessive) association, and pointed to what was prevailing in his situation, at the
time. That was his injury (of or by) others. It is more proper that a statement
should fit the state of the questioner, rather than that of the speaker.
Mu'awiyah wrote to 'A'ishah: "Write me a letter, giving me therein counsel but
make it brief.' She wrote to him: 'From 'A'ishah to Mu'awiyah, peace be upon

Book one: Repentance

83
you! I heard the Aposde of Allah say: "One who seeks Allah's pleasure through
men's displeasure, Allah protects him from the trouble of men, and one who
seeks Allah's displeasure through men's pleasure, Allah puts him in charge of
men." Farewell!" Consider her cleverness in how she ventured upon the bane that
confronts rulers, namely, the control over men versus the desire to please them.
She wrote him on another occasion: 'Fear God! If you fear Allah, He will protect
you from men. If, however, you fear men, they will not avail you against Allah.
Farewell!"
Therefore, it should be the concern of every counselor to detect the hidden
qualities and discern the appropriate conditions, so that he might deal with the
significant. To narrate all the spiritual exhortations in the individual cases is
impossible, and, to engage in preaching on what does not call for preaching is a
waste of time.
You might say: If the preacher is speaking to an assembly, or is asked for
counsel by someone with whose inner state he is unfamiliar, how is he to act?
The path for him, in such a case, is to preach that which is of universal
application, generally or mosdy. For in the religious studies there are
nutriments and remedies. The nutriments are for all, and the remedies are for
the sick.
A case in point is what is related of a man who said to Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri:
"Counsel me!' He replied: "You must fear Allah, it is the beginning of all good.
You must exert yourself in jihad, it is the monasdeism of Islam. You must read
the Qur'an, it is an illumination for you among the earthly host and a
remembrance for you among the heavenly host. You must be silent, except for
the good. Thus you will triumph over Satan."
Also, a man said to Hassan: "Counsel me!' He said: "Honour Allah's
command and He will honour you."
Luqman said to his son: "My son, join the throng around the scholars, but
do not dispute with them lest they hate you. Take from this world your
subsistence, and spend the rest of your acquisitions for your hereafter. Do not
reject this world totally lest you be a burden to and dependent upon others.
Fast, so as to curb your craving but not so as to damage your prayer. For prayer
is superior to fasting. Do not keep the company of the foolish, and do not
associate with the two-faced.' He also said: 'My son, do not laugh without
amazement; do not proceed without aim; do not ask of what is of no concern
to you; do not squander your wealth to promote the property of another. For
your stock is that which you prepared (of good deeds) ahead of time, and the
stock of others is that which you leave (to others). My son, one who is
compassionate is treated with compassion; one who is silent is safe; he whose
word is good gains, he whose word is evil sins, and he who does not master his
tongue regrets."
A man said to Abu Hazim: "Counsel me!' He said: "Adhere to that which you
would consider precious when facing death; avoid that which you would consider
a misfortune when facing death."
Moses said to Al-Khadir: "Counsel me!' Al-Khadir said: "Be benign and be

The quarter of the saviors
84
not angry; be useful, not harmful; eschew obstinacy; go not without need; and do
not laugh without wonderment. Son of 'Imran, do not scold sinners for their
errors, cry over your own."
A man said to Muhammad Ibn Karram: "Counsel me!' Ibn Karram said:
"Strive to please thy Creator in the same measure as you seek your own
satisfaction."
A man said to Hamid Al-Laffaf: "Counsel me!' He said: "Make for your
religion a cover like the cover on the Qur'an, lest it should get soiled by troubles.'
The man asked: "What is the cover of religion?' He said: "Renouncing worldly
pursuit except for the minimum; abstention from talking much unless it is
necessary; reducing social intercourse to a minimum.
Hassan (al-Basri) wrote to 'Umar Ibn 'Abd Al-'Aziz saying: "Fear that which
Allah has alarmed you about, be cautious of that which Allah has cautioned you
about, and take from what is in your hands to what is ahead of you. At the time
of death the ultimate message shall reach you. Farewell!"
'Umar Ibn 'Abd Al-'Aziz wrote to Hassan asking for his admonition.
Hassan replied: "The greatest terror and the horrors are ahead of you, and you
cannot escape from witnessing them, be either in salvation or perdition.
Know, that he who takes his soul to account gains, and he who is negligent of
his soul loses. He who contemplates the consequences is saved, but he who
follows his mood errs. He who is meek gains; he who fears is safe; he who is
safe learns by example; he who learns by example gains insight; he who has
insight understands, and he who understands knows. If you have slipped,
return. If you have regret, uproot (the evil). If you are ignorant, ask. And, if
you are angered, forbear."
Mutarrif Ibn 'Abdullah wrote to 'Umar Ibn 'Abd-Al-Aziz: "This world is an
abode of punishment. For it the senseless are gathering (goods) and, by it one
who has no knowledge is deluded. Commander of the Faithful! Be in it like one
whose injury is treated, enduring the severity of the remedy for fear of the
consequences of the disease."
'Umar also wrote to 'Adi Ibn Arta'ah saying: "This world is an enemy of
Allah's friends and of Allah's enemies. It distresses His friends, and deludes
His enemies.' He also wrote to one of his governors: "You have the power to
oppress people. If you intend to wrong one, remember Allah's power over
you. Know that if you cause any trouble to the people, the responsibility
remains yours. Know, also, that Allah takes to account the oppressors on
account of the oppressed. Farewell!"
This is how the admonition should be - for the masses or when the preacher
does not know the specifics of the case. These exhortations are like the
nutriments by which all the people can benefit. But, because of the lack of such
as these preachers, the gate of learning from admonition is barred, sins
predominate, and decay proceeds apace. The people are afflicted with preachers
who parade rhymed prose and recite verses, take upon themselves to talk of that
which is beyond the range of their knowledge, and imitate others. The masses
lost their respect for the preacher. The preacher's words do not emanate from the

Book one: Repentance

85

heart so as to reach the heart. Rather, the speaker is arrogant, the listener
burdened, and each of them is slipping and failing.
Seeking a physician, therefore, is the start of the treatment for the sick, and
seeking the learned, is the beginning of treatment for sinners. This is one of the
pillars and principles of treatment.
The second principle is forbearance (Sabr). The point of the need for
forbearance is that the patient's illness is prolonged because he takes what is
harmful to him. He consumes that, either because he is unaware that it is
harmful, or because of the intensity of his craving. Such action has two
causes. What we have mentioned is the treatment for the unawareness. There
remains, then, the treatment of craving, but we have already discussed the
method of its treatment in the Book of the Discipline of the Soul The gist of
it is that, when his voracity for a harmful food becomes intense, the patient
will perceive the magnitude of its harm. Then he should remove that from his
scope of vision and not keep it. Then he will seek to distract himself from it
with something which approximates it in form but not in virulence. Then, by
virtue of fear, he should overcome the pain caused by abstention. Under all
conditions, the bitterness of forbearance is inevitable, and thus he will treat
the craving for transgression.
A young man, for example, when desire overcomes him, becomes incapable
of controlling his eye, heart or limbs in the pursuit of his desire. .He must realize
the harm of his sin by examining the relevant fearful passages in the Qur'an and
in the Tradition. When his dread is intensified, he keeps his distance from the
factors inciting his drive.
The external stimulant of desire is the presence of the object of desire and
gazing at it. The treatment is flight and isolation. The internal stimulant is the
consumption of delicious foods. Its treatment lies in hunger and prolonged
fasting. All this can be achieved only through forbearance. One shows
forbearance, however, only from fear, but one fears only from knowledge, and,
one gains knowledge only from insight and reflection or from listening and
emulation. The first order of business, then, is attendance at invocation
assemblies (Dhikr); then, listening, with a heart devoid of other engagements,
devoted to attention; then reflection on it unto perfect understanding. Thereupon
fear will certainly be aroused. With fear rising, forbearance will be facilitated, and
the requisites of seeking treatment will develop. Behind that lie divine assistance
toward success and divine facilitation.
One who gives, of his heart, proper attention, perceives the dread (of sin) and
fear of Allah, expects recompense and confirms the reward most fair , Allah eases
him to easing but as for him who is a miser and self-sufficient and cries lies to the
reward most fair, Allah will ease him to the hardship only the clarification of the
paths of guidance falls upon the prophets. Yet, To Allah belongs the first and the
last , You might assert: The entire matter reverts then to (a question of) faith,
because renunciation of sin is impossible without forbearance; forbearance is
possible only through the experience of fear; fear sets in only through knowledge;
knowledge is attained solely through confirming (the belief in) the magnitude of

The quarter of the saviors
86
injur}7 caused by sins, and confirmation of the magnitude of sins' harm is
confirmation of the belief in Allah and His Aposde, which is faith. It appears,
then, that one who persists in sin does so only because he is not a believer.
Know, that this persistence is not due to the loss of faith but rather to its
weakness, inasmuch as ever}7 believer believes firmly that transgression is a cause
of alienation from Allah, and is the cause of punishment in the hereafter. The
reason, however, for his falling into sin is manifold.
Firstly, the promised punishment is concealed and not in (immediate)
attendance. The soul is predisposed to being influenced by what is at hand. The
effect upon the soul of the promised chastisement is weak compared to the
impact of that which is present.
Secondly, the gratification of the cravings leading to sin are consummate and
they immediately grab the throat. Because of habituation and custom, - habit
serving as the fifth element - (this pressure) is vigorous and overpowers the soul.
The soul finds it hard to shift from the immediate to the fear of the future. That
is why it says: no indeed; but you love the hasty world and leave be the hereafter,
and, nay, but you prefer the present life The Prophet expressed how difficult this
is in his sayings: "Paradise is encircled by adversities, and hellfire by cravings'; a
'God created hellfire. Then He said to Gabriel: Go and look at it. He looked at it,
then said: By Your Glory! No one who hears of it shall enter it. Allah then
encircled it with the desires, then said again: Go look at it. He looked at it and
said: By Your Glory! I am afraid that none shall remain who will not enter it.
Allah created Paradise. He said to Gabriel: Go and look at it. He did, and said: By
Your might! Everyone who hears will (seek) to enter it. Allah then surrounded it
with adversities and said: Go and look at it. He did, and said: By Your might! I
am afraid that none shall enter." Thus the immediate oppressiveness of the
desires, and the relegation of punishment into the future are two obvious causes
in the self abandon despite the presence of the basic faith. Nobody who, while
sick and because of his thirst, drinks ice water denies, thereby, the basis of
medicine. Nor does he deny the fact that ice water is harmful for him. But the
craving overcomes him, and the pain of desisting is supreme, so that the
anticipated pain seems minimized.
Thirdly, ever}7 believing sinner is, generally, determined to repent and to
atone the evil through pious deeds. Further, it has been promised that such
will restore him. Continued hope, however, prevails over the natural
dispositions, and man keeps postponing repentance and atonement. Yet, since
his hope is for divine help towards success in repentance, he may often
proceed despite faith toward sin.
Fourthly, every convinced believer maintains that sins do not necessitate
chastisement to the extent of precluding forgiveness. He sins, therefore, and
anticipates forgiveness trusting in Allah's generosity.
These are four causes that lead to persistence in sin, despite the survival of
the basic faith.
Certainly, the sinner might come up with a fifth reason, that impairs that basic
faith. Namely, he may doubt the authenticity of the prophets. This is unbelief. He

Book one: Repentance

87
is like the one whom the physician cautioned about consuming what would, in
his ill state, harm him. If the man cautioned does not consider the warner a
medical authority, the patient may deny or doubt the physician. He will,
therefore, pay no attention to the doctor. But such is unbelief.
You might say: What, then, is the treatment for the five causes? I say that it is
reflection (Fikr).
That is that man persuade himself in the first instance, i.e., the relegation of
punishment, that everything that is to come, is (truly), coming; that, for those
who watch, the morrow is nigh, and that death is closer to everyone than his shoe
lace; what shall make him know, perhaps the Hour is nigh, and when that which
has been put off takes place it is merely the consummation of the prophetic
message. He should remind himself that, in this world, he is weary forever for
fear of something in the future. Thus, a man travels overseas and undergoes
hardship of journeys for the sake of gain which he thinks he might need at
another time. Yet if he falls ill, and a Christian physician tells him that drinking
cold water will harm him and lead to his death, and cold water is, to his mind, the
most delicious of things, he abandons drinking it, despite the fact that the pain of
death is only of an instant, if he did not fear what follows it, and departure from
this world is (anyhow) inescapable.
Yet what is the proportion between his existence in this world to his
absence for ever and ever! Let him consider how quickly he is going to abandon
his pleasures at the instruction of a non-Muslim with no miracle to support his
medicine. Then he will say: "How does it befit my intelligence that the word of
the prophets, supported by miracles, should be inferior in my eyes to that of a
Christian who claims (the knowledge of) medicine without any (supporting)
miracle and without any confirmation except by the common folk? How can
the torment of hellfire be less, to me, than the torment of disease, when each
day in the hereafter is like fifty thousand years of this world?"
Through this same contemplation he treats the delight which is overcoming
him. He will force himself to abandon it by saying: "If I am unable to renounce
my delights during the days of my life which are few, how, then, shall I ever be
able to do so? If I am not able to endure the pain of forbearance, how, then,
could I withstand the pain of hellfire? If I am unable to renounce the vanities of
this world despite its vexations, disturbances, and the blend of its delight and
grief, how can I forgo the bliss of the hereafter?
As for postponement of repentance, he can treat it by reflection on (the fact)
that most of the anguish of the people of hellfire stems from procrastination, as
the procrastinator builds on what is not his, namely immortality. Yet perhaps he
will not survive, and, if he survives, he may be unable to desist tomorrow, just as
he is unable to abstain today. I wish I knew; did he not fail, in the present, only
because of the triumph of craving, which craving is not going to leave him on the
morrow, but rather is compounded since it is reinforced through habituation.
Now, the craving which a man reinforced by habit is not like the one which he
did not reinforce. Because of this the procrastinators perish, for they suppose
there is a difference between things identical. They do not realize that all days are

The quarter of the saviors
88
similar in that forgoing cravings is always painful, on any day.
A fitting analogy is: one who needs to uproot a tree but sees that it is
strong and will not be extirpated except with great difficulty. He says: "I will
put it off for a year and then come back to it.' But he knows that the longer
the tree survives, the more its deep-rootedness increases, while the older he
gets the more he becomes weak. There is, then, no stupidity grosser than his
in the world: when he, in his prime, fails to stand up to the weak, and begins
to anticipate triumph over the rival while he himself is getting weak and the
weak one is getting strong.
As for the fourth idea, i.e., the expectation of Allah's forgiveness, its
treatment is as above. The man is like one who dissipates all his property,
leaving himself and his family paupers, expecting that Allah, in His generosity,
will provide for him the discovery of a treasure amidst ruins. The possibility
of forgiveness of sins (in such a manner) is like this possibility. He is like one
who fears spoliation at the hand of oppressors in his country, and (yet), he
leaves his treasures in the courtyard of his home. He was able to bury and
hide them but did not do so. He said: "I look to Allah's generosity, it may
bring either inadvertence or distress upon the pillaging tyrant so that he will
miss my home, or, when he turns to my home he will be struck down at the
gate! Both death and inadvertence are possible. Such things occur in fictional
stories, and I anticipate the like from divine kindness.' One who anticipates
this, anticipates the possible. Yet he is extremely silly and ignorant. For it may
not happen and not be so.
As for the fifth cause, i.e., doubt, this is unbelief. It is to be treated with
those elements which would make him learn the veracity of the prophets. But
this would take long. It is possible, however, to treat it with simple knowledge
which would befit the bounds of his intelligence. He should be asked: "Is the
truth of what the prophets said, supported as they are by miracles, possible? Or,
do you maintain that you know that it is impossible, in the same manner as you
know the impossibility of one person being in two places at the same time?' If
he says: "I know that it is as impossible as the latter,' then he is stupid and
idiodc. It would seem that such creatures do not exist among sensible people.
But if he said: "I am in doubt about it,' then let him be asked: "If some
unknown person were to tell you, as you were leaving your meal at home for an
instant, that a viper had licked it, and put its poison in it, and you could admit
his truthfulness, would you then eat the meal or, even be it the most delicious
of foods, would you forgo it?' He would answer: "I would most certainly leave
it. I would say: if he has lied, I shall merely miss this food. To forgo it may be
hard but sensible. If, on the other hand, he was right, I might lose my life.
Compared to the discomfort of abstention from food and its waste, death is
harsher.' Say to him then: 'By Almighty Allah, how can you defer the truth of all
the prophets, despite all their miracles, and the veracity of all the saints,
scholars and sages, nay, of all categories of sensible people - I do not mean
thereby the ignorant of the masses but rather those possessed of intellect - in
favour of the truth of one unknown man who may have some purpose of his

Book one: Repentance
own?"

89

All reasonable men believe in the Last Day and acknowledge reward and
punishment, even if they differ as to pardculars. If they are right, you are on the
brink of a chastisement which is to continue forever. If, on the other hand, they
are wrong, you miss nothing save some cravings of this passing and vexatious
world. There can remain no hesitation for him, if he is intelligent, following this
reflection, for there is no comparison between a lifetime and eternity Nay, were
we to presume that the world is filled with a speck, and that a bird gathers, every
million years, one granule of it, still surely the speck would come to an end, and
eternity would not be diminished at all. How could a sensible man’s mind waver
about forgoing desires for say, a hundred years, for the sake of bliss eternal? That
is why Abu -'Ala' Ahmad Ibn Sulaiman at-Tanukhi Al-Ma'arri said: The
astrologer and physician both of them Deny the resurrection of the body. I said:
"Oh, get you gone. If this is your belief, upon you perdition falls, not upon me
Therefore." 'Ali said to one whose intelligence fell short of true understanding
and was a doubter: "If what I said is correct, we will all be saved; if not, I am
saved and you perish.’ That is to say, the sensible man follows the path of safety
in all situations.
You might ask: These matters are evident but they are attained only through
reflection. But what about the hearts? They give up reflection about these
matters, and consider (them) too burdensome. What is the treatment for the
hearts by which to return them to reflection, especially in the case of a man who
believes in the basis and ramification of religion?
Know, then, that the impediment to reflection is twofold. Firstly, functional
reflection is the reflection of the punishment of the hereafter, its terrors and
afflictions, the grief of sinners over their exclusion from the everlasting bliss. This
reflection is stinging and painful to the heart. The heart, therefore, shuns it, and
takes delight in reflecting on worldly matters for comfort and relaxation.
Secondly, reflection is an immediate impediment distracting from the worldly
delights and the gratification of cravings. Every man, in every state and with every
breath, has a craving which overtakes him and enslaves him. His intellect then
becomes subservient to his craving. Therefore, man is busy to set his ruse (to
gratify it), and it becomes his delight to pursue the ruse, or to start the
gratification of his craving. But reflection holds him back from that.
To treat these two obstructions, he should say to his heart: "How great is
your foolishness in being wary of reflecting on death and what follows it,
because of the pain caused by the mention of death, despite the disdain for the
pain of struggling with death. How will you endure sustaining it, whenever it
happens, seeing that (at the same tune), you are unable to endure the very
admission of death and what follows it, and are pained thereby? To treat the
second impediment, i.e., that reflection makes you miss worldly pleasures that
are graver and more decisive. For, pleasures of the hereafter are infinite and
unmarred, while the worldly pleasure are quickly obliterated and are mixed with
vexations. In this life there is no pleasure free of worry. (The more so) as in
repenting of transgressions and in concern for obedience lies delight in

The quarter of the saviors
90
conferring with Allah, repose in perceiving and obeying Him and constant
closeness to Him. If the obedient had no other recompense for his deeds than
what he feels of die sweetness of obedience and the spirit of intimacy in
converse with Allah, that would surely be sufficient. The more so, when to this
is added the bliss of the hereafter. Certainly, this pleasure does not occur at the
iiiidal stage of repentance, but after man endures (in repentance) for a long
time, the good having become habit as before the evil was. The soul is recepdve
- as you train it, so it becomes habituated. Good is habit, and evil is (sheer)
obsdnacy.
These reflections, therefore, induce fear which in turn induces the ability to
forgo pleasures. The stimulant of these reflections is exhortation of the
preachers, and admonitions which penetrate into the heart through innumerable
appropriate motifs. Reflection then becomes consonant with temper, and the
heart tends toward it. The cause which projects harmony between the temper and
the reflection, which (itself) is the cause of goodness, is termed succor (twain),
inasmuch as succor is the fusion of will and the faculty which is obedience useful
unto the hereafter.
It is related in a long Hadith that Ammar Ibn Yasir "Allah be pleased with
him" arose and said to Ali Ibn Abu Talib "Allah be pleased with him": "O
Commander of Believers! Tell us about disbelief. Upon what is it built?" Ali
"Allah be pleased with him" answered: "It is built upon four props: rudeness,
blindness, heedlessness and doubt. The one who is rude scorns the truth,
proclaims the false and hates the learned; and the One who is blind forgets
the invocation (of Allah's name); and the one who is heedless swerves from
good sense; and the one who doubts, the desires mislead him, then, only to be
seized by sighing and regret, and what he was not considering (possible)
concerning Allah appears to him now."
What we have mentioned explains some of the damages wrought by neglect
of reflection. So much for (the discussion of) repentance.
If forbearance is one of the pillars of continued repentance, it is imperative to
explain it We will, therefore, discuss it, Allah willing, in a separate treatise.

i fTftrrtfr ^rTrrpC;Jtrrif1tiTT7-3 ^rrri frrffrtTrritJ
It is the second book of the quarter of saviors
In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Praise be to Allah, Who is fitting for praise and thanks, Whose Alone is the
garment of Grandeur, and the attributes of Glory and Supremacy, Who supports
his selected friends and allies with the power of patience at the times of ease and
adversity, and gratitude for distress and blessing.
Allah's permanent and ceaseless blessing and peace be upon Muhammad,
the chief of all the Prophets and Messengers, his companions, the chiefs of
the selected allies and friends of Allah, and his family, the leaders of the pious
and righteous.
Coming to the point: faith consists of two halves: patience and gratitude, in
accordance with the Prophetic narrations and sayings of the righteous
predecessors. Both are among the attributes and Most Beautiful Names of Allah
Almighty, Who names Himself the Patient, and the Thankful. The ignorance of
the real nature of both is indeed ignorance of both halves of faith, and
heedlessness of two of the attributes of (Allah) Most Gracious. To be sure, there
is no way to be close to Allah Almighty without faith. How could it be imagined
to follow the path of faith without knowing the components and object of faith?
However, to fail to know both patience and gratitude is to fail to know the
components and object of faith. This is why there is dire need to clarify the real
nature of both halves. We are going to clarify both halves in one book, Allah
willing, for they are interconnected.

Part one: Patience
It consists of seven chapters, which go as follows:
Explication Of Merit Of Patience
Explication Of Its Definition And Real Nature
Explication Of The Fact That It Constitutes Half The Faith
Explication Of The Fact That Its Names Differ By The Difference Of Its
Appurtenances
Explication Of Its categories In Regard To Strength And Weakness
Explication Of The Dire Need For Patience
Explication Of Medicine Of Patience; And That Whose Aid Is Sought To
Support It

CHAPTER ONE
EXPLICATION OF MERIT OF PATIENCE
Allah Almighty described the patient with many good characteristics, and
referred to patience more than seventy two times in the Quran, and assigned the
greater portion of degrees (of felicity) and good to the patience, as being its fruit.
91

The quarter of the saviors
92
He Almighty said: " And We appointed, from among them, Leaders, giving
guidance under Our Command, so long as they persevered with patience and
continued to have faith in Our Signs." (As-Sajdah 24)
4 (jfS O\y\£=>j 'jyws
And: " The fair promise of your Lord was fulfilled for the Children of Israel,
because they had patience and constancy." (Al-A'raf 137)

4 CSS& Iff

^

And: "And We will certainly bestow, on those who patiendy persevere, their
reward according to the best of their actions." (An-Nahl 96)
\f\£=* L
\f/^o oiAjT
}
And: " Twice will they be given their reward, for that they have persevered."
(Al-Qasas 54)

4 © 1cfy

1 oyy^

And: " those who patiently persevere will truly receive a reward without
measure!" (Az-Zumar 10)
There is no act of worship but that its reward is measured barring patience,
whose reward is immeasurable. Since fasting implies patience, and constitutes its
half, Allah Almighty says about it (as narrated by His Prophet): "Fasting is for Me
for which I give reward." From among all acts of worship, He ascribed fasting to
Himself. He promised the patient that He would be with them, saying: " and be
patient and persevering: for Allah is with those who patiently persevere." (AlAnfal 46)

4©

^

He Almighty suspended victory on patience, saying (addressing the faithful
believers): "Yea, if you remain firm, and act aright, even if the enemy should rush
here on you in hot haste, your Lord would help you with five thousand angels
making a terrific onslaught." (A1 Imran 125)
^

'jlOj If. }

4 OV?y~*
I yiJ I f
He combined for the patient many good things which have never been
combined for anyone else, as shown from His statement: " They are those on
whom (descend) blessings from their Lord, and Mercy, and they are the ones that
receive guidance." (Al-Baqarah 157)

Consider how right guidance, blessing and mercy (of Allah) have been
combined only for the patient! However, it will be too lengthy to relate all the
Holy Verses regarding patience.
There are many Prophetic narrations as regards patience, of which a mention

1
Book two: Patience and gratitude
93
may be made of the following:
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Patience constitutes half the faith" as we will explain its meaning in detail later.
(Abu Na'im and Al-Khatib on the authority fo Ibn Mas'ud). He "peace be upon
him" further said: "You have been given the least portion of certainty (of faith)
and determination of patience. Whoever is given his fortune of them (in full),
should not care about what he has missed of standing at night (for
supererogatory prayers) and fasting by day. It is dearer to me to keep patient on
your state on which you are, than to come to me, with each of you having (as
much) work as the work of all of you. But I fear most that this world would be
opened to you, with the result that you would deny each other, and at that point,
you would be denied by the hosts of heaven. Whoever keeps patient and expects
his reward for that (from Allah), would receive his reward in full." Then, he
"peace be upon him" recited: " What is with you must vanish: what is with Allah
will endure. And We will certainly bestow, on those who patiently persevere, their
reward according to the best of their actions." (An-Nahl 96)
It is narrated on the authority of Jabir "Allah be pleased with him" that the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was asked about
faith, thereupon he said: "It consists of patience and tolerance." (Ibn Hibban and
At-Tabarani). He "peace be upon him" further said: "Patience is a treasure from
the treasures of Paradise." He "peace be upon him" was asked once again: "What
is faith?" he said: "Patience." (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority fo Anas).
It resembles his statement: "Hajj is (to stand at) Arafah." (the composers of
sunan on the authority fo Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Ya'mur). It means that the
greatest part of Hajj is fulfilled by standing at Arafah. He "peace be upon him"
further said: "The best of deeds is that which souls are forced to do under
compulsion (for it requires great patience)." It is said that it was revealed to
David "peace be upon him": "Behave in accordance with My good manners, and
one of My good manners is that I am the Patient."
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them"
(through Ata') that when the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" entered upon the Ansar he asked them: "Are you really
believers?" they kept silent. Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: "Yes O
Messenger of Allah." He asked: "Then, what is the sign of your faith?" they
said: "We thank (Allah) for comfort, keep patient on adversity, and accept
(with good pleasure) the fate (decreed by Allah)." On that he said: "You are
really believers, by the Lord of the Ka'bah." (At-Tabarani). He "peace be upon
him" further said: "Much good lies in your keeping patient on what you
dislike." (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Ibn Abbas). The Christ "peace be
upon him" said: "You would not attain what you like unless you keep patient
on what you dislike." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "Were patience to be a man, he would have been generous;
and Allah likes the patient." (At-Tabarani on the authority of A'ishah).
However, the Prophetic narrations in this connection are beyond calculation.

I

The quarter of the saviors

94

There are many sayings belonging to the righteous predecessors, and a
mention may be made of the following:
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" wrote in his message to Abu Musa
"Allah be pleased with him": "Adhere to patience, and know that patience is
of two kinds, one of which is better than the other. To keep patient on
adversities is good, but what is better is to keep patient on what has been
forbidden by Allah Almighty. Know also that patience is the substance of
faith, for the piety, which is the best deed of righteousness, is achieved by
patience." Ali "Adlah be pleased with him" said: "Faith has been established on
four sides: certainty, patience, Jihad and justice." He said on another occasion:
"Patience in relation to faith is like the head in relation to the body; and as
well as there is no body without a head, there is no faith without patience."
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" used to say: "How good are both sides (of
the camel), and how good is the extra load for the patient." By both sides, he
meant prayer and mercy, and by the extra load the right guidance. By this , he
referred to the statement of Allah Almighty: " They are those on whom
(descend) blessings from their Lord, and Mercy, and they are the ones that
receive guidance." (Al-Baqarah 157)
Habib Ibn Abu Habib used to weep whenever he recited the followingFIoly
Verse: "Truly We found him (Job) full of patience and constancy, how excellent
in Our service! ever did he turn (to Us)!" (Sad 44)
4

j4^\

4£Juc>-j b] ^

He used to say in comment on that: "How astonishing! He gave and praised
(whom He gave)." i.e. He gives for patience, for which He praises." According to
Abu Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased with him": "The peak of faith is patience on
the judgement, and contentment with the Divine Decree."
That is an exposition of the merit of patience from the transmitted texts. As
for its rational side, it would not be understood clearly unless you know well the
meaning and real nature of patience. Indeed, the merit and grade are attributes
which could be known only after the knowledge of the real nature of the
described thing. So, let's make a mention of its real nature and meaning, and
success be with Allah Almighty.

CHAPTER TWO
EXPLICATION OF REAL NATURE AND MEANING OF PATIENCE
It should be known that patience is one of the stations of religion and mystic
travellers; and all stations of religion consist of three components: knowledge,
states and acts. Knowledge is the origin which produces states, and the acts are
the fruits of states. Knowledge is like the trees, states the branches, and acts the
fruits. This is true of all the stations of the mystic travellers on the path to Allah
Almighty. The term faith sometimes is given only to knowledge, and at other
times to all the three elements as we have already referred to the different
meanings of both faith and Islam in the book of the rules of creed.

Book two: Patience and gratitude
95
Patience could be accomplished only on the basis of a previous knowledge
and a present state. The act then is produced from that previous knowledge and
present state. This could be known only if we know the order in which angels,
men and animals exist. Patience is unique to men and it is unimaginable in both
angels and animals, due to the deficiency of animals and perfection of angels.
That is, the animals are seized by appetites, to which they are subject, and nothing
stimulates or quietens them other than the appetites. They have no power to
resist the appetite and repel it, so that the constancy of this power vis-a-vis the
requirement of appetite might be called patience. As for angels "peace be upon
them" they are devoted to longing for the presence of Lordship, and delight in
the degree of nearness to it; and no power of appetite is directed on them in
order to need to resist what keeps away from the presence of Lordship with other
soldiers to overcome it.
As regards man, he is created as being incomplete during childhood, like
animals. He has nothing but the appetite for food which he needs, then there
appears in him the appetite for play and adornment, followed by the appetite for
marriage. He does not have the power of patience to resist those, for patience in
its real nature is to have soldiers stand steadfast in opposition to other fighting
soldiers. But the child has but the soldiers of desire with nothing to oppose them,
like animals. But Allah Almighty, with His mercy and generosity, honoured the
sons of Adam and raised their class over that of animals. When man becomes at
the threshold of attaining the age of puberty, he is entrusted to two angels: one to
guide him aright, and the other to strengthen him. In this way, he is distinguished
by the aid of angels from the animals. He further is given two distinctive
characteristics: one is the knowledge of Allah Almighty and His Messenger, and
the knowledge of the consequences resulting from acts. This is by virtue of the
angel in charge of guiding and teaching. Indeed, the animal has none to guide it
to know the consequences resulting from acts like man. For this reason, it
requires but what is pleasant and delicious, but it is beyond its capacity to demand
the beneficial, though presently bitter medicine.
Man thus, by the light of guidance, came to know that following the desires
has harmful consequences. But this guidance alone is insufficient so long as he is
not provided with the power to leave those harmful things. How many harmful
things which man knows to be harmful, like ailment, and man has no power to
avert them. Since then he has no power to avert from himself the soldiers of
desire, Allah Almighty entrusted him to another angel to strengthen him and
provide him with soldiers invisible to him to help him overcome the soldiers of
desires. He Almighty ordered him to fight the soldiers of desire. But sometimes,
this (angelic) soldier becomes weak, and at other times strong, according to the
support provided by Allah for His servant, the same as the light of guidance
which is different among men.
Let's give that characteristic by which man is distinguished from animals as
far as curbing and overpowering desires is concerned, the name of religious
motive, and give the desires' demanding to be fulfilled the name of motive of
inclination. There is then fighting and war between the motive of religion and the

The quarter of the saviors
96
motive of inclination. The (matter of victory and loss in the) war between diem is
determined by turns. The heart is the place where the batde between them
occurs. The religious motive gets its supplies from the angels who support the
party of Allah Almighty; and the motive of inclination gets its supplies from
Satans who support the enemies of Allah Almighty.
Patience is the constancy of the religious motive vis-a-vis the motive of
inclination. If the religious motive stands steadfast until it overpowers the motive
of inclination, the party of Allah then will have achieved victory, and man will
have joined the patient; and if it weakens and is overpowered by desire, and has
no power to keep patient until he averts it, he will have joined the followers of
devils. Leaving the desired things is caused by an act resulting from a state called
patience. It is the constancy of the religious motive vis-a-vis the motive of desire.
The constancy of the religious motive is a state resulting from the knowledge of
the enmity of desire, and its opposition to the causes of happiness in the world
and hereafter.
The more one's certainty of faith is strengthened, i.e. the certainty that the
desire is to cut off on him the way to Allah Almighty, the more the religious
motive becomes constant; and once it becomes more constant, the acts will be
done in opposition to the requirements of desires.
The desire then could be left only by the power of the religious motive which
opposes the motive of desire. To be sure, the power of knowledge and faith
uncovers the harm and evil consequences of desire, those two angels are in
charge of those powers, by permission of Allah Almighty. They are subjugated by
Him. They are among the generous scribes. They are entrusted to be in charge of
all human beings.
If you know that the class of the guiding angel is higher than that of the
strengthening angel, it then will not be hidden from you that the right side is
nobler than the other. This angel is the companion of the right side, and the
other the companion of the left side. A servant has two states of heedlessness
and thinking on the one hand, and unrestraint and mortification on the other
hand. By heedlessness, he turns away from and does evil to the companion of
the right side, who, in turn, writes his conduct as an evil deed against him. But
by thinking, he turns towards him to get benefit from his guidance, thus doing
good to him, and he, in turn, writes his devotion to him as a good deed.
Likewise, by unrestraint, he turns away from the companion of the left side,
and does not take heed to get supplies from him, thus doing evil to him, with
the result that he writes his conduct as an evil deed against him. But by
mortification, he gets supplies from him, and he, in turn, writes this as a good
deed for him.
For their writing good and evil deeds, these angels are called generous scribes.
They are generous for the servant gets benefit from their generosity, and all
angels are righteous generous. They are scribes for they record good and evil
deeds. They record them in scrolls folded within the heart, in order not to be
uncovered in this world. Those scrolls, their scribes, handwriting, description and
all things related to them belong to the dominion of invisibles. Everything

Book two: Patience and gratitude

97
belonging to the dominion of invisibles is beyond the reach of sights. Those
folded scrolls are to be spread out twice: the first on the minor resurrection, and
the other on the major resurrection. By minor resurrection, I mean the state of
death, in compliance with the statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him": "Whoever dies, his judgement has been
established." (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Anas).In this minor
resurrection, the servant is alone, and at that point, it is said: "And behold! you
come to Us bare and alone as We created you for the first time: you have left
behind you all (the favours) which We bestowed on you." (Al-An'am 94)
4©

**jj}^y>- &

CSts'y'j

And: "Read your (own) record; sufficient is your soul this day to make out an
account against you." (Al-Isra' 14)
ti-bip

11JX-uLxj

l^sl ^

But on the major resurrection which gathers all creatures, he will not be
alone: on the contrary, perhaps he will be reckoned in front of the assembly of
people, where the pious will be driven to the Garden, and the disbelievers and
criminals to the fire (of Hell) in crowds.
The first terror comes from the minor resurrection. All terrors of the
major resurrection have matches in the minor resurrection, like the
earthquake. At the time of your death, the earth that belongs to you quakes. It
is known that the earthquake might befall any part of the land without the
surrounding parts. What affects man by the earthquake is the tremble of his
own residence and not that of others. You should know that you are created
from dust, and your portion from the dust is only your own body and not the
bodies of others. The piece of land on which you sit is but an envelop, and
you feel afraid of its quake lest your own body would quake consequently,
otherwise, the air is always in quake, and you fear it not, for it does not lead to
the quake of your own body. Your portion from the whole earthquake is the
quake of your own body only.
That is because it is your own earth and dust, your bones the mountains of
your earth, your head the sky of your earth, your heart the sun of your earth, your
hearing, seeing, and all the other senses the stars of your sky, the blood that runs
in your veins the ocean of your earth, your hair the plants of your earth, your
limbs the trees of your earth, and so forth to all parts of your body. If the pillars
of your body collapse by death, your earth will have then quaked with great
quake; and if the bones separate from the flesh, both earth and mountains will
have been carried and pounded to powder; and if the bones are thrown, the
mountains will have vanished; and if your heart darkens at death, the sun (with its
spacious light) will have then been folded up; and if your hearing, seeing, and all
your senses become idle, then the stars will have fallen, losing their luster; and if
your head split open, the sky will have been cleft asunder; and if your forehead
sweat out of the severe terror of death, the oceans of your body will have boiled
over with a swell; and if one of your legs is turned on the other, and both are
your riding mount, then, the ten-month pregnant she-camels will have been left

||

The quarter of the saviors
98
untended; and if the soul departs from the body, the earth then will have been
flattened out, And cast forth what is within it and become (clean) empty, and so
forth.
The point is not to make comparison of all states, but it is to say that by
death, die terrors of this minor resurrection will be established on you, without
losing anything from the major resurrection. Which benefit do you get from the
survival of the stars as regards others so long as your own senses have become
idle by death? To be sure, it is the same to the blind both day and night, the
eclipse and brightness of the sun, etc, for it eclipses only in regard with him, and
not in regard with others; and this is his own portion from it, and the brightness
afterwards is the portion of the others. Similarly, when one's head is split open,
his sky will have been cleft asunder, for the sky is what is above the head, and
whoever has no head, no sky will be good for him: which benefit does he have
from the survival of the sky for the others? This is the minor resurrection with its
terrors and fears. But there are more severe terrors and deferred fears to come
with the major resurrection.
It should be known to you that however long we are in describing this
minor resurrection, we would not encompass more than one-tenth its reality;
and this minor resurrection is but like the minor birth in comparison with the
major birth. Man has two births: the first is to come out from loins to the
womb, where he resides in a well-firm place to a specific period of time. In
order to reach perfection of creation, he should come upon various stages
beginning from being a sperm-drop, then a leech-like clot (of blood), then a
piece of flesh like a morsel, etc until he gets out of the narrowness of the
womb to the spaciousness of the world. The particularity of the minor
resurrection compared to the generality of the major resurrection is like the
narrowness of the womb in comparison with the spaciousness of the world.
The spaciousness of this world compared to the spaciousness of the world to
which one goes by death is like the measure of the womb in comparison with
the spaciousness of this world. It is on this measure that you should compare
the hereafter with the world. You were not created, nor would you be
resurrected but like a single soul. The second creation would be only on the
measure of the first creation. We could say that the number of creations is not
limited only to two, as referred to by the statement of Allah Almighty: " From
changing your Forms and creating you (again) in (Forms) that you know not."
(Al-Waqi'ah 61)
^ (J|j) 0^

JjSj o'

£

Whoever indeed believes in both resurrections is certain of the world of
visibles and the dominion of invisibles; and whoever believes only in the minor
resurrection and not in the major one sees only with one eye one of both worlds.
This is the evident ignorance and error in which one imitates the one-eyed Dajjal.
How heedless you are O poor man, given that in front of you are all of those
terrors! Indeed, we all are poor. If you do not believe in the major resurrection
out of ignorance and error, is it not sufficient for indication to it the minor
resurrection? Have you not heard the statement of the master of Prophets "peace

99
Book two: Patience and gratitude
be upon him": "It suffices death to be a preacher"? (Al-Baihaqi on the authority
of A'ishah). have you not heard about his distress at death to the extent that he
"peace be upon him" said: "O Allah! Make easy the agonies of death upon
Muhammad"? (At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah on the authority of
A'ishah). Do you not feel shy of regarding death too slow to attack you, in
imitation of the heedless lowly who " will not (have to) wait for aught but a single
Blast: it will seize them while they are yet disputing among themselves! No
(chance) will they then have, by will, to dispose (of their affairs), nor to return to
their own people!" (Ya Sin 49-50)
f $1*' ejj ^5

Oj(@) Oy+^^-'y^i

^/J

U^

If ailment attacks them as a warner of death, they would receive no
admonition; and when hoariness befalls them as a messenger from death, they
would take no consideration. " Ah! alas for (My) servants! there comes not a
Messenger to them but they mock him! See they not how many generations
before them We destroyed? Not to them will they return: But each one of them
all, will be brought before Us (for judgment)." (Ya Sin 30-32)
^ • y p- gh*

i "j!ioj*jr~~i

^y ^

cy

^

1■> ^

013@by^ry ^
"Not a Sign come to them from among the Signs of their Lord, but they turn
away therefrom." (Ya Sin 46)
i

I

That is because " We have put a bar in front of them and a bar behind them,
and further, We have covered (hem up; so that they cannot see. The same is it to
them whether you admonish them or you do not admonish them: they will not
believe." (Ya Sin 9-10)
t yp^ ^3-3 (c^) Oyvpy V yi* j»

>+49^ o^3 '3L yy^ CW (y

^

4 Cjj Oytyi ^ y*J 4^ jb s 1

\

I
i

Let's now return to our main purpose: it is clear then that patience is the
constancy of the religious motive in resisting the motive of inclination. That
resistance is characteristic of mankind, due to the generous scribes entrusted to
him. They record nothing from the children under age, or from the mad. We
have already mentioned that the good deed lies in turning to get benefit from
them, and the evil deed lies in turning away from them, and since there is no way
for the child or mad to get benefit, then, no devotion nor turning away is
imagined from him. They record the devotion and abstention only from him who
has the capability of devotion and abstention. By my life, the commencements of
the light of guidance might rise at the age of discernment and grow gradually until
the age of puberty, just in the same way as the light of dawn starts to rise and
grow gradually until the emergence of sun disk.
But it is still an imperfect guidance that does not guide to the consequences

j

The quarter of the saviors
100
that result from the evil in the hereafter, if not to the consequences that result
from the evil in this world. For this reason, a child is beaten for his leaving prayer
in this world, although he will not be punished for that in the hereafter.
Furthermore, no scrolls are written down against him to be spread out. It is the
duty of the righteous dutiful pious guardians and trustees who imitate the
righteous generous scribes from the angels to record both good and evil deeds of
the child on the page of his heart, spread that out to him to let him know (the
difference between good and evil), and then chastise him for it by beating. Every
guardian as such has indeed inherited the good manners of the generous scribes
of angels, and used that in favor of the child (under his guardianship), would
attain thereby the degree of closeness to the Lord of worlds, just as it is attained
by the angels. In this way, he would be in the company of the Prophets, sincere
affirmers and lovers of truth, and those brought near to Allah. To this fact the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" referred in his
statement: "I and he who takes care of the orphan will be (as close to each other)
as those (fingers) in the Garden." He "peace be upon him" pointed out his index
and middle fingers. (Al-Bukhari on the authority of Sahl Ibn Sa'd).

CHAPTER THREE
EXPLICATION OF THE FACT THAT PATIENCE CONSTITUTES
HALF THE FAITH
It should be known to you that faith might sometimes be meant to refer to
giving trust to the foundations of religion, and sometimes refer to the works that
result from the former, and at other times refer to both. Knowledge and works
likewise are of different categories. As faith includes all of them all, it consists of
over seventy-two branches. We have already referred to the different concepts of
faith as such in the book of the Rules of the Creed.
But here, we can say that patience constitutes half the faith on the basis of
two considerations, and in accordance with two concepts given to faith:
The first consideration is that faith is meant to refer to giving trust to
foundations of religion as well as to works that result from it, and in this way,
faith has two fundaments: certainty and patience. Certainty is meant to refer to
the incisive knowledge learnt by the guidance therewith Allah guides His
servant to the foundations of religion. Patience is meant to refer to work in
accordance with this certainty. Certainty lets man know that disobedience is
harmful and obedience is beneficial; and it is impossible to leave disobedience
totally and persist in obedience totally except by patience, which is to use the
religious motive to overpower the motive of inclination. By that consideration,
patience constitutes half the faith. For this reason, the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" combined them in his statement:
"You have been given the least portion of certainty (of faith) and determination
of patience."
The second consideration is that faith is meant to refer to the states that
produce works, and not to the knowledge itself. In this way, all what man
encounters is divided into what benefits him and what harms him in this world
and the hereafter. In relation to what harms him, he has the state of patience; and

i

p

101
Book two: Patience and gratitude
in relation to what benefits him, the state of thankfulness. By that consideration,
thankfulness constitutes half the faith, just as certainty half the faith by the
former consideration. From this viewpoint, Ibn Mas'ud "Allah be pleased with
him" said, and it might be raised up to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him": "Faith is of two halves: one half is padence, and the
other half is thankfulness."
Since padence is to abstain from the modve of inclination by virtue of the
constancy of the religious motive, and that the motive of inclination is of two
divisions: a motive of appetite and a motive of anger, i.e. the appetite in pursuit
of the pleasure, and the anger in flight from the harm, and that fasting is to keep
patient on the requirement of appetite only, i.e. the appetite of stomach and sex,
and not on anger, it is said, by that consideration, that fasting constitutes half the
patience. That is because the perfect patience is to abstain from the requirements
of both appetite and anger altogether. By that consideration also, fasting
constitutes the quarter of faith. It is on that measure that you should understand
how the limits of works and states are determined by religious law, and compared
to faith. The basic rule therein is to know the different categories which faith
includes.

1

I

CHAPTER FOUR
EXPLICATION OF THE FACT THAT ITS NAMES DIFFER BY THE
DIFFERENCE OF ITS APPURTENANCES
It should be known to you that patience is of two kinds: physical, i.e. to
constantly endure the corporal difficulties. This might be either by act, through
doing the difficult works, in regard with worship or anything else, or by tolerance,
like patience on the severe beating, painful injuries and ailments, etc. This is
praiseworthy once it agrees with the religious law. But the other kind is perfectly
praiseworthy, i.e. the psychological patience on deprivation of the natural desires
and inclinational requirements. If this is to be patience on the desire of the
stomach and sex, it is called chastity; and if it is to endure a particular harm, then,
its names change by the change of the harm endured.
If it is to endure a calamity, it is called patience, in opposition to a state called
fear and scare, which is to let the motive of inclination go on raising voice,
slapping cheeks, tearing clothes, etc. If it is to endure the loss of richness, it is
called self-control, in opposition to a state called rejection (of reality). If it is to
endure fighting and war, it is called courage, in opposition to cowardice. If it is to
control one's anger, it is called forbearance, in opposition to exasperation. If it is
to endure one of time's harmful disasters, it is called chest expansion, in
opposition to disturbance, disgust and breast constriction. If it is to conceal a
secret of another, it is called concealment of secret, and its perpetrator a
Concealer. If it is to endure the loss of surplus living, it is called abstinence, in
opposition to greed. If it is to endure a little fortune of living, it is called
contentment, in opposition to greed.
Most works of faith then are included in patience. For this reason, when the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was once asked
about faith, he said: "It is patience." That is because it is the most important deed

!

|
'

The quarter of the saviors
102
which includes the greatest portion of works of faith. Allah Almighty combined
all of those elements in His statement: " and to be firm and patient, in pain (or
suffering) and adversity, and throughout all periods of panic. Such are the people
of truth, the God-fearing." (Al-Baqarah 177)
.f

Those are the different categories of patience according to its different
appurtenances. Whoever takes the meanings only from names thinks that those
states are different in their reality and nature, just depending on their different
names. But he who follows the straight path and looks with the light of Allah
Almighty, sees the meanings first and gets acquainted with their realities and then
takes heed of the names which are put only to designate them. The meanings are
the origins and the names are but subsequents. Whoever seeks for the origins
through their subsequents should inevitably slip. To both parties, Allah Almighty
refers in His statement: " Is then one who walks headlong, with his face
grovelling, better guided, or one who walks evenly on a Straight Way?" (Al-Mulk
22)
The disbelievers did not fall into mistake but for their reversal movement: We
ask Allah for good success, with His mercy and generosity.

CHAPTER FIVE
EXPLICATION OF CATEGORIES OF PATIENCE IN RELATION TO
STRENGTH AND WEAKNESS
It should be known to you that the religious motive, in relation to the motive
of inclination, has three states:
The first is to overcome it at all, with the result that it will have no power to
dispute with it. This is accomplished by constant patience. At that point, it is said:
"Whoever keeps patient has indeed achieved success." But unfortunately, it is
only a very few who could attain that level. Undoubtedly, they are the truthful
who will be brought near (to Allah Almighty), who said: "Our Lord is Allah" and
then they became upright Those have stuck to the straight way, walked on the
even path, and felt assured on the religious motive. It is those who would be
called by the caller (on the Day of Judgement): "O (you) soul, in (complete) rest
and satisfaction! Come back you to your Lord, well pleased (yourself), and well­
pleasing unto Him! Enter you, then, among My Devotees! Yea, enter you My
Heaven!" (Al-Fajr 27-30)

©

(j

»4Lj JJ

^

(Jr*’ d30^

The second state is that the motive of inclination overpowers the religious
motive completely, with the result that one surrenders to the soldiers of
devils, and mortifies himself not because of losing all hope of the effect of
mortification. Those are the heedless. They represent the majority of people.
It is those who have become slaves of their desires and lusts, and their

\

103
Book two: Patience and gratitude
wretchedness has seized them. They then put their hearts, which are one of
the mysteries of Allah Almighty, under the control of the enemies of Allah
Almighty. To them Allah Almighty refers in His statement: "If We had so
willed, We could certainly have brought every soul its true guidance: but the
Word from Me will come true, "I will fill Hell with Jinns and men all
together."" (As-Sajdah 13)
*

liS/

£

It is those who have sold the hereafter for this world, thereupon the loss was
their portion. To him who wanted to guide them, it was said: " Therefore shun
those who turn away from Our Message and desire nothing but the life of this
world. That is as far as knowledge will reach them. Verily your Lord knows best
those who stray from His Path, and He knows best those who receive guidance."
(An-Najm 29-30)
pic-1 3-A

oj (4*^^ (cjs

Oy>S\ ^1 Zji jJ}

^

j-

<■

^^
I

This state is characterized by despair, loss of hope, and deception by desires
and wishes. This is, to be sure, the utmost degree of foolishness. The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The
intelligent is he who mortifies himself and works for the life to come after
death; and the foolish is he who follows his own desires, and hopes from Allah
(to reward him)." The one in such a state, being admonished, says: "I have
longing for repentance, but, at the same time, I have no covet of it, for it has
become difficult on me." He indeed has no longing for repentance. But he said:
"Verily, Allah is Oft Forgiving, Most Merciful, Most Generous, and He is not in
need of my repentance." This poor has subjugated his mind to be in service of
his desire. He uses it only to deduce the subdeties and tricks thereby to fulfill
his desires. His mind has become in service of his desires like a Muslim in the
hands of disbelievers, who use him only to look after pigs, keep and carry wine,
and so on. His place in the Sight of Allah is the same place of him who
subjugates a Muslim and hands him over to the disbelievers, and makes him a
captive in their hands. That is because, with his odious crime, he has subjugated
that which should not be subjugated, and gave power to such as has no right to
take power.
The Muslim has the right to take power due to his knowledge about Allah
Almighty and the religious motive he has; whereas the disbeliever should be
subjugated due to his ignorance of Allah Almighty, and lack of the religious
motive in return for the devilish motive. The Muslim's right on himself is
more binding than the right of anyone on him. So, when he subjugates the
noble faculty that belongs to the party of Allah Almighty and the soldiers of
angels to be under the control of the despicable soldiers that belong to the
party of Satan, he seems as if he has enslaved a Muslim to a disbeliever. Nay!
He seems as if he aimed at a benefactor king and took his dearest child and

1

I
i

!

The quarter of the saviors
104
handed him over to his most hateful enemy. Consider then how ungrateful he
is to the favors of Allah Almighty, and how responsive he is to His wrath.
Indeed, the inclination is the most hateful object of worship on earth in the
Sight of Allah Almighty, whereas the mind is the dearest being to be created
on the surface of the earth.
The third case is that (the matter of victory and loss in) war between both
parties is by turns. This one is among the diligent and not among the successful.
The people in this case are those who mixed a good deed with an evil deed, and
perchance Allah Almighty would turn to them in repentance.
Those are the states of patience regarding strength and weakness. But further
three states spring from the number of the things on which one might keep
patient:
One might overpower all desires and lusts, is overpowered by all desires and
lusts, or overpower some and is overpowered by some. To the third class the
following statement of Allah Almighty refers: "Others (there are who) have
acknowiedged their wrong doings: they have mixed an act that was good with
another that was evil. Perhaps Allah will turn unto them (in mercy): for Allah is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful." (At-Tawbah 102)
oI Oil

Ly>-1f j \j>xS^o

4

jj

I

1*5 ^

^

As for those who abandon mortification and rather surrender to their desires
and lusts, they are like beasts, nay more straying in way. That is because the beast
is not given the knowledge and faculty with which it could resist desires and lusts,
unlike such a man who is given the knowledge and faculty with which he could
resist desires and lusts, but those are idle in him. This is why he is defective. That
is the significance of the poetic verse: "I have never seen a defect in the people
like the lack of the capable in perfection."
By the consideration of difficulty and ease, patience also is divided into that
which man could hardly persist in it without great effort and suffering, and this is
called ostentatious perseverance; and that which is done with ease and the least
amount of effort, and it is called patience. If one persists in piety and gives trust
in the good end he will receive, the patience becomes very easy on him. That is
the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty: " So he who gives (in charity)
and fears (Allah), And (in all sincerity) testifies to the Best, We will indeed make
smooth for him the path to Bliss." (Al-Lail 5-7)

The example of such is like a fighter: to be sure, the strong man is able to
overpower the weak with much ease, the least measure of effort, and from the
first attack, receiving no suffering nor fatigue. But he could not overpower the
strong like him without much effort and great suffering. Such is fighting between
the motive of religion and the motive of inclination. It is, indeed, fighting
between the soldiers of angels and the soldiers of devils. When the desires and
lusts submit and are curbed, the motive of religion takes power, and patience

Book two: Patience and gratitude

105

becomes easy on man by virtue of long persistence, he will be raised up to the
station of good pleasure, as will be explained later. To be sure, the good pleasure
is higher in station than patience. This is why the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Worship Allah with good pleasure; and if
you could not, then, much good lies in keeping patience on what you dislike."
One of the Gnostics said: "Patience has three stations: the first is to abandon
appetite, and this is the degree of repentants. The second is to be well-pleased
with what is decreed, and this is the degree of the abstinent ascetics. The third is
to love what one's master does with him, and this is the degree of the sincere
affirmers of faith." Allah willing, we shall show in the Book of Loving that loving
is higher in station than the good pleasure, just as the good pleasure is higher in
station than patience. That division applies to a particular kind of patience, i.e. the
patience on calamities and disasters.
On the other hand, it should be known to you that patience, by consideration
of its ruling, is divided into obligatory, supererogatory, undesirable and unlawful.
To keep patient on what is forbidden is obligatory. To keep patient on what is
undesirable is supererogatory. To keep patient on the forbidden harm you receive
is forbidden. Its example is like him whose hand or the hand of whose son is cut
off and he keeps patient and remains silent on it; or like him who shows a sexual
desire for an unlawful woman, which arouses one's jealousy, but he keeps patient
and remains silent. Indeed, this patience is unlawful particularly if such a woman
belongs to his family. The undesirable patience is to keep patient on harm one
receives from an undesirable source under Sharia.
Sharia then should be made the touchstone of patience. That patience
constitutes half the faith should not give you the false impression that all kinds of
patience are praiseworthy under Sharia. What is intended is to keep patient on
certain and not all things.

CHAPTER SIX
EXPLICATION OF THE DIRE NEED FOR PATIENCE; AND THAT ONE
COULD NOT DISPENSE WITH IT
It should be known that all a servant encounters in this world are included
under two main categories: what agrees with his disposition, and what disagrees
with his inclination and he dislikes. In each, he is in need of patience. Since there
is no way but to encounter either both altogether, or at least one of them, he
could hardly dispense with patience.
The first category, i.e. what agrees with his nature, like health, safety,
wealth, majesty, big clan, large means of living, great number of adherents and
followers, and in general, all pleasures of this world. Indeed, man is in dire
need of patience on those things. That is because unless he restrains himself
from uncontrollable reliance on and involvement and engagement in what is
permissible of them, this might lead him to rejection (of reality) and
transgression, as confirmed by the statement of Allah Almighty: " Nay, but
man does transgress all bounds, In that he looks upon himself as selfsufficient." (Al-'Alaq 6-7)

f

i

;

The quarter of the saviors

106
4©

o'ej jl ^5 ^jlJ

oj

This led one of the Gnostics to say: "The believer could keep patient on the
disaster, but none other than a sincere affirmer of faith could keep patient on
wellbeing." According to Sahl: "To keep patient on wellbeing is more severe than
to keep patient on disaster." When the gates of this world with its pleasures and
delights were opened to the companions "Allah be pleased with them" they said:
"We were afflicted with the temptation of adversity and we kept patient; and
when we were afflicted with the temptation of prosperity, we were unable to keep
patient."
That is why Allah Almighty warned His servants of the temptation of wealth,
wives and children when He said: " O you who believe! Let not your riches or
your children divert you from the remembrance of Allah. If any act thus, the loss
is their own." (Al-Munafiqun 9)
tiLlIj li

I

? lj£’

-uJj I

4O

'y*!

^

1c Oir'J 1

^

p-*

And: "O you who believe! Truly, among your wives and your children are
(some that are) enemies to yourselves: so beware of them!" (At-Taghabun 14)
I\ykxj o!3

Li ^IjJ-P p 4=auJjlj

4©

(ja ^ ■ jj

^y„j]\ t^Ljj ^

Jy** ^

The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"No doubt, the children are to develop in one miserliness, cowardice and
grief." (Abu Ya'li Al-Mawsili on the authority of Abu Sa'id). When the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" saw his grand
son Al-Hassan "Allah be pleased with him" stumbling in his shirt, he
dismounted from the pulpit and embraced him and said: "Allah has told the
truth when He said: " And know you that your possessions and your progeny
are but a trial; and that it is Allah with whom lies your highest reward." (AlAnfal 28)
4

JO-UP kill ^ • jl\ 4II3

<--=*)'y* I LLl IjulpIj ^

Indeed, when I saw my grandson stumbling, I could not help carrying him."
(the composers of Sunan on the authority of Buraidah).
In that is a lesson to be leamt by such as has insight. So, the perfect patience
is to persevere wellbeing. To keep patient on wellbeing is not to rely on it but
rather to know that it is but a deposit with one, and it might likely be restored at
any time. This means that he should not rely on it, nor let himself freely enjoy of
it, nor engage or involve himself in it. He should observe the rights of Allah due
on his property, by spending, on his body by aiding others, on his tongue by
telling the truth; and the same is true of all favors bestowed by Allah on him. This
kind of patience is connected with gratitude in the sense that it could not be
accomplished without thankfulness, as will be shown later.
Furthermore, to keep patient on prosperity is more severe for it is connected

107
Book two: Patience and gratitude
with the capability, and it is out of protection to have no power (to be an
argument against you). To keep patient on your getting cupped by another is
easier than to keep patient on cupping or bloodletting yourself. The hungry, in
absence of food, is more capable of patience than he is in the presence of
pleasant and delicious kinds of food. This is why the temptation caused by
prosperity is more severe.
The second category, i.e. what disagrees with one's inclinations and nature. It
might be optional, like the acts of obedience and disobedience; or compulsory
like calamities and adversities; or not optional, but one has the choice to remove,
like taking revenge on him who does harm to him. The total is three divisions.
The first division is that which is optional, i.e. all of his acts of obedience and
disobedience. They are divided into two:
First: the acts of obedience, and a servant is in need of keeping patient on
obedience. Indeed, to keep patient on it is very difficult. That is because one, by
nature, refrains from slavery and rather desires for supremacy. For this reason,
one of the Gnostics said: "There is no soul but that it conceals what Pharaoh
disclosed when he said: ’I am your supreme Lord.1" But Pharaoh found the
opportunity to disclose his supremacy for he ridiculed his people and they obeyed
him in his claim. However, there is none but that he has the same claim with his
servant, followers, and all who are under his guardianship, even though he does
not disclose it. He is not infuriated when they fall short of serving him but
because of such a feeling of arrogance and enslavement, in which he shares the
Lord the garment of supremacy. In other words, slavery in itself is difficult on the
soul at all. Some acts of worship are disliked because of laziness like prayer,
others because of miserliness like giving in charity, and others because of both
like Hajj and Jihad. Patience on the acts of obedience then is to persevere difficult
things. One needs to be patient in three states:
The first is before the act of obedience, in order to make sincere and true his
intention, refrain from the stains of showing off and causes of evils, and be
resolute on sincerity and loyalty. This is difficult patience particularly in the sight
of him who knows well the real nature of intention and sincerity, the evils of
showing off and self-plots. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" drew the attention to that when he said: "The (rewards of) deeds
depend on intentions, and everyone shall have (the reward) according to his
intention." (both sheikhs on the authority of Umar). In confirmation of that,
Allah Almighty said: " And they have been commanded no more than this: to
worship Allah, offering Him sincere devotion, being True fin faith)." (AlBayyinah 5)
That is why Allah Almighty gave precedence to patience over work as
shown from His statement: "Not so do those who show patience and
constancy, and work righteousness; for them is forgiveness (of sins) and a
great reward." (Hud 11)
V

£=a

|j

J iLi)j I

j.1

I

Qi jj I "ilj ^

The quarter of the saviors

108

The second is during the work itself. One should not become heedless of
Allah during the work, nor weary to achieve its etiquettes and manners. It should
rather persist in its requisite manners to the end of work. This requires him to
keep patient on the causes of weakness until he finishes from the work; and this
is also very difficult. To it Allah Almighty refers in His statement: " an excellent
reward for those who do (good)! Those who persevere in patience, and put their
trust in their Lord and Cherisher." (Al-Ankabut 58-59)
He means those who kept patient until they finished from the work.
The third state is after finishing from the work. In this state, one needs to
keep patient on disclosing it and showing it to others in avoidance of being heard
and seen of men. He also should keep patient on regarding it with die eye of
conceit or pride lest it would become invalid and fruidess, as shown in the
statement of Allah Almighty: "O you who believe! obey Allah, and obey the
Messenger, and make not vain your deeds!" (Muhammad 33)

i

f i^4 %

i\Ly^>‘ ‘oii‘

♦>

Allah Almighty also said: " O you who believe! Cancel not your charity by
reminders of your generosity or by injury, like those who spend their
substance to be seen of men, but believe neither in Allah nor in the Last
Day." (Al-Baqarah 264)
Vj

*15j ja,jL

(Sd-J^

13 ,^-L!l

if ^iJtli Lfjiij ^

4
cr?yWhoever does not keep patient on making reminder of his generosity after
giving his charity out has indeed invalidated it.
The acts of obedience are divided into obligatory and supererogatory, and
man needs to keep patient on them all. Allah Almighty combined them all in His
statement: " Allah commands justice, the doing of good, and liberality to kith and
kin." (An-Nahl 90)

4©

} </£»J5 cr~^

o] ♦ ^

Justice is obligatory, doing good supererogatory, and liberality to kith and kin
is to keep good relations with them. All of this needs patience.
Second: the acts of disobedience. A servant is in dire need of keeping patient
on all kinds of sins and acts of disobedience, which Allah Almighty combined in
His statement: " and He forbids all shameful deeds, and injustice and rebellion."
(An-Nahl 90)

4 © L^

\

The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The
Muhajir is he who absconds evil; and the Mujahid is he who resists his
inclination." (Ibn Majah and An-Nasa'i on the authority of Fadalah Ibn Ubaid).
Sins are required by inclination, and the most severe perseverance is to keep
patient on sins to which one has got accustomed by practice. To be sure,

1

Book two: Patience and gratitude

109

habituation is regarded a fifth nature; and if it is joined to desire, then, two
soldiers of Satan would back each other against the soldier of Allah Almighty,
with the result that the religious modve would have no power to suppress them.
If this act (of disobedience) is made easy to man to do, patience on it
becomes heavier, like, for instance, the patience on the sins of tongue of
backbiting, talebearing, wrangling, self-praising directly or indirecdy, the harmful
jokes, words of scorn and contempt, dispraising and slandering the dead, etc. all
of this is outwardly backbiting and inwardly praising oneself. That is because the
soul has two desires in that: the first is to deny the other, and the second is to
affirm oneself. By both desires, one's supremacy is achieved, in opposition to
slavery (to Allah) which he is commanded to observe. If both desires are
combined together and become easy on the tongue to practice, patience on them
becomes more difficult.
Although they are the greatest destructives, there has been despair of
disapproving them in the heart, because of people's familiarity and intimacy with
them. One might put on silk and his conduct be disapproved severely, although if
he lets loose his tongue to talk with evil and immorality about people during day
and night, his conduct would not be disapproved, given that the Prophet "peace
be upon him" affirmed that backbiting is more severe (in effect) than fornicadon.
Whoever does not have the power to control his tongue during conversation, let
him resort to seclusion, for nothing other than seclusion would save him. Indeed,
to keep patient on seclusion is easier than to keep patient on silence with
socialization.
On the other hand, patience on a particular sin differs in accordance with
the strength or weakness of its cause. Easier than the movement of tongue is
the movement of the passing thoughts with doubts. The thought remains
lurking within the mind and one could hardly keep patient on it unless the
mind is occupied by another religious concern, which is apt to remove it. That
case applies to the one whose interests are concentrated on one concern.
Unless he uses his thought in any particular field, the doubts are unlikely to
fade away.
The second division pertains to such of incidents as occur to him against
his will, and it is within the power of his free choice to avert them. Its
example is like him who is harmed by word or deed, or his property is
usurped, etc. To keep patient on that sometimes might be obligatory, and
sometimes supererogatory. One of the companions said: "We did not regard
man having true faith until he kept patient on harm." In confirmation of that,
Allah Almighty said: " We shall certainly bear with patience all the hurt you
may cause us. For those who put their trust should put their trust on Allah."
(Ibrahim 12)
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" once
distributed property among Muslims and one of the Bedouins said: "The
Countenance of Allah has not been intended by that distribution." When the
news of that reached the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be

The quarter of the saviors
110
upon him", the color of his cheeks turned red (out of anger) and he said:
"Allah's mercy be upon my brother Moses. He received harm more than that,
but he kept patient." (both sheikhs on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud).
Allah Almighty further said in this connection: " And obey not (the
behests) of the Unbelievers and the Hypocrites, and heed not their
annoyances, but put your trust in Allah. For enough is Allah as a Disposer of
affairs." (Al-Ahzab 48)
And: "And have patience with what they say, and leave them with noble
(dignity)." (Al-Muzzammil 10)

4O

byJy** L 'Js>

$

And: "We do indeed know how your heart is distressed at what they say. But
celebrate the praises of your Lord, and be of those who prostrate themselves in
adoration." (Al-Hijr 97-98)
4

<lXS)

yM

djil

I5J3 ^

And: "You shall certainly be tried and tested in your possessions and in your
personal selves; and you shall certainly hear much that will grieve you, from those
who received the Book before you and from those who worship many gods. But
if you persevere padendy, and guard against evil, then that will be a determining
factor in all affairs." (A1 Imran 186)

^LyJ cr?3 rM #

ijSjl

^>1 U

♦»

4op l**^3
o]3
"—£31
For this reason, Allah Almighty praises those who remit their rights of legal
retribution saying: " And if you do catch them out, catch them out no worse than
they catch you out: but if you show patience, that is indeed the best (course) for
those who are patient." (An-Nahl 126)
4
\j&~ y^
0$.3
^ky^ ^
o!3 £
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Keep good relation with him who even severs relation with you; give him
who even withholds from you; and forgive him who even wrongs you." In the
Gospel, Jesus, son of Mary "peace be upon him" said: "It has been said to you
that the tooth for tooth, nose for nose, etc, and I say to you: do not avert evil
with evil: nay! He, who slaps you on the right cheek, turn to him your left, and
he who takes your upper garment, give him your lower garment, and he who
subjugates you to walk with him for a mile, walk with him for two miles." All
of this belongs to the command to keep patience on harm. To be sure,
patience on harm is the highest level of patience, for it is a product of the co­
operation between the religious motive, the motive of desire and the motive
of anger.
The third division pertains to the incidents that occur against one's will and
one has no power to avert, like calamities and disasters, caused, for instance, by

Book two: Patience and gratitude

Ill

the death of the dear persons, the loss of property and wealth, the destruction of
crops and fruits, the evaporation of health by ailment, blindness and impairment
of the parts of body, etc. To be sure, to persevere such events is the highest
stadon of padence. According to Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them":
"Padence in the Qur'an has three levels: padence on performing the obligatory
deeds enjoined by Allah Almighty, and it has three hundred degrees; patience on
what is forbidden by Allah Almighty, and it has six hundred degrees; and padence
on the calamity just at the first stroke, and it has alone nine hundred degrees."
This third level, although it belongs to the supererogatory deeds, is given
superiority to the first two, although they belong to the obligatory deeds, for
every believer has the power to keep patient on what is forbidden. But the
padence on the disaster doomed to one by Allah Almighty could not be endured
but by the Prophets, for it is the goods of the sincere affirmers of truth. That is
why it is difficult on people. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" used to say (by way of supplication): "1 ask You (O Allah) to
provide me with certainty (of faith) thereby to make easy upon me the calamities
of this world." (At-Tirmidhi, An-Nasa'i and Al-Hakim on the authority of Ibn
Umar). This kind of patience is supported by the good certainty (of faith).
According to Abu Sulaiman: "By Allah, since we could hardly keep patient on
what we like: how could we keep patient on what we dislike?" the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: Allah Almighty says: "If I
decreed for anyone of My servants a calamity in his body, property or children,
which he received with good patience, I would feel shy of him on the Day of
Judgement to set up a balance or spread out a scroll for him (to be reckoned)."
(Ibn Adi on the authority of Anas). He "peace be upon him" further said: "To
wait the release with patience is an act of worship." (Al-Quda'i on the authority of
Ibn Umar and Ibn Abbas). He "peace be upon him" said: "No believing servant
is afflicted with a calamity and says just what Allah Almighty ordered him to say,
i.e. 'We all to Allah, and to Him we shall return. O Allah! Give me reward for my
(patience on my) calamity, and recompense me with something better than it', but
that Allah Almighty does so to him." (Muslim on the authority of Umm
Salamah).
It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: Allah
said to Gabriel: "O Gabriel! What is the reward of him who has been deprived of
(the light of his) two eyes?" he said: "Glory be to You! We know not but what
You have taught us." Allah Almighty said: "His reward is to abide forever in my
Abode (Paradise), and look at My Countenance." (At-Tabaram; and Al-Bukhari
with a slight variation of wording). He "peace be upon him" further said: Allah
Almighty says: "If I afflict anyone of My servants and he receives that with
patience, and does not complain Me to his visitors, I would give him flesh better
than his, and blood better than his; and if I cause him to recover, he would
recover without sins upon him; and if I cause him to die, I would take him unto
My mercy." (Malik in his Muwatta' on the authority of Ata' Ibn Yasar from Abu
Sa'id).

The quarter of the saviors

112

David "peace be upon him" said: "O Lord! What is the reward of the
aggrieved who keeps patient on the affliction seeking Your good pleasure?" he
said: "His reward is that 1 would dress him in the dress of faith, and never deprive
him of it." Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz said in one of his sermons: "Allah never gives
a servant a favor and then deprives him of it in recompense for patience but that
the recompense is better than what he deprives him of." Then, he recited the
statement of Allah Almighty: "those who patiently persevere will truly receive a
reward without measure!" (Az-Zumar 10)

4 Cf^hlrA>1

j'y

^

Fudail was asked about patience and he said: "It is to be pleased with the fate
of Allah Almighty." It was said: "How is that?" he said: "The contented never
hopes anything above his station (of satisfaction)."
It was said that once Ash-Shibli was confined in a hospital and a group of
people came to visit him and he asked them: "Who are you?" they said: "Your
lovers who have come to visit you." He started to throw them with stones, and
they ran away. On that he said: "Were you really my lovers, you would keep
patience on my trial." It is reported that a Gnostic had a parchment in his pocket
which he used to take out and look at every hour and it had the following
statement: "Now await in patience the Command of your Lord: for verily you are
in Our eyes." (At-Tur 48)

4

4

13 y

It was said that once the wife of Fath Al-Mawsili stumbled and the nail of her
toe got broken. On that she laughed. It was said to her: "Do you not feel the
pain?" she said: "Indeed, the pleasure of its reward has removed from my heart
the bitterness of its pain."
David said to Solomon "peace be upon them": "The piety of a faithful
believer is attested by three things: Good reliance (on Allah Almighty) in what
he has not got, the good pleasure with what he has got, and the good patience
on what he has missed." Our Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "It is out of
veneration and right you should have to Allah Almighty not to complain of
your pain, nor make a mention of your calamity." (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya, but
from one of the religious jurists and not from the Prophet himself). It is
narrated from one of the righteous that he came out one day having a parcel
in his sleeve and behold! He lost it and it seemed to have been taken from his
sleeve. On that he said: "May Allah bless him in it for perhaps he might be in
need of it more than me." It is further narrated on the authority of a righteous
man that he said: I came upon Salim, the freed slave of Abu Hudhaifah "Allah
be pleased with them" and he was at his last breaths among the killed. I asked
him: "Do you like to get a sip of water?" he said: "Bring me closer to the
enemies and make the water in the shield: indeed, I am fasting, and if I am to
live until sunset, I may drink of it." That is the way the mystic travelers on the
path to hereafter used to keep patient on the trial of Allah Almighty.
You may say: "How does one attain the degree of patience on calamities
given that it is beyond his free choice for he is forced by necessity willingly or

\

Book two: Patience and gratitude
113
unwillingly? If it is intended that he should have no aversion to the calamity
itself, it is not up to him to do so." In reply to that, it should be known to you
that one is far from the station of the padent by fright, tearing clothes,
slapping cheeks, complaining so much, showing gloominess, and changing the
habit of clothes, food, drink, and so on. All of those are under his choice, and
he should avoid them, and rather be satisfied with the decree and fate of Allah
Almighty. He should continue on his habits and entertain in himself the belief
that what he has lost was but a deposit with him which was taken back by its
real owner.
In this respect, it is narrated on the authority of Anas from Umm Sulaim
"Allah be pleased with her" that she said: "My child died while Abu Talhah (her
husband) was absent. I stood and covered him and placed him in one corner of
the house. Then, Abu Talhah came back and I prepared his meal to break his
fasting. He started to eat and asked about the child and I said: "Fine, praise be to
Allah. Since he fell ill, he has never been still and quiet more than he is tonight."
Then, I beautified myself to him more than I have ever done until he fulfilled his
desire from me. Then, I said to him: "Do you not wonder at our neighbours?" he
said: "What is the matter with them?" I said: "They were given something by way
of borrowing and when it was demanded and taken back from them, they were
scared." He said: "How bad are they!" I said: "Then, this is your son: he was a
deposit from Allah Almighty, and now, Allah has taken him unto His Presence."
He praised Allah and said: "We all belong to Allah and to Him we shall return."
In the morning he went to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" and related the story to him. On that he said: "O Allah! Bless them in
(what they have done) in their last night." The narrator said: "Afterwards, I saw
seven from among their children in the mosque, and all of them had kept the
Qur'an by heart." (Abu Na'im and both sheikhs in their Sahihs on the authority
of Anas). It is further narrated on the authority of Jabir "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "I saw myself (in a dream) having entered the Garden and behold! I
saw Ar-Rumaisa', the wife of Abu Talhah."
It is said that "The good patience is that with which the afflicted could hardly
be recognized from anyone else." Neither the heartache nor the flowing of tears
turn one from the station of the patient, since it is expected from almost all the
attendants for death. Flowing of tears is an aspect of heartache for the loss of the
dead, and it is a part of human nature. For this reason, when Ibrahim, the son of
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" died, his eyes
overflowed with tears. It was said to him: "Have you not forbidden us to do so?"
he said: "That is out of mercy, and indeed, Allah Almighty bestows mercy upon
the merciful among His slaves." This also does not turn one from the station of
contentment, to be sure, he who gets himself cupped or phlebotomized does so
with satisfaction, though because of which he feels pain, and his tears might flow
if the pain is severe. This will be explained in more detail in the Book of
Contentment, Allah willing.
Ibn Abu Najih wrote a message to condole one of the caliphs in which he

f

:

\i

The quarter of the saviors
114
said: "the one who should observe the right of Allah Almighty upon him in what
is taken from him is he, who regards with greatness the right of Allah Almighty in
what remains for him. Moreover, it should be known to you that (the effect of)
whoever passed before you remains with you, and whoever remains after you
would be rewarded for you. It should be also known that the reward of the
patient for what they are afflicted with is greater than the favor upon them
concerning it." Thus, whoever drives away the aversion of the affliction by
thinking about the reward he would receive for it, would inevitably attain the
degree of the patient. It is true that the perfect patience requires one to conceal
ailment, poverty and calamities. In this context, it is said that "One of the
treasures of righteousness is to conceal ailment, calamities and charity."
This explains to you that patience is binding in general in all cases and under
all circumstances. Whoever even abstains from all desires and appetites, and
remains in seclusion, aloof from the people, is also in need of patience, without
which he could hardly endure solitude outwardly, and the doubts and whispers
aroused by Satan inwardly. To be sure, the movement of passing thoughts never
ceases. Those thoughts always roam about what has been lost and could not be
caught, or what would inevitably come to pass in the future; and in both cases, he
spends time uselessly. The heart is the servant's instrument, and his lifetime his
goods and commodities. If one's heart is heedless even as short as a breath of the
celebration of Allah Almighty with which he attains the company of Allah, or of
thought about Allah Almighty with which he becomes more acquainted with
Allah, and more lovable to Him, he would be a loser.
This is in case his thoughts and doubts are oriented on what is permissible;
and that occurs in rare cases. People, for the most part, think about the different
tricks to enable them to fulfill their desires and appetites, each according to his
prevailing one. Satan always disputes with him in every movement in opposition
to his purpose and willpower. One might have the false impression that he
disputes with him and disagrees with his command, or even that the most sincere
of his lovers disagree with him, and disobey his orders, and then thinks of the
way to scold them and oppress them and how they justify their disagreement with
him. In this way, he is incessandy engaged. Indeed, Satan has two soldiers: the
flying one and the walking one. The obsessive doubts are the result of the
movement of his flying soldier, and the desire is the movement of his walking
soldier.
Satan was created from fire, whereas man from sounding clay like pottery.
Pottery is always made from clay burnt with fire. The clay is soil by nature,
and fire is in permanent movement. The flaming fire could not be imagined
without movement. That cursed was obligated to become still (for a while)
and fall in prostration to the human being which Allah Almighty created from
clay, but he rejected with obsdnacy and arrogance. He expressed his
disobedience by saying: "I am better than he: You did create me from fire, and
him from clay." (AJ-A'raf 12)

iO&os

** »

Since that cursed did not fall in prostration to our father Adam "peace be

Book two: Patience and gratitude

115

upon him" there should be no covet of his prostration to anyone of his offspring.
Once he abstains from his whispers, hostilities and evils, he will have showed his
compliance and submission, and his submission symbolizes his prostration.
Indeed, submission is the essence of prostration, and placing the forehead on the
ground only its physical aspect and sign.
So, let not the outward shell divert you from the pearl, the body divert
you from the soul, and the husk divert you from the core, lest you would be
of those detained by the world of visibles from the dominion of invisibles.
You should be sure of the fact that Satan is one of those given respite (to
destroy mankind), and by no means would he humble himself before you by
abstention from whispers until the Day of Judgement, unless your concerns
turn to be only one, and you occupy your heart only with Allah Almighty.
Thus, he would find no way to prevail over you. Hence, you would become
one of the selected servants of Allah, who are exempted from the authority
of that cursed.
Furthermore, think not that any empty heart could be void of him for it is
like the blood which runs and reaches everywhere in the body of mankind. It
is like the air in the vessel. If you like to have the vessel void of air without
replacing it with water or with anything else, you would covet of that which is
impossible. On the contrary: air enters into it in proportion to the quantity of
water that is taken out of it. Similarly, the one whose heart is engaged in
religion could hardly be far from the movement of Satan. If he is heedless of
Allah Almighty even as short as a while, he would have no companion at that
very moment other than Satan. For this reason, Allah Almighty said: "If
anyone withdraws himself from remembrance of (Allah) Most Gracious, We
appoint for him an evil one, to be an intimate companion to him." (AzZukhruf 36)

The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Indeed, Allah Almighty dislikes the youth whose (heart is) empty."
That is because if the youth does not have a deed to engage him with what is
permissible to seek its aid to achieve the duties of his religion, his outward
remains empty, but not his heart in which Satan nests, lays his eggs and pullulates,
and the young ones, in turn, lay their eggs and pullulate and so forth. To be sure,
the offspring of Satan proliferate faster than the offspring of all animals on earth,
for his nature is from fire. That proliferation increases whenever he finds his
helpful factors. The desire in the self of a youth in relation to Satan is like the dry
factor in relation to fire. As well as the fire goes out once the fire wood is
consumed, Satan also vanishes from the heart in the absence of desire. Thus,
your desire is your most avowed enemy. When asked about Sufism during his
crucifixion, Al-Hussain Ibn Mansur Al-Hallaj said: "It is yourself: if you do not
engage it, it would inevitably engage you."
The real nature of perfect patience is to keep patient on every blameworthy
movement. The movement of the inside is more fitting for one to keep patient
on it. That is permanent patience which nothing interrupts but death. We ask

The quarter of the saviors
116
Allah Almighty to provide us with good success by His favor and generosity.

CHAPTER SEVEN
EXPLICATION OF MEDICINE OF PATIENCE; AND THAT WHOSE AID IS
SOUGHT TO SUPPORT IT
It should be known that He Who has brought the ailment to existence has
also brought its medicine and promised recovery. Patience, though being
difficult or unlikely to be achieved, is possible by the mixture of knowledge and
work. Both knowledge and work are the mixture from which the medicines of
all the ailments are composed for the heart-diseased. But each ailment needs a
particular kind of knowledge and work. As well as the patience is of different
kinds, the causes that impede it are also of different kinds. As well as the causes
are different, the kinds of medicine also should consequently be different. That
is because the medicine is to counteract and curb the cause with its opposite.
To explain all of that in detail is too lengthy. But at least, we know the way in
many examples.
Let's say that if one lacks patience on the sexual desire, and is possessed by
such desire in a way that he could not have control over his pudendum, or
over his eye in case he has the power to control his pudendum, or over his
heart and soul in case he has power to control both his pudendum and eye,
and that his heart suggests to him the requirements of desire, and thus diverts
him from the regular celebration of Allah, thought and righteous deeds, the
solution is to say that the patience is the fighting between the religious motive
and the motive of inclination. If we like that one of both fighters should win
over the other, there is no way for us but to strengthen it, and weaken the
other. In this case, we have to strengthen the religious motive, and weaken the
motive of inclination. There are three things to use in order to weaken the
motive of desire.
One of those is to consider the substance of power that strengthen the
desire, like the good delicious and pleasant food that moves the desire by
virtue of its kind and quantity, and belittle it by regular fasting, and limiting
the meals of breaking fast to the little quantity of food whose effect is weak
on sex. Meat, for instance, and all kinds of food that stimulate sexual desire
should be avoided.
The second is to cut off its irritating causes at the moment. Indeed, the sexual
desire is irritated by looking at the things that prompt it. Looking always moves
the heart, and the heart stirs up the desire. This is achieved by keeping retired and
avoiding places where one might look at the pictures that move sexual desire,
from which one should flee away. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: "The gaze is one of the arrows of Iblis." It is an arrow
shot by the cursed, and no shield could avert it but shutting the eyelids, or fleeing
away from the range of its harm. He indeed shoots that arrow through the
pictures that move desire, and once you turn away from them, his arrow would
not affect you.
The third is to console the self with the permissible sex, i.e. through marriage.
In all desires, there is among the permissible things what makes one dispense

Book two: Patience and gratitude

117

with the impermissible. That is, to be sure, the most beneficial remedy for the
majority of people. Indeed, to belitde the quantity of food, and limit its kinds
might have a negative effect on the other works, although it might not curb the
sexual desire of a great pordon of men. For this reason, the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "I advise you to marry, and
whoever could not (for lacking the wherewithal's), let him observe fasdng, for
indeed fasdng is a protective shield for him."
Those are three means. The first remedy, i.e. to prevent food, resembles to
prevent fodder from a recalcitrant beast or a voracious dog, in order that it would
weaken and lose its power. The second resembles to keep a dog from flesh, or
the animal from parley, in order not to move its appetite for seeing it. The third
resembles to console it with something of what it likes, in order for it to reserve
some power that enables it to endure discipline.
On the other hand, there are two ways to strengthen the religious motive:
The first is to engage himself in the many benefits and fruits of selfmortification in religion and world, by considering the narrations we have related
about the excellence and good consequence of patience in the world and the
hereafter. According to a tradition: "The reward of patience on a calamity is more
than what one might have lost. That is why he is envied because of such a
calamity (on which he keeps patient), for what he has lost is limited only to the
duration of his lifetime, and what he has obtained (of reward by patience) would
survive even after death; and whoever abandons a despicable for a valuable
should not grieve for the loss of the despicable at present." That belongs to the
category of knowledge which is a part of faith. It sometimes weakens and
sometimes becomes strong. The more it becomes strong, the more it strengthens
the religious motive, and the more it weakens, the more it weakens it. The
strength of faith is referred to as certainty, which moves the determination of
patience. But unfortunately, people rarely are given both the determination of
patience and the certainty of faith altogether.
The other is to habituate that religious motive to gradually fight with the
motive of inclination step by step until it tastes the pleasure of victory over it,
with the result that it would have the courage to challenge it, and become
stronger in fighting. To be sure, exercise and practice of difficult works always
add more to the powers that produce those works. This is why the porters,
farmers and fighters are stronger than the normal people. In general, these who
practice difficult works are stronger than those who do normal jobs like tailors,
religious jurists, makers and sellers of perfume, etc, whose power is not
strengthened by practice.
The first resembles to induce the fighter with a present when he wins and
promise him of many things of honour, in the same way as Pharaoh promised his
magicians , when he tempted them to win over Moses "peace be upon him"
saying as Allah Almighty tells about him: " you shall in that case be (raised to
posts) nearest (to my person)." (Al-A'raf 114)

i©

^^

The second is to habituate the child who is expected to be a fighter, to

The quarter of the saviors
118
practice fighting from his early childhood, in order to obtain the required
courage, and become stronger. That is because whoever abandons entirely the
mortification for patience, the religious motive weakens in him, and fails to resist
the motive of inclination; and whoever habituates himself to oppose his
inclination, inevitably overpowers it however and whenever he likes.
That is the method of remedy applicable to all kinds of patience. All could
not be included in discussion. The most difficult is to hold back the soul from
self talk which is intensified particularly for him who has curbed the outward and
external appetites, and devoted himself to seclusion, by living in solitude and
spending the time in celebration, thoughtfulness and observation, in which case,
the evil whispers attract him from all sides. There is no remedy for that state
except to cut off all relations, outwardly and inwardly, by fleeing away from one's
family, children, property, friends and companions, and resorting to a little
corner, satisfying oneself with the least requirements of sustenance. But even, all
of this would not be sufficient unless all concerns are reduced to one, i.e. to be
concerned only with Allah Almighty.
If this even possesses the heart, it would not be sufficient, unless it has a place
in thinking, and swimming inwardly in the dominion of the heaven and earth, and
the wonders of the making of Allah Almighty, in addition to all categories of the
knowledge of Allah Almighty, until when all of this prevails over his heart, it
would have the power to avert the evil whispers of Satan. If he could not swim
inwardly in the dominion of the heavens and earth, nothing would save him but
the continuous devotional recitals or prayers and celebrations which he should
persist in at every moment. Besides, he needs to entertain the presence of heart,
for indeed, it is the inward thought which engages the heart other than the
outward and external devotional recitals.
However, after all of that, he could not persist in this but for some and not all
the time, for he could not be free, at many times, from incidents to occupy him
from devotional recitals and celebration, like ailment, fear, harm or transgression
he might receive from those with whom he mixes, for he could hardly dispense
with such as with whom he mixes to aid him in the means of living. That is one
of the things that might occupy him.
Another is necessary, if not more necessary than the previous, i.e. his
engagement in getting his food, drink, clothes, residence, or in general, the means
of sustenance and living. If he undertakes that by himself, he would engage in it;
and if it is undertaken by another one else, he could hardly be free from having
his heart engaged by the one who undertakes it.
But after cutting off all relations with the world, a greater portion of time
would be available to him, provided that no calamity nor affliction would
befall him. During those times, the heart becomes pure, thinking and
contemplation available, and it is revealed to him of the mysteries and
wonders of Allah Almighty in the dominion of the heavens and earth
hundreds of times what might be revealed to him during a very long time in
which his heart is engaged by the connections with this world. That is the
highest station to be attained by acquisition and effort. As to how much what

Book two: Patience and gratitude

119
is revealed of the mysteries of Allah Almighty as regards states and deeds, it is
like fortune to be doomed to each one. In many cases, effort might be much,
and the outcome little, and vice versa.
One should rely in his effort on the attraction of (Allah) Most Gracious,
which are equal to the deed of all men and jinn. This is beyond the free choice
of the servant. One has the choice to expose himself to that attraction as long
as he cuts off his heart all attractions of this world, for indeed, whoever is
attracted to the low could by no means be attracted to the high. Everyone
who is concerned with the world is, to be sure, attracted to it. To cut off ail
attracting relations is intended by the statement of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "Your Lord gives gifts, in some of
your days. Behold! Expose yourselves to those gifts." Those gifts and
attractions are due to heavenly causes as shown by Allah in His statement:
"And in heaven is your Sustenance, as (also) that which you are promised."
(Adh-Dhariyat 22)
4. ©

'J&jj * \^lS\ Jj ^

That is the highest kind of sustenance. The heavenly lights are veiled from
us, so we do not know when Allah makes available to us the means of
sustenance. All we have to do is to disengage the place and await the mercy of
Allah Almighty to descend. The example is like him who reclaims the land,
cleans it off grass, sows the seeds along its different parts, and do all possible
means fitting for cultivadon: all of this is of no avail to him unless it rains and
he does not know when Allah Almighty will doom it to rain. But at the same
time, he is confident of the mercy and bounty of Allah Almighty, and that He
never passes a year without rain. Similarly, no year, month, or day is void of a
gift or attraction from the gifts and attractions of Allah Almighty. So, the
servant should have purified the heart from the grass of desires and appetites,
sowed in it the seeds of willpower and sincerity, and exposed it to the wind of
mercy and bounty.
As well as the chance for rain to fall is more likely in spring and when clouds
emerge, the chance for those gifts and attractions is more likely during the noble
times, and at the congregation of people and hearts like the case on the day of
Arafah, on Friday, and on the days of Ramadan. Such congregations are means to
call for the mercy of Allah Almighty, to the extent that rain is called for by them
at the time of invoking for water. But to call for the drops of the revelations of
Allah Almighty from the treasures of the dominion is more likely than to call for
the drops of rainfall and clouds from over mountains and the depths of oceans.
To be sure, revelations are present with you in your heart, and as you are
occupied from them by your worldly relations and desires, they are veiled from
you. All you need is to break and curb desires in order for the veil to be lifted and
removed, so that the lights of gnosis would rise from the depths of the heart. To
dig channels in the ground to get the water therefrom is easier than to go to a far
and low place to have it.
For it is always present in the heart, though forgotten by occupation from it,
Allah Almighty calls the gnosis of faith remembrance as He states: " We have,

The quarter of the saviors
120
without doubt, sent down the reminder; and We will assuredly guard it (from
corruption)." (Al-Hijr 9)
<0'ojUi- AS bjj JS4)T U# £ bj >
And: "(Here is) a Book which We have sent down unto you, full of blessings,
that they may meditate on its Signs, and that men of understanding may receive
admonition." (Sad 29)
<©

iJj* f'jQj <.*^1; ijjSoJ

And: "And We have indeed made the Qur’an easy to understand and
remember: then is there any that will receive admonition?" (Al-Qamar 17)
That is the remedy of patience on evil whispers and occupants; and it is the
last degree of patience. Patience on all relations is prior to patience on the passing
thoughts. According to Al-Junaid "may Allah have mercy upon him": "To travel
from the world to the hereafter is easy on the faithful believer, to desert the
people for the sake of loving the truth is difficult, to travel from the self to Allah
Almighty is more difficult, and to keep patient with Allah is the most difficult."
He refers to the difficulty of patience on the occupants of the hearts, followed by
the difficulty of desertion of people, and the most difficult thing on the self is to
cut off relations from the people, and abandon majesty and authority. That is
because the pleasure of majesty, loftiness, authority and arrogance over the
people is the sweetest in this world for the rational men. How could it not be so,
given that it requires one of the attributes of Allah Almighty, i.e. supremacy?
Supremacy is lovable to the heart, for it befits all high and noble matters, as
referred to by Allah in His statement: " Say: "The Spirit (comes) by command of
mi
my Lord: of knowledge it is only a little that is communicated to you, (O men!)
(Al-Isra 85)
i © ^4*

Cr?

Cr?

^ ^

The heart is not criticized for that love: nay, it is criticized for the mistake it
has fallen in because of the deception of the cursed Satan, who is alienated from
the world of command, thereupon he envied him of his being of the world of
command, with the result that he misled him. How could the heart be criticized
for it since it seeks for the happiness of the hereafter? It indeed seeks
permanence after which there is no annihilation, honour after which there is no
humiliation, safety after which there is no fear, richness after which there is no
poverty, perfection after which there is no shortage. All of those belong to the
attributes of Lordship. The heart is not blamed for seeking after that. Every one
has the right to aspire for a great kingdom which has no ends. The seeker after
kingship aspires for honour, highness and perfection. But there are two kinds of
kingship: a kingship that is stained by pain whose loss is fast; and the other is
permanent in which there is neither impurity nor pain, and none would interrupt.
But the former is hasty and the latter is deferred.
Man was created as hasty, desirous for the transitory and Satan came to

\

Book two: Patience and gratitude
121
him and induced him through his hasty nature and allured to him the present. He
also tempted him through his foolishness, and promised him, by way of
deception, of the kingdom of the hereafter besides the kingdom of this world, as
confirmed by the statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him": "The foolish is he who followed his own inclinations, and hoped
that Allah (would fulfill his) wishes." The result is that he was deceived and
engaged by seeking after the kingdom of the world from the kingdom of the
hereafter. But the successful among people has not hung himself by the rope of
Satan's deception, since he knew the ways of his plotting, thereupon he
abandoned the transitory world. To this fact Allah Almighty refers in His
statement: " Nay, (you men!) But you love the fleeting life, And leave alone the
Hereafter." (Al-Qiyamah 20-21)
And: " As to these, they love the fleeting life, and put away behind them a
Day (that will be) hard." (Al-Insan 27)

<

A©
bjj^j
byrf'
bid ^
And: " Therefore shun those who turn away from Our Message and desire
nothing but the life of this world. That is as far as knowledge will reach them.
Verily your Lord knows best those who stray from His Path, and He knows best
those who receive guidance." (An-Najm 29-30)

1

pfe-1

vUj3 oj

o*

(jjj US-dt o^S\

Jz Jy QA J*

^

0*i

When the plotting of Satan became spread among the people, Allah Almighty
sent His angels to the Messengers whom He chose from among them, and
revealed to them how the enemy ruin and induce people. Then, they engaged in
calling the people to the real kingdom of the hereafter other than the perishable
baseless kingdom of this world. They addressed them saying: "O you who
believe! What is the matter with you, that, when you are asked to go forth in the
Cause of Allah, you cling heavily to the earth? Do you prefer the life of this world
to the Hereafter? But little is the comfort of this life, as compared with the
Hereafter." (At-Tawbah 38)
i j*yi\ ji

<4

8>/37 4

iij^ L \jia\i

}

Ji o^JT ^ Lbi Wft ^

The Torah, Gospel, Psalms, Qur'an, the books of Abraham and Moses
"peace be upon them" and in general, all Scriptures were sent down only to invite
people to the permanent never-ending kingdom. They are required to be kings in
this world, as well as kings in the hereafter. To be a king in this world is to
abstain in it and be satisfied with the little from it. To be a king in the hereafter is
to come close to Allah Almighty, thereby one attains eternal stay and ceaseless
honour, besides a delight of the eye that is kept in this world which no soul
knows.

The quarter of the saviors

122

Satan, on the other hand, invites the people to the kingdom of this world,
other than that of the hereafter, for his knowledge that the latter would skip
him. The kingdoms of the world and hereafter are harmful to him (in case the
world is unblemished) but it is his good fortune that the kingdom of the world
is blemished and were it to be unblemished, of a surety, he would have envied
man for it. But the kingdom of this world could hardly be void of disputes and
embitterment's, and the long concerns and interests in thinking and planning.
And even in case it is unblemished and all means are fulfilled in it, the lifetime
of man would inevitably come to an end " till the earth is clad with its golden
ornaments and is decked out (in beauty): the people to whom it belongs think
they have all powers of disposal over it: there reaches it Our command by night
or by day, and We make it like a harvest clean-mown, as if it had not flourished
only the day before! thus do We explain the Signs in detail for those who
reflect." (Yunus 24)

jLuSVfj o&T 'jft lL j*yf\

^ ii3-u AHJi ^

j1 ^0
4

15 Aji s^JT 'jL ulj >

p-r1
J

^VL)

1

*51 JG-aj dJJ'uS^

ur*-

^

Allah Almighty set forth a parable for this world when He said: "Set forth
to them the similitude of the life of this world: it is like the rain which We
send down from the skies: the earth's vegetation absorbs it. But soon it
becomes dry stubble, which the winds do scatter: it is (only) Allah Who
prevails over all things." (Al-Kahf 45)
B

I

*-<j -hi: >- ll p L»JL) I

4

^

I j LiS" Llj jJ I 51

Oyvs> lj ^

^ 0^3

When abstinence from this world is a present kingdom, Satan envies man for
it. The meaning of abstinence is that a man has control over his desire and anger
which submit to the religious motive and indication of faith. That is a meritorious
kingdom, for its owner thereby becomes free, and by being possessed by his
desire, he becomes a slave of his belly and pudendum, as well as of all his desires
and lusts. In this way, he becomes like an owned animal that is led by the nose
string of desire to wherever it likes and wishes. How deceived is man! He thinks
he will attain kingdom but he has become possessed by others, and he will attain
supremacy, but he has become a slave. Such is only adverse in this world, and
downtumed in the hereafter. For this reason, when one of the kings asked one of
the ascetics: "Do you have a need?" he said: "How should I have a need from you
given that my kingdom is greater than yours?" he asked him: "How is that?" he
said: "You are a servant of that which is, in turn, my servant" He said: "How is
that?" he said: "You are a slave of your desire, anger, belly and pudendum, and I
have control over them all, and they have become slaves of me."
That is the kingdom in this world which leads to the real kingdom in the
hereafter. Those deceived by Satan have lost both the world and the hereafter.
But those who succeeded to walk straight on the even path have won both.

Book two: Patience and gratitude

123
If you come to know now the meaning of kingdom and supremacy, slavery
and subjection, and the way of error in that, and how Satan dissembles and
puts man to confusion concerning this, it would become easy on you to turn
away from kingdom and majesty and keep patient on losing that, for by that
loss, you would become a king at present, and expect for a kingdom in the
hereafter. But if those lights are revealed to him who has been accustomed to
majesty and authority for a long time, only knowledge and disclosure are not
sufficient for remedy. He should add work to that. His work should include
three things:
The first is to flee away from the place of majesty in order not to see its
means and thus it becomes difficult on man to keep patient on leaving it, like him
who is possessed by desire, when he flees away from the pictures that move his
sex appeal. Whoever does not do so has indeed been ungrateful to the favor of
Allah in regard with the spaciousness of the earth. He Almighty said in this
respect: "Was not the earth of Allah spacious enough for you to move yourselves
away (from evil)?" (An-Nisa' 97)

The second is to force himself to do things in opposition to what he used to
do. He could, for instance, exchange ostentation for simplicity, expensive clothes
of splendor for cheap clothes of humbleness, and so forth. The same is true of all
his states, habits and settings as regards his food, drink, clothes, residence, etc. in
short, he should exchange everything required by majesty he used to do for its
opposite. There is no significance for remedy unless one does the opposite of
what he used to do.
The third is to adopt a gradual approach in one's movement from an
extreme to its opposite. This means that he should not move at once to the
farthest extreme, for disposition, by nature, is always repulsive, and it could not
be shifted from its habits except gradually. Let him first curb some and leave
others of those blameworthy things and once he is satisfied with them, let him
curb more and so on until he finds himself having curbed all blameworthy
characteristics with good satisfaction. To this fact, the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" referred in his statement: "This
religion is strong. So, delve into it nicely and step by step, and cause not the
worship of Allah to be hateful to you, for the uprooted has not cut sufficient
distance (to keep himself safe), nor left a riding mount (to carry him if he likes
to return)." (Ahmad on the authority of Anas; and Al-Baihaqi on the authority
of Jabir). He "peace be upon him" further said in this issue: "Impose not hard
terms upon yourselves regarding that religion, for none imposes hard terms
upon himself concerning that religion but that it overpowers him."
The remedy of patience concerning evil whispers, desire and anger returns to
the laws of self-mortification we have already mentioned in the Book of SelfDiscipline in the Quarter of Destructives. So, take it your constitution, in order to
know the remedy of patience in all categories we have already shown in detail.
But patience, according to gradation, upgrades with one to a state in which it
becomes difficult on him as it was at first, and the matter is reversed for him in a

1

i

The quarter of the saviors
124
way that what he used to like becomes hateful, and what he used to dislike
intimacy with him and so on. The recognition of that depends on experience and
taste, and it has a resemblance in the reality. When the child is forced to learn
under compulsion in the beginning, patience on leaving playing for learning
becomes difficult on him. But when his insight opens, and knowledge becomes
intimate with him, the matter is reversed, and it becomes difficult on him to keep
patient on leaving learning for playing.
In this respect, it is narrated that a Gnostic asked Ash-Shibli about patience,
thereupon he said: "Patience is in (the religion of) Allah." He said: "No, it is not
so." He said: "Then, patience is for the sake of Allah Almighty." He said: "No, it
is not so." He said: "Then, patience is with Allah Almighty." He said: "No, it is
not so." He said: "Then, what is it?" he said: "Patience is to be on Allah." AshShibli cried so loudly that he was about to die. In comment on the following
statement of Allah Almighty: " O u who believe! persevere in patience and
constancy; vie in such perseverance; strengthen each other; and fear Allah; that
you may prosper" (A1 Imran 200)

4
It is said: "Persevere in patience and constancy in (the religion of) Allah
Almighty, vie in such patience by Allah Almighty, and strengthen each other with
Allah Almighty."
It is said that patience for the Sake of Allah is satisfaction; patience by Allah is
survival; patience with Allah is loyalty; and patience on (alienation from) Allah is
desertion. It is also said about that in the form of a poetic verse: "Patience on
(leaving) you is of blameworthy consequences, whereas patience in anything else
is praiseworthy." In the same meaning, it is also said: "Patience is good in
anything, but patience on (abandoning) you is not good."
That is what we liked to explicate regarding the sciences and mysteries of
patience.

Part two: Gratitude
This part consists of three pillars:
The first pillar discusses the excellence, real nature, divisions and rulings of
gratitude
The second pillar talks about the real nature, general and particular divisions
of favor
The third pillar deals with the best of gratitude and patience

FIRST PILLAR
EXCELLENCE, REAL NATURE, DIVISIONS AND RULINGS OF GRATITUDE
Excellence Of Gratitude
It should be known that Allah Almighty joined gratitude with remembrance
of Him in His Holy Book, although He said: " and remembrance of Allah is the
greatest (thing in life) without doubt." (Al-Ankabut 45)

1

Book two: Patience and gratitude
125
In this respect, Allah Almighty said: "Then do you remember Me; I will
remember you. Be grateful to Me and reject not Faith." (Al-Baqarah 152)

i ©)

%J

}

And: " What can Allah gain by your punishment, if you are grateful and
you believe? Nay it is Allah that recognizes (all good) and knows all things."
(An-Nisa 147)
4. ©

Ij£==» Li Ail! 0 Kj

;I Jbu 4l)l fJjJu LI ^

And: "And swifdy shall We reward those that (serve us with) gratitude."
(A1 Imran 145)

In comment on the statement of Allah Almighty relating about Jblis:
"Because You have thrown me out of the Way, lo! I will lie in wait for them on
Your Straight Way" (Al-A'raf 16)

i0

Tj'£ o^S/

'Jii >

It is said that it refers to the way of gratitude. In view of the high rank of
gratitude, the cursed Satan slandered mankind saying: " nor will You find, in most
of them, gratitude (for Your mercies)." (Al-A'raf 17)
i0
^4
J^r^1 cfi
cr?3 rr-^1 o* 03 >4^^ P ^
Allah Almighty said about mankind: " but few of My servants are grateful!"
(Saba' 13)
Allah Almighty promised to give for gratitude without exception as shown
from His statement: "If you are grateful, I will add more (favours) unto you;
but if you show ingratitude, truly My punishment is terrible indeed." (Ibrahim
7)
i0
ailp oj
crjj
3^=*^ <yj }
But He Almighty made exceptions in five things: enrichment, giving
sustenance, response to supplication, forgiveness and repentance. He Almighty
said: " soon will Allah enrich you, if He wills, out of His bounty, for Allah is AllKnowing, All-Wise." (At-Tawbah 28)
He also said: "Nay, On Him would you call, and if it be His Will, He would
remove (the distress) which occasioned your call upon Him." (Al-An'am 41)
And: " for Allah does provide for those whom He will, without measure."
(An-Nur 38)

i 0 0* ^4”

* ^4 cr* AS* ^13 ^

And: "but He forgives anything else, to whom He pleases." (An-Nisa' 48) and:

|

The quarter of the saviors
126
"For Allah will turn (in mercy) to whom He will; and Allah is All-Knowing, AH
Wise." (At-Tawbah 15)
4O
^4^3 ^
Gratitude is one of the good manners of Lordship as stated by Him: "for
Allah is Most Ready to appreciate (service), Most Forbearing." (At-Taghabun
17)
Furthermore, Allah Almighty made gratitude and praise the commencement
of the speech of the inhabitants of Paradise as shown from His statement: "They
will say: "Praise be to Allah, Who has truly fulfilled His promise to us." (AzZumar 74)
4 C9

lli jl^j

jjf

*tyJii3 ^

He Almighty further said: "and the close of their cry will be: "Praise be to
Allah, the Cherisher and Sustainer of the Worlds!"" (Yunus 10)

4 Sp

A

o> ^

As regards the Prophetic narrations, a mention may be made of the following:
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"The thankful who eats (even without fasting) has the same rank of the patient
fasting." (Ibn Majah, At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban on the authority of Abu
Hurairah). It is narrated on the authority of Ata' that he said: I entered upon
A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" and said: "Tell us about the most amazing
thing you saw from the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him"." She wept and said: "And which of his actions were not amazing? One
night he came to me (and it was my turn) and entered into the covering (or the
quilt) with me until when our bodies became in touch, he said to me: "O
daughter of Abu Bakr! Let me worship my Lord." I said: "Indeed I like your
nearness, but at the same time, I give preference to letting you do what you
wish." I gave him permission. He stood to a water-skin and performed ablution,
but without pouring much water. He then stood in prayer and went on weeping
until his tears flowed on his breast. When he bowed, he wept; and when he fell
in prostration, he also wept; and when he raised his head, he wept; and so on
until Bilal came and informed him with the Adhan of the due time of Fajr
prayer. I said to him: "O Messenger of Allah! What causes you to weep given
that Allah has forgiven for you your previous and later sins?" on that he said:
"Then, should I not be a thankful slave? And why do I not do since Allah
Almighty revealed to me the following statement: " Behold! in the creation of
the heavens and the earth, and the alternation of Night and Day, there are
indeed Signs for men of understanding." (A1 Imran 190)

4

j^'3

13 o’jiLuTjIi- j ^

(Ibn Hibban in his Sahih). This signifies that one should not cease to weep at
any rate.
That is confirmed by the narration about one of the Prophets who came

Book two: Patience and gratitude ------------------------------------------------ 127
upon a small stone with a great quantity of water springing from it. He was
astonished at that. Allah Almighty made it utter the following: "I have been
weeping since I heard the statement of Allah Almighty: " then fear the Fire
whose fuel is men and stones which is prepared for those who reject Faith."
(Al-Baqarah 24)
*
t^
4
^ ojb>xj>J lj UJI Laijij I jllJ I *1yiu li
So, I am weeping out of fear of Him." It asked him to save it from the
fire, and He did accordingly. Some time later he saw it in the same state of
weeping, thereupon he asked it: "Why are you weeping now?" it said: "The
first weeping was the weeping of fear, and that weeping is the weeping of
gratitude and pleasure. However, the servant's heart is like a stone if not
harder, and its hardness would be removed only by weeping in both states of
fear and gratitude."
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "On the Day of Judgement, a caller would make a public call:
"Let the praisers stand up." They would stand, and a flag would be fixed for
them, and they would enter the Garden." It was said to him: "Who are the
praisers O Messenger of Allah?" he said: "Those who thank Allah Almighty in
all states (or who thank Allah Almighty at the time of ease and adversity,
according to another version)." (At-Tabarani, Abu Na'im and Al-Baihaqi on the
authority of Ibn Abbas). He "peace be upon him" said: "Praise is the upper
garment of (Allah) Most Gracious." Allah Almighty revealed to David "peace
be upon him": "As for the patient, their abode will be the abode of peace, and
when they are admitted to it, I would confer upon them the favor of
thankfulness, and it is the best speech; and when they thank, I would give them
more; and when they look at Me, I would give them more and more."
When it was revealed in the treasures what was revealed, Umar "Allah be
pleased with him" said: "Then, which wealth should we take?" The Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Let anyone of you
take a tongue which celebrates (Allah), or a heart which thanks (Allah)." He
thus ordered them to preserve a thankful heart instead of wealth and property.
According to Ibn Mas'ud "Allah be pleased with him": "Gratitude constitutes
half the faith."

Explication Of Definition And Real Nature Of Gratitude
It should be known to you that gratitude is one of the stations of the mystic
travelers (on the path of Allah); and it consists of knowledge, state and work.
Knowledge is the origin which develops the state, and the state, in turn, develops
work. The knowledge is to know the favor from the benefactor. The state is the
pleasure one entertains as a result of the favors. The work is what one does to
achieve the purposes of the benefactor. This work pertains to the heart, the
organs and the tongue. All of this should be explicated in order to encompass the
real nature of gratitude. What is said, indeed, in the definition of gratitude falls
short of fathoming its real meaning and essence entirely.
Knowledge is the first foundation, as we have mentioned, and it is to know

The quarter of the saviors
128
three tilings: the favor itself; the fact that it is for him; and the benefactor with
His attributes and acts by which the favor is done. There should be then a favor,
a benefactor, and a beneficiary to whom the favor is given by intent and will.
Those should be known with anyone else other than Allah Almighty. In relation
with Allah Almighty, it should be known that all favors are from Him, and all
intermediaries and means are but under His control, subjugated by His Will. This
knowledge is after monotheism and sanctification. The first gnosis of faith is
sanctification and once he knows the Sanctified, he should subsequendy know
that none is sanctified but One and no more, and that is the monotheism. Once
he knows diat, he comes to know that all things in this universe spring only from
that One, as a favor from Him. This is why it ranks third to sanctification and
monotheism. Besides monotheism and sanctification, it implies the perfect power
and uniqueness of doing.
To this fact, the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him"
referred in his statement: "Whoever says 'Glory be to Allah' receives ten good
deeds; and whoever says 'There is none worthy of worship except for Allah'
receives twenty good deeds; and whoever says 'Praise be to Allah' receives thirty
good deeds." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
further said: "The best remembrance is to say 'There is none worthy of worship
except for Allah'; and the best of supplication is to say 'Praise be to Allah'." (AtTirmidhi, Ibn Majah, An-Nasa'i and Ibn Hibban on the authority of Jabir). He
"peace be upon him" said too: "Nothing of those words of remembrance yields
manifolds (of reward) as does 'Praise be to Allah." (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya but
ending up with Ibrahim An-Nakh'i).
But think not that those good deeds are given only for tongue movement
with those words without their meaning present in the heart. 'Glory be to Allah'
is a statement which indicates to sanctification; and 'There is none worthy of
worship except for Allah' indicates to monotheism; and 'Praise be to Allah'
indicates to the acknowledgement that the favor is from Allah, the One and
Only. The good deeds then are given in accordance with those items of gnosis
which are among the categories of faith and certainty.
It should be known to you that the perfection of this knowledge is achieved
by negation of polytheism not only through words, but also through acts and
deeds. When one receives a favor from a king and he sees that one of his
ministers or assistants has a role in bringing that favor to him, he indeed has
ascribed partners to that real benefactor. That is because he does not see the
favor from the king from all sides: but from him in part and from others in part.
The result is that his pleasure with that would be divided between them, although
it should be unique to the king, who is the real benefactor. It is true that when he
sees the signature of the king on the paper which carries the command of favor,
his monotheism and gratitude to the king are not affected, for he thinks that
those are but subjugated by the king, under his control. Similarly, he should know
that the king's assistant or minister or storekeeper who brings the favor to him is
but subject to the will of the king in doing so, and were the matter to be referred
to anyone of them, and there is no fear of the king, he might not have conveyed
the favor to him.
Having known this, one should be sure that the role of the storekeeper is no

129
Book two: Patience and gratitude
more than that of the pen and the paper, which develops no ascription of
partners to the king in terms of being the only benefactor. Similarly the animals
endued with free choice are also directed in that free choice by the willpower of
Allah Almighty, to do what they are doomed to do, willingly or unwillingly. They
are like the storekeeper who is forced to give you in compliance with the order of
the king, and had the matter been up to him, he would have given you nothing at
all. In short, all you receive at the hands of anyone is a favor from Allah
Almighty, who directs upon him the causes that force him to give, by stimulating
in him the belief that his good in this world and the hereafter lies in giving you.
In the face of that belief created in him by Allah Almighty, he finds no way but to
give you. He then gives you to serve himself and not for your sake, and had it
been only for your sake, he would have given you nothing at all; and had it not
been for the fact that he knows that your benefit leads to his benefit, surely, he
would not have benefited you at all. In this way, he is not a benefactor in relation
to you: on the contrary, he takes you as a means to attain another favor which he
expects. But the real benefactor is He, Who subjugated him to give you, willingly
or unwillingly.
If you know that, you have known Allah Almighty as is fitting for Him, and
known also His acts and deeds, and if you know His acts and deeds, you will be a
monotheist, able to give thanks to Him as He deserves. Nay! You will become
thankful only by that knowledge. For this reason, Moses "peace be upon him"
said in his conversation with the Lord: "O Lord! You created Adam with Your
Own Hand and did such and such things to him: how had he thanked You?"
Allah Almighty said: "He knew that all of this is from Me." His knowledge in
itself was thankfulness. Then, one could not give thanks unless he knows that all
favors are from Him Alone. If doubts arises to you as to that fact, you would
have no real knowledge of the favor nor of the benefactor. That is because your
pleasure would be divided between the real benefactor and others who have no
role in the favor. The more your pleasure with the benefactor is short, the more
your deed would be short.
The second foundation is the state that stems from the knowledge, and it is
the pleasure with the benefactor, with submission and humbleness, which is, in
itself, thankfulness, just as the knowledge is considered thankfulness. But, the
pleasure might be thankfulness only if it achieves its necessary prerequisite. Its
necessary prerequisite is that your pleasure should be with the benefactor not
with the favor nor with the act of giving it. This might be difficult on you to
understand. So, let's set forth an example for you.
When a king intends to set out on journey, and he grants a horse to a man,
he, in turn, is imagined to be pleased from three points of view: the first is to be
pleased with it as a horse to be ridden, a preserved property to be utilized when
there is necessity, and so on. That is the pleasure of him who has no fortune in
the king himself: but his purpose is to get the horse itself. Were he to find it in a
desert and take it, he would have the same pleasure. The second is to be pleased
not with it as a horse, but as an indication of the king's care and sympathy for
him. In this case, were he to find the horse in a desert, or be given it but from

The quarter of the saviors
130
anyone else other than the king, he would not have the same pleasure. That is
because he is not in need of the horse itself or because he regards it with
slightness in relation with the good position he expects to attain in the heart of
the king. The third is to be pleased with it for he will enable him to set out in
service of the king, and bear the difficulty and trouble of journey in his service in
order to attain closeness to him, thinking that, by so doing, he might promote to
the degree of ministry as he is not satisfied with the position of being cared for or
given a horse by the king. He indeed does not aspire for the ministry for its own
sake in so much as for the fact that it spares for him the opportunity to see and
be near the king regularly; and were he to be given the choice between the
nearness without the ministry or the ministry without the nearness, surely, he
would choose the nearness without the ministry.
Those are three levels: the first is void of the meaning of thankfulness for the
beneficiary restricts his view to the gift itself, and his pleasure is with the horse
itself and not with the giver. That is the state of everyone who is pleased with a
gift in terms of being a delicious and pleasant gift that agrees with the fulfillment
of his desires and purposes, thereby he is far from the concept of gratitude. The
second implies the meaning of gratitude but in as much as the pleasure is not
with the benefactor himself but with his care and sympathy which stimulate him
to give gifts to the beneficiary in the future. That is the state of the righteous who
worship Allah for fear of His punishment and in expectation for His reward. But
the perfect gratitude is implied in the third level, where the servant is pleased with
the favor of Allah Almighty in its being a means to enable him to attain the
nearness of Allah, be in His neighbourhood, and enjoy the permanent look at His
Bounteous Countenance.
That is the highest level. Its sign is that he rejoices with the world but
inasmuch as it is a farm for the hereafter, and enables him to fulfill the duties of
his religion, and grieves with any gift that might divert him from the
remembrance of Allah Almighty, and keep him off His way. That is because he
does not want the gift for its being a pleasant delicious, but just for it enables him
to be near Allah, just as the man of the horse which wants it only to carry him in
the company of the king in order to see him and become near him perpetually.
For this reason, Ash-Shibli "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "The
gratitude is to see the benefactor and not the gift itself." According to AlKhawas: "The laymen give thanks for the food, drink, clothes and residence,
whereas the private give thanks for the inputs of the hearts."
That level is unattainable by him in whose sight the pleasures and delights are
restricted only to stomach, sex, and such perceptibles as colours and sounds,
apart from the pleasures of the heart To be sure, in the state of health, the hart is
pleased with the remembrance of Allah Almighty, gnosis of and meeting with
Him. But it is pleased with anything else if it is befallen by the disease of the evil
habits, just as some abnormal people are pleased with eating clay, and some ill
persons loathe the sweet and edible things, and are delighted with the bitter
things. To that meaning, the following poetic verse refers: "And whoever has an
ill bitter mouth would feel sore even the sweet fresh water."

131
Book two: Patience and gratitude
That is the prerequisite of the pleasure with the favors and gifts of Allah
Almighty. If the highest level is unattainable, let it be the second level. But the
first level is inconsiderable. How many a difference between him who wants
the horse for the sake of the king, and he who wants the king for the sake of
the horse; and how many a difference between him who wants Allah to give
him favors and gifts, and he who wants the gifts and favors of Allah to reach
Allah thereby.
The third foundation pertains to work according to the pleasure that ensues
from the knowledge of the benefactor. This work relates to the heart, the tongue
and the organs. In relation to heart, it is to intend good inwardly and outwardly
for the people. Concerning the tongue, it is to show gratitude to Allah Almighty
with the praises indicative of that. Regarding the organs, it is to use the favors
and gifts of Allah Almighty in obedience of Him, and avoid using them in
disobedience of Him. In this way, the gratitude of eyes, for example, is to screen
all defects seen in any Muslim; and the gratitude of ears is to screen all defects
heard about him, and so on. This belongs to the gratitude for the favors of Allah
Almighty with the organs.
The gratitude of the tongue is to show, through words, one's good pleasure
with Allah Almighty, and he is commanded to do so. It is narrated that the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to a man:
"How are you?" he said: "Fine." He "peace be upon him" repeated the same
question, and the man gave the same reply until when it was the third time he
said: "Fine, praise be to Allah and a lot of thanks be to Him." On that he "peace
be upon him" said: "This is just what I wanted from you to say." (At-Tabarani on
the authority of Al-Fudail I bn Amr and Abdullah Ibn Amr; and Malik in his
Muwatta' but ending it up with Umar). It was the habit of the righteous
predecessors to ask each other about their states with the intention to bring out
the gratitude for Allah on the tongue of each other, perchance the thankful would
be obedient and the one who caused it to be uttered obedient too. By no means
they intended showing off.
However, anyone who is asked about his state falls between two choices:
either to give thanks to Allah or make a complaint against his state:
thanksgiving is obedience and complaint is disobedience. And how should it
not be considered disobedience the complaint against the King of all kings in
Whose Hand all things are, to an owned slave who has no power to do
anything? It is more fitting for a servant, if he does not endure patience on the
fate and trial of Allah Almighty, and his weakness leads him to complain, to
make his complaint to Allah Almighty and not to anyone else. It is He Alone
Who puts to trial, and He Alone has the power to remove it. To be sure, the
servant's humiliation to his master is honour, whereas his complaint to anyone
else like him is a humiliation, and to show humiliation to a servant alike is
most odious ignominy. Allah Almighty says: " The things that you worship
besides Allah have no power to give you sustenance: then seek you sustenance
from Allah, serve Him, and be grateful to Him: to Him will be your return."
(Al-Ankabut 17)

i

-

The quarter of the saviors

132
ijJUPlj

*>lijj

*5 4jt Oj-5

oJjJ-r" 0**^ V^->J ^

And: " Verily those whom you call upon besides Allah are servants like unto
vou: call upon them, and let them listen to your prayer, if you are (indeed)
truthful!" (Al-A'raf 194)

4

o! ^

!>Lp 4jjl

^

o5 Qtjtf oj }

Thanksgiving with tongue then is a part of gratitude. It is narrated that a
delegate came to Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz "may Allah have mercy upon him"
and a young man stood to speak on their behalf thereupon Umar said: "Let
the oldest of you speak." On that he said: "O Commander of Believers! Were
the matter to depend on the age, surely, from among the Muslims, there are
such as older than you." He said: "Then, speak." He said: "We are not a
delegate who have come for a desire, nor are we moved by fear. As for the
desire, your bounty has fulfilled it. As for fear, your justice has made us safe
from it. But we are the delegate of gratitude, and we have come to give thanks
to you with the tongue and then leave."
Those are the foundations of gratitude that encompass its meaning
comprehensively. But as for the statement of him who says that ’gratitude is
to acknowledge the gift of the benefactor with submission’, it is the
consideration of only the act of the tongue with some states of the heart. In
relation with the statement of him who says that ’gratitude is to praise the
charitable person’, it is the consideration of only the act of tongue. But the
statement of the one who says that ’gratitude is to devote oneself to seclusion
on the carpet of contemplation with permanent sanctity’ is the consideration
of most aspects of thanksgiving, with nothing skipping therefrom but the act
of the tongue. The statement of Hamdun Al-Qassar that ’gratitude is to see
yourself in the position of a parasite as regards thanksgiving’ means that the
gnosis is one of the meanings of gratitude. The statement of Al-Junaid that
’gratitude is to see yourself unfitting for the gift’ describes one of the states of
the heart in particular.
Those are their phrases which express their states, and this is why they differ
according to their difference. Therefore, anyone of them might give different
answers in accordance with his different states, for they do not speak but in
expression of their current prevailing state as they engaged in what concerns
them, and abandon what concerns them not, or in proportion to the state of the
asker from their viewpoint, as they limit their phrases to the extent which he
needs and refrain from what he needs not. So, think not that what we have
already mentioned means that we slander them, or that were all of those
meanings to be offered to them they would deny them: this is unimaginable on
the part of any rational except as far as the dispute that occurs to the mind as to
whether the term ’gratitude’ includes all or some of the meanings is concerned.
But it is not our purpose in that book to explain in detail those deep linguistic
issues; and it is Allah Who grant success with His mercy.

!

Book two: Patience and gratitude

----------------------------------------------

133

Explication Of The Way Of Gratitude To Allah Almighty
It might occur to your mind that we thank a benefactor for he has, to some
extent, of fortune which makes him fitting for gratitude. We might give thanks to
kings by praising them in order to become dearer to the people, and their
generosity seem to the people, with the result that they gain better reputation and
majesty in their sight; or by serving them which is to help them achieve some of
their purposes; or by bowing in front of them as servants in order to increase
their followers and authority. Those kings then are not thanked except for any of
those reasons. But this is not unfitting as regards Allah Almighty, from two
points of view:
The first is that Allah Almighty is deemed far beyond fortunes and
purposes, exalted from being in need of service or assistance, or of more
majesty and authority by praising and lauding, or more followers by bowing and
prostrating as servants in front of Him. We thank Him in the same way as we
thank a king who is benefactor with no expected fortune, i.e. we thank him by
sleeping at home, in which the king has no fortune, and he is absent, and has no
knowledge of what we do. To be sure, Allah Almighty has no fortune in all of
our acts.
The other point of view is that all we do by our choice is a gift given to us by
Allah Almighty. To be sure, our organs, power, will and determination, and in
total the causes of our movement, if not our movement itself, are created as a
favor by Allah Almighty. How then could we thank a favor with the help of
another favor? If we are given by a king a vehicle to ride and we take another or
are given another also by him, the other would, by no means, be a way of
thanksgiving for the first on our own part: on the contrary, the other would be in
need of thanksgiving as would be the first. The thanksgiving thus could not be
thanked except by way of another favor, and so forth.
This means that thanking Allah Almighty is impossible due to those points of
view, in which there is no doubt given that they are confirmed by Sharia. What is
then the way to combine both?
In reply to that, it should be known to you that this thought occurred to the
mind of David and Moses "peace be upon them" who said: "O Lord! How
should I thank You given that I could not thank You except with the help of
another favor from You?" or in another version: "Given that my gratitude to you
is but another favor from You which makes binding upon me to thank You once
again for it?" on that Allah Almighty revealed to him that "Once you know that,
you will have thanked Me", or in another version: "If you acknowledge that the
favor is from Me, I would accept that (acknowledgement) as thanksgiving from
you."
But you may argue: "Although I have understood the question, I could not
understand the significance of what was revealed to them. I indeed, know how it
is impossible to thank Allah Almighty. But at the same time, how should the
acknowledgement of such impossibility be reckoned as thanksgiving? That is
because such acknowledgement is in itself a favor from Him, how has it become
thanksgiving? I could not understand that. It seems as if whoever does not thank

1

The quarter of the saviors
134
has indeed given thanks, for the acceptance of the second gift is considered
thanksgiving for the first one. The mystery that lies behind that is abstruse.
Would you please make it clear by an example?"
In reply to that, it should be known to you that by so doing, you will knock
one of the gates of gnosis, which transcends the science of practical religion. But
at any rate, let's refer to some of its features. Here, there are two views:
One is that which makes you look with the eye of mere monotheism and lets
you know that He is the grateful and the appreciated, the lover and the beloved.
That is the view of him who knows that in the whole existence, there is none but
Him, and that everything will perish barring His Countenance. That is perpetually
true for the other is he who is never imagined to exist independendy, and that
other is nonexistent, and its existence is impossible for the real existent is he who
exists by Himself, and whoever does not exist by itself is indeed nonexistent, for
its existence depends on another. The real existent then is he who survives by
himself in such a way that if anyone else is doomed to nonexistence, he would
ever survive independendy. If, besides its independent existence, he sustains
others, he is then a sustainer. There is no sustainer but one, and otherwise is
unimaginable. Thus, in the existence, there exists none but the Ever-Living,
Sustainer (of all existence), the Only one, the Eternal. If you adopt that view, you
would know that all things come from Him Almighty, and to Him all things shall
return, and that He is the grateful and the appreciated, the lover and the beloved.
From that point of view, Habib Ibn Abu Habib understood the following
statement: " Truly We found him (Job) full of patience and constancy, how
excellent in Our service! ever did he turn (to Us)!" (Sad 44)

He said in comment on that: "How astonishing! He gave and praised (whom
He gave)." i.e. He gives for patience, for which He praises. This means that if He
praised for giving, He indeed has praised Himself: He is the praiser and the
praised, as well as He is the lover and the beloved. That is a high level which you
could not understand but through an example to befit the limit of your mind. It is
obvious that if a composer likes his composition, he has indeed loved himself,
and that if a maker likes his making, he has indeed loved himself, and that if a
parent likes his child as being his own child, he has indeed loved himself, etc. all
things in the existence are the making and creation of Allah Almighty, and if He
liked them, He has indeed loved Himself.
That is the view of him who looks with the eye of monotheism, a state
referred to by Sufis as self-annihilation i.e. that one is detached from himself
as well as from anything else other than Allah in a way that he sees nothing
but Allah Almighty. Whoever does not understand that says: "How has he
been detached (from himself), given that he has a mass, size and dimension
and occupies a space and eats, drinks and breathes?" The ignorant scoff at
them due to their ignorance of the significance of their speech. To this Allah
Almighty refers in His statement: " Those in sin used to laugh at those who
believed, And whenever they passed by them, used to wink at each other (in
mockery); And when they returned to their own people, they would return

!

!
I

135
Book two: Patience and gratitude
jesting; And whenever they saw them, they would say, "Behold! These are the
people truly astray!" But they had not been sent as Keepers over them!" (AlMutaffiffin 29-33)
^J3 CjD

p-y: IjJ*

\y'6\y*'j>- I

\jLuj\ ~Lj gjs o>lUiJ 5^/3^ oj

oj ^

J*-ajij 1313 (0)

<jj

4 @)
But He Almighty showed afterwards that the laughter of the Gnostics at
them in the morrow (i.e. in the hereafter) is more significant as shown from
His statement: " But on this Day the Believers will laugh at the Unbelievers:
On Thrones (of Dignity) they will command (a sight) (of all things)." (AlMutaffiffin 34-35)
4

QP OjUSdT£jA \y^\c <jiU]T

^

Similarly, the people of Noah "peace be upon him" mocked at him when they
saw him engaged in the making of the ark, thereupon he said to them as stated by
Allah Almighty: "If you ridicule us now, we (in our turn) can look down on you
with ridicule likewise!" (Hud 38)
i

^ZS bji iL I

That is the first view.
The other view is that of such of men as have not attained the station of selfannihilation. They are of two divisions:
The first are those who do not acknowledge but their own existence, and
deny that there is a Lord to be worshipped. Those are the blind in both eyes for
they deny what is really proved to be true, i.e. Allah, the Sustainer of whole
existence, Who sustains all things in the universe, and all things depend in
existence on Him. Furthermore, they affirm survival to their own selves. But
even, were they to know the reality, they would learn that they would neither
survive nor cause themselves to exist. They, in fact, are caused to, and do not
cause themselves to exist. There is a big difference between the real existent and
the one caused to exist. In the universe, there is only One Existent and one
caused to exist The Real existent is a fact, and the one caused to exist is false.
The Real Existent is independendy surviving and sustainer of all in existence,
whereas the one caused to exist is perishable and ending. If all things on the earth
shall perish, then, none will abide barring the Countenance of your Lord, Full of
Majesty, Bounty and Honour.
The other division are of those who are not fully blind, but just one-eyed.
That is because they see with one eye the Real Existent Whom they do not deny.
But the other eye is blind, for it does not see the annihilation of the one caused to
Exist In this way, they affirm another existent with Allah Almighty, thereby they
are polytheists, just as the former are atheists. If such is only blear-eyed, he would
make sense of disparity between both existents, thereby he affirms one as the
Lord and the other as a slave. It is only by that extent of disparity between both
and shortage in the other (perishable) existent he affirms that he joins the sphere
of monotheism.

The quarter of the saviors
Between both, there are countless levels on the basis of which the
monotheists differ. The Books of Allah revealed on His Messengers are like the
kohl therewith the sights shine, and the Prophets are like those who put kohl in
the eyes of people. They came to invite people to pure monotheism, i.e. 'There is
none worthy of worship except Allah'. Its meaning is to see none other than
Allah, the One and Only. Only a few are those who attain the perfect
monotheism, and on the opposite extreme stand the rejecters and atheists, and
they also are few. The idolaters said: "We only serve them in order that they may
bring us nearer to Allah." (Az-Zumar 3)

136

JJ

-5j

^>

By that statement, they were on the first threshold of monotheism, even
reluctandy. The middling represent the majority. From among them, there are
such as whose insights open and facts of monotheism seem to them but like
the fleeting short-lived lightning, and others with whom they last for some
time after which they vanish. They survive in rare cases, each according to his
level of faith.
When Allah Almighty commanded His Prophet "peace be upon him" to
come closer, it was said to him: " bow down in adoration, and bring yourself the
closer (to Allah)!" (Al-'Alaq 19)
He said during his prostration: "I seek refuge with Your pardon from Your
punishment, from Your good pleasure from Your displeasure, and I seek refuge
with You from You: I could not reckon praises on You, for You are just as You
have described Yourself." (Muslim on the authority of A'ishah). His saying "I
seek refuge with Your pardon from Your punishment" refers to seeing only the
acts of Allah Almighty, i.e. he seemed as if he did not see but Allah and His acts,
thereupon he sought refuge with some of His acts from some of His acts. Then,
he raised up to the point of detachment from seeing the acts to seeing the source
of acts, i.e. the attributes thereupon he said: "And I seek refuge with Your good
pleasure from Your displeasure", and both are among the attributes (of Allah

Almighty).
Then, he observed that this is insufficient for monotheism, thereupon he
raised up from the point of seeing the attributes to the point of seeing the Divine
Essence, and said: "And I seek refuge with You from You." That is a flight from
Him to Him without seeing any act or attribute. But he saw himself having fled
from Him to Him, sought refuge and praised. Thus, he was detached from seeing
himself regarding that as shortage, and came closer by saying: "I could not reckon
praises on You, for You are just as You have described Yourself." His saying "I
could not reckon" is a statement about his self-annihilation; and his saying "You
are just as You have described Yourself’ refers to His being the Praiser and
Praised simultaneously, and that all things come at first from Him, and to him all
things will return in the last, since " Everything (that exists) will perish except His
own Face. To Him belongs the Command, and to Him will you (all) be brought
back." (Al-Qasas 88)

137

Book two: Patience and gratitude
" t i.c

^
^J]}
d
*^! viAJLa •» *
Thus, his first station is the last one of monotheists, i.e. to see none but
Allah Almighty and His acts. He sought refuge with one act from another.
Consider how he ended to the Real one and Only, and all things other than
Him were removed from his sight. He "peace be upon him" never rose from a
stadon to a higher one but that he saw the former far from the latter. He used
then to ask Allah for forgiveness from the former and see it deficiency in his
conduct and shortage in his rank, to this he "peace be upon him" referred with
his statement: "The (stain of evil) is accumulated on my heart that I ask Allah
for forgiveness seventy dmes per day and night." He thus raised up seventy
stadons above each other. Although he had, by the first of those, transcended
the utmost degree a human being could ever reach, he saw it shortage in
comparison with the last of them; and that is the cause of his prayer for
forgiveness. When A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" said to him: "Has Allah
not forgiven for you your previous and later sins? Then, what is the cause of
that weeping in your prostradon? And what is the reason for that severe trouble
you are suffering?" he "peace be upon him" said: "Then, should I not be a
thankful slave?" (Ibn Abu Ash-Shaykh). i.e. should I not ask for more and
higher stadons? Gratitude causes one to get more as stated by Allah Almighty:
"If you are grateful, I will add more (favours) unto you." (Ibrahim 7)
i*

^

ji

Now, let's return to the science of practical religion. Let's say that the
Prophets "peace be upon them" were sent with the true invitation to call the
people to the perfect monotheism, as we have already described it. But between
people and that perfect level of monotheism, there is a great distance and there
are difficult obstacles in the way. The entire religious law is to show to the people
how to cut the great distance and cross those obstacles. At that point, there is
another witness and another station, in which there appears, in relation with that
witness, the thanksgiving, thankful and thanked. But this could not be clear
except through an illustrative example.
Suppose that a king sent to one of his servants who is far from him a vehicle
to ride, clothes to wear and provisions to help him cut the distance in order to
come close to his presence. In this respect, he has two states: either he wants to
bring that servant to his presence in order to serve him; or he has no fortune in
him, nor is he in need of his closeness, nor is he affected by his remoteness. But
he wants to bring him to his presence in order that the servant would enjoy the
happiness of being near him, and benefit with that, and no advantage will return
to the king himself. The position of Allah Almighty from all the servants applies
to the second state. That is because the first is impossible upon Allah, whereas
the second is possible.
On the other hand, the servant would not be regarded thankful to the king
in the first state only by riding and arrival at his presence unless he serves him
as required. But in the second state, the service is not needed. But at the same
time, he is imagined to be thankful or ungrateful. He is thankful in case he

I

The quarter of the saviors
138
uses what is given to him by his master in what he likes for the benefit of the
servant and not for the benefit of the master. He is ungrateful in case he uses
that not, or uses it in what alienates him more from the king. If the servant
puts on the clothes and rides the horse, and consumes the provisions on the
way, his master would appreciate his conduct for he will have used his gifts in
his love, i.e. in what he loves for his servant and not for his own self. If he
neither puts on the clothes, nor rides the horse to come closer or farther, he
will have been ungrateful to his master's favor, for he has neglected it and
made it idle.
Similarly, Allah Almighty7 created the creation and in the beginning of their
life, they use appetites in order to complete therewith the building of their bodies.
But once they do so, they come farther from His presence, given that their real
happiness and felicity7 lie in their closeness to Him. For this reason, He gave them
of favors what they could use to attain the rank of closeness. In reference to their
closeness and remoteness, Allah Almighty said: " We have indeed created man in
the best of moulds, Then do We abase him (to be) the low of the low, Except
such as believe and do righteous deeds: for they shall have a reward unfailing."
(At-Tin 4-6)

X! 0 05^--

1

0

Cr~^1 U

^^

^0o
The favors of Allah then are instruments therewith the servant raises up from
the level of the lowest of the low. Allah created those favors for the servant to
attain therewith the happiness of closeness to Him, given that Allah Almighty is
not in need of the servant's closeness. The servant might use those favors in
obedience thereby he is thankful to his master, for he complies with what his
master loves; or might use them in disobedience, thereby he is ungrateful for he
plunges into what his master dislikes and disapproves for him. Indeed, Allah
Almighty never approves disbelief and disobedience for His servants. If he makes
them idle and uses them not either in obedience or in disobedience, he is also
ungrateful for he has wasted these favors.
AJ1 that is created in this world is but an instrument in order for the
servant to attain therewith the happiness and felicity of the hereafter, and the
rank of closeness to Allah Almighty. Every obedient is grateful to the favors
of Allah Almighty in so far as he uses the instruments given to him in
obedience; and every disobedient is ungrateful and deprived of the love of
Allah Almighty in so far as he uses those improperly, or in a way that alienates
him farther. Although obedience and disobedience are subject to will, by no
means are they determined by love and hate. But nay! How many a desired
thing which might be either loved or disliked! The mystery that lies behind all
of that is the Divine decree which could not be disclosed to anyone
whatsoever. It is by this that the first problem is solved, i.e. if the thanked has
no portion, how should thankfulness be given?
The second is also solved thereby: if we do not mean by thanksgiving but
that the favor of Allah Almighty is directed in what Allah Almighty loves. If

Book two: Patience and gratitude

139

the favor is directed to the love of Allah by virtue of Allah Almighty, then, the
desired goal has been achieved, for your act has been a gift from Allah
Almighty, and as you are the place where it lies, He has praised you, and His
praise has been a further gift from Him upon you. It is He who has given, and
He Who has praised, and one of both His acts has been a cause of doing the
other towards the direction of His love, and in both states, a lot of thanks
should be given to Him. You are thankful in the sense that you are the place
where gratitude lies and not in the sense that you are the cause of gratitude,
just as you are described as knowledgeable and Gnostic in the sense that you
are the place where knowledge and gnosis lie and not in the sense that you are
the cause of both. It has been placed in you by the Divine eternal power
which made you deserve to be described as thankful. That is an affirmation of
a thing to you and you are a thing. The Creator of things has made you a thing
where you had been nothing at all. In consideration of Him Who has made
things, you are a thing (made by Him). But without that consideration, you are
nothing. To this fact he "peace be upon him" referred in his statement: "Do
deeds for everyone finds it easy on him to do what is created for him." He
indeed said so in reply to the question: "O Messenger of Allah! What is the
significance of work since Allah had finished from creating and ordaining
things?"
From this it seems that the creatures are beings on whom the will of Allah
Almighty is executed, and places where His acts lie, although they themselves are
among His acts. But some of His acts are places of others. His statement "Do
deeds", being on the tongue of the Messenger "peace be upon him", is also one
of His acts. It is the cause that led the people to know that their deed is
beneficial; and their knowledge is one of the acts of Allah. Knowledge is a cause
by which movement towards obedience arises; and arising is also one of the acts
of Allah Almighty. It is a cause of the movement of the organs, which is, in turn,
one of the acts of Allah Almighty. Some of acts of Allah then are causes of
others, i.e. they are conditions for each other to happen, just as the creation of
the body is a cause of the creation of the accident, the creation of life is a cause
of the creation of knowledge, and the creation of knowledge is a cause of the
creation of will, and so forth. All are the acts of Allah Almighty, and they are
causes and conditions of each other. They are so in the sense that none is ready
to accept life but a body, and none is ready to accept knowledge but a living, and
none is ready to accept will but one of knowledge, and so on. In that sense some
of His acts are causes of others and not in the sense that they cause each other to
exist. Once this is realized as it should be, it raises one up to the level of
monotheism as we have already described.
But you may argue: "Why has Allah Almighty commanded us to work
otherwise we would be punished and blamed for disobedience, given that the
matter is not up to us? How should be blamed and criticized when all things
return in the end to Allah Almighty?" in reply to that, it should be known to you
that this command of Allah Almighty is a cause of our belief, and our belief is a
cause which arouses fear; and fear is a cause that prompts us to abandon desires

The quarter of the saviors
140
and lusts, which, in turn, is a cause of our corning close to Allah Almighty. Allah
Almighty is the causer of causes in such order as we see them. So, he, to whom
happiness is doomed, finds those causes easy on him until he is led by their chain
to the Garden. That is the significance of the statement of the Prophet "peace be
upon him": "Everyone finds it easy on him to do what he is created to do." But
he, to whom no good is doomed from Allah Almighty, keeps himself far from
the speech of Allah Almighty and of His Messenger "peace be upon him" and of
the learned scholars; and if he does not hear, he will not know anything, and if he
does not learn anything, he will entertain no fear, and if he entertains no fear, he
will not abandon desires, and rather wall rely on this world, and if he relies on this
world, he wall remain in the party of Satan; and the fire of Hell is the promise of
them all.
Having known this, you would be amazed by a people being led to the
Garden by chains. There is none but that he will be led to the Garden by the
chain of causes, by virtue of directing knowledge and fear on him. Likewise,
there is no disappointed one but that he will be led to the fire of Hell by the
chain of causes, by virtue of directing heedlessness, deception and feeling of
safety on him. The pious will be driven to the Garden by oppression, and the
criminals to the fire of Hell also by oppression; and there is no oppressor but
Allah, the One and Only, the Irresistible, and none has the power over all
things but the King. When the veils are lifted from the eyes of the heedless,
and they will see the matter as such, at that point they will hear the caller
calling: " Whose will be the Dominion that Day? That of Allah, the One, the
Irresistible!" (Ghafir 16)

Of a surety, the dominion belongs to Allah perpetually, but the heedless
will not hear that except on that day. So, it is a statement of the disclosure of
the new states of the heedless, on a day it will be of no profit to them to be
disclosed. So, we seek refuge with Allah Most Generous, Most Forbearing
from the causes of ignorance and blindness, for they are the causes of
destruction.

Explication Of The Difference Between What Allah
Likes And What He Dislikes.
It should be known to you that gratitude on the one hand, and
ungratefulness on the other hand could not be achieved unless one knows what
Allah likes and distinguishes it from what He dislikes. The meaning of gratitude
is to use his favors in what He likes; and the meaning of ungratefulness is to use
them in what He dislikes. There are two senses by which what is liked by Allah
could be distinguished from what is disliked by Him: Hearing which is
supported by the Holy Verses and Prophetic narrations and traditions; and the
insight of the heart, i.e. the vision with the eye of consideration. The latter is
very difficult and this is why it is rare. For this reason, Allah Almighty sent the
Messengers and Prophets, through whom He made the path easy on the people.
The knowledge of that is based on learning all rulings and judgements of Sharia

141

Book two: Patience and gratitude

perdnent to all acts of people. Whoever does not get acquainted with all rulings
of Sharia in all of his acts could not be able to do the required gratitude.
The other is to see with the eye of consideration. It is to perceive the wisdom
of Allah that lies behind every existent created by Him. To be sure, He has
created nothing in this world but that there is a wisdom lying behind creating it;
and that wisdom refers to a certain purpose. That purpose is the beloved. The
wisdom is divided into evident and hidden.
The example of the evident is the knowledge that the wisdom which lies
behind creating the sun, for instance, is to make day different from night, in
order for the day to be as a means of subsistence and night as covering, and the
movement to be easy by day and stillness easy at night. This is one and not all of
the wisdoms that lie behind creating the sun, for there are countless wisdoms
lying behind creating it. The same is true of learning the wisdom that lies behind
cloud and rainfall, i.e. in order for the land to split and produce various kinds of
vegetation and plants, to provide food for people and fodder for cattle. However,
the Qur’an implies a set of glorious wisdoms that befit the understanding of
people, apart from the subtle and abstruse ones that are beyond the reach of their
minds. Allah Almighty said: " For that We pour forth water in abundance, And
We split the earth in fragments, And produce therein Corn, And Grapes and
nutritious Plants, And Olives and Dates, And enclosed Gardens, dense with lofty
trees, And Fruits and Fodder, For use and convenience to you and your cattle."
(Abasa 25-32)
[jjXjjj (Cr*))

j LaSs-j ('jr/i LL>- L^J tiTj\JlC*

i

V1 i^-j

SfJ ^'3 *#*3 ®

c. LlJ 1

131

tfji^-3 O

As for the wisdom that lies behind the creation of the planets and stars, it is
hidden for the most part to the majority of people. What they could understand
is that they adorn the sky, so that the eye would be pleased with looking at them,
as referred to by His statement: " We have indeed decked the lower heaven with
beauty (in) the stars." (As-Saffat 6)

i

jkjf

fuuT

£j}

In brief, there are countless wisdoms lying behind every atom created in the
universe, with its skies, earths, stars, planets, winds, mountains, metals, oceans,
seas, plants, trees, animals, etc. The wisdom in all of this is divided into what is
evident and what is hidden. The same is true of the wisdom that lies behind the
organs of animals: an example of the evident wisdom is to learn that the eye is
created for seeing not for grasping, ear for hearing not for seeing, hand for
grasping not for hearing, foot for walking not for touching, and so forth. But as
for the internal organs like intestines, stomach, liver, kidney, veins, nerves,
muscles, etc, with their cavities and folds, not all the people know the wisdom
that lies behind all of them; and even those who know it know only a little
thereof in comparison with what is within the knowledge of Allah Almighty as
confirmed by His statement: "of knowledge it is only a little that is communicated
to you, (O men!)" (Al-Isra’ 85)

The quarter of the saviors

142
i d*- id*

->l*ho+

~^3 Jj j* 1 a? c^'

^

Thus, whoever uses any favor improperly or in that for which it is not created
is indeed ungrateful to the favor of Allah Almighty on him. Whoever, for
instance, beats another with his hand is indeed ungrateful to the favor of the
hand for the hand is created only to avert from oneself what harms him and get
what benefits him, and not to harm others. Whoever looks at die face of him
who is unlawful for him to look at is indeed ungrateful to the favors of both the
eye and the sun with which seeing is realized, for both are created in order for
one to look at what benefits him in his religion and world, and ward off what
harms him in them. Once he does so, he has used them improperly or in that for
which they are not created.
That is because the creation of the creatures and the creation of this world
with its means and causes is intended for man to seek their aid to reach the
presence of Allah Almighty, and he could not reach without His love and
intimacy with him in this world, and desertion from the deception and conceit of
this world; and there is no intimacy but with the permanent and regular
supplication; and there is no love but with the permanent knowledge that is
obtained from the regular meditation; and one could not persist in supplication
and meditation without the survival of the body; and the body could not survive
but with food; and the food is not produced but from the earth, water and air;
and all of this could not be realized but with the creation of the heavens and the
earth and all things in existence.
All of this is for the sake of the body which is, in turn, the riding mount of
the soul. What will return to Allah Almighty in the end is the satisfied soul that is
pleased with the long worship and gnosis. For this reason, Allah Almighty said: "
I have only created Jinns and men, that they may serve Me. No Sustenance do I
require of them, nor do I require that they should feed Me. For Allah is He Who
gives (all) Sustenance, - Lord of Power - steadfast (forever)." (Adh-Dhariyat 5658)
o! ©

^

^3 <3jj Cr? yr?
4

^ © Oj

*5] J-j^3 o4^

^3 ^

J-5 <31jjti y*

Whoever uses a favor in disobedience of Allah Almighty is ungrateful to
the favors of Allah in all the means which are necessary for man to commit
that disobedience.
Now, let’s mention one of the hidden wisdoms which is not, anyway, among
the most hidden ones, to consider and learn thereby the way of gratitude and
ingratitude to favors. Among the favors of Allah Almighty is His creation of
Dirhams and Dinars, which are stones, and there is no benefit in themselves as
concrete bodies. But the people are forced to get them in terms of the need of
everyone to have more things to gain his food, clothes, residence, etc. one might
not have what he needs and possess what he needs not, like him who possesses
saffron and needs a camel to ride, or him who possesses a camel and needs
saffron, and so on. Thus, compensation is required between them, and the extent

Book two: Patience and gratitude

143

of compensation needs evaluation, for the owner of the camel could not give his
camel entirely for the whole quantity of saffron, and there is no resemblance
between the camel and saffron in order that he would be given the like of it in
form and weight.
Similarly, he who purchases a house for a dress, a servant for a footwear,
baking powder for a donkey, etc: there is no resemblance nor relevance between
those things. One could hardly know how much saffron a camel is. In this way,
the dealings would become very difficult. So, those disparate unequal concrete
bodies are in need of a mediator to judge between them with justice and
distinguish each according to its characteristic status and position until when they
are put in order according to their different positions, the equal would be known
and distinguished from the unequal.
Both Dirhams and Dinars then are created by Allah Almighty as mediators
between the different commodities, in order for these goods to be estimated and
evaluated by them, like saying: this camel is equal to one hundred Dinars, and
that amount of saffron is equal to one hundred Dinars, and as they get the same
evaluation, they then are equal in value. This is possible only through currency,
and that is the purpose from creating it, and there is no other purpose in those
coins in terms of their being concrete bodies. They are created by Allah Almighty
in order to be in circulation among the people as mediators to judge between
goods and commodities with justice.
There is another wisdom from creating them, i.e. to have access, through
them, to all things in the world. They are not so much, and since they have the
same relation with all things, whoever possesses them seems as if he possesses all
things, unlike him who possesses a garment: he does not possess but that
garment and no more, and if he needs food, it may be that the owner of food will
have no desire for the garment. Thus, there is a need for a thing, i.e. the currency,
which is, in its form, nothing at all, but in meaning, it represents all things. The
relation of a thing to the different things is the same if it does not get its meaning
from its particular form, like the mirror which has no color, but, at the same time,
it shows all colours in it. Similarly, the currency has no purpose in its own form,
but at the same time, through it all purposes are achieved, and also the letter has
no meaning in its form, but with it the meanings appear. That is the other
wisdom.
There are other wisdoms and it will be too lengthy to mention them all.
Anyway, whoever does with them anything in opposition to the wisdom and
purpose for which they are created, is ungrateful to the favor of Allah concerning
them. Whoever hoards them, for instance, is unjust to them, since he makes idle
the wisdom of Allah regarding them, and becomes like him who detains the judge
of Muslims in a prison in which he fails to judge between Muslims. That is
because if money is hoarded up, its judgement will be lost, and thus the purpose
intended by creating it will not be achieved. The Dirhams and Dinars are not
created for a particular person apart from others: but they are created to be in
circulation among men, as judges on the basis of which the value of things is
known and things accordingly distinguished.
Allah Almighty told those who fail to read the Divine lines, that are

The quarter of the saviors
144
written in the pages of the existents with a Divine script with neither a letter
nor a voice, and thus is beyond the reach of the ordinary eye since it is
perceived only by the insight: He told those incapable with a speech they
heard from His Messenger "peace be upon him" until it reached them through
letter and voice, the meaning which they already failed to perceive, saying: "
And there are those who bury gold and silver and spend it not in the Way of
Allah: announce unto them a most grievous penalty. On the Day when heat
will be produced out of that (wealth) in the fire of Hell, and with it will be
branded their foreheads, their flanks, and their backs, "This is the (treasure)
!MI
which you buried for yourselves: taste you, then, the (treasures) you buried!
(At-Tawbah 34-35)
(

*+*+*$*

„

,

>

f

s*. *

_____

>

L ' 3-=-* *♦
4 {(2^ jj&j
L I^5j jj
^
Similarly, whoever takes utensils from gold or silver is indeed ungrateful to
the favor of Allah concerning them, and his state is worse than him who bury
them, for his example is like him who uses the judge in such works as sewing,
collecting taxes, and the jobs done by the lowest of people; and imprisonment is
better for him than that. That is because iron, copper, lead, and pottery do the
same job of keeping the liquid even better than gold and silver. Whoever does
not get this fact revealed to him, it would be disclosed to him with the Divine
interpretation with the statement: "He, who drinks in a utensil made of gold or
silver seems as if he drags the fire of Hell in his belly." (both sheikhs on the
authority of Umm Salamah).
Likewise, whoever deals with Dirhams and Dinars on usurious basis is indeed
ungrateful to the favor of Allah concerning them for they are created not for
their own selves but for other things to be obtained through them. So, if trade is
practiced on them, they will be taken as ends in themselves, in opposition to the
wisdom of creating them. It is out of injustice to use currency improperly or in
anything different from that for which it is created to use. Whoever has a
garment, for example, and has no money might not be able to buy food or a
riding mount by it, for food and the riding mount might not be sold by garment.
In this way, he is excusable to sell the garment for money in order to get through
that money the food or the riding mount. They are then a means to others, and
not ends in themselves.
Their position in relation to goods and commodities is like the position of a
letter in relation to speech, described by the grammarians as that which comes to
give meaning for anything other than it, or like the position of a mirror in relation
to the colours. But he who has currency and it is available to him to sell it for
currency alike, limiting thereby the end of dealing to money only, with the result
that the currency remains detained with him, it will be unjust, like putting the
judge or the ruler in prison and hindering him from judging between the people.
Indeed, it is of no significance to sell currency for currency unless it is taken to be
saved; and it is out of injustice.
But you may ask: "Why it is possible to sell one currency, say a Dirham, with
another, say a Dinar, and not to sell it with the same kind, i.e. a Dirham with a
Dirham?" in reply to that, it should be known to you that both differ in the

145
Book two: Patience and gratitude
purpose of getting things, in the sense that it might be easy to obtain with a great
quantity of Dirhams many scattered things, which is difficult to be obtained by a
litde quantity of Dinars, regardless of their possible equality in value. Thus, if
Dirhams are prevented, the purpose intended by them might be negatively
affected, i.e. the availability to obtain through them many things scattered about.
But to sell a Dirham with a Dirham is impermissible in the sense that no
intelligent might have the desire to do so particularly if both are equal, and no
trader is imagined to do it for it is insignificant. It is like putting the Dirham on
the ground and then taking it once again. Indeed, we fear not for the intelligent to
spend their time in putting the Dirhams on the ground and taking them once
again, unless one of them is better than the other. But this case also is
unimaginable for the owner of a good Dirham is not expected to leave his for a
bad one, and if he demands more of the bad Dirhams in order to equalize his
good one, it should be prevented, and rather judged that the good and bad are
equal, for good and badness should be regarded in case the things are intended
for themselves, and what is not intended for itself should be regarded only in
relation with others. But it is out of injustice to exchange Dirhams for Dirhams
that differ in quality until such quality becomes the purpose intended, though it
should not be considered so. But in case a Dirham is exchanged for another
Dirham like it in quality and value, but on credit, it should be impermissible, for
none does so except a tolerant generous one who likes to do good in the loan,
and it is a good deed from him for which he should receive praise and reward.
But such praise and reward vanish with compensation and this is why it is
injustice for it wastes the particular quality of tolerance and deals with it
improperly.
Similarly, the different kinds of food are created only as nourishment and
provision or as medicine for the creatures. So, they should not be turned from
their sphere. But dealings on them constrains them in a limited number of hands,
and impedes them from their vital role of being eaten. Indeed, Allah did not
create food but to be eaten. The need for food is very dire. So, it should be taken
from the hands of those who are not in need of it, and given to those who need
it. To be sure, none makes dealings on food but he who is not in need of it.
Whoever has food, why does he not eat it if he needs it? Why does he make it
one of the commodities to be traded with? And in case he makes it one of the
commodities to be traded with, let him sell it for compensation he needs other
than food. But he who sells it for the same kind of food seems as if he has not
in need of it. For this reason, the Sharia, through many Prophetic narrations,
sends curses upon the monopolizer of food, as we have already mentioned in
the Book of the Etiquettes of Earning. It is true that he who sells dates for
wheat is excusable for each has its purpose which is different from the other,
but he who sells a Sa' of wheat for another and equal Sa' of wheat is inexcusable
for he is jesting and playing, and this is why there is no need to be prevented. It
is not imagined unless there is disparity between both in the quality, and to be
sure, the owner of the good does not approve to sell his with an equal quantity
of the bad one. But the good might be sold for its twice of the bad. But since

The quarter of the saviors
146
food is essential, and the good is equal to the bad in the origin of the benefit,
and differs from it in the points of blessedness, Sharia cancelled out the
purpose of blessedness in what sustains the life of beings. That is the wisdom
of Sharia that lies behind the prohibition of usury. It belongs to jurisprudence.
That is only one example for the hidden wisdom that lies behind the creation
of currency. So, let the gratitude and ingratitude of the favor be considered
according to it. Anything that is created for a certain wisdom should not be
turned from it; and none does so but he who knows the wisdom, and whoever is
given wisdom has indeed been given much good. But even, the gems of wisdom
could bv no means occur to hearts which are trashes of desires and lusts, and
playgrounds of devils. That is because none remembers but those endued with
sound minds. That is the significance of the statement of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him”: "Had it been for the fact that devils
hover round the hearts of mankind, they would have been able to see the
dominion of the heaven."
Having known that example, you should measure on its basis your
movement and stillness, speech and silence, and in short, all of your deeds and
words: they might be either gratitude or ingratitude and nothing else. Some of
those, according to religious jurisprudence, belong to what is undesirable in
part, and some to what is dangerous in part. But all is dangerous in the sight of
the masters of hearts.
Let me say, for example, that if you clean your private parts with your right
hand after responding to the call of nature, you will have been ungrateful to the
favor of both hands. Allah Almighty created to you both hands, and made one of
them stronger than the other. The stronger (i.e. the right) then deserves to be
more honored and preferred to the weaker. But to prefer the weaker is injustice;
and Allah Almighty enjoins but justice. Then, He Who gave you both hands,
made you in need of doing many works, some of which are noble, like taking the
Mushaf, and some ignoble like removing the filth after responding to the call of
nature. If you take the Mushaf with the left hand, and remove the filth with the
right, you will have then assigned the ignoble to the noble, and the noble to the
ignoble. By so doing, you will deviate from justice.
Similarly, if you spit on your right side or on the direction of Qiblah, or if you
face the Qiblah while responding to the call of nature, you will have been
ungrateful to the favor of Allah concerning the creation of directions and
dimensions of the world. He Almighty created the directions to be the
dimensions of your movement. Then, He divided the directions into what is not
honoured, and what is honoured by His House (the Ka'bah), which He placed in
order to attract your heart towards it, and set firm your body to it as being your
Qiblah during worship. Similarly, your deeds are divided into the noble like the
acts of worship, and the ignoble like responding to the call of nature and spitting.
Thus, if you spit on the direction of Qiblah, you will have been unjust to it, and
ungrateful to the favor of Allah Almighty concerning the Qiblah, with which your
worship is perfect. Likewise, if you put on your footwears, starting with the left,
you will have been unjust. That is because the footwear protects man and thus

Book two: Patience and gratitude

147

man has a fortune in it, and in fortunes, one should begin with what is more
honoured, for that is the justice and fulfillment of wisdom, and the opposite is
injustice and ingratitude to the favor of the footwear and the foot itself.
This is regarded a major sin in the sight of Gnostics, although no more than
an undesirable act according to religious jurisprudents. One of those Gnostics
once collected a great quantity of wheat and started to give it in charity. When he
was asked about that he said: "Once I put on my sandals, and forgetfully started
with the left one. So, I liked to atone it with charity." It is true that the religious
jurisprudent could hardly aggravate the matter in such affairs, for he is poor, and
it is difficult on him to reform the laymen who are close in their degree to cattle,
and dipped in layers of darkness, too deep to describe as offenses in comparison
with those affairs. It is ugly, to say, for example, that he, who drank wine and
took the vessel with his left hand, has committed two transgressions: one is
drinking alcoholic drink, and the other is the taking with the left hand. It is also
ugly to say that he, who sold wine at the time of Adhan on Friday, has indeed
committed two treacheries: one is selling wine and the other is selling at the time
of Adhan on Friday. Likewise, if one responded to the call of nature in the
praying place of the mosque, making the Qiblah on his back, it will be ugly to be
described as having abandoned the etiquettes of responding to the call of nature,
by not making the Qiblah on his right side (in comparison with his doing so in
the praying place of the mosque).
However, all sins are but layers of darkness over each other, in such a way
that some (i.e. the trivial) are hidden by others (i.e. the more significant). The
master, for instance, might punish his slave if the latter used his knife without his
permission. But if he killed by that knife the dearest of his sons, his using it
without permission would not become effective (or significant in comparison
with the killing). In short, all of etiquettes and proprieties observed by the
Prophets and saints in which we have indulged in religious jurisprudence as
regards the laymen is due to that necessity, otherwise, all those undesirable acts
are injustice and ingratitude to the favors of Allah Almighty, and deficiency in the
degrees of closeness of the servant (to Allah Almighty). Some of them negatively
affect the servant as reflected in the reduction of the degree of closeness and
degradation of rank, others turn him entirely from the sphere of closeness, down
to the world of remoteness which is the residence of devils.
In addition, if a man broke a branch from a tree with no dire necessity, he
would be ungrateful to the favors of creating the tree as well as the hand. As
for the hand, it is not created for useless playing in so much as for obedience
(of Allah), and doing all works and acts that help achieve that obedience. As
for trees, Allah Almighty created them, and created for them stalks and
branches, and drove the water to sustain them, and created in them the power
of growth until when they attain maturity, they become of benefit for the
servants. To break a tree then before attaining its maturity with no benefit is
to oppose the purpose of wisdom and deviate from justice. But if there is a
correct purpose from breaking the branch, it will be right, since trees and
animals are made to serve the purposes of men. Both are perishable, and to

The quarter of the saviors
148
consume the lower for the sake of the survival of the higher even for some
time is closer to justice than to lose them all. To this fact Allah Almighty
refers in His statement: " And He has subjected to you, as from Him, all that
is in the heavens and on earth: behold, in that are Signs indeed for those who
reflect." (Al-Jathiyah 13)
i CD

J'i J oj ^

^3 o/yl-lh ^ L.

}

It is true that if he breaks that branch from a tree owned by another, he
will be wrongful, even if there is a dire necessity for that. That is because each
tree could, by no means, satisfy the needs of all servants of Allah Almighty.
But each satisfies the need of certain individual or group. If one takes it up
without preponderance or without its being assigned to him, it will be
injustice. The one to whom it is assigned is he who planted it, by bringing and
then sowing the seed in the ground, driving the water to it, and kept looking
after it until it grew. So, he is more entitled to own it. But if a tree grows in a
dead land with no human help or interference, then, another kind of
assignment should be sought, i.e. the one who preceded to get it, in which
case, the precedent shall have the privilege of precedence. Jusdce then
requires that he should be more entitled to get it.
That preponderance is what the religious jurisprudents call ownership. But
ownership is a figurative expression, for the real ownership belongs to the King
of all kings, to Whom do belong all that is in the heavens and that is on earth.
How should a servant be an owner given that he does not have real ownership
over himself? That is because he is owned by another (i.e. Allah). It is true that all
people are but servants of Allah Almighty, and the earth is the repast of Allah;
and He has given them permission to eat of His repast as much as they need. It is
like the king who sets up a repast for his servants to eat thereof. If one takes a
morsel with his right hand and catches hold of it with his fingers, and then
another servant comes and wants to take it, it will not be possible for him, not
because the morsel has become in his ownership by his taking it with his hand,
for he and his hand are owned by Allah Almighty, but because each morsel could,
by no means, satisfy the need of all servants, and this is why justice requires
assignment by way of preponderance and specification, and taking is a kind of
specification which prevents anyone from taking what is not specified to him.
It is in this context that you should understand the command of Allah
Almighty concerning His servants. For this reason, we say that whoever takes
from the property and wealth of this world what is beyond his need and then
hoards it up, while there are other servants of Allah who are in need of it, he is
indeed wrongful and is one of those who bury gold and silver, and spend them
not in the Way of Allah Almighty. The Way of Allah is to obey Him, and the
usage of property in this world to provide for the sustenance of the people is an
aspect of His obedience, for with wealth, their needs are satisfied. But this is
beyond the limit of juristic fatwas, for the needs are too abstruse to measure, and
the people differ in their feelings of poverty and ways of reception, and the ends
of lifetimes are unknown.
To oblige the laymen to do so is like to oblige the children to adhere to

Book two: Patience and gratitude

149

solemnity, reverence and silence from useless speech. But, as immature, they
could not endure it. So, we did not object to their play and amusement, but
that we make it permissible for them does not mean that play and amusement
are right. Similarly, that we make permissible for the laymen to preserve
property, and spend thereof as much as enables them to fulfill the obligatory
charity, and this is due to the sdnginess to which they are predisposed by
nature, does not mean that it is right. To this fact the Holy Qur'an refers as
shown from the statement of Allah Almighty: " If He were to ask you for all
of them, and press you, you would covetously withhold, and He would bring
out all your ill-feeling." (Muhammad 37)

^ (£23

01 ^

But the perfect right and justice require that none among the servants of
Allah Almighty should take from the property of Allah Almighty more than the
rider's provision. All of Allah's servants are riders and their riding mounts are
their bodies on their journey to the presence of Allah (in the hereafter). Whoever
takes what is beyond his need and then withholds it from another rider who is in
need of it is, indeed, wrongful and unjust, and nonobservant of the purpose of
the wisdom for which the property is created, and ungrateful to the favor of
Allah Almighty on him through the Qur'an and the Messenger "peace be upon
him", reason and all means by which he knew that what is beyond the rider's
provision is harmful to him in the world and the hereafter.
Whoever understands the wisdom of Allah Almighty that lies behind all the
existents is able to undertake the duty of gratitude. But to survey that needs huge
volumes which, therefore, could do but little. However, we have mentioned that
amount in order to prove the truthfulness of the statement of Allah Almighty:
"but few of My servants are grateful!" (Saba' 13)
And the happiness of Iblis the cursed about His statement: " nor will You
find, in most of them, gratitude (for Your mercies)." (Al-A'raf 17)
ft"

**

None understands the meaning of the Holy Verse without knowing all of this,
in addition to so many others, whose survey is beyond the limit of the entire
lifetime. Of course I do not mean the linguistic explanation of the Holy Verse
which is familiar to anyone who is skilled in language.
You may argue: "All that you have mentioned means that Allah Almighty has
wisdom that lies behind all things He created; and that He caused some acts of
servants to perfect that wisdom until it achieves its purpose, and others to hinder
it. That is, every act that agrees with the wisdom and helps it achieve its purpose
is gratitude, and every act that disagrees with it and impedes the causes to reach
their ends is ingratitude. This is understandable. But there is still a problem, i.e.
that the act of servants which is divided into what perfects the wisdom and what
impedes it, is, in itself, produced by Allah Almighty. Then, how should a servant
be grateful once and ungrateful once?"
In reply to that, it should be known to you that the answer of that stems from

The quarter of the saviors
150
a huge current of the science of Disclosure (Mukashafah); and we have referred
to some features thereof. Now, let's express that in brief which is understood by
him who learns the language of birds and rejected by him who knows it not
Allah Almighty, in His Glory and Supremacy, has an attribute from which all the
creation spring, I mean an attribute which is beyond the limit of linguistic
expression. In view of its glory and uniqueness, no linguistic expression in this
world has ever been found to describe it. For this reason, these of language,
failing to refer to it with any linguistic term, fell short of seeing it in the same way
as the sights of bats fail to see sunlight, not because it is cloudy but because of
the weakness of the sights of bats. But those whose sights are opened to perceive
that attribute were forced to borrow from the world of language a term to
designate, even weakly, something of its facts. This term is the 'power'. We thus
dared to use that borrowed term saying:
Allah Almighty has an attribute, i.e. the power from which creation and
invention spring. The creation in existence is divided into many divisions. As
regards their division, another term, for the same necessity we have referred
to above, has been borrowed to designate another attribute, i.e. the 'will*.
However, as well as the term 'power' is short of fathoming the real nature and
fact of the attribute which it designates, the same is true of the term 'will'.
Then, the acts that spring from the power are divided into what succeeds to
achieve the required purpose, i.e. the wisdom, and what is hindered from
achieving the desired purpose. Each of those is related to the attribute of
'will', in view of the distinctive characteristics it has on the basis of which the
division is made. Thus, for such of acts as succeeds to achieve its purpose, the
term 'love' is borrowed, and for what fails to achieve its purpose, the term
'dislike' is borrowed. Both are included in description of the will. But each has
another characteristic which is beyond the description of the terms 'love' and
'dislike'.
Similarly, the servants of Allah, who are among His creation and invention,
are divided into such as doomed, by the eternal will, to be used to hinder the
wisdom of Allah from achieving its purpose, by way of oppression, and directing
causes and means over them, and such as doomed, by eternal will, to be used to
drive His wisdom to achieve its desired goal. Each of both parties then is related
to the will in a particular way. For those used for the wisdom of Allah to be
perfect through them, the term 'pleasure' is borrowed, and for those used to
hinder the wisdom of Allah from achieving its purpose the term 'anger' is
borrowed. On those with whom He grew angry in eternity, an act appears with
which the wisdom of Allah is hindered; and for such the term 'ingratitude' is
borrowed, followed by curse and wrath out of punishment; and on those with
whom He was pleased in eternity, an act with which the wisdom is driven to
achieve its desired goal, and for such the term 'gratitude' is borrowed, followed by
praise and commendation, out of pleasure and approval. The result is that He
Almighty gave beauty and praised for it, and gave punishment and then defaced
and ruined for it
Its example is that a king cleans his dirty servant and removes the dirt

Book two: Patience and gratitude

151
from him and then dresses him in a beauty and smart dress, and once he
completes his adornment he says to him: "O pretty man! How pretty arc you,
and how smart is your dress, and how clean is your face!" the king in reality is
the maker of beauty and the praiser of it at the same time. He is the praiser in
all states in a way as if he praises none but himself, and the servant is only the
apparent object of praise.
As such things were in eternity, and as such goes the sequence of causes and
causers by determination and decree of the Lord of all things, the Causer and
Founder of all causes. All of this is subject to His will, wisdom, true judgement
and decisive command, for which the term 'fate' is borrowed. It is said that it is
but a single (Act), like the twinkling of an eye, if not shorter, from which the
oceans of decreed things have flowed with what was doomed to be; and for the
sequence of those decreed things, as resulting from each other, the term 'Divine
decree' is borrowed. Thus, the term 'fate' describes the single comprehensive
command, and the term 'Divine decree' describes the details of things to happen
perpetually.
It is said that nothing is outside the fate and Divine decree. For this
reason, some servants wondered why the division required those details, and
how justice was observed with such disparity and giving superiority to some
over others. As some failed to fathom the mystery that lies behind this issue,
they could not help abstain from delving into it, and they were told to keep
silent, for " He cannot be questioned for His acts, but they will be questioned
(for theirs)." (Al-Anbiya 23)
The niche of some of them was filled with light, springing from the light of
Allah in the heavens and the earth. Their Oil was first pure, well-nigh luminous,
though fire scarce touched it. But when fire touched it, it flamed in Light upon
Light. The result is that the sides of the dominion of the invisibles shone in
front of them by the light of their Lord therewith they perceived the matters as
they really are.
But they were told to discipline themselves with the etiquettes of Allah
Almighty, and keep silent; and "whenever the Divine decree is mentioned, abstain
from speaking in that, for you are surrounded by people who are weak in sight.
So, go on and uncover not the sunlight to the sights of bats lest you would
contribute in their destruction. So, behave in accordance with the good manners
of Allah Almighty, and descend from the dominion of the invisibles to the world
of visibles, so that the weak would be intimate with you, and get from the
remaining of your light that is rising from behind your veil, in the same way as
bats get from the remaining of the light of sun and the other stars at night,
therewith they live in a way that befits them, and not a complete life of him who
moves in the light of sun."
As such was the beginning and end of that matter. You could not understand
it unless you are fitting for it. If you are fitting for it, your eye would be opened
to see it, and once your eye is opened, you would need not a leader to lead you. It
is true that the blind might be led by another, but when the road becomes so

The quarter of the saviors
152
much narrow, sharper than the sword and thinner than the hair, the bird becomes
just able to fly over it, but not to drag a blind behind him. If it is a water path,
only die skilled swimmer would be able to cross it, but without drawing anyone
behind him. Those are matters proceeding on which in relation to the audience
and majority of laymen is like to proceed on water in comparison with
proceeding on the ground. Although swimming could be learnt, by no means
would walking on water be learnt: but it is acquired by the power of certainty of
faith. For this reason, it was said to the Prophet "peace be upon him": "It is said
that Jesus "peace be upon him" walked on the water." On that he said: "If he
advanced in certainty (of faith) more, he would have been able to walk on the
air."
Those are but references and hints to what is intended by love and dislike,
pleasure and displeasure, gratitude and ingratitude. Nothing more thereof is
fitting for the science of practical religion. Allah Almighty set for an example
to illustrate the matter to the minds of people, when He said that He did not
create men and jinn but to worship Him. Thus, their worship of Him was the
final wisdom from creating them. Then, He told that He has two servants: He
loves one of them called Gabriel, the Holy Spirit, the Honest. He is loved,
obeyed, trustworthy and strong. He dislikes the other called Iblis, i.e. the
cursed who is given respite to the Day of Judgement. Then, He turned the
matter of guiding to Gabriel as shown from His statement: " Say, the Holy
Spirit has brought the revelation from your Lord in Truth, in order to
strengthen those who believe, and as a Guide and Glad Tidings to Muslims."
(An-Nahl 102)
4

j

C-lLj

-till

And: "by His Command does He send the spirit (of inspiration) to any of His
servants He pleases, that it may warn (men) of the Day of Mutual Meeting."
(Gha6rl5)

He turned the temptation and misleading to Iblis as shown from His
statement: "Thus misleading others from Allah's Path." (Az-Zumar 8)
4

fol Jjl $ ^

The temptation is to hinder the servants from attaining the end of
wisdom. Consider then how temptation is attributed to the servant with
whom He grew angry, and guidance, which is the way to attain the end, to the
servant whom He loved.
There is an example for that from the ordinary life. If a king needs somebody
to give him drink and another to cup him, clean the house and remove the dirt
from it; and at the same time he has only two servants: the more ugly of them
would be given the assignment of cupping and cleaning the house, whereas the
better and dearer of them to himself would be given the assignment of providing
him with drink. You should not attribute any of acts to yourself, for it is He Who
causes you to assign die hateful act to the hateful person, and the lovable act to

153
Book two: Patience and gratitude
the lovable person, in order to perfect justice. His justice sometimes is done by
things in which you have no share, and sometimes through yourself, for you are
but one of His acts. Your causes, power, knowledge, work, and all things you do
are His act which He arranged in you jusdy in a way that from which
proportionate acts and works spring. But since you see but yourself, you think,
though falsely, that what appears on you in the world of visibles has no reason
from the dominion of invisibles; and this is why you attribute the act to yourself.
Your example is like the child who watches at night the play of a sorcerer,
who brings out pictures from behind a screen, dancing, crying and moving. They
are composed of lifeless and motionless pieces of cloth, that are moved by thin
and fine threads which are not visible in the darkness of night, whose heads are in
the hand of the sorcerer, who is hidden from the sights of children. The children
rejoice and wonder, thinking those pieces of cloth dance and move by
themselves, unlike the radonal mature who know that they are moved and do not
move by themselves. But perhaps they do not know the details and even those
who know some of its details does not know it completely as the sorcerer himself
who manages and does it knows it.
The same is true of the children among the inhabitants of this world. All the
people are children in comparison with the learned. They look at those persons
and think that they move by themselves, thereupon they turn the movement to
them, unlike the learned who know that they are moved and do not move by
themselves. But they might not know how they are moved. This is the case of the
majority of learned. But the Gnosdcs and those well-established in knowledge
perceived with their sharp insights those spider threads, if not finer, hanging
down from the sky with their ends clinging to the persons on earth, and in view
of their minuteness, they are not perceived by the apparent sights. Then, in a later
stage, they perceived the heads of those threads having their handles in the hands
of angels who move the heavens. They also watched the angels of heaven
directing themselves to the carriers of the Throne (of Authority), in expectation
of such of commands as descend on them from the Presence of the Lord, in
order not to disobey the command of Allah, and do what they are commanded to
do. Those contemplations are referred to in the Qur'an by His saying: " And in
heaven is your Sustenance, as (also) that which you are promised." (Adh-Dhariyat
22)

i (JfJo43 }
As for the angels' expectation of the command of Allah Almighty, it is
referred to in the following statement: "Allah is He Who created seven
Firmaments and of the earth a similar number. Through the midst of them
(all) descends His Command: that you may know that Allah has power over
all things, and that Allah comprehends all things in (His) Knowledge." (AtTalaq 12)

jr

ai o? 1 p&
ad

>vr

u«vi
^^

<j^

®>

yj*

The interpretation of those matters is known only by Allah Almighty, and

The quarter of the saviors
154
those well-established in knowledge (are caused by Allah to know that). Ibn
Abbas "Allah be pleased with them" referred to the specialty of these wellestablished in knowledge in sciences that are beyond the reach of the minds of
the ordinary people. He recited the statement of Allah Almighty: " Through the
midst of them (all) descends His Command..." and then commented: "Were I to
mention to you all 1 know about the meaning of this statement, you would surely
stone me to death (or "you would ascribe me to disbelief', according to another
version)." At that point, let’s be satisfied with what we have mentioned, by which
we have transcended the real nature of the science of practical religion to the
science of Disclosure.
Let's return to the purposes of gratitude. If the real nature of gratitude in the
end is to use a servant to perfect the wisdom of Allah Almighty, the most
thankful among the servants is the dearest to Allah Almighty, and the nearest to
Him; and the nearest to Allah are the angels, who are classified according to
different ranks, and everyone of them has a specific station, the nearest among
them is Israfil "peace be upon him". Their high rank and nearness are due to their
honor and piety. With them, Allah Almighty communicated the Prophets "peace
be upon them", the noblest of creatures on the surface of the earth. The
Prophets are good in themselves. With them, Allah Almighty guided the people,
and perfected His wisdom. The one of the highest rank among them is our
Prophet Muhammad "peace be upon him", with whom Allah completed the
religion, and concluded the Prophets.
Following them are the religious and learned scholars, the heirs of Prophets
(in knowledge). They are righteous in themselves. With them Allah Almighty
reformed the people. The degree of each of them is determined by the extent of
reforming himself and the people round him. Following them are the just rulers
for they reformed the world of people with their justice in the same way as
religious scholars reformed their religion. Because religion, kingship and ruling
were combined to our Prophet Muhammad "peace be upon him", he was the
best of all the Prophets, with him, Allah completed the rightness of their
religion and world; and sword and kingship were given to none other than him
from among the Prophets, following learned scholars and just rulers are the
righteous among the people who made right their religion as well as their own
selves only, thereupon the wisdom of Allah Almighty was not perfect through
inasmuch as in them. Apart from those mentioned above, all are rabble laymen.
It should be known to you that with the ruler, the religion is established. So,
he should not be scorned, even if he is a wrongful wicked. According to Amr Ibn
Al-As: "An oppressive ruler is better than a ceaseless affliction." It is narrated on
the authority of Umm Salamah "Allah be pleased with her", the wife of The
Prophet that The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: “In the near future some commanders will be appointed as rulers over you,
and you will approve their good deeds and disapprove of their bad deeds. They
would do mischief, but what Allah makes right at their hands would be more. If
they do good, they would receive reward, and gratitude would be due on you; and
if they do evil, they would incur sin upon themselves, and patience would

Book two: Patience and gratitude ----------------------------------155
become due on you." (Muslim, with a slight variation of wording).
According to Sahl: "Whoever denies his imam, i.e. the ruler, is an atheist;
and whomever the imam invites and does not respond to his invitation is a
religious innovator; and whoever comes to the ruler without invitation is an
ignorant." Once he was asked: "Who among the people is the best?" he said:
"The ruler." It was said: "We think that the ruler is the worst of people." On
that he said: "Be quiet! Indeed, Allah Almighty looks at him twice per day: one
to the safety of the property of Muslims and the other to the safety of their
persons. Once (he achieves both) He Almighty considers his scroll and then
forgives for him his sins." He used to say: "The pieces of black wood hung at
the gates of their houses are better than seventy storytellers relating
narrations."

SECOND PILLAR
THE OBJECT OF GRATITUDE
It discusses the real nature, and the general and particular divisions of favor,
given that all favors of Allah upon His servants are beyond calculation, as
confirmed by Allah Almighty: " But if you count the favours of Allah, never will
you be able to number them. Verily, man is given up to injustice and ingratitude."
(Ibrahim 34)

So, we are going to present universal issues as laws in learning the favors, and
follow them with some details; and it is Allah who grants success.

Explication Of Real Nature And Divisions Of Favor
It should be known to you that every good, pleasure and happiness, if not
every desired thing is called favor. But the real favor is the hereafter happiness.
Given anything else the name of happiness is either wrong or figurative, like
giving the name of favor to the worldly happiness which assists not for the
hereafter: that is evident error. That a particular thing is given the name of favor
might be true, but to give the name of favor to the hereafter happiness is more
truthful. Every means that helps or causes one to attain the hereafter happiness,
either through one or more ways, might be truly named a favor, for it leads to the
real favor. Let us then divide the helpful means and pleasures called favor into
many kinds of division and explain them as follows:
The first division is that all things in relation with us are divided into what is
beneficial in both the world and the hereafter, like knowledge and good manners;
what is harmful in both the world and the hereafter like ignorance and bad
manners; what is beneficial at the moment, i.e. in this world, and harmful in the
hereafter, like taking the pleasure from following the desires and appetites; and
what is harmful and painful at the moment and beneficial in the hereafter, like
curbing desires and opposing the self. What is beneficial at the moment and in
the future is the real favor, with verification, like knowledge and good manners;
and what is harmful in both is the real disfavor with verification, like ignorance
and bad manners.
What is beneficial at the moment and harmful in the future is an evident

The quarter of the saviors
156
disfavor in the sight of those endued with deep insight and intelligence, although
a favor in die sight of die ignorant foolish. Its example is like a hungry person
who finds poisoned honey: if he is ignorant of its reality, he would think it a
favor; and if he learns its reality, he would know that it is a disfavor driven to
him. What is harmful at the moment and beneficial in the future is a favor in the
sight of the intelligent, though a disfavor in the sight of the ignorant. Its example
is like die medicine of presendy bitter sore taste, which is to cure from the
ailment in the future. If the ignorant child is obliged to drink it, he would think it
a disfavor; whereas the intelligent regards it a favor, and becomes under
obligation to him who gives it to him.
That is why the mother, for instance, prevents her child from getting cupped,
unlike the fadier who invites him to it. That is because the father, due to his
perfect mind, looks over the good consequence, whereas the mother, due to her
excessive emotion and deficiency in mind, sees only the harm at the moment, and
the child, due to his ignorance, inclines to appreciate his mother and not his
father, and further gets comforted with her pity and considers the father his
enemy. But were he to be discerning, he would surely know that his mother is an
enemy to him disguised in the form of a friend, for preventing him from cupping
would lead him to more painful ailments . However, the ignorant friend is dearer
to oneself than the intelligent enemy. Every one is the friend of himself, but an
ignorant friend. For this reason, it controls him more than an enemy might do
with him.
A second division: It should be known to you that all means and ways in
this world are mixed in a way that their good could hardly be distinguishable
from their evil. Good could hardly exist in pureness separated from evil.
Consider the property, family, children, kinship, majesty, and all means and ways
in general. But they could be divided into things whose benefit is more than
harm, like the sufficient amount of money and majesty, and all the other means;
and things whose harm is more than benefit in relation with the majority of
people like much property and large majesty; and things in which benefit and
harm are equal, and those differ by the difference of persons: it may be that a
righteous man gets benefit from the lawful property and if it is too much, he
would spend it in the Way of Allah and on the sides of good, in which case such
property is a favor for him; and another man might harm himself even with the
little, by making many complaints to his Lord about his displeasure, asking Him
for more, in which case, it is a disfavor for him.
A third division: It should be known to you that the good things are divided,
by another consideration, into what is preferred for itself only, what is preferred
for another only, and what is preferred for itself as well as for another thing.
An example for what is preferred for itself only is the pleasure of looking
at the Countenance of Allah Most Generous, and the happiness of meeting
Him, or in general, the never-ending happiness of the hereafter: it is not
sought in order to have access therewith to another end beyond it. Nay! It is
sought only for itself.
An example of the second, which is intended for another thing only, and it is

Book two: Patience and gratitude
157
not intended in itself, is like the Dirhams and Dinars: if the need could be
fulfilled without them, surely, they would have become in the same position of
the gravel on the ground. But since they are a means to get the pleasures, they
have become dear to the ignorant in themselves, to the extent that they came to
collect and hoard them, and exchange both on usury basis, thinking currency to
be intended in its own self. The example of those ignorant is like him who loves a
person, and because of him, he loves his messenger who connects between them,
and in the midst of loving the messenger, he forgets gradually his love for the
original beloved, with the result that he turns away from him along his lifetime,
and rather engages in taking care of the messenger; and that is, to be sure, the
utmost ignorance and error.
The third is that which is intended for itself as well as for another thing. Its
example is like the health and safety. They are intended for one to be able
therewith to remember (Allah) and meditate (His signs), which leads in the end to
the meeting with Allah Almighty in the hereafter. But at the same time, they also
are intended for their own selves. Man, even if he could dispense with the thing
for which the safety is sought, seeks safety in its being safety.
In short, what is preferred for itself only is the real good and favor with
verification. What is preferred for itself and for another thing is also a favor, but
less in rank than the former. But as for what is preferred only for another thing,
like Dinars and Dirhams, they are not described as a favor as being concrete
bodies, although, as being a means to get things and fulfill needs, a favor but for
him who wants a thing which could not be achieved without them. If his purpose
is knowledge and worship, and he has the amount of money which, by a hair's
breadth, suffices the necessities of his life, then, gold and stones become equal in
his sight, that it is the same to him to possess or lose them. But even, their
existence might divert him from worship and meditation, in which case they
become a disfavor and not a favor for him.
A fourth division: It should be known to you that the good things, by
another consideration, are divided into the beneficial, pleasant and beautiful. The
pleasant is that with which one gets comforted at once. The beneficial is that
which benefits in the future. The beautiful is that which is regarded good in all
states. Likewise, evils are divided into the harmful, ugly and painful. Each of both
divisions are of two categories: either absolute or restricted. The absolute is that
which combines the three characteristics like, in the case of the good things,
knowledge and wisdom: it is beneficial, pleasant and beautiful in the sight of
those endued with knowledge and wisdom; or like, in the case of evil things,
ignorance, which is harmful, ugly and painful.
That is because the ignorant feels the pain of ignorance once he knows that
he is ignorant, by seeing the other as knowledgeable, and himself as ignorant,
thereby he perceives the pain of shortage, which arouses in him the pleasant
desire for knowledge. But it may be that his envy, arrogance and physical desires
impede him from learning, leaving him strained between two opposites, thereby
his pain worsens grievously: If he leaves learning, he would be pained by
ignorance and perception of shortage; and if he engages in learning, he would be

■

The quarter of the saviors
158
pained by leaving his physical desires or by leaving arrogance for the humiliadon
of learning. Such man continues to suffer unrelenting punishment.
The other kind is that which implies some and not all the characteristics,
like the painful beneficial. Its example is like cutting off the impaired finger
from the sound body. Another is the ugly beneficial like foolishness, which is,
though being ugly, beneficial in many cases. It is said: "Relieved has he been
who has no mind." That is because he thinks not about the consequence,
thereupon he gets comforted at the moment until it is time for his death.
Something might be beneficial in part and harmful in part, like throwing the
money into the sea when there is fear of sinking: it is harmful in relation with
the money, and beneficial for the person himself who might be saved. The
beneficial is of two kinds: One is the necessary like faith and good manners as
means to drive one to the hereafter happiness. By both 1 refer to knowledge
and work, without which faith is impossible. The other is unnecessary, like the
usage of oxymel as a medicine for bile, which might be treated by anything
instead.
A fifth division: It should be known to you that the favor refers to every
pleasant thing. The pleasures in relation with man as being characterized by them
or shares the other creatures in them, are of three kinds: Mental, physical in
which he shares some animals, and physical in which he shares all animals.
The first is the mental, like the pleasure of knowledge and wisdom, which are
not pleasant to seeing, hearing, smelling, touching and tasting, nor are they to
belly and sex. They are pleasant only to the heart for it is characterized by a
particular quality referred to as mind. This pleasure, though being the noblest, is
the scarcest. Its scarcity is due to the fact that knowledge is not pleasant but to a
learned scholar, as well as wisdom but to a wise; and how scarce are the men
endued with knowledge and wisdom, and how many are those who claim their
qualities and imitate their attributes! Its honor is due to the fact that it is inherent
and never vanishes in the world and the hereafter, and permanent of which one
never gets bored. Food, once satiates the hungry, becomes boring, and the same
is true of the sexual desire. But both knowledge and wisdom are unimaginable to
be tedious or wearisome.
If one has the ability to do the noble thing which is permanent and neverending and then is pleased with the despicable which is perishable, has, to be
sure, a mental disorder, and is, due to his wretchedness, deprived of all good. The
least thing to be said about it is that knowledge needs not any assistants or
guardians, unlike wealth: knowledge safeguards you while you safeguard wealth.
Knowledge increases by spending, while wealth decreases by spending. The
wealth is apt to be stolen, as well as the office to be taken, unlike knowledge, to
which the hands of thieves never stretch, nor could it be taken. The result is that
the possessor of knowledge is always in safety and security, unlike the owner of
wealth or authority who always lives in unrest and fear. Furthermore, knowledge
is always beneficial, pleasant and beautiful in all states, unlike wealth which
sometimes leads to destruction and sometimes to salvation. For this reason, Allah
Almighty dispraised the wealth many times, and described it as good many times

:
I

I

Book two: Patience and gratitude
159
in the Qur'an.
That most people are short of perceiving the pleasure of knowledge is due to
their lack of taste, for whoever does not taste a thing is ignorant of it, and has no
longing for getting it, for longing always ensues from taste; or due to their
corrupt mood and heart disease as a result of following their desires and lusts,
like the ill person who does not perceive the sweetness of honey and feels it bitter
in his mouth; or due to the shortage of intelligence, as the quality with which they
could get pleasure from knowledge has not yet been created in them, like the
infant who could not perceive the pleasure of honey or the flesh of birds, for he
still takes pleasure in milk only, given that he relishes not both does not mean
that honey and flesh of birds are not pleasant, or that he finds agreeable the milk
means that it is the most pleasant of edible things.
Thus, those who are short of perceiving the pleasure of knowledge and
wisdom are three kinds: he whose heart never lives like the child; he whose heart
dies after life by following desires and lusts; and he who falls ill because of
following appetites. Thus, when Allah Almighty says: "In their hearts is a disease;
and Allah has increased their disease" (Al-Baqarah 10)

40

4}

He refers to the disease of mind. His statement " That it may give admonition
to any (who are) alive" (Ya Sin 70)

40

^

Refers to those whose hearts never live. To be sure, every living in person
and dead in heart is regarded among the dead in the Sight of Allah Almighty,
though living in the sight of the ignorant. This is why the martyrs are living
with their Lord, given their sustenance regularly, regardless of their being dead
in person.
The second pleasure is that in which man shares some and not all animals,
like the pleasure of authority, supremacy and primacy. The lion, tiger and some
other animals share man in that pleasure.
The third is the pleasure in which man shares all animals, i.e. the pleasure of
belly and sex. It is the most existing although the most despicable. This is why it
is common to all animals, including even the smallest larva. If one rises up a
degree, the pleasure of authority and supremacy clings to him in general, and to
the heedless and ignorant among men in particular, and a higher degree, he could
taste the pleasure of knowledge and wisdom, particularly the knowledge of Allah
Almighty, and the knowledge of His attributes and acts; and that is the grade of
the sincere affirmers of truth. It is not attained unless the love of authority comes
out of the heart. Indeed, the love of authority is the last to come out of the heads
after which one turns to be of the sincere affirmers of truth. As for the desires of
belly and sex it is easy upon the righteous to curb. But only the sincere affirmers
of truth are able to suppress the greed for authority. But to remove the desire of
authority entirely is likely beyond the capacity of human beings. It is true that the
gnosis of Allah and His attributes and acts might prevail in many states, but not
in all states, and it does not remain forever. Some periods of weakness befall the

The quarter of the saviors
160
heart during which the self returns to the normal human characteristics, including
such desire, but it is not too strong to entice the heart to leave moderation.
At that point, hearts are divided into four categories: A first heart loves none
but Allah Almighty, and gets comforted only with advance in gnosis of and
meditation in Him. A second heart does not know the significance of the
pleasure of the gnosis of, and intimacy with Allah Almighty: But it gets its
pleasure in majesty, authority, wealth and all physical desires. A third heart is that
which, for the most part of its states, takes pleasure in gnosis of, intimacy with
and meditation in Allah Almighty. But in some states, the normal human desires
might befall it. Finally, a fourth heart is that which, for the most part of its states,
takes pleasure in normal human desires, and in some states, the pleasure of
knowledge might befall him.
As for the first, if it is possible, it is very unlikely. The second is prevailing in
the world. As for the third and the fourth, they exist rarely but not seldom. They
vary in muchness and littleness by the difference of ages and times. The closer we
are in time to the ages of Prophets, the greater in number they are; and the
farther we are from the time of Prophets, the less in number they turn to be and
so forth until the establishment of the Day of Judgement, where Allah would
accomplish a matter already enacted. Its rareness at that time is suitable for it will
be the commencement of the dominion of the hereafter, and as the dominion in
general is rare, the kings should subsequendy be rare too. As well as the excellent
in beauty and dominion are very rare, while the normal who are below them
represent the majority, the same is true of the dominion of the hereafter, for the
world is but a mirror of the hereafter as being the world of visibles, and the
hereafter the dominion of invisibles, and the world of visibles always follows the
dominion of invisibles just as the image in the mirror follows the picture of the
beholder. Although the image in the mirror ranks second in existence, it is the
first you see, for you do not see yourself unless you see first your image in the
mirror, therewith you recognize yourself.
In other words, the heart that is the second to exist is the first to recognize,
and the latter to exist is the earlier to recognize and so on. This is a reversion. But
to be sure, both reversion and overturn are necessity in this world (of visibles).
The world of visibles imitates the dominion of invisibles. Some people, upon
whom it is made easy to look at that world by consideration, do not see a thing in
the world of visibles but that they cross therewith to the dominion of the
invisibles. This is commanded by Allah in His statement: "Take warning, then, O
you with eyes (to see)!" (Al-Hashr 2)

i

JIjlsS

^

Others have their insight blind thereupon they do not receive admonition nor
warning, and rather are constrained in this narrow world of visibles, and their
prison would be opened but to the gates of the fire of Hell. Although this prison
is full of fire which mounts right to the hearts, but there is a veil between such
men and perception of its pain; and once this veil is removed by death, its pain
soon becomes perceptible.
In reference to that, Allah Almighty revealed the truth on the tongue of some

Book two: Patience and gratitude

161
people who said: "Both Paradise and Hell are created. But Hell is once perceived
by a perception called ' certainty of mind’, and once by a percepdon called '
certainty of sight'." But the certainty of sight would happen only in the hereafter.
The certainty of mind might be in this world but for those who have fulfilled
their fortune of the light of certainty. For this reason, Allah Almighty says: " Nay,
were you to know with certainty of mind, (you would beware!) You shall certainly
see Hell-fire!" i.e. in the world "Again, you shall see it with certainty of sight!" i.e.
in the hereafter. (At-Takathur 5-7)
4

{^)

o

jJ

^

Thus it is clear that the heart to be fitting for the dominion of the hereafter is
very rare, like the person to be fitting for the kingdom of this world.
A sixth division: It combines all kinds of favor. It should be known to you
that a favor might be sought as being an end in itself, or as being a means to
achieve another end. What is an end in itself is the permanent happiness of the
hereafter. It has four characteristics: never-ending permanence; pleasure in which
there is no grief; knowledge with which there is no ignorance; and richness after
which there is no poverty. That is the real favor about which the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "There is no real living but
that of the hereafter." He said so during the time of hardship to console himself
and the people, i.e. during digging the trench, (both sheikhs on the authority of
Anas). But he said the same once again at the time of prosperity, to forbid the
soul to rely on the pleasure of this world, i.e. when the people surrounded him
during the farewell Hajj. (Ash-Shafi'i and Al-Hakim). A man said (by way of
supplication): "O Allah! I ask you the perfection of favor." The Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" asked him: "Do you know the
perfection of favor?" the man answered in the negative, thereupon he said: "The
perfection of favor is to enter Paradise." (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of
Mu'adh).
As for the means, they are divided into the nearest, like the merits of the
self, and then the next of nearness like the merits of body, and then the next
which transcends the body to other things, like means and ways attached to
the body such as property, family and clan, and those which combines the
means outside and inside the self, like guidance and success. Those then are
four categories:
The first pertains to the spiritual merits, which return in the end to faith and
good manners. Faith is divided into the science of disclosure (Mukashafah), i.e.
the gnosis of Allah Almighty, His attributes and acts, His angels, Messengers and
Books; and the sciences of practical religion (Mu'amalah). As for the good
manners, they are also divided into two: the abandonment of desires and anger,
and this is called chastity. One should observe justice in refraining from and
fulfillment of desires, in a way that makes him follow a middle course between
absolute abstention and absolute fulfillment. Thus his abstention and fulfillment
become subject to the just balance revealed by Allah Almighty on the tongue of
His Messenger "peace be upon him", as shown from His statement: In order
that you may not transgress (due) balance. So establish weight with justice and fall

1

162
not short in the balance." (Ar-Rahman 8-9)

4O

^3

The quarter of the saviors

*3 (£f5 o|/s*h <4 '3^-* ^^

So, whoever gets himself castrated in order to abstain from the sexual desire,
or abandons marriage given his financial and physical capability, or whoever
refrains from eating until he weakens even to practice his acts of worship, has,
indeed, fallen short in the balance. Similarly, whoever is involved in fulfillment of
the desires of belly and sex has indeed transgressed the due balance. Justice
requires to make his balance due, neither transgressing nor falling short; and it is
only with this that both scales of balance become just. The merits of the self
which draw one near to Allah are then four: the science of Disclosure, the science
of practical religion, chastity and justice.
But more often, this is not achieved without the second category, i.e. the
physical merits, and they are four: health, power, beauty and long life. But those
four could hardly be made easy without the third category, i.e. the favors that are
external but surrounding the body, and they are also four: property, family,
majesty and clan. But neither the physical merits nor the outside merits could
avail without the fourth category, i.e. that which matches them and what befits
them of the spiritual merits, and they are four: Allah's guidance, direction, success
and support.
Those then are sixteen favors divided into four categories, and each
consisting of four. They always need each other, and that need might be essential
or beneficial. An example of the essential need is the need of the hereafter
happiness for faith and good manners. There is no way to have access to the
hereafter happiness without both. None has more than the fruits of his endeavor,
as well as none shall have of the hereafter but the provisions he takes from this
world. Similarly, the need of the self-favors which helps man acquire those
sciences and improve manners for such physical favors as health is essential. An
example of the beneficial need is the need of the self-favors and the physical
favors for such outside favors as wealth, honor and family. If those are absent,
perhaps it might lead to disorder in some inside favors.
You may ask: "What is the need of the way to the hereafter for the external
favors like wealth, family majesty and clan?" in reply to that, it should be known
to you that those external favors are like the wing or the instrument which
facilitates the achievement of the purpose. As for wealth, the poor who seeks to
obtain knowledge and perfection, without having sufficient money to help him
do so is like him who goes to the war without a missile, or like a falcon which
chases without a wing. For this reason, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said: "How good wealth is that for the good man!"
(Ahmad, Abu Ya'li and At-Tabarani on the authority of Amr Ibn Al-As). the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "What
a good wealth is to assist one fear Allah (and safeguard himself from His
punishment)!" (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of Jabir).
W^iy not since he who is deprived of wealth consumes the most part of his
time in gaining sustenance, and securing clothes and residence, in addition to the
other necessities of living? Furthermore, he is exposed to such of harmful things

163
Book two: Patience and gratitude
as divert him from celebradon (of Allah) and meditadon (of His signs), which
could hardly be averted without the missile of wealth. Additionally, the shortage
of wealth deprives one of performing Hajj, giving in charity, and spending in
what is good. One of the sages was asked about the blessing, thereupon he said:
"Richness. Indeed, I have seen diat the poor could not have a real living." He was
asked to give more thereupon he said: "Security. Indeed, I have seen that the
fearful could not have a real living." He was asked to give more and he said:
"Health. Indeed, I have seen that the weak and sick could have no real living." He
was asked to give more and he said: "Youth. Indeed, I have seen that the old aged
could have no real living." What he referred to belongs to the blessing of the
world, but inasmuch as it helps one for the hereafter, it is a favor. For this reason,
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "He, upon
whom morning comes and he is health, secure in himself, and has the sustenance
of his day, seems as if the entire world has been owned by him." (At-Tirmidhi
and Ibn Majah on the authority of Ubaidullah Ibn Mihsan Al-Ansari).
As for the family and good offspring, the need for them is not hidden. For
this reason, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "How good person is the righteous wife to help (her husband) in
religion." Concerning the offspring, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said: "If mankind dies, his deed would cease except
in regard with three things: ...and a good son/daughter to invoke good upon
him." (Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah). We have made a mention
of the merits of the wife and children in the Book of Marriage.
As for kinship, the more a man has children and relatives, the more they
become like his eyes and hands to facilitate for him a lot of things in the world
which help him in his religion, and were he to be alone, he would spend long
time to facilitate them. All what disengages your heart from the worldly
necessities helps you in the religion, and becomes a favor for you.
As for honor and majesty, with them man averts humiliation and injustice
from himself. Almost no Muslim could dispense with any of both, for he is
surrounded from all sides by an enemy to harm him, and a wrongdoer to distract
his knowledge, work and free time, and engage his heart, which is his main
capital. But by honor and majesty, those occupants are averted. For this reason, it
is said: "Religion and power of authority are twins." In confirmation of that,
Allah Almighty said: " And did not Allah check one set of people by means of
another, the earth would indeed be full of mischief: but Allah is full of bounty to
all the worlds." (Al-Baqarah 251)

There is no meaning for majesty but to have possession of hearts, as well as
there is no meaning for richness but to have possession of Dirhams and Dinars,
and by virtue of possessing money, masters of hearts are subjugated to defend
him. As well as one needs a roof to protect him against rain, a cloak to protect
him against cold, a dog to protect his cattle and sheep against the wolf, one also
needs somebody therewith to avert evil from himself.
It is with that purpose that the Prophets "peace be upon them" who had no

The quarter of the saviors
164
power of authority sought the support of those endued with authority among the
people, and so do the religious scholars, not with the intention to get from their
treasures, and increase their number in this world by following them. Think not
that the favor of Allah Almighty on the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" as He supported him, perfected for him his religion, made
him victorious over all his enemies, and planted his love in the hearts of people,
until his honor and majesty became far-reaching, was less than His favor on him
"peace be upon him" when he was exposed to harm until he was forced to
emigrate.
You may ask: "Are die honor of the clan and the good ancestry of the family
among die favors?" I answer in the affirmative. For this reason, the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The imams (rulers) should
be from Quraish." (An-Nasa'i and Al-Hakim on the authority of Anas). The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was the most
honored in ancestry among all sons of Adam "peace be upon him". The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "Select
for your (children to be produced from your) sperm-drops the equivalent (to you
in religion)." (Ibn Majah on the authority of A'ishah). The Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "Beware of the green plant
that grows amidst the dunghill." They asked: "What is the green plant which
grows amidst the dunghill O Messenger of Allah?" He "peace be upon him" said:
"The pretty woman who grows up in a bad family." That is also one of the
favors. But I do not mean by it the belonging to the wrongdoers, or the lovers
and masters of this world, but I mean the belonging to the family tree of the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" as well as to the
righteous religious scholars and pious men whose work and knowledge are good.
You may ask: "What is intended by the physical merits?" Let me say that it is
not hidden that there is a dire need for health, power and long life, without which
both knowledge and work could hardly be obtained. For this reason, the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The best of
happiness is the long life to be spent in obedience of Allah Almighty." (AtTirmidhi on the authority of Abu Bakrah, but with variation in wording). But
only the fourth among them, i.e. the beauty is regarded with slightness. It is said
that suffices for one to have his body sound and flawless of the ailments which
divert one from doing good.
By my life, beauty, though of little benefit, is one of the good things. Its
benefit in this world is self-evident. As for the hereafter, its benefit is due to two
points of view:
The first is that the ugly is dispraised and loathsome, whereas the beautiful is
nearer to the hearts, and his needs are closer to be responded to by others. From
this perspective, it is a wing, like wealth and majesty, that conveys to the purpose.
That is because it is a kind of power therewith the good-looking person could
achieve things that is beyond the power of the bad-looking. To be sure, what
helps one achieve the needs of this world is considered useful in accomplishing
the hereafter needs.
The other point is that beauty, more often, indicates to the merit of the soul,

165
Book two: Patience and gratitude
for the light of the soul, once it rises perfectly, is reflected on the face. Both
appearance and essence are frequendy inherent. For this reason, the
physiognomists often rely on the physical appearance as indicator to the good
manners. They say: "Both face and eye are a mirror of the inner self." The traces
of anger, grief and pleasure always appear on the face. It is also said: "The
cheerfulness of the face is the tide of what is lurking in the self." It is further said:
"Nothing ugly exists in the earth but that its face is the prettiest of it." Once, AlMa'mun spectated the army and behold! An ugly man was shown to him and
when he asked him about himself, he found out that he was mute, thereupon he
cancelled his military enrollment. In his justification of that he said: "When the
soul rises with its light on the appearance, it makes it bright, and if it does in the
soul, it seems in the form of eloquence; and this man has neither a good
appearance, nor a good soul."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Seek good with those of bright faces." (Ibn Hibban and Al-Baihaqi on the
authority of Ibn Umar). Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: "If you send a
messenger, seek a person of lovely face and good name." according to many
religious jurisprudents: "If the praying men are equal in rank, then, the most
good-looking among them are preferable to lead the prayer." In confirmation of
the importance of beauty, Allah Almighty said (about Talut): "Allah has chosen
him above you, and has gifted him abundantly with knowledge and bodily
prowess: Allah grants His authority to whom He pleases." (Al-Baqarah 247)
fA JrszX*
4l)lj
lj >*-hJl
^
Alljay?Tkill
^
4 (@) * Uso
Of course we do not mean by beauty what arouses sexual desire, for this
belongs to femininity. But we mean the high straight stature with moderation of
flesh and proportion of organs and facial features so that people would not detest
looking at him.
But you may argue: "You have included wealth, good ancestry, majesty,
family and offspring among the favors, although wealth and majesty in
particular are dispraised by Allah Almighty, as well as by the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him", and the religious scholars.
Allah Almighty said in this respect: " O you who believe! Truly, among your
wives and your children are (some that are) enemies to yourselves: so beware
of them!" (At-Taghabun 14)

4
IjAp
q*
^
^
And: "And know you that your possessions and your progeny are but a trial;
and that it is Allah with whom lies your highest reward." (Al-Anfal 28)

1*^13 ^
Ali "Allah be pleased with him" said in dispraising the ancestry: "No doubt,
the people are the sons of (their work)that they do well, and the value of every
man is (determined by the work) that he does well." It is said: "The man is
(valuable) by himself and not by virtue of his father." Then, how should those be
considered favors given that they are dispraised under Sharia?"

166

The quarter of the saviors

In reply to that, it should be known to you that whoever depends in obtaining
sciences only on the transmitted words that are interpreted (according to
inclinations) and the generalizations which he particularizes should inevitably go
astray, as long as he is not guided by the light of Allah Almighty to perceive
sciences as they are in reality, and then construe the transmitted texts according
to what seems to him from them, once by interpretation and once by
particularization. Those favors help one accomplish the affairs of the hereafter,
and there is no way to deny that. But at the same time, they might be a source of
temptations and risks. The example of the wealth is like a female-snake which has
harmful poison and beneficial medicine. If it is taken by the snake charmer who
knows well how to avoid its harmful poison and the way to extract its beneficial
medicine, it will be a favor for him, and if the heedless gets it, it will be a disfavor
on him. It is also like the sea that is full of variety of gems and pearls underneath
its water. If the one who sails in the sea is skilled in swimming, diving and
avoiding its destructives, he will be able to attain its favors and pleasures. But if
the one who plunges into it is an ignorant and heedless of that, he will be
destroyed.
This is why Allah Almighty praised wealth and named it 'good', and the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" praised it when he
said: "What a good wealth is to aid one to fear Allah Almighty (and safeguard
himself from His punishment)!" similarly, Allah Almighty praised majesty and
honor when He conferred His favor upon His Messenger "peace be upon him"
and made his religion prevail over all religions, and endeared him to the people,
and made him loveable to their hearts. All this was by virtue of majesty. But the
texts transmitted in praising it are little in comparison with those transmitted in
dispraising majesty and wealth.

=
■

;

Furthermore, wherever showing off is dispraised, majesty is dispraised with it,
for the purpose of showing off is to attract the hearts, and the significance of
majesty is to have possession of hearts. Both majesty and wealth are dispraised
more often and praised less for the majority of people are ignorant of the way to
deal with the female-snake of wealth and dive in the ocean of majesty. So, it has
become incumbent to warn them, for they would be ruined by the poison of
wealth before being able to extract its medicine, and would be eaten by the
crocodile of the sea of majesty before obtaining its pearls and gems. Had they
been dispraised in all states and for all the people, kingship then would not have
been ascribed to Prophethood, as it was to our Messenger "peace be upon him",
nor would richness been ascribed to it as was ascribed to Solomon "peace be
upon him".
However, all the people in this world are but children, and wealth is like
female-snakes, and Prophets and Gnostics are female-snake charmers. Thus
what harms the child might not harm the snake charmer. Ti is true that if the
snake charmer has a child whom he likes to save, and he finds a female-snake,
and takes it with the intention to get its medicine, and there is fear that his
child, seeing him and desirous to imitate him, might play with a similar femalesnake once he finds it, in which case, it becomes incumbent upon the snake

167
Book two: Patience and gratitude
charmer to make a comparison between his purpose of getting the medicine
and his purpose of saving the life of his child: if he could dispense with the
medicine with no harm, and at the same time his child might probably take the
female-snake to play with it, which exposes him to destruction, then, it would
be binding upon him to run away from it, and ask the child to do so, and deface
it in his sight, and show to him that it has fatal poison, from which none could
be saved, and abstain from telling him anything about its beneficial medicine,
for this might harm him if he does it without sufficient knowledge. Similarly, if
a diver knows that his child, who is not skilled in diving, might probably follow
him and expose himself to destruction in case he dives, which it becomes
incumbent upon him to refrain from diving and further warn his child of the
risk of the sea and river. If the child is not deterred by only warning, seeing his
father hover round the seacoast, it becomes binding upon his father to move
far from the seacoast, and come not close to him at the sight of his child.
Likewise, the people in comparison with the Prophets are like stupid
children. For this reason, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" said: "Indeed, I am to you like the parent in relation to his
child." (Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "You would fall into
the fire (of Hell on the Day of Judgement), like moths and I would keep you
away (as much as I could)." (both sheikhs on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
Their greatest portion is to keep their children from destructives, for which
only they were sent as Prophets. But their portion in wealth was only in
proportion to sustain themselves. For this reason, they limited themselves to
the amount of sustenance, and did not withhold, but rather spent what
remained beyond their essential needs.
However, medicine lies in spending, whereas poison lies in withholding. If the
gate of earning is opened to the people and they are exhorted to do so, they
would surely be inclined to the poison of withholding, and turn from the
medicine of spending. This is why wealth was defaced, in reference to the fact
that what should be defaced is to withhold it, and be stingy on it, by proliferating
it and increasing its delight in a way that causes one to rely on the world with its
pleasures. But to take from it only what suffices to sustain oneself and spend
what is beyond the need in good things is not blameworthy.

I

It is incumbent upon every traveler but to carry only such of provision as
suffices him on journey, if he is determined to sustain only himself. But if he is
pleased to have his journey companions share food with him, there will be no
harm to increase his provision. It is within that meaning that the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Let the vehicle of
conveyance of anyone of you (to the hereafter) from this world is no more than
the rider's provision." (Ibn Majah and Al-Hakim on the authority of Salman).
This is in case he spends only on himself, otherwise, some narrators of this
Hadith used to take as much as one hundred Dirhams and spend it all at once on
the needy and keep no single one thereof with them. When the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" told that the wealthy would, by a

The quarter of the saviors
168
hair's breadth, enter Paradise, Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf "Allah be pleased with
him" sought his permission to abandon his wealth entirely, and he gave him
permission. But Gabriel "peace be upon him" descended and said to him: "Tell
him to feed the indigent, dress the naked, and deal with the guest generously."
(Al-Hakim on die authority of Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf).
The worldly favors then are not entirely pure, for their medicine is
contaminated with poison, good expectations with risks, and benefit with harm.
So, whoever is confident of his good insight and gnosis, he could approach the
world if he so likes, provided that he should ward off its poison and extract its
medicine carefully; and whoever is not confident of that, let him run away in
flight from its probable risks. Indeed, safety is unequalled for such, who represent
almost all die people save such of them as Allah Almighty protected and guided
to the right path.
You may ask: "What is the concept of the accommodational favors to which
Allah accommodates the servant by virtue of guidance, rectitude of conduct,
support and grant of success?" in reply to that, it should be known to you that
the Divine accommodation is indispensable. It is to accommodate the will of a
servant to coincide with the Divine decree and fate of Allah Almighty. It includes
both good and evil, and both happiness and wretchedness. But the custom
requires to specify the term 'Divine accommodation' to the fate and Divine
decrees of Allah Almighty which coincide with happiness only. Similarly, as
atheism is to deviate, it is specified to him who inclines from the truth to
falsehood. The need of Divine accommodation is then self-evident. For this
reason it is said: "If a man is not helped by Allah Almighty (do good), his effort
more often leads him to evil consequences."
As for guidance, there is no way for a servant to seek happiness without it.
That is because the will of man might incline to what serves for his benefit in the
hereafter. But if he fails to know what benefits him in the hereafter, thinking
corruption to be benefit, then, which profit could his will only avail him? Indeed,
there is no benefit in the will, power and causes except after the guidance (of
Allah). That is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty: "Our Lord is
He Who gave to each (created) thing its form and nature, and further, gave (it)
guidance." (Ta Ha 50)

And: " and were it not for the grace and mercy of Allah on you, not one of
you would ever have been pure: but Allah does purify whom He pleases: and
Allah is One Who hears and knows (all things)." (An-Nur 21)

_
:

The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"None shall enter Paradise without the mercy, i.e. guidance of Allah Almighty." It
was said to him: "And even not you O Messenger of Allah?" he said: "And not
even I." (both sheikhs on the authority of Abu Hurairah).

169
Book two: Patience and gratitude
Guidance has three stations: the first is to know the way to good and evil
referred to by the statement of Allah Almighty: " And shown him the two
highways?" (AJ-Balad 10)

4O

^

Allah Almighty conferred that favor upon all of His servants, some by
virtue of mind, and others on the tongue of His Messengers "peace be upon
them". That is the meaning of His statement: " As to the Thamud, We gave
them guidance, but they preferred blindness (of heart) to Guidance: so the
stunning Punishment of humiliation seized them, because of what they had
earned." (Fussilat 17)
LL; Oj-A I

I

I AJLXL^>

li

I J[p

^ <225

1 Iy*S>%zSM Li

J_£3 Jll I j y

l*-* ^

The causes of guidance then are the Books, the Messengers, and the sights
of mind. All of those are available, and nothing hinders from them other than
envy, arrogance and love for this world, in addition to the causes that blind
the hearts but not the sights, as confirmed by Allah Almighty in His
statement: " Truly it is not their eyes that are blind, but their hearts which are
in their breasts." (Al-Hajj 46)

i<9

Among the causes that blind the insights, a mendon may be made of the long
habit and tradidon as referred to by Allah Almighty in His statement: "Nay! they
say: "We found our fathers following a certain religion, and we do guide ourselves
by their footsteps."" (Az-Zukhruf 22)
^

bj IjJlS 1)j ^

To arrogance and envy as among the causes of blindness, Allah refers in His
statement: "Also, they say: "Why is not this Qur’an sent down to some leading
man in either of the two (chief) cides?"" (Az-Zukhruf 31)

<©

oia^jT ili '4 yj

>

And: "For they said: "What! a man! a solitary one from among ourselves! shall
we follow such a one? Truly should we then be straying in mind, and mad!" (AlQamar 24)
-> >

ill IJ&HjJUti ^

It is those causes of blindness that hindered people from receiving guidance.
The second guidance is that which follows the first one, with which Allah
Almighty provides the servant from dme to dme as a fruit of self-mortificadon,
as confirmed by His statement: " And those who strive in Our (Cause), We will
certainly guide them to Our Paths: for verily Allah is with those who do right."
(Al-Ankabut 69)

4. fijS

^ oJ3 y

The quarter of the saviors
And: "But to those who receive guidance, He increases the (light of)
Guidance, and bestows on them their Piety and Restraint (from evil)."
(Muhammad 17)

170

The third guidance which follows the second one is the light that rises in the
world of Prophethood and alliance (of Allah Almighty) after the perfection of
self-mortification, with which one receives guidance more than he would do by
virtue of the normal mind with which obligation and learning sciences are due. It
is that which Allah Almighty honored when He ascribed it to himself, given that
all things comes from Allah Almighty, as shown in His statement: "Say: "Allah's
guidance is the (only) guidance, and we have been directed to submit ourselves to
the Lord of the Worlds." (Al-An'am 71)
i -

^4

It is called life in the statement of Allah Almighty: " Can he who was dead, to
whom We gave life, and a Light whereby he can walk amongst men, be like him
who is in the depths of darkness, from which he can never come out? Thus to
those without Faith their own deeds seem pleasing." (Al-An'am 122)
o-’lUajT

hlx>-j Aulhi*

^

It is intended by the statement of Allah: "Is one whose heart Allah has
opened to Islam, so that he has received enlightenment from Allah, (no better
than one hard-hearted)?" (Az-Zumar 22)
4©

jy 'Js-

^AZ, yj

-5)1

{j^*\ ^

By rectitude of conduct, we mean the Divine care that helps man achieve his
purposes, and strengthens him to do what benefits him and refrain from what
harms him. It always comes from within as stated by Allah Almighty in His
saying: "We bestowed aforetime on Abraham his rectitude of conduct, and well
were We acquainted with him." (Al-Anbiya 51)
4

Jt3 (j* JOaJLj

j3j lil* jAj ♦ ^

The rectitude of conduct is guidance which moves one to the direction of
happiness. If a young man, for instance, becomes well-experienced in storing
wealth and the different ways of trade which increases wealth, but, at the same
time, he spends with profligacy, he will not be called righdy-directed, not because
of his lacking guidance but because of the failure of his guidance to provoke his
will to increase wealth. How many a man who does what he knows to harm him,
although he is given guidance with which he is distinguished from the ignorant
who does not know that this harms him, but he is not given rectitude of conduct.
By that consideration, rectitude of conduct is more perfect than the mere
guidance to the ways of good. To be sure, it is a great favor.
As for grant of success, it is to direct one straight to the right purpose, and
make it easy on him in order to endeavor more to do the right as fast as he could.

171
Book two: Patience and gratitude
However, the mere guidance alone is insufficient, but it should be a guidance that
has the power to move the will, i.e. the rectitude of conduct. Rectitude of
conduct alone is insufficient, but the movements should be made easy with the
help of organs and instruments for the goal for which the will is stimulated to be
achieved. Thus, guidance is to let one know, rectitude of conduct is to stimulate
the will to wake up and move, and the grant of success is to assist and help by
moving the organs towards success.
Support combines all of those. It is to strengthen one by insight from within,
and strengthen his doing and empower causes from without. It is intended by the
statement of Allah Almighty: " We gave Jesus, the son of Mary, Clear (Signs) and
strengthened him with the Holy Spirit" (Al-Baqarah 87)

Close to that is protection. It is a kind of Divine existence swimming within
man, therewith he is strengthened to do good and refrain from evil. It is invisible,
to which Allah refers in His statement: " And (with passion) did she desire him,
and he would have desired her, but that he saw the evidence of his Lord: thus
(did We order) that We might turn away from him (all) evil and shameful deeds."
(Yusuf 24)
OyCaiJ Hl'jirjt I

4

iUsJjlj; jlS\ *1i

Those are the main favors which could not stand firm in the absence of
the pure and sharp understanding, aware hearing, insightful and humble heart,
advice-giving tutor, wealth that is sufficient for one to do his required tasks,
which, if short, would make him indulge in that, and if beyond the needs,
would not divert him from the religious affairs, and honor that protects him
from the foolishness of the foolish, and the wrongness of the enemies. Each
one of those sixteen favors requires many causes, and each one of those
causes requires many further causes, and so forth until it leads in the end to
the guide of the wanderers and the refuge of the needy, i.e. the Lord of all
lords, and the Causer of all causes.
Given that the chain of those causes is endless, and too countless to
enumerate in that book, let’s mention an example for them in order to know
therewith the significance of Allah Almighty: " But if you count the favours of
Allah, never will you be able to number them. Verily, man is given up to injustice
and ingratitude." (Ibrahim 34)

4

^/• jj

*3

ol3 ^

Explication Of An Example That Is Typical Of The Fact That The
Favors Of Allah Almighty Are Countless
It should be known to you that we have included the favors of Allah
Almighty under sixteen elements, and made the favor of body health one of them
in the last category. If we like to survey all causes and means that lead to it, of a
surety, we could not be able to do so. But eating, for instance, is one of the

______________________ The quarter of the saviors
172
make a mention of a set of causes with which the favor
causes- of health. Let us
of eating is .ac^e
ancj its being an act means that it is a movement, and every
movement should have a moving body which is its instrument, and a power to
111
jt to move, and knowledge and perception of the desired
move, a will to cause
purpose of movement. Eating
...requires
. an, eaten,
, i.e.. an edible thing,
. , and
i this
requires an origin from which it is produced, and a maker to prepare it. Lets now
mention the causes of perception, then the causes of will, then die causes of
pow er, and then the causes of the edible thing, all by way of reference and not by
way of survey.
The First Side Of Allah's Favors:
The Creation Of The Causes Of Perception
It should be known to you that Allah Almighty created the plant as more
perfect in existence than stone, iron, copper, and all lifeless non-living beings
which never grow nor are given nutrition. The plant is endowed with a power to
attract nutrition to it, through its root and trunk that extend in the earth, working
thereby as instruments for it. They begin from the fine and minute strands on the
leaf whose roots are gradually thick and then they ramify into capillaries
spreading throughout the parts of the leaf until they disappear from the sight. But
in spite of that, the plant is imperfect, for unless the nutrition is driven to it and
be in contact with its root, it would wither and die. By no means could it seek for
nutrition in any way other than that, for the petition is based on the knowledge of
what is petitioned and then movement to it. But the plant is unable to do so.
Thus, among the favors of Allah Almighty He bestowed upon you is that He
created for you the instruments of sense and movement therewith to seek for
nutrition. Consider, for example, the wisdom that lies behind the order in which
Allah Almighty created in you the five senses, i.e. the instruments of perception.
The first is the sense of touching in order that whenever a burning fire or a
wounding sword touches you, you would soon flee away. That is the first sense to
be created for animals, and no animal is imagined without it. Without that sense,
by no means would it be possible for it to live as an animal. The least degree of
sense is to sense only what touches it for to sense what is far from the body is
more perfect. That sense is available to every animal, including even such small
and little ones as the worm in the mud: if it is pierced with a thorn, it would soon
shrink to run away, unlike the plant which, even if cut off, would not shrink for it
does not feel the pain of cutting.
But if you have only that sense, you would be imperfect, unable to seek for
nutrition, like the worm, as long as it is far from you, for you would not sense but
what touches your skin, which you thus would attract to yourself. That is because
you would lack a sense to perceive therewith what is far from the contact of your
skin. For this reason, the sense of smelling has been created for you. But with it,
you detect only the smell, without knowing from which direction it comes upon
you. You then need to go round different sides perhaps you would or would not
find the food whose smell you have detected. Were you to have only those
senses, you would be evidently imperfect. Thus, the sense of seeing has been

Book two: Patience and gratitude

173

created for you to perceive therewith what is far from you and identify its exact
direction, in order to go towards it.
But were you to have only those, you would also remain imperfect, for you
would be unable to perceive what is beyond the walls and screens. You would see
only that between you and which there is no screen, be it food, enemy, etc, but
not that between you and which there is a screen. Such screen might not be
removed before the enemy comes close to you and you thus are unable to run
away. Thus, the sense of hearing has been created for you to perceive therewith
the sounds from behind the walls and screens. That is because you perceive with
the sight only what is present in front of you and you could not perceive what is
absent from you except with the help of sounds and words to be recognized by
the sense of hearing. That is the significance of your dire need for it. You also
have been disdnguished from all animals by the capability of understanding
speech. But even, all of this would avail you not unless the sense of taste has been
created for you, for once the food reaches you, without it you would not be able
to perceive whether or not it agrees with your disposition; and in case it disagrees
with you and you eat it, you would be ruined, like the tree which is apt to receive
every kind of liquid, without tasting it, although it might cause it to wither.
But even, all of this is insufficient unless something has been created in
front of your brain called the common sense, to which all perceptibles to be
perceived through the five senses are brought together. If you eat something
yellow which you detest as being bitter, and then leave it, you will not
recognize it if you find it without tasting it once again in the absence of that
common sense. The eye sees the yellowness but perceives not the bitterness,
whereas the taste tastes the bitterness but perceives not the yellowness, how
should both then abstain from getting the harmful thing once again? So, there
should be a judge with whom both yellowness and bitterness meet, in order to
judge, depending on both, that this particular thing is harmful from which you
should abstain.
In all of those senses, the animals share you; and were you to have only those,
you would remain still imperfect. Any animal might be taken by a trick, and does
not know how to avert harm from itself, and get rid of the trick. If it is tied, how
should it release itself? It might throw itself into a well, knowing not that this
might destroy it. It might eat what tastes pleasant immediately but is harmful in
the future, with the result that it falls ill and dies. That is because it senses only
what is occurring at the moment, and not the consequences in the future. That is
the favor with which Allah has distinguished you.
Consider then how Allah Almighty favored and honoured you over all things
by that favor, which is the noblest of all, i.e. the mind. It is with mind that you
perceive the harm and benefit of the food at present and in the future, the way of
cooking and preparing different kinds of food in order to taste pleasant and
become beneficial. In this way, you get benefit from the mind in the food which
is among the important causes of your health. That is the best benefit of mind,
and the smallest wisdom, for the greatest wisdom that lies behind the creadon of
mind is the gnosis of Allah Almighty and His acts and attributes. At that point

The quarter of the saviors
174
the benefit of the five senses turns in your favour, as they would become like
spies entrusted to collect news from different sides of the kingdom, each to a
specific field: one to the news of colours, another to the news of sounds, a third
to the news of scents, a fourth to the news of tastes, and a fifth to the news of
the cold and heat, coarseness and softness, dryness and fluidity, etc. the spies
then collect news from the different sides of the kingdom and give them to the
common sense, which lies in the front of the brain, like the man standing at the
door of the king to gather stories and books that come to him from all parts of
the world. He takes and preserves them as sealed and closed, for his duty is only
to take and preserve them but not to know what they contain. Once he meets the
king, i.e. the mind, he hands them over to him, who, in turn, inspects them, and
gets acquainted with the secrets and mysteries of the kingdom and judge with
their help on the different cases in the kingdom. It is according to what seems to
him therefrom that he moves the soldiers and members of the kingdom, once in
pursuit of something, once in flight from something, and so on.
That is the sequence of the favors of Allah on you concerning the
perceptions. Think not that we have mentioned them in full. The outward senses
are a part of perceptions, and sight is one of them, and one of its instruments is
the eye, which is composed of ten layers over each other, and each has its specific
characteristics and attributes, form and appearance. If there is disorder in anyone
of those ten, the sight would be affected, and it would become beyond the
capability of physicians to recover. This is in relation to one sense, on the basis of
which you should measure all senses like hearing, touching, tasting and smelling.
The favors of Allah Almighty in one sense, or to be more specific, in one part of
a sense, could not be mentioned in full in many volumes, although it might be as
small as an eyeball. How then do you think of all members and parts of the body?
Those are only exemplary references to the favors of Allah Almighty as
regards the creation of perceptions.

The Second Side Of Allah's Favors As Regards The Creation Of Will
It should be known to you that even if the sight is created for you to perceive
therewith the food from afar, but at the same time, no inclination nor longing nor
appetite are created for you to urge you to move to get it, such sight would
remain idle. How many a patient who sees with his eye the food which is
beneficial to him, but in the absence of appetite for it, he abstains from getting it,
with the result that both sight and perception become idle. Thus, you are forced
to have inclination to what pleases you, called appetite, and disinclination from
what displeases you, called aversion, in order that you then would pursue a thing
with the help of appetite and flee away from another with the help of aversion.
Thus, Allah Almighty created in you the appetite for food, and invested it with
authority over you, and entrusted you to it, in order to force you to get food, and
by eating you would survive. All animals, but not the plants share you in that
favor.
Furthermore, unless that appetite calms down once it takes what is sufficient
for it, it would cause you to eat lavishly until you destroy yourself. For this
reason, Allah Almighty created for you the aversion which appears at satiety

175
Book two: Patience and gratitude
therewith to abstain from getting more. In this way, you are unlike the plant
which continues to attract water to it as much as it is available until it is spoiled.
This requires it to be in need for a man to determine the provision for it, i.e. to
water it once and withhold water from it once, and so on. As well as this appetite
for food has been created for you to eat and sustain your body, the sexual desire
has been created for you to have sexual intercourse (with such as lawful for you)
and sustain your human race.
If we relate to you the wonders of the making of Allah in creation of the
womb, blood of menstruadon, the formation of the fetus from the mixture of the
sperm and the female discharge, the creation of the testicles and the veins that
connect them with the backbone which is the source of seamen, the way the
female discharge flows from between the ribs through the related veins, the way
the womb is divided into places to determine the kind of male and female once
the sperm falls in a particular one, the way the fetus turns through different
phases of creation beginning from being a sperm-drop, then a leech-like clot of
congealed blood, then a morsel of flesh, then a piece of flesh covered with bone
and filled with blood, and the way it is divided to form the body with its different
parts like the head, hands, legs, belly, back, etc: if we relate all of those to you,
surely, you would be extremely amazed by those favors bestowed by Allah upon
you just in the matter of your creation in its first phases. But we want to limit
ourselves to the favors of Allah Almighty in the matter of eating, in order not to
be so much lengthy.
The appetite for food is one of the elements of will. But it alone is not
sufficient for you, for you are surrounded by the destructives from all sides, and
unless the power of anger is created in you, you would fail to avert harm from
yourself, and rather be exposed to all kinds of evil which might deprive you of all
provision you have got. Everyone other than you desires for what is in your
hand, and you need a drive to avert and fight that, i.e. the drive of anger,
therewith you avert all that harms you. But even both alone are insufficient for
you, for they call only to what benefits and harms at the moment. But as regards
the future, they are useless. Here, Allah Almighty created another will for you, to
be subjugated to the command of mind which knows the future consequences,
just as He created both anger and desire to be subjugated under the sensible
perception of the present state. That is the way you benefit from the mind. Your
knowledge alone that this desire harms you would not avail you to avoid it unless
you have inclination to act in accordance with that knowledge. It is with this will
that you have been preferred to the animals out of honoring mankind, just as you
have been favored with the knowledge of the future consequences. We called that
will a religious motive, and explained it in more detail in the Book of Patience.

The Third Side Of Allah's Favors Of Creating Well And Instruments
Of Movement
It should be known to you that sense avails not but the perception, and the
will has no value without inclination to pursuit or flight. This alone is insufficient
if you lack the instrument of pursuit and flight. How many a patient who has
longing for something afar from him which he perceives well, but he could not

The quarter of the saviors
176
move towards it for he loses his leg, or could not grasp it for he loses his hand, or
because he is paralyzed. For this reason, the instruments of movement should be
available and they should be provided with power to enable them to move in
pursuit according to desire, or in flight according to aversion. For this reason,
Allah Almighty created for you the organs and parts of body which you see their
outward, but do not know well their inward mysteries. Some of them are made to
pursuit and flight such as legs for man, wings for bird and sides for animals, and
some to avert harm like the weapons for man and horns for animals. In this
respect, animals are extremely different. Some have their enemies more and
provision far, thereupon they need quick movement, for which wings were
created for them therewith to fly fast. Some have four sides and some two legs
created for them, and others are creeping. But it will be too long to mention them
all
Let's limit our mention to the organs that are necessary for eating and
measure all on them. It is insufficient to see the food from afar unless you are
able to get it. In this way, you lack a grasping instrument, thereupon Allah
Almighty bestowed on you the favor of both hands. They are too long to
stretch towards things and have joints to enable them move easily in various
directions. The hand's end is made broad by creating the palm, which is divided
from the end into five parts representing the five fingers, that are made in two
sides: the thumb in one side, and the remaining four in the other side. Were all
to be gathered or accumulated in one side, the purpose from the hand would
not be fully achieved. They are made in a way that if you spread the hand, it will
become a sweeper, and if you withdraw it to you, it will become a spade, and if
you gather it, it will turn into a striking instrument, and if you spread and then
draw it, it will become a grasping tool. Then, nails were created for it, and made
to be over the ends of fingers in order not to go to pieces, so that therewith you
could pick up the fine things which could not be picked by fingers.
Then, suppose you are able to pick up food with your hands, how should it
be sufficient for you unless it reaches the stomach which is inside your belly?
That requires a path through which food could enter into it. Thus mouth was
made an oudet to the stomach, besides its great number of benefits and
advantages. But even, if you insert the food into the mouth and it is one piece, it
will not be easy to swallow unless it is ground. This necessitates you to need a
grinding teeth therewith to grind food. Thus, tooth-bearing bones were created
for you, and the upper molars were made to close on the lower ones in order to
be able therewith to grind food.
Food sometimes needs to be crushed, and sometimes to be cut off, after
which it needs to be ground. This is why teeth were divided into broad molars,
sharp cutters like canine teeth, and pointed teeth like incisors. The joints of both
jaws were made limply movable so that the lower jaw would move forward and
back of the upper one. Without that, both would strike each other like the
clapping of hands, and food would not be ground well. But the lower jaw was
made movable, and the upper firm. Consider then the wonderful making of Allah
Almighty. Every kind of human-made millstone has its lower stone firm and its

177
Book two: Patience and gratitude
upper stone movable, in contradiction to that Divine-made millstone. Glory be to
Allah! How great is His state, how powerful is His authority, how perfect is His
proof, and how extensive is His favor.
Then, suppose that you inserted the food into the cavity of the mouth, how
do you imagine it to move in between the teeth? How should teeth draw it to
themselves? In this issue, consider how Allah Almighty bestowed upon you the
favor of the tongue which moves in the different sides of the mouth wherever it
likes, pulling food towards teeth in accordance with the required need, like the
sweeper which pulls grains inside the millstone. It also has many other benefits
like taste, the wonders of the faculty of speech, and many besides which we are
not going to mention now.
Suppose that you cut and ground the food which is dry, you would not be
able to swallow it unless it skates into the pharynx with the help of moisture. In
this respect, consider how Allah Almighty created underneath the tongue a
channel therefrom saliva flows as much as is required with which the food is
kneaded. Consider how He Almighty subjugated it to serve in this matter: you see
food from afar, thereupon the jawbones are stimulated to serve in chewing, and
the saliva flows to help in this process, while food still is far from you.
Then, suppose that the food is really ground inside the mouth with the help
of teeth and molars, and kneaded with the saliva, how should it reach the
stomach? By no means you could be able to stretch your hand into the mouth to
drive it in towards the stomach, nor does the stomach have something to pull it
towards itself. Thus, consider how Allah Almighty prepared the esophagus to
expand and open for the food to enter, and once it enters, it soon contracts so
that with the help of pressure, food is turned and driven into until it reaches the
stomach easily.
But even, if the food that reaches the stomach is composed of bread, fruits,
meat, etc, in such a state it does not avail to make flesh, blood and bones in the
body. But it should be cooked in a particular way in order to be fitting for the
body to get benefit from. In this connection, Allah Almighty created the stomach
in the form of a sack in which food falls, thereupon it closes tightly, and it
remains in it until it is fully digested with the help of the hot liquid. This heat is
caused by the organs that surround the stomach from all sides: the liver on the
right side, spleen on its left side, outer flesh of the belly in the front of it and the
flesh of the loin on its back. By virtue of such heating, the food is cooked until it
turns into a liquid fitting for passing through veins. But at that point, it is still like
the water of parley, unfitting yet for nourishment.
At that level, Allah Almighty created veins to connect the stomach with the
liver, having many openings through which liquid of food is poured until it
reaches the liver. The liver is made from the same blood of the body. It has many
capillaries spreading through its different parts with which the liquid of food is
mixed and resides for a period of time until it turns into blood, fitting for the
nourishment of the body. But as this cooking is caused by the heat of liver, two
kinds of waste matters are produced from the blood: the black and yellow bile,
and were they not to be separated from the blood, the body would be damaged.

The quarter of the saviors
178
For this purpose, Allah Almighty created both gallbladder and spleen, and
provided each with a narrow part extending inside die cavity of the liver in order
for the gallbladder to draw to itself the bile, and the spleen the black, leaving the
blood pure to a great extent.
But, the blood at that level still has some extra liquid, and but for such liquid,
it would be hard to spread through those capillaries and come therefrom up
towards the different organs. For this purpose, Allah Almighty created both
kidneys, and provided each with a narrow part extending towards the liver. It is
one of die wonders of the wisdom of Allah Almighty that they do not enter into
the cavity of the liver, but rather are connected with it through the veins that
emerge from outside the liver, in order for them to draw food after passing
through the capillaries of the liver, for were they to draw it before passing
through die capillaries of the liver, it would be still thick, to hard to come out of
the veins. Once water is separated from it, the blood then becomes extremely
pure and clean from those three waste matters.
On the other hand, Allah Almighty created so many veins extending from
outside the liver into all parts of the body from the toes to the head, externally
and internally. In those various veins, the pure blood circulates and reaches
everywhere in the body. Those veins gradually become fine until they turn in
the end to capillaries like those on the leafs of the plant, too minute to see with
the mere eye. It is through those capillaries that food reaches all parts of the
body. If some disorder befalls the gallbladder, and it fails to draw to it the bile,
the blood would get spoiled causing such diseases as icterus (yellows), pustule,
etc; and if any disorder befalls the spleen and it fails to draw the black bile,
many diseases would occur like vitiligo, leprosy and melancholia; and if both
kidneys fail to draw the water from the blood, this would cause many diseases
like dropsy and others.
Then, consider how the Wise Creator based the benefits on those despicable
waste matters. The gallbladder draws the yellow bile and ejects it into the large
intestines, whereas the spleen turns the black bile into acidity to stimulate the
desire for hunger with the help of a part thereof, and eject the remaining into the
large intestines: and both constitute excretion. As for both kidneys, they take
provision from the blood that is in the liquid and send the remaining water to the
bladder (to come out in the form of urine).
Let's be satisfied with that amount of explication of the favors of Allah
Almighty concerning the causes and means of eating. Were we to mention how
the liver needs the brain and heart, and how the heart needs both, or how those
main organs need each other, and how the veins and arteries ramify from the
heart and liver into all parts of the body, through which sense and nutrition reach
everywhere in the body, and how all organs and parts of the body are composed:
were we to mention all of this, and all is necessary for eating, the speech would be
too lengthy. Man, for example, has thousands of muscles and nerves and millions
of blood cells, different in size, shape and intensity. There is nothing thereof
without one, two to ten wisdoms to lie behind it. All of those are among the
favors bestowed by Allah upon you. If a still vein moves, or a moving vein

Book two: Patience and gratitude —-------------------------179
becomes still improperly, you would be given to destruction.
Consider then the favors of Allah upon you: would you not have afterwards
power to give thanks to Him? You do not know of the favors of Allah in this
respect but eating, which is the most trivial among them all. You do not know
but that whenever you grow hungry, you would eat, in which the donkey shares
you. That is because the donkey knows that whenever it grows hungry, it would
eat; whenever it gets tired, it would sleep; and whenever it is moved by sexual
desire, it would have sexual intercourse. If you do not know about yourself more
than the donkey knows about itself, how then would you offer gratitude for the
favor of Allah Almighty upon you?
All what we have mentioned is but a single drop of a huge ocean of the favors
of Allah Almighty. So, measure what we have not mentioned on that we have
mentioned. Indeed, all what the people know in comparison with what they
know not of the favors of Allah Almighty is less than a single drop of a huge
ocean. But whoever knows anything of that would perceive a part of the
significance of the statement of Allah Almighty: " But if you count the favours of
Allah, never will you be able to number them. Verily, man is given up to injustice
and ingratitude." (Ibrahim 34)
j! ^ • jl 14- 'b/ 4j)lc-~«JUj ijui o !3 }

Furthermore, consider how Allah Almighty connected the subsistence, forces,
benefits and perceptions of those organs and parts of the body through a fine
vapor that erupts from the mixture of the four humors. Its residence is the heart
therefrom it circulates everywhere in the body through the extending veins. It
never reaches a part of the body but that it provides it with what it needs of
sense, perception and power of movement. It is like the lamp that is turned
throughout the different parts of the house, and it does not reach a part but that
it lights it up, and its illumination is reflected on the remaining parts. This light is
the creation of Allah Almighty, but He made the lamp a cause of it, by His
wisdom. This fine vapor is what the physician call spirit.
Its residence is the heart. Its example is like the fire of the lamp, the heart like
the cresset, the black blood that is inside the heart like the fuse, provision like the
oil, and the apparent life in the different organs and parts of the body because of
it like the light of the lamp. As well as if the oil of the lamp is consumed the lamp
would be extinguished, the lamp of the spirit would fade away once the provision
is withheld from it; and as well as the fuse might burn and turn into ashes which
accepts not the oil to be kindled once again, with the result that the lamp would
be extinguished although the oil is available, similarly, the blood might burn
because of the scorching heat of the heart, and be used up although the provision
is available. As well as the lamp might be extinguished due to an internal or
external cause like a stormy wind, the light of the spirit might be extinguished due
to an internal or external cause like killing. As well as the lamp is extinguished,
whatever the cause might be, according to a Divine decree ordained by Allah,
similarly the spirit also is extinguished, whatever the cause might be, once its
owner comes to its appointed term ordained by Allah Almighty. As well as if the
light of the lamp is extinguished the entire house would darken, similarly, if the

The quarter of the saviors
180
spirit vanishes, the whole body would darken, and lose all lights it used to get
from the spirit, i.e. die lights of sense, power and will.
You may argue: "You have talked about spirit and described it, although
when the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was
asked about it he said no more dian: "The spirit is by the command of my Lord."
(Al-Isra' 85)
4© ajs'cr?
)
Thus he did not describe it to them in the same way you have done." In
reply to that, let me say: It should be known to you that this argument is
based on heedlessness of the different meanings given to the term spirit.
Regardless of all its meanings, we intend by it that subtle tenuous substance of
an ethereal sort, which the physicians call spirit. They recognize its qualities
and characteristics, how it circulates in the different organs and parts of the
body, bringing about sense and faculties, to the extent that if a part of the
body is anesthetized, they would learn that this is due to occlusion of a part of
the channel in which the spirit circulates, thereupon they would not remedy
that very part, but rather treat the place of occlusion where the nerve of that
particular part originates. This tenuous substance, with its subtleties,
penetrates into the network of nerves, by which the heart is connected with all
parts of the body.
But as to the soul which gives life to the body in the sense that if it leaves the
body, it will be ruined by death, of a surety, it is one of the greatest mysteries of
Allah Almighty. It is indescribable, and it is not fitting for us to describe it. All to
say about it is to describe it as a Divine affair as confirmed by the statement of
Allah Almighty: " Say, "The soul is of the affair of my Lord. And mankind have
not been given of knowledge except a little."" (Al-Isra' 85)

Of a surety, the Divine affairs are beyond the capacity of human minds to
describe, for the minds of most people are put to confusion about it. That is
because it is not for the mind to perceive such supreme things which are
perceived by another light, more honorable and higher than the mind. It rises in
the world of Prophethood and alliance (with Allah Almighty). Its relation to the
mind is like the relation of the mind to illusion and fancies.
Allah Almighty created the people and made them pass through many phases:
as well as the child perceives only the concrete things apart from the abstract for
he has not attained the phase of perceiving such high things, the adult perceives
the abstract but not the metaphysical things for he has not attained yet the phase
of perceiving such things. Indeed, it is a noble station, a sweet drink, and a high
rank in which the Gardens of truth is seen with the light of faith and certainty.
That drink is too honorable to be available to every comer. It is said that whoever
does not recognize himself does not recognize his Lord. How should such be
made available to the science of medicine? Since the minds with which
obligations are made are short of perceiving such high things, Allah Almighty
gave no permission to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be

181

Book two: Patience and gratitude

upon him" to talk to the people about it: but rather He commanded him to
address them according to their limited minds. Allah Almighty did not mention in
His Holy Book anything about the real nature of this matter. He rather
mentioned its ascription to Him as one of His affairs, and its act in His statement:
"(To the righteous soul will be said:) "O (you) soul, in (complete) rest and
satisfaction! Come back you to your Lord, well pleased (yourself), and well­
pleasing unto Him! Enter you, then, among My Devotees! Yea, enter you My
Heaven!"" (AJ-Fajr 27-30)

Thus He Almighty did not describe its very essence.
The Fourth Side: The Favors Of Allah Almighty As Regards The
Sources Of Food
It should be known to you that there are numerous kinds of food, and there
are many wonders as for creating them by Allah Almighty. But to mention that
in all kinds of food is so much lengthy. However, the food might be medicine,
fruits or nutrition. Let's satisfy ourselves with the nutrition, for it represents the
most important fundament. Let's also limit ourselves to a single grain of wheat
and leave the others.
If you find one or more grains of wheat which you eat, they would inevitably
be consumed and you would also remain hungry. For this reason, you need to
have them grow and produce more grains in order to satisfy your need and the
need of others. Allah Almighty created in the grain of power what nourishes it
until it grows up, just as He created in your body. Plant differs from you in regard
with sense and movement, but not in nourishment, for it is nourished by water
which it draws to itself by way of roots, just as you are nourished. As well as both
wood and dust avail not in nourishing you and you need a particular food to be
nourished therewith, the grain is not nourished by all things, but it needs a
particular thing. In confirmation of that, if you leave the grain in the house, it
would not grow for nothing surrounds it but the air, and only the air avails not to
nourish it. Similarly, if you leave it in the water, it would not grow, and if you
leave it in a ground where there is no water, it would also not grow. In order to
grow, it requires an earth where there is water. To this fact Allah Almighty refers
in His statement: " Then let man look at his Food, (and how We provide it): For
that We pour forth water in abundance, And We split the earth in fragments, And
produce therein Corn, And Grapes and nutritious Plants, And Olives and Dates,
And enclosed Gardens, dense with lofty trees, And Fruits and Fodder, For use
and convenience to you and your catde." (Abasa 24-32)

tpi
4 (JfJ

0

uaii

;U3T u&i w ®

ifi \mZ 0 t\j i&lij 0 &£ (33 (0)

j]

}

(05

05

But even, only earth and water are insufficient, for were it to be left in a wet
or salty land, it would die because of lacking air. This means that it needs an earth

The quarter of the saviors
182
open to air, where there is water in sufficient quantity. Therefore, the air does not
move towards it by itself, but it needs wind to move it. To this fact Allah
Almighty refers in His statement: "And We send the fecundating winds." (Al-Hijr
22)

iO

Its duty is to accommodate between water, air and earth. However, all of this
would avail not if you are in severe cold, for you need the moderate atmosphere
of spring, and the heat of summer. Those then are the four elements required for
the growth of the plant.
Consider what should each need: Water is needed to be drawn to the
cultivated land from rivers, springs and wells. See how Allah Almighty created
rivers, caused the land to gush forth springs and wells. Furthermore, the land
might be elevated to the extent that water could not reach it easily. But Allah
Almighty created the clouds and made it under the control of wind to drive it to
that elevated cultivated land in order for water to reach it through raindrops
along the year according to the required need. Consider also how He created
mountains to preserve water, therefrom springs and wells gush forth gradually for
were it to come out all at once, surely, the land would drown, and the farms and
life stalk would ruin entirely. To be sure, the favors of Allah concerning the
mountains, clouds, rivers and springs are beyond calculation.
As for heat, although both land and water are cold, the atmosphere is hot.
Consider here how He created sun and subjugated it to serve as heater for the
land, although it is very remote from it. This heating differs from time to time
and from place to place, according to the required need. That is among the
wisdoms that lie behind the creation of sun, given that its wisdoms are
countless.
Therefore, if the plant of fruits is elevated from the earth, it would be dry
and hard, and become in need of humidity to ripen it. Consider here how He
Almighty created moon which, by screening the sun from the land at night,
serves as cooler, ripening thereby the fruits and dying them, each according to its
specific characteristics, by the decree of Allah, the Full if wisdom. For this reason,
were trees to be in a place where sun does not rise and moon does not appear,
they surely would be spoiled. Do you not see that the small tree is spoiled if it is
shaded forever by a huge tree?
As well as sun is subjugated to heat the land, and the moon to dampen it, the
same is true of all the stars in the sky: each of them is created to serve a certain
benefit. The wisdom that lie behind the creation of each of them are beyond the
capacity of any human mind to describe or enumerate. Had it not been for that,
they would have been created in vain, in opposition to the statement of Allah
Almighty: "Our Lord! not for naught have you created (all) this!" (A1 Imran 191)
^
i
c* uij ^
And: " Not for (idle) sport did We create the heavens and the earth and all
that is between!" (Al-Anbiya 16)

183

Book two: Patience and gratitude
4

<>jVlj i LLUI Uil>- Li3 ^

As well as there is in your body no organ without a benefit, there is no
member in the celestial body without a benefit. The entire world is like one body,
and its components like the members and organs of the body which co-operate
together in the same way as yours co-operate inside your body. To explain this
issue would take us a very long time and place.
Think not that to believe that the sun, the moon and all the stars are
subjugated by Allah to serve particular benefits and advantages for man
contradicts Sharia, due to the forbiddance to trust the astrologers. Only two
things are forbidden in astrology: One is to trust that they are independent in
doing and achieving their outcomes and traces by themselves, and that they are
not subjugated to be under the control of the power and will of the Creator Who
created and overpowered them. That is evidently disbelief. The other is to give
trust to the astrologers about the detailed news they bring which not all people
perceive. That is because they say what they say out of ignorance. Astronomy and
its rules and principles represented a miracle of one of the Prophets "peace be
upon them". But later on, it was obliterated, and nothing but confusing mixed
traces remained in which the right could hardly be distinguishable from the
wrong.
To believe that the stars are means, in a way or another, of many effects to
occur on earth, in the plants and the animals, but by the will and decree of Allah
Almighty, does not contradict the religion for it is true. But to claim the
knowledge of the rules and principles that determine it decisively disagrees with
religion. If you have a garment which you have washed and liked to dry, and
somebody told you to bring it out and spread it for the sun has risen and it has
become very hot, you are required neither to give trust nor to give lie to him.
Similarly, if the colour of somebody's face has changed and he told you, in
justification, that sun touched his complexion on the way, blackening his face,
you are not required to deny his speech. Measure all things on that parable. But
all the facts are known in part and unknown in part, in which to claim knowledge
is impermissible; and even the known among them is not learnt by all the people.
Some are known to all like the fact that heat ensues from sun, and others are not
known to all the people like saying that the cold results from exposing one's head
to the emerging moon. The point here is that the stars have not been created in
vain: on the contrary, countless number of wisdoms lie behind creating them.
For this reason, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” looked at the sky and then recited the statement of Allah Almighty: "Our
Lord! not for naught have you created (all) this! Glory to You! Give us salvation
from the Penalty of the Fire." (A1 Imran 191)
^ @) J^II

Lxlj ^

Then, he said: "Woe to him who recited that Holy Verse and then did not
take heed of it." (Ath-Tha'alibi on the authority of Ibn Abbas). It is to recite the
Qur'an without considering it, i.e. to be satisfied with knowing from the
dominion of the heaven only its colour and light of the stars, in which even the

The quarter of the saviors
184
animals share you. Indeed, Allah Almighty has countless wonders in the
dominion of the heaven and the earth in the horizons and in the beings, and the
lover of Allah Almighty should endeavor to know of them as much as is possible
for him to know. It is known that whoever loves a religious scholars seeks to get
his compositions in order to increase in love for him with the help of his
knowledge. The same is true of the wonders of the making of Allah Almighty. all
the entire world is die making and creadon of Allah Almighty, nay! All human
compositions and makings are out of His creadon and composition. If you
wonder at a particular composition, do not wonder at the composer in so much
as at the One Who subjugated him to compose it in such a way as you see.
The point is that the nourishment of the plant is obtained only with the help
of the water, air, earth, sun, moon, stars: all of those could not run but in their
orbs, and with the help of heavenly angels who move them perpetually. There are
so many farther reasons which we have left for they are irrelevant to our issue.
But now, let's be satisfied with what we have mentioned.

The Fifth Side: The Favors Of Allah Almighty Concerning The Means
By Which Food Reaches You
It should be known to you that not all kinds of food exist everywhere in the
world, for the existence of any kind of food is determined by particular
conditions for it to be available in a certain place. The people are spread on the
surface of the earth, and in many cases, food is far from them, and there are
rivers, oceans, seas or any separating hindrances between them and it. Consider
here how Allah Almighty subjugated traders and merchants to transfer goods and
commodities from one place to another, and invested with authority over them
the love and greed for wealth and profit, for which they undergo trouble and
suffering in order to bring food to you as well as to others in any place
throughout the earth.
Consider also how Allah Almighty taught them the profession of making
ships and sailing aboard them. Consider also how Allah Almighty created animals
and subjugated them as vehicles and means of transportation. Consider how the
camel is created, how the horse is provided with the quick movement, how the
donkey is made patient to endure trouble and hardship, how the camel is able to
cut the long distance amidst the desert for many consecutive days without food
or drink. Consider also how Allah Almighty made it easy for those merchants to
proceed through the land from one place to another by way of ships, vehicles and
riding mounts, carrying food and all needs to you. Allah Almighty created all of
this not only to meet the need, but also as much as beyond the required needs.
To enumerate all is impossible and will take us far from our issue. So, let's
satisfied with what we have mentioned.

The Sixth Side: Preparation Of Food
It should be known to you that what grows in the land or among the animals
(i.e. what is fitting to eat) could not be eaten in the very state in which it really
exists. But each should be prepared in a particular way until it becomes fit for
eating. To enumerate all things implied in that matter is beyond the capacity of

185
Book two: Patience and gratitude
die context. Let's limit our consideration to a single loaf and see what is needed
for it to be ready for eadng.
The first step is to sow the seed in the ground and take care of it by watering,
dldng, and cleaning up the land from the grass until it grows and becomes wheat,
parley, etc. such crop needs to be harvested and rubbed (to be removed from its
ears) until it turns into grains, to be ground as baking powder and then made into
dough and baked in the oven to turn into bread in the form of a loaf. Consider
the number of those processes and the equivalent number of the persons who
undertake them as we have mentioned, and the number of the equipment and
instruments required for them to be achieved perfectly, and the number of those
we have not mentioned. Consider also the number of the persons involved in the
making of bread with its related industries: the making of instruments, grinding,
baking, manufacturing ovens and places of baking, etc. Consider the need of each
of those makers, carpenters and ironsmiths to iron, wood, copper, lead, etc.
consider also how Allah Almighty created mountains, stones and minerals in the
ground, and made the earth like adjacent pieces, different in size, shape and the
things they contain.
If you inspect the matter, you would know, O poor man, that a single loaf
would not become in the very shape you eat it without more than one thousand
makers to share in making it, beginning from the King Who drives the clouds
and sends rain for the plant to grow in the earth passing through the angels and
ending with the work of man. Consider the great deal of work of man in those
instruments to the extent that the small and little needle therewith you sew the
dress to protect you against the cold and heat could not become like this without
more than twenty-five makers to share in making it. Had Allah Almighty not
gathered the countries and subjugated the people to work in them, and had you
been in need of any of them, you would have lost almost your lifetime without
getting a single loaf in the very state you find it. Do you not see how Allah
Almighty guided man whom He created from a despicable sperm-drop to do
those wonderful and amazing works?
The Seventh Side: Preparation Of Makers
It should be known to you that if the makers and workers involved in the
manufacture of bread disagree with and oppose each other in opinion and
thought, and dispute with each other over what they do, they would avail anyone
in naught. Consider here how Allah Almighty joined their hearts in love and
made them sociable to, and intimate with each other: And (moreover) He has
put affection between their hearts: not if you had spent all that is in e ear
could you have produced that affection, but Allah has done it. or e is x te
in might, Wise." (Al-Anfal 63)
„c
„
CaJ I <UJ I

jli ^

„ •*

-<

c~aJ I L*

4
T"due to their being sociable
It is by virtue of that affection and love,
^ and towns> make houses
beings, that they gather together, build and inha
near to each other and to the market places, and so

The quarter of the saviors
But this love might disappear because of their competition over the
limited number of things, due to the envy, anger and competition on which
man is predisposed by nature, which lead, in most cases, to fighting and
disliking each other. Consider then how Allah Almighty invested rulers and
governors with authority over the people and provided them with power and
cast terror of them in the hearts of people, and how He Almighty guided the
rulers and governors to reform the countries and arrange their affairs and
make their parts like the parts of a single body, co-operating with each other
for the mutual benefits. They made the chiefs, judges, prison and market
places to serve for the benefits of people. They obliged the people to abide by
the law of jusdce and equality, and forced them to help each other and co­
operate with each other, each according to his power and profession, in order
that they would get benefit from each other, by virtue of their arrangement,
gathering and discipline under the authority of the ruler and governor, just in
the same way as the different parts of the one body co-operate and get benefit
from each other.
Then, consider how Allah Almighty sent the Prophets "peace be upon
them" to guide the rulers and governors who take care of the affairs of the
people, and show to them the laws of Sharia and religion to maintain justice
among the people, and the laws of politics to discipline and rule them. They
revealed to them of the judgements of jurisprudence and ruling what is
helpful for them to reform their world and religion. Consider how He
Almighty repaired the Prophets "peace be upon them" with the angels, and
the angels with each other, and so forth until it ends up to the angel that is
brought near to Allah Almighty, who acts as an intermediary between them
and Allah Almighty.
To return to the point, the baker bakes the dough; The grinder grinds the
grains; the farmer farms the plant by taking care of it until it turns into grains to
be harvested; the ironsmith makes the equipment of farming; the carpenter
makes the equipment of the ironsmith; and the same is true of all makers and
manufacturers of food. The ruler reforms the makers; and the Prophets "peace
be upon them" reform the learned scholars who are their heirs; and the learned
scholars reform rulers; and angels "peace be upon them" reform Prophets; and so
forth until the matter ends up to the Presence of the Lordship, which is the
spring of each system, the source of beauty, the fountainhead of all arrangements
and harmony. All of this is out of the favors of Allah Almighty, the Lord of all
lords, and the Causer of all causes.
Had it not been for His bounty and grace, we would have not been guided to
that small deal of His favors in confirmation of His saying: " And those who
strive in Our (Cause), We will certainly guide them to Our Paths: for verily Allah
is with those who do right." (Al-Ankabut 69)

186

i©

^ 0]3 Ll^

^

>

Had He not impeded us from aspiration, with the eye of ambition, to
encompass in knowledge all of His favors, we would have been longing for that.
But He Almighty kept us from that when He said: " But if you count the favours

Book two: Patience and gratitude

187

of Allah, never will you be able to number them. Verily, man is given up to
injustice and ingratitude." (Ibrahim 34)
i

V -JJ'c-Gu ijiij o]3 ^

If we speak, it is by His will that we talk in detail; and if we keep silent, it is by
His oppression, for none gives what He withholds, and none withholds what He
gives. At every moment during lifetime, we hear, with the hearing of the hearts,
the call of the Irresistible King: " Whose will be the Dominion that Day? That of
Allah, the One, the Irresistible!" (Ghafir 16)

Praise be to Allah Who distinguished us from the disbelievers, and made us
able to hear that call before the termination of life.

The eighth side: exposition of the favors of Allah concerning the
creation of angels "peace be upon them"
The favor of Allah concerning the creation of angels "peace be upon them" in
terms of reforming the Prophets, guiding them and reporting to them the Divine
revelation is not hidden from you. But think not that their role is limited to that.
They are of three classes: The earthly angels, the heavenly angels and the carriers
of the Throne (of majesty). Consider then how Allah Almighty entrusted you to
them concerning your food and nourishment as we have already mentioned,
apart from their role of guidance and direction.
It should be known to you that each part of your body, if not of the plant
could not be nourished without seven to ten to one hundred to more and
more angels to whom it is entrusted. To explain that, it is well-known that
nourishment means that a damaged part is replaced by another which turns in
the end into blood, flesh and bone; and once it becomes flesh and bone you
will have been nourished. But blood and flesh are powerless bodies which
have neither knowledge nor freedom of choice. They neither move nor
change by themselves. Their nature alone is not sufficient to cause them to
move or change, just as the wheat does not turn by nature into baking powder
then dough, and then baked bread in the form of a circled loaf without
makers to do so, the blood does not turn into flesh, bone and nerves without
makers to do so. The makers inside the body are the angels, as well as the
makers outside the body are the real men of one's city or village. Allah
Almighty has bestowed His favors on you outwardly and inwardly. So, do not
be heedless of His internal favors.
Let me say that an angel is required to draw food towards the flesh and bone,
since food does not move by itself; and another angel is required to hold it; and a
third one to give it the form of blood; and a fourth to cover it with flesh and
veins or bone; and a fifth to push away the waste matter; and a sixth to join the
new with the old bone and flesh; and a seventh to observe the proportion and
match each with what befits it in shape, size and colour, lest the body would lose
its harmony. To be sure, this internal geometry is vital and it is entrusted to one
of the angels. Think not that the blood has the power to form itself in such a way

The quarter of the saviors
188
as you see by itself, for this is beyond its nature on which it is created; and
ignorant is he who thinks so.
Those are the earthly angels who engage themselves with you, while you are
asleep in comfort and heedlessness. They maintain nourishment inside your body,
and you know not. This applies to all of your inseparable parts of body. Some
parts, like the eye and the heart, need more than one hundred angels to maintain
them. But we have left the detail of that matter in order not to be lengthy. The
earthly angels are provided with the heavenly angels according to a specific order
fathomed only by Allah Almighty. The heavenly angels, in turn, are provided with
the carriers of die Throne (of Majesty). Their benefactor Who provides them
with support, guidance and success is AJlah, the Preserver of safety, the Holy one,
Whose Alone is the kingship and dominion, power and honour. The narradons
about the angels to whom it is entrusted the matter of the heavens and the earth,
each part of the plants and animals, each single drop of rainfall and piece of
cloud, and so forth are coundess. So, we have turned away from quodng them.
You may argue: "Why do you not entrust all of those works to only one angel,
and what is the need of seven angels? Wheat, for instance, needs somebody to
grind it, another to refine it from the husk, a third to pour water over it, a fourth
to make dough, a fifth to cut the dough to ball-shaped pieces, a sixth to make
them fine broad loafs, and a seventh to get them into the oven to bake them. But
only one could undertake all of those works. Why do the works of the angels
inside the body not look like those of the people outside?"
In reply to that, it should be known to you that the creation of angels
differs from that of men. Each angel has only one characteristic and no more;
and this means that each of them could but do only one act. To this fact He
Almighty refers in His statement: "Not one of us but has a place appointed."
(As-Saffat 164)

4 sjs

nj iL cj ^

This is why there is no competition nor fighting between them: On the
contrary, their example in their ranks and works is like the five senses. The sight
does not compete hearing in perceiving sounds, nor does smelling compete sight
in perceiving forms, and so on. But they differ from both hands and feet, for you
might strike with the toes competing thereby the fingers, and you might beat
another with your head, competing thereby the hand, which is the instrument of
striking, and so forth.
Thus, they are not like the one man who could undertake by himself all
works of grinding, making dough and baking. This is, to be sure, a kind of
crookedness and deviation from justice, caused by the variance of man's
characteristics and desires. He is not unilateral in attribute and act, unlike the
angels. This is why man sometimes obeys Allah and sometimes disobeys Him due
to the variance of his desires and attributes. But this is impossible for the nature
of angels, who are predisposed to obedience of Allah Almighty. Undoubtedly,
they flinch not (from executing) the Commands they receive from Allah, but do
(precisely) what they are commanded." (At-Tahrim 6)

Book two: Patience and gratitude

189

4 G\sy L oGy^i "5 ^
They celebrate His glory night and day and never weaken to do so. Such as
bowing among them is bowing forever, such as prostrating among them is
prostrating forever, and such as standing among them is standing forever and so
on. There is no disparity nor weariness in their acts and each of them has a place
appointed beyond which he never goes.
Their submission to Allah Almighty in which there is no point of
disobedience is like the submission of your organs to you in the sense that if you
want to open your eyelid, it could but submit to you unless it is not sound. That
is because it is under your disposal. This is the point in which it resembles the
angels. But it differs from them in another point, i.e. your eyelid does so without
knowledge of what it does, unlike the angels who are living and knowing of what
they do.
This is the favor of Allah Almighty upon you concerning the earthly and
heavenly angels and your need of them as far as food is concerned, apart from
the other needs. To be sure, the classes of favors are beyond calculation. Allah
Almighty has conferred his favors upon you outwardly and inwardly. Then He
said: " Eschew all sin, open or secret: those who earn sin will get due recompense
for their earnings." (Al-An'am 120)
4
G\y&
Gy~^-> SOj
^
1*5^3 ^
To leave the secret sins which are unknown by most people, like envy, evil
assumption, religious innovation and concealment of evil against people, and the
like of those hidden and secret sins of the heart, is to give thanks for the inward
favor, and to leave the apparent sins committed by the organs and parts of body
is to give thanks for the outward favor.
Let me say that whoever disobeys Allah Almighty even through a single
minor sin, such as to open his eyelid where he should lower his gaze, has
indeed proved ungrateful to the favors of Allah on him in the heavens, on
earth and what is between them. However, all that is created by Allah in the
heavens and on earth, including the angels, the plants, the animals, etc, is a
favor He bestowed upon man from which each individual gets benefit. In
each eye twinkle, there is a pair of favors bestowed by Allah Almighty: He
Almighty created underneath each eyelid muscles and strings to connect it
with the brain nerves with the help of which the eyelid opens and shuts. On
each eyelid, there are black eyelashes, whose duty is to focus the light which is
dispersed by whiteness. They are arrayed in one line in order to protect the
eye from the small larva and insects, and also from the air molecules. In each
single hair, there are two favors as regards its smooth root and thin figure.
The interlacement of eyelashes has a greater favor. The air dust might hinder
the eye from opening,, whereas the interlacement of eyelashes in such a way
enables the eye to see through that net of hair, without closing completely. In
this way, the net of hair prevents dust from harming the eye from without,
but do not prevent the eye from seeing. Furthermore, if the eyeball is harmed
by dust, the ends of eyelashes were created to serve, by closing, as polishers of
a mirror.

The quarter of the saviors

190

/

Let's return to our issue and say that whoever looks at what is unlawful for
him to look at has indeed proved ungrateful to the favors of Allah upon him
concerning the eyelids. The eye could not do without the eyelids; and the eyelids
could not do without the head; and the head could not do without the whole
body; and the bod)7 could not do without the nourishment, i.e. the food; and the
food could not be available without water, air, earth, sun, moon, and all the other
things required for plants to grow; and nothing of that could do without the
heavens; and the heavens could not function without the angels; and so on. Ail
are like one thing whose members are connected with each other, in the same
way as the parts of the body are connected with each other. Thus, by looking at
what is unlawful for you to look at, you have been ungrateful to all favors on you,
and there remains neither an orb, nor an angel, nor a plant, nor an animal nor a
non-living being but that it curses you.
For this reason, it is related that the spot wherein people gather either curses
them or invokes forgiveness upon them when they leave. It is also related that
everything, including even the fish in the ocean, prays for forgiveness for the
religious scholar; and that the angels send their curses upon the disobedient. Ail
of this refers to the fact that the perpetrator of a sin done by an unlawful eye
twinkle commits in fact a crime against all beings in the universe and dominion,
which leads to his destruction unless he follows the evil deed with a good deed to
erase it, and the curse is replaced with prayer for forgiveness, perchance Allah
would turn to him in repentance.
Allah Almighty revealed to Job "peace be upon him": "O Job! There is no
servant of mine from among mankind but that he has two angels with him: if he
gives thanks to me for My favors on him, they would say: "O Allah! Increase him
in favor, for You are fitting to be praised and thanked." So, be among the
thankful and it is sufficient for a high rank to be near the thankful. I appreciate
their gratitude and My angels invoke good upon them, places love them and foot
traces weep for them when they leave."
As well as in each eye twinkle there are dozens of favors on man, you should
know that in every breath taken in and out there are a pair of favors. By taking
out a breath, the vapor, i.e. Carbone dioxide, comes out of the breast, and should
it not come out, the heart would be ruined; and by taking in a breath, the essence
of air, i.e. oxygen enters the breast, and should it not enter, the heart would be
burnt due to its lack of oxygen. Every day and night consists of twenty-four
hours, and every hour man takes in and out more than one thousand breaths, and
every breath lasts about ten moments. Thus, you are under obligation to
thousands of thousands of favors concerning each part of your body, if not each
part of the components of this world. Consider then whether a thorough survey
of that is imaginable.
When the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty: " But if you
count the favours of Allah, never will you be able to number them " (Ibrahim

34)
4 (^5)

^JJl CUaju Ij Jju 013 ^

Was revealed to Moses "peace be upon him" he said: "O my God! How

Book two: Patience and gratitude __
191
should I give thanks to You and You have a mi,
c
my bodv? You have made smooth its root and ™
,V,°” ln each sln8ie halr of
a particular narradon that "Whoever
^ " rdated “
his food and drink, his knowledge is little and
we have mentioned returns to the favor of food and drink o *
consider aU favors. The insightful never sees or think, ahn ,
J°U
u
woUd bu, thn, he veHfc ^tM,hhas a *2 ZZ'tZS&Z K
leave the thorough detail for it is longing for what is beyond the reach.
Exposition Of Why People Are Diverted From Gratitude
It should be known to you that the people fall short of gratitude only because
of their ignorance and heedlessness. They have been prevented by both
ignorance and heedlessness from knowing the favors of Allah Almighty upon
them; and it is unimaginable to give thanks for a favor before knowing it.
Furthermore, if one knew such a favor, he imagined that it is sufficient for
gratitude to say only with his tongue: "Praise be to Allah; thanks be due to
Allah...", giving no attention to the fact that the real gratitude for a favor is to
use it to fulfill the wisdom for which it has been intended, i.e. to obey Allah
Almighty. But even, apart from both, nothing prevents man from gratitude
except his overpowering desire on the one hand, and his submission to the
control of Satan on the other hand.
There are many reasons for heedlessness of favors. Among them is that, at
least the ignorant among the people, and how many are they, do not regard as
favor such as common to the people in general in all their states; and this is why
they do not give thanks for all we have above mentioned, for they are common
to all the people in all of their states. Everyone of them does not see those favors
unique to him in particular. They do not thank Allah for the oxygen they breathe,
given that should it be kept away from them for a moment, they would be
exposed to death; and should they be detained in a bathroom or a well full of
moisture, they would get suffocated. If anyone of them was tested by it, and he
then was saved, he might regard it a favor from Allah Almighty for which he
would give thanks to Him.
It is the utmost ignorance to make one’s gratitude for a favor conditional on
its being taken away from him even for a moment, and then given back to him, in
some cases. The favor is more entitled to be appreciated in all states. But you do
not see the sighted, for instance, give thanks for his sound sight before he
becomes blind. At that time, if his sight is restored to him, he would regard it a
favor for which he would give thanks to Allah Almighty. Since the mercy of Allah
Almighty is all-encompassing over all the people in general, the ignorant among
them do not regard it a favor. The people do not give thanks but for the wealth
which they own in particular, and forget all favors bestowed by Allah Almighty
upon them.
One of those ignorant complained of his poverty to one endued with deep
insight, who said to him: "Would you be pleased to be blind and have ten
thousand Dirhams?” he answered in the negative. He further asked him: "Would
you be pleased to be mute and have ten thousand Dirhams?” he answered in the

The quarter of the saviors
192
negative. He further asked him: "Would you be pleased to have your hands and
legs cut off and have twenty thousand Dirhams?" he answered in the negative.
He further asked him: "Would you be pleased to be mad and have ten thousand
Dirhams?" he answered in the negative. He said to him: "Then, do you not feel
shy of complaining your Lord Who has given you things equal to fifty thousand
Dirhams?"
It is related that one of the reciters was given to severe poverty by which he
was disturbed so much. He saw in a dream somebody asking him: "Do you like
that we cause you to forget the Surah of Al-An'am and you have one thousand
Dinars?" he answered in the negative. He asked: "Then, the Surah of Hud?" he
answered in the negative. He asked: "Then, the Surah of Yusuf?" He answered in
the negative. He counted many Surahs for him and the man gave the same
answer each time. On that he said to him: "Then, do you complain of poverty
although you have as much as one hundred thousand Dinars?" In the morning,
his state of anxiety was over.
Once Ibn As-Sammak entered upon one of the caliphs who had a mug of
water from which he was drinking. He asked him to give him admonition. He
said: "Had you not been given that sip of water but for your whole property,
otherwise you would have remained thirsty: Would you have given your
property?" the caliph answered in the affirmative. He further asked him: "Had
you not been given it but for your entire kingdom: would you have conceded it?"
he answered in the affirmative. On that he said to him: "Then, rejoice not of a
kingdom which is not equal to a sip of water." It seems then that the favor of
Allah Almighty on a man concerning only a sip of water when he is thirsty is
greater than the dominion of the entire earth.
If the people are predisposed, by nature, to consider only the particular favors
apart from the public and general, let's mention briefly a set of the special favors.
Let's say that no servant investigates his state but that he sees one or more favors
unique to him in which only a limited number of people, and in some cases none
shares him. This is acknowledged by man in three things: mind, character and
knowledge.
As far as mind is concerned, there is no servant of Allah Almighty is
displeased with Him as regards his mind: Each of them thinks he is the most
intelligent among the people. One rarely asks Allah to provide him with mind. It
is out of the honour of mind that the one lacking it rejoices with it in the same
way as the one possessing it does. Hence, if one thinks himself the most
intelligent of people, it is a favor for which he should give thanks to Allah
Almighty. That is because if it is really so, thanksgiving is due upon him; and if it
is not so, then, it is also a favor in his sight for which he should give thanks. If
one buries a treasure, he rejoices with it and thanks Allah for it. If the treasure is
taken without his knowledge, he continues to rejoice and be thankful as long as
he thinks the treasure is still buried in its very place.
As regards moral character, there is no servant does not criticize the others
for what seems to him from their deficiencies and shortcomings. He criticizes
them as he sees himself free from these evils. Indeed, if he does not engage in

193
Book two: Patience and gratitude
criticizing others, at least he should engage in giving thanks to Allah Almighty
Who has made good his moral character and put the others to trial because of
their bad character.
In relation to knowledge, there is no servant but that he knows well his
internal thoughts and hidden ideas, and that which is unique to him alone. Were
the veil to be removed and were his matter to be revealed to anyone else, he
would be put to shame. How then do you think of him if all the people, and not
only one, know his matter? Then, every servant knows about himself something
in which none save Allah shares him. Why does he not then thank Allah
Almighty for the favor of screening his evils and faults from the sight of people
and disclosing only the good to them?
Those are three among the special favors of Allah Almighty with which all
servants acknowledge. Now, let's move from this very special rank to one which
is more general, saying that there is no servant from among the servants of Allah
Almighty but that He endowed him, either in his person, physique, manners,
attributes, residence, family, kinship, honour, or majesty, whether in some or in
all of these he likes,with something so much important to him that if it is taken
away from him, and given to anyone else, he would be displeased. It is like
making him a believer instead of a disbeliever, a living being instead of a non­
living being, a man instead ofan animal, a male instead of a female, a sound
instead of a sick, a perfect instead of a defective, etc. although those
characteristics are almost general and common to a lot of people, if all or at least
any of them is replaced with its opposite, he would be displeased with it.
In many cases, he would not accept that his state be replaced with the state of
anyone else; and this means that his state, at least in his sight, is better than that
of anyone else. Being so, he is then under obligation to Allah Almighty for His
favors, unique to him alone and not to anyone else among His servants. If there
is some whose state he accepts to replace his own state with, let him consider
them, and he will soon know that these who seem better and higher than him in
rank are lesser in number than those who seem inferior and lower than him. But,
why does he look at such as higher than him in order to scorn the favors of Allah
upon him? Why does he not look at such as inferior and lower than him in order
to make much of the favors of Allah upon him? Why does he not make his world
equal to his religion? Is it not that if his soul blames him for a sin he has
committed, he apologizes justifying that there are a lot of sinners and dissolute
men?
In religion, he considers such as inferior and lower than him, unlike the world
in which he always considers such as higher and above him in rank. If most
people are better than him in religion, and he is better than most people in the
world, why should not he give thanks for that? This is why the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "He, who looks at such as
higher and above him in religion, and at such as inferior and lower than him in
the world, Allah writes him among the patient and thankful; and whoever looks
at such as higher and above him in the world, and at such as inferior and lower
than him in religion, Allah does not write him among the patient and thankful."
(At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr).

The quarter of the saviors
Thus, whoever inspects his own state and considers what he is favored with
apart from others, should affirm the Oneness of Allah Almighty for His favors
He bestowed upon him uniquely, particularly he who is favored with following
the sunnah, faith (in Allah and His Messengers and Books), knowledge and
Qur'an. Ranking second to this is disengagement from concerns, health and
security, and so on. For this reason, it is said (in the form of poetic verses):
"Whoever likes to have abundant life and good religion, let him look at such as
higher and better than him in piety, and at such as inferior and lower than him in
wealth." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Whoever does not become free of want with the Signs of Allah Almighty, may
Allah not make him independent." This is a reference to the favor of knowledge.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said:
"Verily, the Qur'an is the richness beside which there is neither richness nor
poverty." (Abu Ya'li and At-Tabarani on the authority of Anas). The Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said too: "He, whom Allah
Almighty endowed with the favor of the Qur'an and thinks that there is anyone
else richer and more wealthier than him, has indeed ridiculed the Signs of Allah
Almighty." (Al-Bukhari in his Tarikh on the authority of Raja' Al-Fanawi). The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" also said: "Not
among us is he who does not get rich by the Qur'an." The Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" also said: "Sufficient is certainty (of
faith) for richness." (At-Tabarani on the authority of Uqbah Ibn Amir).

194

One of the righteous predecessors said: Allah AJmighty says in one of the
Scriptures He revealed: "Indeed, I have made My servant independent from three
things: I have perfected my favor on him and made him not in need of an
authority to seke him, of a physician to remedy him, and of covet of what is in
the hand of his brother." Of that meaning, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" expressed. It is narrated on the authority of
Salamah Ibn Ubaidullah Ibn Mihsan Al-Ansari from his father that he said: The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “He, upon
whom morning comes while being healthy and rest assured, having the
sustenance of his day, seems as if (all of the) world has been combined for him.”
(Ibn Majah).
If you consider the people, you would find almost all of them complaining
and growing of things beyond those three, given that their consequence is evil
upon them. They do not thank the favor of Allah upon him in those three. They
do not thank Allah for the favor of faith with which they attain the abiding bliss
and great dominion. The insightful is he who should rejoice only with the
certainty of faith and knowledge. We know that there are from among the
religious learned scholars such as if all the world is offered to him in return for
his knowledge, he would reject the deal, thinking the favor of knowledge excels
any favor else, since it leads him to come close to Allah Almighty in the hereafter.
If he is promised to get what he expects in the hereafter, and rather is offered the
pleasures of this world in return for the pleasure of knowledge, he would reject
the deal for he knows well that the pleasure of knowledge is never-ending, unlike

195
Book two: Patience and gratitude
the pleasures of the world.
We should not say that whoever turns away from the world suffers from
patience on it, for whoever devotes himself to it also suffers from patience on
preserving and obtaining it, and averting thieves and robbers from it. But
there is difference between both: The pain of the one who turns away from
the world leads him to the pleasure in the hereafter, whereas the pain of him
who devotes himself to it brings about pain for him also in the hereafter. Let
those who turn away from the world recite the following statement of Allah
Almighty: " And slacken not in following up the enemy: if you are suffering
hardships, they are suffering similar hardships; but you have hope from Allah,
while they have none. And Allah is full of Knowledge and Wisdom." (AnNisa* 104)
yrS3 v, • jjntiii 'CtS ^ j

4

Jmpji

oj

au\ oifj

^

i * iLjI ^

^

The way of gratitude has been closed in the face of people due to their
ignorance of the apparent and hidden, private and public favors bestowed upon
them by Allah Almighty.
You may ask: "What is the remedy of those heedless hearts in order to feel
the favors of Allah upon them, perchance they would be grateful?" in reply to
that, let me say that it is sufficient for the hearts of those endued with deep
insight to consider the different kinds of the general favors of Allah Almighty we
have already mentioned. But the hearts of the callous, who does not regard the
favor as favor unless it is unique to him, or unless he is put to trial because of it,
his way is to consider such as inferior to him in rank, and do what some Sufis did,
who used to go everyday to the graves, hospitals and the places where the legal
punishments were established. As for hospitals, he used to go to see the trial to
which Allah put the sick and then regard his health, thereupon he would feel the
favor of health upon him in comparison with the ordeal of ailment upon them,
and then thank Allah Almighty for His favor.
He used to see the criminals who were to be killed, those whose organs cut
off, or these who had to receive many types of punishment as a penalty for
their crimes, thereupon he would give thanks to Allah Almighty for protecting
him from such crimes and punishments, and thank Him for the favor of
security and safety. He used to go to the graves and know that the dearest thing
to the dead is to return to life even for as short as one day, in order for the
sinner to reform himself, and the doer of good to do more good. The Day of
Judgement is the day of mutual loss: the obedient will be given to loss for when
he would see the recompense for his obedience, he would say: "I had power to
do more acts of worship! How great is my loss for I have wasted long times in
what is permissible." But the loss received by the sinner is self-evident. So,
when one sees the graves, and knows that the dearest thing to the dead is to
have in their lives as much as remains in his own life, he might devote the
remaining of his life to do the things for which the dead desire to return to life.
Having done so, he would know the value of the favors of Allah upon him

196
The quarter of the saviors
during the remaining portion of his life. If one knows that, he would give
thanks, by devoting the remaining of his life to that for which life has been
created, i.e. to take from the world provisions for the hereafter. This is the
remedy of those hearts which are heedless of the favors of Allah, perchance
they would be grateful.
Ar-Rabie Ibn Khaithamah, in spite of his deep insight, used to seek the aid
of that way in confirmation of knowledge. He dug a grave in his house. He used
to put a yoke in his neck and lie in it reciting: "O my Lord! send me back (to
life), In order that I may work righteousness in the things I neglected." (AlMu'minun 99-100)
Then, he would stand and say: "O Rabie! You have been given what you
asked for. Then, do righteous works before you ask for return and are given
no answer."
Another thing to remedy the hearts which abstain to give thanks for favors is
to know that if the favor is not appreciated, it would vanish. For this reason, AlFudail Ibn Iyad used to say: "I advise you to persist in gratitude for all favors, for
almost no favor has been removed from the people and then returned to them
once again." According to one of the righteous predecessors: "The favors are like
void animals. So, tie them with gratitude." According to a particular narradon:
"The more the favor of Allah upon a man is great, the more the people become
in need of him. So, whoever deals with them slighdy would expose such favor to
disappear." (Ibn Adi and Ibn Hibban on the authority of Mu'adh Ibn Jabal). Allah
Almighty said: " Verily never will Allah change the condition of a people until
they change it themselves (with their own souls). But when (once) AJlah wills a
people's punishment, there can be no turning it back, nor will they find, besides
Him, any to protect." (Ar-Ra'd 11)
qa ^ Lj j-J s'ja

ft}* Syi

Si31 frjj

iS i

^3-a-j L j$xj ^

^

4®
THIRD PILLAR
THAT IN WHICH PATIENCE AND GRATITUDE SHARE AND ARE
RELATED TO EACH OTHER
Exposition Of The Way In Which Patience
And Gratitude Gather On One Thing
You may argue that what you have mentioned means that Allah Almighty
has a favor in all that exists. But this requires that the ordeal is absent. Then,
what is the significance of patience? If the ordeal is present, then, what is the
sigm icance of gratitude for ordeal? Some claim that we give thanks for ordeal
just as we do for favor. Then, how is it imagined to give thanks for ordeal?
°1|V,1S lt: lma^ne t0 give thanks for that on which we should keep patient? It is
we
own at patience on ordeal summons pain, whereas gratitude for favor

197
Book two: Patience and gratitude
summons pleasure; and both pain and pleasure are opposing. What is the
significance of the statement that Allah Almighty has a favor in all that He has
brought to existence?
In reply to that, it should be known to you that both favor and ordeal exist,
and the affirmation of favor requires the affirmation of ordeal, for both are
opposing. The loss of ordeal is a favor, whereas the loss of favor is a ordeal.
But we have already mentioned that the favor is divided into absolute favor,
like, in the hereafter, the servant's permanent happiness to be in the
neighbourhood of Allah Almighty, and, in the world, like faith and good
manners and what helps one achieve them; and restricted favor, like wealth
which reforms religion from one point and corrupts it from another point.
Similarly, ordeal is divided into absolute and restricted. The example of the
absolute ordeal is, in the hereafter, like the remoteness from the neighbourhood
and presence of Allah Almighty, whether forever or for some time; and, in this
world, like disbelief, disobedience and bad manners, and those lead to the
absolute favor. The example of the restricted ordeal is, like poverty, ailment,
fear, and all kinds of ordeals which belong to the world more than to the
religion.
Thus, absolute gratitude should be for the absolute favor. But no patience is
due in case of the absolute ordeal in this world. Disbelief is a ordeal, and patience
on it is pointless, and the same is true of disobedience. It is incumbent upon the
disbeliever and sinner to leave his disbelief and sin (rather than to keep patient on
them). Every kind of ordeal which man is able to avert from himself, he should
not keep patient on it. If one, for instance, leaves water until he is given to
painful thirst, his patience on that is pointless; and it becomes incumbent upon
him rather to remove the pain (by drinking) than to keep patient on it (as long as
water is available). The real patience is that on a pain which a servant has no way
to remove from himself.
Thus, patience in this world is on a ordeal which is not absolute. And as
long as the favor is not absolute, it may probably be a ordeal from one point
and a favor from another point. In this way, both duties of patience and
gratitude are imagined to gather on it. Richness, for example, might be a cause
of destruction of the rich, by being killed with his family because of his
wealth; and the same is true of health, as well as of all the worldly favors.
Similarly, the restricted ordeal might possibly turn into a favor. For a
particular servant, poverty and ailment might be better for him, and were he
to be healthy or rich, he would become transgressing arrogant. Allah Almighty
said: " If Allah were to enlarge the provision for His Servants, they would
indeed transgress beyond all bounds through the earth; but He sends (it)
down in due measure as He pleases. For He is with His Servants Wellacquainted, Watchful." (Ash-Shura 27)
He further said: " Nay, but man does transgress all bounds, In that he looks
upon himself as self-sufficient." (Al-Alaq 6-7)

The quarter of the saviors

198

i0

«*i ;3 of o

o^f oj

»

The Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Indeed, Allah Almighty protects His servant whom He loves in this world, just
as anyone of you protects his patient." (At-Tirmidhi and Al-Hakim).
The same is true of one's family, children and all things included under the
sixteen kinds of favor: all save faith and good manners are imagined to be a
ordeal on some people, and thus their opposites a favor on them. We have
already mentioned that knowledge is perfection and favor for it is one of the
attributes of Allah Almighty. But in some cases, it might turn into a ordeal and its
loss a favor. A typical example is man's ignorance of his term appointed: It is a
favor on him. Were he to know it, this would embitter his life. So is his ignorance
of what men hide from him concerning his kinship and relatives: it is a favor on
him; and were this to be revealed to him, he might probably become envious and
resentful. So is his ignorance of the blameworthy characteristics of others: Were
he to know them, he would dislike and harm them, which would be of evil
consequence on him in the world and the hereafter. The same is true of Allah's
concealment of the Day of Judgement, the Night of Power, the hour in which
supplication receives answer on Friday, etc: All of this is a favor for it prompts
one to endeavor more and more. This is the favor of Allah Almighty concerning
ignorance.
It is true that there is a favor for Allah Almighty in all that exists. This applies
to all things, and even the pain, in some cases, might also be a favor on him in
whom it is created. The pain received by the disbelievers in the fire of Hell is a
favor, if not on them, on the faithful believers, for the calamities of a people
might avail others. Had Allah Almighty not created punishment therewith to
punish some people, those blessed in joy would have not recognized the
significance of their comfort in comparison with them. The joy of the inhabitants
of Paradise is multiplied by thinking about the pains of the denizens of fire. Do
you not see that the inhabitants of the earth does not rejoice with the sunlight
given their dire need for it, just for it is common almost to all the people, nor do
they rejoice with the adornment of the sky given that it excels their
ornamentations on earth, just because it is generally common to all of them? It is
true then that Allah Almighty has not created a thing without a wisdom lying
behind it, nor has He created a thing without a favor in it, whether on all or at
least on some of His servants. There is also, in the creation of ordeal a favor
whether on the tried or on anyone else. What is then not an absolute favor nor an
absolute ordeal is fitting for both duties of patience and gratitude to gather on it.
But you may argue: "But both are opposing: there is no patience but on
anxiety, nor is there any gratitude but for joy. How then should they gather?" In
reply, it should be known to you that a thing might be a cause of grief in some
cases, which summons patience, and a cause of joy in other cases, which
summons gratitude. In poverty, ailment, fear and ordeal in this world, there are
five things for which the heedless should give thanks.
The first is that there is no ailment nor poverty which afflicts a man but that
there is what is greater than it which might afflict him, for Allah's decrees are

i

I

199
Book two: Patience and gratitude
infinite. Had one's ailment or poverty been multiplied by Allah Almighty, who
would have averted it from himself? So, he should give thanks for receiving no
greater than it in this world.
The second is that his calamity might have possibly been in his religion. A
man asked Sahl: "A thief entered my house and stole my luggage. What should I
do?" On that he said: "Thank Allah for had Satan entered your heart and
corrupted your faith in the Oneness of Allah, what would you have done with it?"
this is why Jesus "peace be upon him" sought with Allah in his supplication: "O
Allah! Make not my calamity in my religion." Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be
pleased with him" said: "I have not been tried with a ordeal without being under
obligation to Allah concerning four favors in it: that it has not been in my
religion; that it has not been more grievous than it; that I have not been deprived
of pleasure because of it; and that I expect reward for it."
One of the masters of hearts had a friend, whom the ruler put in prison, and
when he sent to him to inform him and complain to him, he told him to thank
Allah. Then, the ruler punished him by beating, and when he sent to his friend to
inform him and complain to him, he told him to thank Allah. Then, a Magian was
brought and put in custody with him, and tied with the same fetter, and there was
a link in his foot and another link in the foot of the Magian. Whenever anyone of
them wanted to stand to answer the call of nature, the other would stand and go
with him and wait until he would finish. He sent to his friend to inform him and
complain to him, and he told him to thank Allah Almighty. He sent to him
asking: "Until which time should I continue to thank Allah? Is there any ordeal
more grievous than that?" his friend, the master of heart, said to him: "Had the
same belt been put round your and his waists, what should you have to do?"
Whoever then is afflicted with a ordeal which he reflects well inwardly or
outwardly, he would realize that he would have deserved what is more grievous
than it sooner or later. If one hundred lashes are due on you, and you have been
lashed only ten, then, you should give thanks to him who reduced the
punishment from you. Similarly, whoever deserves that both his hands be cut off
and only one has been cut off, he should give thanks to him who reduced the
punishment from you. For this reason, an old respectable man was walking in the
street when a bowl of ashes was poured on his head. On that he fell in
prostration out of thankfulness to Allah Almighty. When he was asked about that
he said: "I expected a bowl of fire to be poured on my head. And now since it
was only ashes, it should be a favor."
You may argue: "But even, how should I rejoice given that I see that a group
of people, though more disobedient and sinful than I am, and even the
disbelievers, have not been afflicted with the same calamities and distresses as I
have been?" in reply, it should be known to you that such of punishment and
affliction as kept for the disbeliever is more and more, and he is given respite
until he increases in sin and crime, as confirmed by Allah Almighty: " We grant
them respite that they may grow in their iniquity: but they will have a shameful
punishment." (A1 Imran 178)

The quarter of the saviors
As for sins, how should you know that one is more sinful than another? It
may be that only an evil passing thought occurs to the mind about Allah's
attributes and acts is more sinful than drinking alcoholic drinks and committing
fornication, and all sins to be committed with organs. That is die significance of
die statement of Allah Almighty: " and you thought it to be a light matter, while it
was most serious in die sight of Allah." (An-Nur 15)

200

4

^^

^

How then should you come to know that anyone else is more sinful than you?
It may be diat his punishment has been deferred to the hereafter, whereas yours
has been hastened on for you in this world, for which you should give thanks to
Allah Almighty.
That is the third point of thankfulness, i.e. there is no punishment but that it
is imagined diat it should be deferred to the hereafter. To be sure, the calamines
of this world might be alleviated and reduced by other means, unlike those of the
hereafter which are constandy permanent, and would never be reduced by
anything whatsoever. Whoever has his punishment hastened on for him in this
world would not be punished for the same sin once again in the hereafter as
stated by the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "If a
servant commits a sin and then is afflicted with a calamity or distress in this
world, Allah Almighty is too generous to punish him for it once again in the
hereafter." (At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah on the authority of Ali).
The fourth is that this affliction or calamity has been doomed to him in the
Mother of the Book, and he should inevitably receive it sooner or later. But since
he received it in this world, it was over for it was removed from him. Which
comfort one might get better than this? To be sure, this is a favor in its own right.
The fifth is that the reward he would get for it is more. However, the
calamities of this world are ways to the hereafter from two perspectives:
The first perspective is in the same way as the hateful medicine is a favor on
the patient, and the prevention of a child from playing is a favor on him, for were
he to be left to play as much as he liked, this would have impeded him from
acquisition of knowledge and etiquettes, losing thereby his entire lifetime.
Similarly, the wealth, family, relatives, organs and parts of body, including even
the eye, the dearest to man, might be a cause of his destruction in many cases;
and also the mind, the greatest and the most valuable, might lead to destruction.
The atheists would hope, in the hereafter, that had they been mad or lost their
mind in this world before they behaved in the religion of Allah with their minds
in the very manner that led to their destruction.
There is nothing but that man should imagine that he has a religious good
therein. Thus, he should have good assumption about Allah Almighty, and
estimate that it is good for him for which he should give thanks to Allah. The
wisdom of Allah is all-embracing and He is more acquainted with the benefits
and interests of His servants. In the morrow, the servants would thank Allah for
the ordeals when they see the reward they would receive for them from Allah
Almighty, just as the child, after maturity and attainment of the age of puberty,
thanks his mister and father for beating and disciplining him until he was able to

Book two: Patience and gratitude

201

acquire knowledge. To be sure, the ordeal from Allah Almighty is out of
discipline, and He takes care of His servants more perfecdy and completely than
fathers do of their children.
In this connection, it is narrated that a man said to the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: "Advise me." He said: "Do not abuse
Allah in anything He has decreed on you." (Ahmad and At-Tabarani on the
authority of Ubadah). In another context, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” looked at the sky and then laughed. When he
was asked about that he said: "I wonder at the Divine Decree of Allah for the
faithful believer: if He decrees prosperity for him, he would be pleased, and it is
good for him; and if He decrees adversity for him, he would be pleased, and it is
good for him." (Muslim on the authority of Suhaib).
The other perspective is that the source of destructive sins is the love for this
world, and the source of means of salvation is to desert with heart from the
abode of deception, to receive favors as much as one likes without being mixed
with ordeals and distresses summons self-assurance and intimacy to this world
until it comes to be like Paradise for him. This is why he feels much pain at death
because of his would-be departure from it. But if he suffers much trials and
ordeals, he would be disturbed and annoyed by it, with the result that it would
turn to be a prison for him, and his salvation from it would be the greatest
pleasure he could ever have, for it would be like salvation from the prison. That
is the significance of the statement of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him”: "This world is the believer's prison and disbeliever's
Paradise." (Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah). The disbeliever stands for
such as turns away from Allah Almighty, and intends nothing but the life of this
world with which he is reassured and pleased. The faithful believer stands for
such as wholeheartedly absconds from this world and has much longing for
departure from it. Disbelief is apparent in part and hidden in part. As much as
one loves the world, the hidden polytheism circulates in his body. The absolute
Unitarian is he who loves only (Allah) the One, the Real.
That is the perspective from which the trial has favors with which man
should rejoice. The feeling of pain here is necessary. It is like your pleasure, when
you are in dire need to get yourself cupped, with a cupper who volunteers to cup
you, or, when you are in need of medicine, with the physician who volunteers to
give you medicine, no matter painful or bitter the cupping or medicine might be.
You feel pain and pleasure at the same time. You keep patient on pain, and give
thanks for the cause of pleasure. Any worldly trial is like the medicine which
seems painful at the moment and beneficial in the future. If a man entered the
house of a king in which he saw a beautiful woman, he would dislike to come out
of it no matter how evil it might be to him for he would be affable with a house
in which he could not stay any longer. Should his stay in it put him to the risk of
causing the king to see and thus punish him for that, and at the same time, should
something hateful happen to him which forced him to come out (before the
king's arrival), it would be a favor on him.
The world then is an abode, which people enter from the gate of the

The quarter of the saviors
202
womb and come out of it from the gate of the grave. What makes them
affable with the abode is an ordeal; and what disturbs their hearts from it and
interrupts their intimacy to it is a favor on them. Whoever knows that well is
imagined to give thanks for trials as well as for favors; and whoever does not
know that is unimagined to give thanks for them, for gratitude follows the
knowledge of the favor. Whoever does not believe that the reward he would
receive for the calamity is greater than the calamity itself is unimagined to give
thanks for the calamity.
It is related that a Bedouin consoled Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with
both" for the death of his father, saying: "Be patient, so that we would be
patient with you, for the patience of the wards always follows that of their head.
The reward you would receive after Al-Abbas is better than him; and Allah is
better than you to Al-Abbas." On that Ibn Abbas commented: "None has ever
consoled me better than him." However, there are so many narrations about
keeping patient on calamities. The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him” said: "Whomever Allah intends good for, He afflicts him
(with calamities in this world to purify him)." (Al-Bukhari on the authority of
Abu Hurairah). The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him” further said: Allah Almighty says: "If I afflict anyone of My servants with
a calamity in this world which he receives with good patience, I would feel shy,
on the Day of Judgement, to set up a balance or spread a scroll for him (to
reckon him)." the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him”
also said: "No servant is afflicted with a calamity for which he says as he is
commanded by Allah Almighty to say, i.e. "We all are to Allah, and to Him we
all shall return. O Allah! Reward me for my calamity, and give me a better
recompense", but that Allah Almighty does that for him." The Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said too: Allah Almighty says:
"He, from whom I have taken away his two cherished organs (i.e. his eyes), his
reward would be the eternal stay in My House (Paradise), and the (honour of)
looking at My Countenance."
It is related that a man said to the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him”: "O Messenger of Allah! I have lost my property, and my
body has become faint." On that the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him” said: "No good lies in him who does not lose his property
and whose body does not become faint. Verily, if Allah loves a servant, He
would put him to trial, and if He puts him to trial, He would cause him to be
patient" (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri). The
Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said: "A man
might have a rank with Allah Almighty which he does not attain with a deed
until he is afflicted by Allah in his body; and it is by this that he then attains it."
(Abu Dawud on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Khalid As-Sulami from his
father from his grandfather).
It is narrated on the authority of Khabbab Ibn Al-Aratt "Allah be pleased
with him" that he said: We complained to The Messenger of Allah “Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him” (of the persecution inflicted on us by the

203
Book two: Patience and gratitude
infidels) while he was sitting in the shade of the Ka’bah, leaning over his Burdah
(i.e. covering sheet). We said to him, "Would you seek help for us? Would you
pray to Allah for us?" the colour of his face changed into red and he said:
“Among the nations before you a (believing) man would be put in a ditch that
was dug for him, and a saw would be put over his head and he would be cut into
two pieces; yet that (torture) would not make him give up his religion. His body
would be combed with iron combs that would remove his flesh from the bones
and nerves, yet that would not make him abandon his religion. By Allah, this
religion (i.e. Islam) will prevail till a traveler from Sana (in Yemen) to Hadramaut
will fear none but Allah, or a wolf as regards his sheep, but you (people) are
hasty." (Al-Bukhari).
It is related on the authority of Ali "Allah be pleased with him" that he said:
"Whoever is put in prison by the ruler wrongfully and he dies, is a martyr; and if
he is beaten until he dies, he would be a martyr." The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "It is out of honouring and
respecting Allah Almighty not to complain of your pain nor make a mention of
your calamity." According to Abu Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased with him": "You
give birth (children) to die, inhabit (the earth) to be destroyed later, covet of what
is perishable and leave what remains. Behold! How good are the three hateful
things: ailment, poverty and death." It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah
be pleased with him" that he said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: "If Allah intends good for a servant and wants to purify
him, He would pour trials and afflictions on him. If he invokes Him, the angels
would say: "This voice is known to us." If he invokes Him once again saying: "O
Lord!" He would say: "I am responding to your call O My servant, and all
happiness be in your hand. You would ask Me for nothing but that I would give
it to you or avert from you and keep with Me for you what is better." When it is
the Day of Judgement, the people of good deeds would be brought and given
their reward in full according to the balance of deeds: prayer, fasting, almsgiving
and Hajj; and when the people of trials and afflictions are brought, no balance
nor scroll would be made to them: the reward would be poured on them in the
same way as trials and afflictions were poured on them in the world. At that time,
the people who were healthy in this world would like that were their bodies to be
filed with files, for the reward they would see the tried people would get apart
from them. This is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty. "Those
who patiently persevere will truly receive a reward without measure!" (Az-Zumar
10)

i

A r*>1

' &y- M $

It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them" that
one of the Prophets made a complaint to his Lord saying: "O Lord! The believer
obeys You and avoids sins, but you keep away the world pleasures from him and
bring trials before him, whereas the disbeliever disobeys You and dares to
commit sins, but You keep away trials from him and bring the world pleasures
before him." On that Allah Almighty revealed to him: "All trials and servants
belong to Me, and all celebrate My praises. It may be that a believer has

The quarter of the saviors
204
committed sins, thereupon I keep away the world pleasures from him and bring
trials before him instead to make expiation for his sins until he meets Me to be
rewarded according to his good deeds. Therefore, the disbeliever might have
good deeds, thereupon I enlarge sustenance for him and keep away trials from
him, in order to be rewarded according to his good deeds in this world until he
meets Me to be requited according to his evil deeds."
It is narrated that when Allah Almighty revealed: " whoever works evil, will be
requited accordingly. Nor will he find, besides Allah, any protector or helper."
(An-Nisa' 123)
i @3

^3 ^3

cr?^ ^3 ‘-ti

a- }

Abu Bakr As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased with him" said: "How should one
rejoice after that Verse?" the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "May Allah forgive for you O Abu Bakr! Do you not fall ill? do
you not receive harm? Do you not grieve? It is with this that you are requited (for
your evil works)." (At-Tirmidhi and others). It is narrated on the authority of
Uqbah I bn Amir "Allah be pleased with him" that he said: the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "If you see that a man is
given what he likes although he persists in sin, you should know that he is seized
by degrees." Then, he recited the following statement of Allah Almighty: " But
when they forgot the warning they had received, We opened to them the gates of
all (good) things, until, in the midst of their enjoyment of Our gifts, on a sudden,
We called them to account, when lo! they were plunged in despair!" (Al-An'am
44)
i^jjI

13]

0*3^
^

-

f

i

*

I3jj

^

L-

llii

'

(Ahmad, At-Tabarani and Al-Baihaqi).
It is narrated on the authority of Al-Hassan that one of the companions of
the Prophet saw a woman which he knew from the Pre-Islamic days of
ignorance. He talked with her and then left her and went away. But he turned his
face towards her while walking until a wall struck him and injured his head. He
came to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and
told him. The Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "If Allah Almighty intends
good for a servant, He would hasten on his punishment for his sin in this world."
(Ahmad and At-Tabarani on the authority of Al-Hassan from Abdullah Ibn
Ma’qil). Ali "Allah be pleased with him" said: "Should I not tell you about the
Holy Verse in the Qur'an which gives the greatest hope?" they answered in the
affirmative, thereupon he recited to them: " Whatever misfortune happens to
you, is because of the things your hands have wrought, and for many (of them)
He grants forgiveness." (Ash-Shura 30)

The misfortunes in this world ensue from committing sins. If Allah
punishes the sinner in this world, He is too generous to punish him for it once
again in the hereafter. If He excuses him in this world, He is too generous to

Book two: Patience and gratitude

205

-----------------------------

punish him for it on the Day of Judgement. It is narrated on the authority of
Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that the Prophet "peace be upon him" said:
"No servant takes two sips dearer to Allah than a sip of anger which he curbs
with forbearance (for the Sake of Allah), and a sip of misfortune for which he
keeps patient. No drop is shed dearer to Allah Almighty than a drop of blood
to be shed in the Cause of Allah, or a drop of tear to be shed amidst the
darkness of night while one is prostrating, and none is seeing him but Allah
Almighty. No servant takes two steps dearer to Allah than a step to be taken to
perform the obligatory prayer, and a step to keep good relation with his kith
and kin." (Abu Bakr Ibn Lala, Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami and Ibn Majah).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: A child belonging to Solomon, son of David, "peace be upon
them" died and he grieved for him so much. Two angels came to him in the
form of two foes and knelt before him. One of them said: "I have sowed seed
and when it yielded, this man came upon it and damaged it." Solomon asked the
other about his opinion and he said: "It was on the main road." Solomon
"peace be upon him" asked him: "Why have you then sowed the seed on the
main road? Do you not know that this road is necessary for people?" he replied:
"Then, why do you grieve for your child? Do you not know that death is the
way to the hereafter?" On that Solomon repented to his Lord and grieved not
for any child afterwards.
Once Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz entered upon one of his children and he was
fatally ill. He said to him: "O my son! To be in my balance is dearer to me than I
be in yours." He said: "O my father! What you like is dearer to me than what I
like." It is narrated that once, the death news was announced to Ibn Abbas "Allah
be pleased with them" of one of his sons thereupon he said: "We all belong to
Allah, and to Him we all shall return. It is a defect screened by Allah, a burden
sufficed by Allah, and a reward given by Allah Almighty." Then he descended
and offered a two-rak'ah prayer and said: "We have done what Allah commanded
us to do. Allah Almighty said: " Nay, seek (Allah's) help with patient perseverance
and prayer: it is indeed hard, except to those who bring a lowly spirit." (AlBaqarah 45)

i©

X!

^13

}

In another context, the death news was announced to Ibn Al-Mubarak of one
of his children. A Magian whom he recognized came to console him and said to
him: "The radonal should do today what an ignorant might do five days later."
Ibn Al-Mubarak said: "Write this phrase from him." A religious scholar said:
"Indeed, Allah Almighty puts a servant to trial from dme to time until he walks
on the earth as sinless." According to Al-Fudail: "Allah Almighty fosters His
believing servant with trials in the same way as anyone of you fosters his family
with good." According to Hadm Al-Asamm: "On the Day of Judgement, Allah
Almighty will support His argument on four classes of men with four persons: on
the rich with Solomon "peace be upon him", on the poor with the Christ "peace
be upon him", on the slaves with Joseph "peace be upon him", and on the patient
with Job "peace be upon him"."

206

The quarter of the saviors

It is narrated that when Zechariah "peace be upon him" escaped from the
disbelievers among the children of Israel and hid himself in the tree and they
learnt his place of escape, they brought a saw and started to saw the tree until the
saw touched his head thereupon he moaned. Allah Almighty revealed to him: "O
Zechariah! Should you moan once again, 1 would erase your name from the list of
Prophethood." On that Zechariah "peace be upon him" kept silent biting his
finger until his body was cut into two halves. According to Abu Mas'ud AlBalkhi: "Whoever is afflicted with a calamity and he tears his clothes or slaps his
front, seems as if he takes a lance to fight his Lord Almighty." Luqman "peace be
upon him" said: "O my son! The gold is tested with fire, and the righteous
servant is tested with trial. If Allah likes a people, He puts them to trial: whoever
is pleased attains the good pleasure (of Allah); and whoever is displeased incurs
displeasure (of Allah upon himself)."
Al-Ahnaf Ibn Qais said: One night I had a tooth ache and in the morning I
complained to my paternal uncle: "I have not slept because of the severe pain in
my molar tooth until I removed it." He said to me: "You have talked much about
the ache of your molar tooth only on one night. I lost my eye thirty years ago,
and none among the people learnt about it." Allah Almighty revealed to Uzair
"peace be upon him": "If you are afflicted with a trial, do not complain Me to
anyone of My creatures, just as I do not complain you to anyone of My angels if
your evil deeds and indignities are raised to Me." We ask Allah Almighty to
screen us out of His great kindness and generosity.
Exposition Of Superiority Of Favor To Ordeal
You may say that these narrations give the impression that the trial is better in
this world than the favor. So, should we ask Allah to endow us with trial instead
of favor? In reply to that, let me say that there is no point to do so, for it is
narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
used to seek refuge with Allah in his supplication from the trial of the world and
the trial of the hereafter. (Ahmad on the authority of Bishr Ibn Abu Arta'ah). He
and the other Prophets "peace be upon them" used to say: "O Lord! Give us a
good deed in this world and a good deed in the hereafter." (Al-Bukhari and
Muslim on the authority of Anas). They also used to seek refuge with Allah from
the enemy's schadenfreude. When Ali "Allah be pleased with him" said in his
supplication: "O Allah! I ask You for patience." On that the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to him: "You have asked for trial.
But rather ask for wellbeing." (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Mu'adh).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased with
him" that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Ask Allah (to endow you with) wellbeing, for none is given better than wellbeing
save certainty (of faith)." (Ibn Majah and An-Nasa'i). By certainty, he referred to
the wellbeing of heart from the disease of ignorance and doubt. However, the
wellbeing of the heart is higher than the wellbeing of the body. According to AlHassan: "The good in which there is no evil is the wellbeing that is mixed with
gratitude. Indeed, many are the unthankful beneficiaries." According to Mutarrif
Ibn Abdullah: "To be healthy and give gratitude is dearer to me than to be put to

Book two: Patience and gratitude

207

trial and keep patient." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said in his supplication: "Your wellbeing is dearer to me." (Ibn Ishaq
in his Sirah, and it is a part of his supplication therewith he supplicated Allah on
the day he set out to Ta'if).
This is self-evident. Therefore, the trial is regarded a favor by two
considerations: the first is that it is so in comparison with what is more severe
and grievous than it whether in the world or in religion. The other pertains to the
expected reward for it. So, we should ask Allah Almighty to perfect favor in the
world, and avert the trial and hardship, and ask Him the reward in the hereafter
for gratitude for His favor, for He is to give for gratitude what He gives not for
patience.
You may argue that one of the righteous said: "Would that I be a bridge to be
held over the fire on which all the people cross and are saved, and I remain in the
fire." Is it not that such ask Allah for trial (other than favor)? In reply to that, it
should be known to you that it is related that Samnun, who asked for trial, was
tried with sexual impotence, after which he used to go round the elementary
schools and say to the children: "Supplicate Allah to a good effect for your false
uncle." Furthermore, it is impossible for a man to like to be in the fire of Hell
sacrificing himself for all the people. But love might prevail over the heart until
one thinks himself fitting for the like of that. Whoever drinks the cup of love
would be intoxicated, and whoever is under the influence might extend in his
speech. But once the state of intoxication is over from him, he would perceive
that what he said was not real. Thus, these words belong to the speech of lovers
which is pleasant to hear, but unreliable in fact.
It is narrated that the husband of Fakhitah used to induce her (to have
sexual relation with her), and she used to prevent him. He said to her: "Why do
you refrain from me given that if you like me to turn the entire universe
including even the dominion of Solomon upside down, I would do for your
sake?" when Solomon "peace be upon him" heard him, he invited him and
blamed him for that. On that he said: "O Prophet of Allah! The lover's speech
is unreliable." He indeed has told the truth. Some lovers have come to take
pleasure in the trial so long as they feel they please Allah Almighty more than
they do in wellbeing so long as they do not feel they please Allah Almighty. If
His pleasure with them is in the trial, the trial would become dearer to them
than wellbeing. This state is not unlikely once love prevails over the heart. But it
is not constantly durable; and even if it is constantly durable, is it a healthy
state? The verification of this matter is unfitting for this topic in issue. The
point is that it seems from what we have mentioned that wellbeing is better
than trial. So, we ask Allah to endow us with forgiveness and wellbeing in
religion, world and hereafter.
Explication Of Which Is Better: Patience Or Gratitude
It should be known to you that this matter is debatable between people some
of whom favor patience, and some gratitude, and others make them equal, and
others differentiate between both according to the different states and conditions.
Each group support their argument with words which are troubled and irrelevant.

1

The quarter of the saviors
208
So, to transmit their words is of no significance. It is rather better to initiate to
show the truth saying:
In order to show this, there are two stations:
The first is the station of simplicity. It is to consider the outward side of the
matter without delving into its truth. It is that with which the laymen should be
addressed, for they fall short of perceiving the abstruse facts. It is this kind of
speech that the preachers should adopt in their preachings, for the purpose of
their speech is to reform the laymen. The suckling woman, for instance, should
not foster the babe with the fat and fleshy birds or the edible kinds of sweet, but
she should nourish him with no more than the good and fresh milk, and forbid
the sweet food from him until he grows up enough and becomes able to eat and
digest it well. This station requires to consider the apparent concept of the texts
of Sharia, and it gives preference to patience over gratitude.
Although there are many narrations in favor of the excellence of gratitude, if
they are to be compared with the narrations in favor of the excellence of
patience, it seems that patience is more excellent. The Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The best things you have been
given are certainty (of faith) and die determination of patience." According to
another narration: "The most thankful among the inhabitants of the earth would
be brought and rewarded by Allah Almighty with the reward of the thankful; and
the most patient among the inhabitants of the earth would be brought and it
would be said to him: "Would you be pleased to be rewarded like the reward We
have given to that thankful?" he would say: "Yes O Lord!" Allah would say: "Nay!
I have bestowed favor on him (the thankful) for which he gave thanks, whereas I
tried you and you kept patient. I would multiply your reward for it." Then, he
would be given many times the reward of the thankful." In confirmation of that,
Allah Almighty said: "those who patiently persevere will truly receive a reward
without measure!" (Az-Zumar 10)

iO

-Mi

1

jy LiiJ ^

As for the Prophet's statement: "The thankful eating is in the same position
of the patient fasting" (At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah on the authority of Abu
Hurairah) indicates to the excellence of patience. Gratitude here is mentioned by
way of exaggeration in order to be raised up to the position of patience. Had it
not been understood from Sharia that patience is higher in rank, raising up the
gratitude to its rank would have not been an exaggeration to overestimate
gratitude. It is like his statement: "The (performance of prayer on) Friday is the
pilgrimage of the indigent, and the woman’s' Jihad is her good companionship
with her husband." (The first half of Al-Harith Ibn Usamah on the authority of
Ibn Abbas; and the second half is narrated on the authority of At-Tabarani on
the same authority). Or like his statement: "The drunk is like the idolater." To be
sure, in simile, the compared with should be higher in rank than the compared.
The statement that "Patience constitutes half the faith" does not indicate that
gratitude is like it.
It is narrated that the Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "The last to enter
Paradise among the Prophets would be Solomon, son of David "peace be upon

Book two: Patience and gratitude

209

them" due to his great dominion (he had in the world); and the last to enter
Paradise among my companions would be Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf due to his
great richness (he enjoyed in this world)." (At-Tabarani on the authority of
Mu'adh Ibn Jabai). According to another narration, "Solomon would enter
Paradise forty years after all the Prophets." According to another narration, the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "All gates of
Paradise have two posts, except that of patience, which has only one post; and
the first to enter through it would be the men of trial, led by Job "peace be upon
him"."
All the narrations that support the good merits of poverty indicate to the
excellence of patience, for patience is the state of the poor, whereas gratitude is
the state of the rich. That is the station with which the laymen are satisfied. It is
sufficient for them to receive the suitable preaching and definitions which
contribute in the righteousness of their religion.
The other station is to let the men of knowledge and deep perception of facts
and real nature of things know by way of revelation and disclosure. If there are
two abstruse matters, the comparison between them is impossible unless the real
nature of each is revealed. Each revealed thing is divided into many divisions and
to compare between them in total is impossible unless each division is separated
to be compared with its counterpart. It is only in this way that preponderance of
anyone of them over the other seems evident. Patience and gratitude are of many
divisions and branches. So, the preponderance or shortage of anyone of them in
total is impossible to seem well.
We have already mentioned that the components of those stations are three:
sciences, states and works. The same is true of gratitude and patience. When they
are compared, from the first sight, it seems to the beholders of the outward sides,
that sciences are intended for states, and states for works, and thus works are the
best. But in the view of the masters of insights, the matter is different. According
to them, works are intended for states, and states for sciences, which seem the
best, followed by states and then by works.
As for each of those three individually, they are different and superior to each
other. The best of knowledge, for example, are the sciences of Disclosure
(Mukashafah), and they are superior to the sciences of practical religion
(Mu'amalah). The sciences of practical religion themselves are inferior to practice
itself, for those sciences are intended for practice, and their benefit is to set right
the work. The scholar of the practical religion is superior to the worshipper in so
much as the benefit of his knowledge is general and public. This differs from the
knowledge which has no practical benefit. Let's say that the benefit of reforming
practice is to reform the state of the heart; and the benefit of reforming the state
of the heart is to have the Glory and Majesty of Allah Almighty in His essence,
acts and attribute revealed to him.
The highest of the sciences of Mukashafah is to know Allah Almighty; and it
is an end which is sought for itself, because therewith happiness is attained. Nay!
It is the happiness itself. But the heart might not feel in this world but in the
hereafter that it is the happiness itself. It is the unrestricted free knowledge, and

I

The quarter of the saviors
210
all the other kinds of knowledge are but restricted by, and servants to it, for they
all are intended for it; and they co-operate in so much as they benefit in leading
to that high knowledge. To be sure, the kinds of knowledge lead to each other
directly or indirecdv through intermediaries. The more the intermediaries
between one and the knowledge of Allah Almighty is less, the better and higher it
is.

As for the states, we intend the states of the heart in purification and
disengagement from the stains and occupations of this world with its
creatures. Once it is purified, the true nature of the Real becomes clear to it.
The merits of states are determined by its effect on reforming and purifying
the heart, and preparing it to be fit for receiving the sciences of Mukashafah.
As well as the mirror needs, in order to be polished, many conditions some of
which bring it nearer to polishing than others, the same is true of the heart in
its accompanying states, some of which bring it nearer to purification and
refinement than others. Of course, the more a state draws the heart to
purification, the better and higher it is than others. Similarly, the order of acts
is subject to the same rule in bringing different states on the heart. Each act
either brings on it a state which hinders it from Mukashafah, darkens it and
brings it to the adornment of this world; or brings on it a state which makes it
fit for Mukashafah, purifies it and disconnects it from the ties of this world
and its occupations.
Disobedience is the name of the former; and obedience of the latter. Sins are
different in their traces on the darkness and harshness of the heart; as well as the
acts of obedience are different in their impact on the illumination and purification
of the heart. The difference indeed is determined by the difference of states. In
illustration, let's say that the supererogatory prayer is better than any other
supererogatory deed; Hajj is better than charity; and the standing at night (for
supererogatory prayers) is better than many things other than it, and so forth. But
with deeper verification, we could say that the rich who has wealth, and is
possessed by miserliness and longing for property, to give in charity is better for
him than to stand at night (for supererogatory prayer), and to observe many
voluntary fasts, for fasting is better for him who is seized by the appetite of
stomach, which he likes to break, or him who is hindered by satiety from pure
meditation on sciences of Mukashafah, and he likes to purify his heart by way of
hunger. Of a surety, the miserliness that is obeyed by the miser is among the
destructives which could hardly be removed even by fasts of one hundred years,
or standing for one thousand nights (for supererogatory prayers). Nothing
removes it but to give out money. So, such has to give what he has in charity.
The details of that are explained in the quarter of destructives. So, you should
return to it.
It is by this consideration that the states are different; and at that point, the
absolute answer is not possible. If one asks you about which is better, bread or
water. No absolute answer would be possible for bread is better for the hungry,
and water is better for the thirsty. If both hunger and thirst are combined, then,
let one consider which of them is more prevalent. If thirst prevails hunger, then,

211

Book two: Patience and gratitude

water would be better, and if hunger prevails thirst, then, bread would be better,
and if they are equal, then, both would be equal. Similarly, if it is asked whether
oxymel or lemonade is better, no answer would be possible. It is true that if it is
said to us whether oxymel or absence of piles is better, we could answer that the
absence of piles is much better, for oxymel is intended for it; and so on.
The point then is that to give in charity is to spend money, which leads to a
particular state, i.e. the removal of niggardliness, and the disappearance of the
love for this world from the heart. With the disappearance of the love for this
world, the heart becomes fit for the knowledge of and love for Allah Almighty.
This means that knowledge is the best, followed by state and then by work.
But you may argue that Sharia exhorted people to do deed which it
overemphasized to the extent that He Almighty said in request for charity to be
given (to the poor): "Who is he that will loan to Allah a beautiful loan, which Allah
will double unto his credit and multiply many times? It is Allah that gives (you)
Want or Plenty, and to Him shall be your return." (Al-Baqarah 245)
*jjj uA-yiJ

l

t**, cf, . 7
' * f'S7 , \>
.f7
< v
QjyL^=> liLa-yb I j*>J
■*
UL,jJU (_£ jjl I 5 ^ ^

And: "Know they not that Allah does accept repentance from His votaries
and receives their gifts of charity, and that Allah is verily He, the Oft-Returning,
Most Merciful?" (At-Tawbah 104)
I

I^LlI

4jjl ^

lij 4-Ollp jjP

I

yb <U)l

IJ-Jlju JLi I ^

By that consideration, why should deed represented in giving in charity not be
the best?
In reply to that, it should be known to you that if a physician rates a
medicine, it would not be an indication that it is intended for itself, or that it is
better than health and cure that result from it. But deed is the remedy of the
heart disease, which one rarely feels. It is like leprosy on the face of him who
has no mirror to see his face in it. The only way to cause him to sense it is to
acclaim exaggeratingly the wash of the face with pure and fresh hailstone if
hailstone is to remove leprosy, which exhorts him to wash his face regularly
with hailstone until his ailment is removed. Were he to be asked to do so with
the intention to remove his ailment, he might abandon it under pretext that his
face is fauldess.
Let's give another illustrative example. If one teaches his child knowledge and
Qur'an and likes to have this constantly permanent in his memory, and he knows
that were he to command him to repeat what he learns so much in order to keep
it in memory, the child would not do it under pretext that it is kept in his memory
and there is no need for repetition, thinking that what he keeps in memory at the
moment remains unchangeable across the time. At the same time, if this father
has slaves, and he commands his child to teach them from what he has learnt,
with the promise to be rewarded for that, and of course, whilst teaching them, he
would repeat what he has learnt so many times, in which case, the poor child
would think that the purpose is to teach Qur'an to the slaves, for which he is
i

The quarter of the saviors
212
used. Perhaps this might lead him to say to himself: "What is the matter with me
that 1 have been used to teach the slaves given that I am higher in rank and
dearer than them in the sight of my father?" he also might think that teaching
those slaves might not avail the father himself, which leads him to indulge in
teaching them. The result is that he would forget knowledge and become
deprived of its benefit, by way of a false deception and imagination.
Some of the straying people have been deceived by that method, under
pretext that Allah is not in need of their worship or to ask them for loan,
wondering about the significance of His statement: "Who is he that will loan to
Allah a beautiful loan, which Allah will double unto his credit and multiply many
times?" (Al-Baqarah 245)
^

5y;.. e-^=> LiL*-b> I .>4,j jA-q.*' va.*3

I ^s>jju (_£ 11 l Ii

^

They said: "had Allah willed to feed the indigent, He would have provided
them with food. Thus, there is no need for us to spend our wealth on them."
Allah says about some of them: " And when they are told, "Spend you of (the
bounties) with which Allah has provided you," The Unbelievers say to those who
believe: "Shall we then feed those whom, if Allah had so willed, He would have
fed, (Himself)? You are in nothing but manifest error." (Ya Sin 47)
b!

ST tCzSy) ^

ijL»i£ b^-AM b$

They also said (as told by Allah): " Those who give partners (to Allah) will say:
"If Allah had wished, we should not have given partners to Him, nor would our
fathers: nor should we have had any taboos."" (Al-An'am 148)

i @)

^

% iSjLIi; % ui=>Li U ST ;U >J i/>Li

0}

Consider then how they had told the truth, and how they had been given to
destruction because of their truthfulness.
Glory be to Allah Who destroys with truthfulness if He so likes, and makes
happy with ignorance if He so likes. He guides many and leaves many to stray.
When they thought they had been served for the benefit of the poor and
indigent, they rejected it and said: "We have no portion in the indigent, and
Allah has no portion in us nor in our property, and it is the same whether we
spend or withhold." In this way they were given to destruction as was the child
when he thought that his father's purpose was the service of the slaves, and did
not sense that his real purpose was to make firm knowledge in his heart in
order to be a cause of his happiness in the world and the hereafter. This
example shows to you how those who were destroyed had been ruined through
that way. The one who takes your wealth indeed extracts the impurity of
destructive niggardliness and love for this world from inside your body, like the
cupper who takes out the corrupt blood and with it the destructive ailment
from inside your body. The cupper then is a servant of you and not you of him;
and he has nothing to do with the blood he takes out of your body. Since the
charity was to purify the inside of bodies from the malicious and wicked
attributes, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
abstained from taking it. He also forbade his kinship to take it and likened it to

213
Book two: Patience and gratitude
the impurities of people.
The point is that deeds affect the heart and according to their effect, the heart
is apt to receive guidance and light of knowledge. That is the universal rule to be
known about the merits of deeds, states and knowledge. Now, let's return to our
main topic about padence and gratitude. Each of them has a knowledge, a state
and a deed. The knowledge, for example of any of them could not be met with
the deed or state of the other. Each should be met with its counterpart in order
for the relevance to seem clear; and after relevance, the superiority might be
distinguished. It may be that if the knowledge of the thankful is met with the
knowledge of the patient, both would refer to the same source. The knowledge of
the thankful is to see the favor of his sight from Allah Almighty; and the patient's
knowledge is to see his blindness from Allah Almighty; and both are equal.
We have already shown that patience might be on doing the act of worship as
well as on abstention from sin. In them, both patience and gratitude are
combined. The patience on doing an act of worship is to be thankful for it. That
is because gratitude refers to using the favor of Allah Almighty in that for which
it is created with wisdom; and patience refers to the firmness of religious motive
versus the motive of inclination and desire. Both patience and gratitude are two
names for the same thing by two different considerations. Firmness of religious
motive versus the motive of inclination and desire is called patience in relation
with the motive of inclination and gratitude in relation with the religious motive.
The religious motive is created for that wisdom, i.e. to overpower the motive of
inclination; and having done so, it will have been used for the wisdom for which
it is created. Both then denote the same thing. How then should a thing be
regarded superior to itself?
Patience then works in three things: obedience, disobedience and affliction.
Its wisdom concerning obedience and disobedience has been shown clearly. As
far as affliction is concerned, it is to lose a favor. The favor might be necessary
like eyes, or unnecessary like the extra wealth that is beyond the need.
As regards what is necessary like eyes, the blind's patience on them is not to
complain, and rather to be satisfied with the fate and ordainment of Allah
Almighty, and not to indulge, because of them, in sins. The gratitude of the
sighted for them is to do two things: the first is not to use them in disobedience
of Allah Almighty, and the other is to use them in obedience of Allah Almighty.
Each of both could hardly be free from patience. The blind is sufficed patience
on the beautiful (unlawful) scenes for he does not see them. If the eye of the
sighted falls on a beautiful scene on which he keeps patient, he would be
thankful for the favor of both eyes; and if he follows his sight, he would be
ungrateful of the favor of both eyes. In this way, patience becomes a part of his
gratitude. Likewise, if he utilizes his eyes in obedience, he would be patient on
obedience.
But even, he might appreciate (the favor of his eyes) by utilizing them in
looking at the wonders of the making of Allah Almighty to reach therewith the
knowledge of Allah Almighty; and in this case, gratitude is better than patience.
Had it not been for that, Shu'aib "peace be upon him" who was blind from

1

The quarter of the saviors
214
among the Prophets would have been higher in rank than Moses "peace be upon
him". That is because he kept patient on the loss of sight versus Moses who did
not keep patient. Had it not been for that too, it would have been out of
perfection for man to lose the favor of all of his limbs and organs and be left as
only bones covered with flesh. But this is debatable for every organ and part of
body is an instrument for religion, and by losing it, one corner of religion is
missed. To Appreciate it is to utilize it for the very thing of religion for which it is
created. This is achieved only by patience.
As for what is unnecessary, like what is beyond the need of wealth, if he is
given only what suffices for the minimum requirements of living and he needs
more, to keep patient on it is out of mortification, i.e. the mortification of
poverty. Of a surety, the additional wealth is a favor, but to appreciate it is not
to use it in disobedience of Allah, or to utilize it only in what is good. If
patience is compared with gratitude which is to utilize it in obedience,
gratitude becomes better, for it implies patience, pleasure with the favor of
Allah Almighty, the probable pain of utilizing it on the poor instead of using it
in permissible enjoyment. But if appreciating it is not to use it in
disobedience, and rather to utilize it in permissible enjoyment, in this case,
patience becomes better.
However, the patient poor is better than the rich who withholds his wealth
and spends it on the permissible enjoyment and pleasures, and not the rich who
spends his wealth on what is good. That is because the poor strives himself and
breaks its desires, and is well-pleased with the trial to which he is put by Allah
Almighty; and this state summons power. But the rich follows his desires and
appetence, but is restricted to what is permissible. The permissible is better than
the unlawful. Although power here is necessary to enable him to be patient on
what is unlawful, the power therewith the poor keeps patient is higher and
stronger than that therewith the rich keeps patient on limiting himself to what is
permissible apart from what is unlawful.
All narrations and Holy Verses in which the reward of patience is preferred to
the reward of gratitude are intended for that rank in particular. That is because
what occurs to the mind from the first sight concerning the favor is wealth; and
what occurs to the mind concerning gratitude for richness from the first sight is
only to say 'Praise be to Allah', and not to spend his money in disobedience. But
it does not occur to mind to spend it in obedience. In this meaning, patience
which is understood by the laymen is better than gratitude that is understood by
the laymen. To that meaning Al-Junaid referred when he was asked about
patience and gratitude: which of them is better. On that he said: "The rich is not
praised for he has, nor is the poor for he has not. Both are praised when they
undertake the conditions required each for his state. The condition of the rich
requires many things to befit his attribute, in terms of enjoyment and delights;
and the condition of the poor requires many things to befit his attribute in terms
of grief and disturbance. If both have the conditions required each for his state,
and do not disobey Allah Almighty, no doubt, the one whose attribute is pained
and disturbed is more perfect than him who enjoys and pleases his attribute."

Book two: Patience and gratitude

215

Indeed, what he said is true as regards the third division of both patience
and gratitude. It is said that Abu Al-Abbas Ibn Ata' disagreed with him when
he claimed that the thankful rich is better than the patient poor, thereupon AlJunaid invoked evil upon him and he was afflicted with the murder of his
children, damage of his wealth and loss of his mind for fourteen years during
which he used to say: "The invocation of Al-Junaid has affected me." He then
detracted from his opinion and came to favor the patient poor over the
thankful rich.
If you observe what we have said, you would know that each of both
opinions has its acceptance in many cases. It may be that a patient poor is better
than a thankful rich as we have already mentioned; and in some cases, it may be
that a thankful rich is better than a patient poor. I mean the rich who sees himself
like the poor in so far as he withholds nothing of his wealth for himself more
than what suffices his necessary needs and spends all his wealth on the good
things, or keeps it in service of the needy and indigent. And even if he spends his
wealth, he does not do so to seek majesty or authority, but rather to fulfill the
right of Allah Almighty in His servants. This thankful rich is better than the
patient poor.
You may argue: "The rich does not feel it difficult on himself, whereas the
poor feels poverty difficult on himself, for the former feels the pleasure of
capacity and power, whereas the latter feels the pain of patience. But if the rich
feels pain because of losing money, it is removed by the pleasure of the ability to
spend." In reply to that, it should be known to you that whoever spends his
wealth with good pleasure and gladness is higher and more perfect in rank than
the niggard who spends his wealth with oppression and against his will. The pain
is not required for itself in so much as to discipline oneself. If pain and
mortification are needed in the beginning (of following the path), they are not
needed in the end for in the end what was painful turns to be pleasant.
Absolutely speaking, patience is better than gratitude. But patience is of many
degrees, the lowest of which is not to complain, followed by the good pleasure,
followed by thankfulness for affliction. Similarly, gratitude is of several degrees
and we have mentioned the highest of them. To feel shy of Allah’s consecutive
favors on a servant is gratitude. One's knowledge of his falling short of
thankfulness is gratitude. To apologize for one's lack of thankfulness is gratitude.
His knowledge of the great forbearance and screening of Allah is gratitude. The
acknowledgement that favors are given by Allah Almighty to servants regardless
of their being not worthy of them is gratitude. The knowledge that thankful itself
is one of the favors of Allah Almighty is gratitude. One's good humbleness
before favors is also gratitude. To thank the means (of favors) is gratitude, since
the Messenger of AJlah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Whoever
does not thank the people has not thanked Allah." Abstention from objection
and adherence to good politeness before the benefactor are gratitude. To receive
the favor of Allah with good acceptance is gratitude.
The point is that both patience and gratitude are of infinite states and deeds
with which we could not favor each over the other in general.

L

Sian*!

It is die third book of die quarter of saviors
In the name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Praise be to Allah whose loving kindness and reward are hoped for, whose
stratagems and punishment are feared; who keeps alive the hearts of His allies
with the breath of hope in Him, so that He may urge them on with the
kindnesses of His benefits to alight in His courtyard and to swerve from His
house of tribulation which is the abode of His enemies. And with the lashes of
direatening and His harsh upbraiding He has driven the faces of those who shun
His presence towards the house of His reward and preferment; and he has
blocked them from thwarting His leaders and becoming the butt of His wrath
and vengeance by leading the different types of His creatures with chains of
violence and coercion, and reins of compassion and graciousness, to His Garden.
And die blessing be on Muhammad, Master of His prophets and the most elect
of his vicegerents, and on his family and Companions and relations.
To proceed. Hope and fear are two wings by means of which those who are
brought near fly to every commendable station, and two mounts on which every
steep ascent of the paths of the next world is traversed. And nothing but the
reins of hope will lead to the vicinity of the Merciful and the joy of the Gardens
the man who is distant from hoping and heavy with burdens, who is
encompassed with what the heart abhors and with toils of members and limbs.
And nothing shall avert from the fire of Hell and the painful punishment the man
who is encompassed with the blandishments of lusts and the marvels of pleasures
except the scourges of threatening and the assaults of violence. Consequently
there is nothing for it but an exposition of the essence and merits of them both,
as well as the way of arriving at a junction between the two of them, in spite of
their polarity and mutual antipathy.
We join the mention of them in a single book which is comprised of two
parts, the first part concerning hope and the second part fear.

PART ONE: HOPE
As for the first part, it includes three chapters:
Exposition of essence of hope
Exposition of merit of hope
Exposition of remedy of hope and way in which hope is obtained by it
Let us ask Allah for good success.

CHAPTER ONE: EXPOSITION OF ESSENCE OF HOPE
It should be known that hope is among the sum of the stations of the
pilgrims and the states of the seekers. And the description station is given only
when it is permanent and endures, and state only when transitoriness is hinted at.
Just as yellow is divided into permanent such as the yellow of gold; transitory such as
the yellow of fear; and what comes between these two like the yellow of a sick
216

Book three: Fear and Hope

217

person. Similarly the attributes of the heart follow these divisions and whatever is
not permanent is called a state, because it soon changes, and this is continually
happening in any description of the heart.
We are dealing at present with the essence of hope. Hope also comprises
state, knowledge and deed. Knowledge is the cause which produces the state and
the state decrees the deed. Hope is the comprehensive name of the three. Its
exposition is that everything that confronts you is either what is abhorred or what
is desired, and is divided into what is existent at the moment, what has existed in
the past, and what is expected in the future. When what has existed in the past
occurs to your mind, it is called remembering and recollecting; if what occurs to
your mind is existent at the moment, it is called finding and tasting and
perceiving. It is called finding because it is a state which you find for yourself.
And, if the existence of something in the future occurs to your mind and prevails
over your heart, it is called expectation and anticipation. If the thing expected is
abhorred, with pain in the heart resulting from it, it is called fear and distress. If it
is something desired, with pleasure and relief of heart resulting from the
expectation of it and the attachment of the heart to it and the occurrence of its
existence to your mind, that relief is hope.
Hence hope is the relief of the heart, because of the expectation of what it
esteems desirable. But the desirable thing which is anticipated must have a cause,
so, if the expectation of it is on account of the obtaining of the majority of the
means to it, the name of hope in relation to it is justified. If that expectation is in
spite of the defectiveness of the means to it and their disorder, the name of selfdeceit and stupidity is more justified in relation to the expectation than that of
hope. If the means are not specified either as existent or in mutual contradiction,
the name of wishful thinking is more justified in relation to the expectation of it,
because it is an expectation which is devoid of a cause. And, in any circumstance,
the name of hope and fear does not apply to what is determined. For one does
not say: I hope for the rising of the sun at the time of sunrise and I fear its setting
at the time of sunset, because that is determined. But one does say: I hope that
the rain will fall and I fear lest it should be cut off.
And the Spiritual Directors teach that this present world is the field of the
next world, and the heart is as the earth, and faith is as the seed in it, and
obedience is conducive to the turning over of the earth and the cleansing of it
and the digging of channels and the leading of waters to them; and the heart
which is infatuated with this present world and submerged in it is like swampy
ground in which the seed does not fructify. And the Day of Resurrection is the
day of reaping, and no one reaps except what he has sown, and only he who has
sown the seed of faith grows crops. Rarely is faith profitable in company with a
vicious heart whose moral traits are tainted just as seed does not fructify in
swampy soil. And it is fitting that the hope of the creature for pardon should
equal the hope of the owner of the crops.
For everyone who seeks good ground and casts into it seed of first quality
which is neither moldy nor worm-eaten, who thereafter furnishes it with what is
necessary to it, that is, the conducting of water to it at appropriate times; who

The quarter of the saviors
218
then clears the ground of thorns and weeds and everything that obstructs the
growth of die seed or makes it rot; who then sits down and expects from the
bounty of Allah the warding off of thunderbolts and blights, until his crop is
mature and he arrives at his goal-his expectation is called hope. And, if he
scatters his seed in ground which is baked hard or swampy, which is so elevated
that the water does not flow into it, and does not labour one whit in the
preparation of the seed-if he dien expects a harvest from it, his expectation is
called stupidity and self-deceit, not hope. And, if he scatters seed in ground
which is good but without water, and proceeds to wait for the waters of the
rains where they neither prevail nor are cut off, his expectation is caLled wishful
thinking and not hope. Therefore the name of hope is legitimate only in relation
to the expectation of a thing desired, all of whose means, which come within
the choice of the creature, have been facilitated, and only what does not come
within his choice remains, and this is the bounty of Allah in repelling birds and
blights.
So when the creature sows the seed of faith and irrigates it with the water of
obedience and cleanses the heart from the thorns of vicious moral traits and
expects from the bounty of Allah his being established in that course until death
and the virtue of the Seal that gives access to pardon, such expectation as his is
hope in its essence, commendable in itself, and giving him an incentive for
perseverance and endurance, in accordance with the means of faith, in perfecting
the means of pardon until death. If its preparation with the water of obedience is
cut off from the seed of faith, or, if the heart is remiss, filled with moral
delinquencies, and obstinately persists in seeking the pleasures of this world, and
then expects pardon, its expectation is stupidity and self-deceit. He (Muhammad)
said: The fool is he whose soul follows its passions and who desires of Allah the
Garden. And He (Allah) said: " But after them there followed a posterity who
missed prayers and followed after lusts: soon, then will they face Destruction.”
(Maryam 59)
^ (^5

oijx-jij ojiyaJi i_^pi^

And He said: ” After them succeeded an (evil) generation: they inherited the
Book, but they chose (for themselves) the vanities of this world, saying (for
excuse): "(Everything) will be forgiven us.”” (Al-A'raf 169)
^dP ^

0,5hi- Lj

\y^

And Allah condemned the owner of the garden, when he entered his garden
and said: ”1 deem not that this will ever perish, "Nor do I deem that the Hour (of
Judgment) will (ever) come: even if I am brought back to my Lord, I shall surely
find (there) something better in exchange." (Al-Kahf 35-36)
*pLUl

~C»j dp I jJl coilA

o'

ti* tJli

^

4
1^3- 0^?- ^ (jj Jl O-iij tfdj
Therefore, "To those who believe and do deeds of righteousness has Allah
promised forgiveness and a great reward." (Al-Ma'idah 9)

Book three: Fear and Hope ---------------------------------------------------4 ((f))j?~b

219

y,A]t iiiT a_Pj ^

And blessing achieves completion only by the entering into the Garden. As
for the disobedient person, when he has repented and repaired all that was remiss
through shortcoming, it is proper that he should hope to receive repentance.
With regard to the reception of repentance, when he has come to abhor
disobedience, when sin grieves him and virtue delights him, when he blames
himself and reproves it (evil) and desires repentance and yearns after it, it is
proper that he should hope from Allah the advancement towards repentance
because of his repugnance for disobedience; and his zeal for repentance is
conducive to the cause which may give access to repentance.
And hope is only present after the consolidating of the means and for that
reason He said: " Those who believed and those who suffered exile and fought
(and strove and struggled) in the path of Allah, they have the hope of the Mercy
of Allah: and Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful." (Al-Baqarah 218)

■J ^STJ.

The meaning is that these have a right to hope for the mercy of Allah. He did
not intend by it that the existence of hope is exclusive to them, since others also
may hope, but he has made exclusive to them the right to hope. As for him who
obstinately perseveres in what Allah abhors, and does not upbraid himself
because of it, and does not resolve on repentance and return, his hope of pardon
is stupidity, like the hope of the person who has sown seed in swampy ground
and made up his mind not to cultivate it by leading water to it and cleansing it of
weeds.
Yahya Ibn Mu'adh said: The person who magnifies self-deceit is, in my
opinion, the one who prolongs his sins, while he hopes for pardon without
repentance and expects to draw near to Allah without obedience, and expects
the crops of the Garden with the seed of the Fire, and seeks after the
dwelling-place of obedience with the deeds of disobedience, and expects the
reward without the deed, and has wishful thoughts of Allah in company with
remissness.
You hope for salvation and you have not trodden its paths,
But the ship does not progress on dry land.
Since you are acquainted with the essence of hope and its marks, you know
that it is a state which knowledge has produced through the setting in motion of
the majority of the means, and this state produces zeal to persevere in the
remainder of the means in accordance with what is possible. For the man whose
seed is fine and whose land is good and who has abundance of water is entitled to
his hope, and his legitimate hope will continually urge him towards the oversight
of the ground and the cultivation of it and the clearing of all the weeds which
grow on it. Thus he will not be remiss in any detail of its cultivation until the time
of harvest. This is because hope sets him at the opposite pole from despair, and
despair inhibits cultivation. For whoever 'knows’ that the ground is swampy and

The quarter of the saviors
220
that the water will not flow and the seed will not grow, will, doubdess, as a
consequence, neglect die oversight of the land and toil in its culdvadon.
Hope is a commendable tiling, because it is a source of incendve, and despair
is reprehensible and is the antithesis of hope, because it distracts from work. Fear
is not the antithesis of hope, rather it is a companion to it, as its exposition will
bring out. More, it is another source of incentive, impelling along die path of awe
just as hope impels along the path of inclinadon. Hence the state of hope
produces sustained spiritual combat through actions, and perseverance in
obedience, however fickle circumstances may be. Among its effects are finding
pleasure in unbroken acceptance with Allah, contentment in private prayer with
Him and fondness for deferring to Him. For diese states must be manifest to
everyone who hopes, whether king or commoner, and so how will that not be
manifest to Allah? If it is not manifest, that will be a pointer to preclusion from
the station of hope and descent into the pit of self-delusion and wishful thinking.
This then is the exposition of the state of hope and how knowledge produces
it and how action is produced from it. And a tradition of Zaid Al-Khair is a
pointer to its producing these actions; when he said to the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”: I have come to enquire of you about
Allah's way of identifying the person who aspires and the person who does not
aspire. So he (Muhammad) said: How do you go about it? He said: I have made a
practice of loving virtue and its people, and, whenever I have the capacity for
anything belonging to it, I make haste towards it and I believe firmly in its
reward. And, when anything belonging to it eludes me, I am grieved thereby and
yearn after it. So he said: This is Allah's identification mark in respect of the one
who aspires, and, if He had desired you for other things, He would have prepared
you for them; then He would not be concerned in which of their wishes you
perished. So he (Muhammad) has mentioned an identification mark of the person
by whom virtue is sought, and, consequendy, whoever hopes that there may be
the intention of virtue without this mark is self-deluded.

CHAPTER TWO
EXPOSITION OF MERIT OF HOPE AND INCLINATION TOWARDS IT
It should be knowm that action on account of hope is of a higher order than
action on account of fear, because the creatures who are nearest to Allah are
those wtiio love Him most, and love dominates hope. This is expressed by two
kings, one of wrhom is served through fear of his punishment and the other
through hope of his reward. For this reason what is desiderated, especially at
the time of death, has to do with hope and optimism. He (Allah) said: " Say: "O
my Servants wiio have transgressed against their souls! Despair not of the
Mercy of Allah: For Allah forgives all sins: for He is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful." (Az-Zumar 53)
4

1j

1

jAj j

(Liy JO l

4^ Oi

Thus He proscribed the root of despair. And (it is recorded) in the traditions
about Jacob that Allah revealed to him saying: Do you know why I parted Joseph
from you ? It was because you said: I am afraid that the wolf will eat him, while

221
Book three: Fear and Hope
you are neglectful of him. Why did you fear the wolf and not hope in me ? And
why did you have regard to the negligence of his brothers and did not have
regard to my preserving him ?
And he (Muhammad) said: Truly, not one of you will die, except he has good
expectations of Allah. And he said: Allah says: I am in accord with what my
creature supposes of me, so let him suppose of me what he will. And he came
into the presence of a man who was at the point of death and said: How do you
find yourself ? So he said: I find that I am fearing my sins and hoping for the
mercy of my Lord. So he (Muhammad) said: These two were not united in the
heart of a creature in this homeland, but Allah granted him what he hoped and
made him secure from what he feared. And 'Ali said to a man whom fear had
brought to despair because of his sins: O you, your despairing of the mercy of
Allah is a greater fault than your sins.
Sufyan said: Whoever commits a sin and knows that Allah has assigned it
against him, and (yet) hopes for His pardon, Allah will pardon him his sin. He
continued: For Allah upbraided a group of people saying: "But this thought of
yours which you did entertain concerning your Lord, has brought you to
destruction, and (now) have you become of those utterly lost!" (Fussilat 23)

And He said: "this seemed pleasing in your hearts, and you conceived an evil
thought, for you are a people lost (in wickedness)." (Al-Fath 12)

4 CP Uy.

^ g. jb

^

And he (Muhammad) said: Truly Allah will say to His creature on the Day of
Resurrection: What obstructed you from loathing the hated thing, when you saw
it ? So, if Allah has given him a grasp of his defence, he will say: O Lord, I hoped
in You and 1 feared the people. He (Muhammad) said: So, Allah will say: I have
forgiven you it.
1- According to a sound tradition there was a man who was lending
money to the people, and he was magnanimous to the rich and overlooked the
debts of the destitute, and he met Allah and had not wrought a single good
deed. Allah said: Who has a better right to that than we have? So He pardoned
him because of his optimism and his hope that He would pardon him despite
his being destitute of obedience. And He said: " Those who rehearse the Book
of Allah, establish regular Prayer, and spend (in Charity) out of what We have
provided for them, secretly and openly, hope for a Commerce that will never

fail:
For He will pay them their meed, nay, He will give them (even) more out of
His Bounty; for He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Ready to appreciate (service)." (Fatir
29-30)
And, when he (Muhammad) said: If you knew what I know, then you would
laugh but little and would weep much, and would go out to the hills beating your
breasts and making entreaty to your Lord. Gabriel swooped down and said: Truly

The quarter of the saviors
222
your Lord says to you: Why do you induce despair in My creatures, so that their
hope and longing rebel against them?
And according to the tradition Allah revealed to David: Love Me and love
whoever loves Me and commends Me to My creatures. So he said: O Lord, how
do 1 commend You to Your creatures? So He said: Mention Me for My gracious
goodness and commemorate My bounties and well-doing and their recollection
of that, for they know Me only as One who is gracious.
And Aban Ibn Abu Ayyash had a vision in his sleep (he was in the habit of
recollecting again and again the categories of hope) and he said: Allah halted me
in front of Him and said: What is it that has spurred you on to this habit ? So I
said: I desired to commend You to Your creatures. So He said: I have pardoned
you. And Yahya Ibn Aktham was seen in a vision after his death and it was said
to him: How did Allah deal with you? So he said: He halted me in front of Him
and said: O Shaykh, you have repeatedly committed evil. He continued: Then
trembling took hold of me with respect to what Allah might know. Then I said:
O Lord, this is not the report I had of You. So He said: And what was reported
to you about Me? So I said: 'Abd Ar-Razzaq related to me from Ma'mar, from
Az-Zuhri , from Anas, from Your Prophet, from Gabriel, that You said: I am in
accord with what my creature supposes about Me, so let him suppose about Me
what he will. So I supposed of You that You would not punish me. Allah said:
Gabriel has spoken the truth, likewise My Prophet and Anas and Az-Zuhri and
Ma'mar and 'Abd Ar-Razzaq and yourself. He continued: And I was fitted out
with clothes and the two attendants walked before me to the Garden and I
exclaimed: What joy!
And in the tradition: There was a man of the children of Israel who was
inducing despair in men and was being hard on them. So Allah said to him:
The Day of Resurrection will be a day on which I will make you despair of My
mercy as you have made My creatures despair of it. And he (Muhammad) said:
Truly a man enters the Fire and remains in it one thousand years, calling out:
O Gracious One, O Bounteous One. Then Allah will say to Gabriel: Go and
bring my creature to me. He continued: So he brings him and halts him beside
his Lord, and Allah says: How did you find your place? So he says: An evil
place. So He says: Take him back to his place. So he walks off and turns
round and Allah says: Why are you turning round? So he says: I had certainly
hoped that You would not return me to it, after You had brought me out
from it. So Allah says: Take him to the Garden. And this pointed to his hope
being the cause of his salvation. Let us ask for the boon of success through
His kindness and favour.

CHAPTER 3
EXPOSmON OF REMEDY OF HOPE AND THE WAY IN WHICH THE
STATE OF HOPE IS OBTAINED FROM IT AND BECOMES DOMINANT
It should be known that two types of men have need of this therapy; either
the man over whom despair has become dominant, so that he has neglected
worship; or the man over whom fear has become dominant, and who has been
extravagant in his perseverance in worship, so that he has done injury to himself

223
Book three: Fear and Hope
and his family. And these two examples of men incline away from the equilibrium
towards the two extremes of neglect and excess, and so they have need of the
treatment which will restore them to the equilibrium.
For the person who is disobedient and self-deceived, who has wishful
thoughts of Allah in company with his evasion of worship and his blind
plunging into deeds of disobedience-the therapeutic properties of hope are, in
his case, turned into lethal poisons, just as is the case with honey which is a
cure for the person who is overcome by cold and a lethal poison to the person
who is overcome by heat. More, in the case of the self-deluded person, only
the therapeutic properties of fear can be employed and the means which
excite it, and, for that reason, it is necessary that there should be one to
preach to the people; one benevolendy disposed who observes the incidence
of diseases and treats every disease with its antidote and not with what it has
excess of. For what is sought after is the equilibrium, and the goal with
respect to all attributes and moral traits, and the optimum state of affairs, is
their mean. And, when the mean transgresses upon one of the two extremes,
it is treated with what returns it to the mean, not with what would increase its
tendency away from the mean.
And the present time is one in which it is not expedient that the means of
hope should be employed with the most of men. Yet an exaggerated employment
of threatening, no less, will hardly return them to the highway of truth and the
beaten tracks of rectitude. As for the mention of the means of hope it would
cause them to perish and would destroy them totally. But when they (i.e. the
means of hope) are less burdensome to the heart and more pleasurable to the
appetites, the goal of preaching is no more than to sway hearts (sc. to hope) and
make people speak in eulogies, whatever be the reason for their inclining to hope,
so that the corrupt increase in corruption and the stubborn in their rebellion
through procrastination.
Ali said: The knowledgeable person is simply he who does not make people
despair of the mercy of Allah and does not make them feel secure from the
stratagems of Allah.
And we make mention of the means of hope in order that they may be
employed in the case of the despairing man or the one who has been overcome
by fear, according to the pattern of the Book of Allah and the Practice of His
Messenger. For both embrace hope and fear in union, since these two unite the
means of healing with respect to different kinds of sick people, in order that the
Knowledgeable , who are the heirs of the prophets, may employ one or other of
them according to need, just as the discriminating physician would employ
them and not the quack who supposes that everything that has therapeutic
value will be salutary to every sick person, whatever may be his condition.
The state of hope becomes dominant by means of two things; the one is
reflection, and the other the reciting of the verses (i.e. of the Qur'an) and
traditions and reports' With respect to reflection man reflects on all that we have
mentioned concerning the different kinds of benefits in The Book of Gratitude ,
until he knows the kindnesses of the blessings of Allah to His creatures in this

The quarter of the saviors
world, and the marvels of His wisdom which He has disposed in the constitution
of man, so that He has furnished for him in this world all that is necessary to him
for the maintenance of existence. For example, the means of sustenance and
what is needful to him, such as fingers and nails, and what is adornment to him,
such as the arching of the eye-brows and the variegation of the colours of the
eyes, and the redness of the lips, and other such things by the loss of which the
goal aimed at would not be impaired. Only he would miss thereby the attainment
of beauty. Since the Divine Providence has not left His creatures deficient in the
instances of these minutiae, so that He was not content for His creatures that
accessories and refinements in respect of adornment and necessity should pass
them by, how will He take pleasure in driving them to everlasting destruction?
Moreover, when He ran over mankind with the eye of a physician, He knew
that the most of men have at their disposal the means of happiness in this world,
so that they dislike the translation from this world through death. Even if it were
reported that there was never a single instance of a person being chastised after
death or that there was no gathering (for Judgement), their distaste would not be
non-existent, unless, doubdess, because the means of grace were predominant.
The person who wishes for death is simply a rarity, and then he does not wish for
it except in a rare circumstance, and an unexpected and unfamiliar contingency.
Since the condition of the most of people in this world is one in which well-being
and security prevail, the Practice of Allah does not find a substitute for them. The
probability is that the affair of the next world is likewise, for the Framer of this
world and the next is One, and He is forgiving, merciful and kind to His
creatures, having compassion on them. So, when due reflection is given to this,
the means of hope are strengthened thereby.
And also included in reflection is the scrutiny of the wisdom of the Law and
its Practice in respect of this-worldly benefits, and the aspect of mercy to the
creatures which is in it, so that one of the Gnostics used to consider the verse on
incurring a debt in the Surah of Al-Baqarah as among the most powerful of the
means of hope. So it was said to him (i.e. to the Gnostic). And what is there of
hope in it ? So he said: This present world in its entirety is small, and the
provision for mankind from it is small, and religion is small separated from His
provision. And perceive how Allah revealed concerning it the longest verse, that
He might guide His creature in the way of being encompassed in the keeping of
his religion. And how will his religion not keep him who will not give anything in
exchange for it ?
The second kind is the reciting of the verses and the traditions, and the
material which has to do with hope is beyond definition. With regard to the
verses, He said: " Say: "O my Servants who have transgressed against their souls!
despair not of the Mercy of Allah: for Allah forgives all sins: for He is OftForgiving, Most Merciful." (Az-Zumar 53).

224

Csy jff

4tt! oj

V
4.

I

IyJC. I Qi jjT

^

JjAijT jA j4Jij

And according to the recitation of the Messenger of Allah: "Then do not fret,

225
surely He is the Forgiving, the Compassionate." And He said: "And the angels
celebrate the praise of their Lord, and ask pardon for those upon the earth." (AsShura 5)
Book three: Fear and Hope

<4 cM

aS^iLj lj Ir&y* & d

~.j C-J 'y ■»»!.) I ^ 15L ^

J v

And He has recorded that He has prepared the Fire for His enemies and has
simply frightened His friends with it. So He said to them: "Above them are
overshadowings from the Fire and below them are overshadowings"; by means
of that Allah threatens His servants. (Az-Zumar 16)
jib

^3 jliTjib

^^^

And He said: "And fear the Fire prepared for the unbelievers." (A1 Imran 131)

4 CD 00*^4

1

^

And He said: "Therefore do I warn you of a Fire blazing fiercely; None shall
reach it but those most unfortunate ones Who give the lie to Truth and turn their
backs." (Al-Lail 14-16)

A0

an @ Ji Vi Vj 4^' V ©

»

He said: "Surely your Lord is forgiving to the people in spite of their
wrongdoing." (Ar-Ra'd 6)
A
# V1^
J^J ^3 OJ3 %
Someone said: Truly the Prophet was making petition without ceasing for his
people, so that it was said to him: Are you not satisfied, although this verse has
been revealed to you: Surely your Lord is forgiving to the people in spite of their
wrongdoing? And in comment on His saying: "Surely your Lord will bestow
upon you and you will be satisfied", (Ad-Duha 5)

4 D l&s*

}

He (the narrator) said: Muhammad will not rest content, while one of his
people is in the Fire.
Abu Ja'far Muhammad Ibn Ali used to say: You people of Iraq are saying: I
hope in the verse in the Book of Allah, namely His saying: Say: O my creatures
who have been profligate against yourselves, do not despair of the mercy of Allah
to the end of the verse. And we, the people of the house ’ say: I hope in the verse
in the Book of AlJah, namely His saying: Surely your Lord will bestow upon you
and you will be satisfied.
Coming to the traditions, Abu Musa has related on the authority of the
prophet "peace be upon him" that he said: My people are a people to whom
mercy has been shown; they will not suffer chastisement in the next world; Allah
has brought forward their chastisement to this world, earthquakes and factions.
And, when the resurrection comes round, He will toss to every man of my people
a man of the People of the Book and it will be said: This is your ransom from the
Fire. And, in another version: Every man of this people will bring to Hell a Jew

The quarter of the saviors
226
or Christian, and he (the Muslim) will say: This is my ransom from the Fire, and
he (the ransom) will be cast into it. And he (Muhammad) said: Heat is from the
expanse of Hell and it is an amenity to the believer from the Fire. And it is
reported in comment on His saying: "On the day when Allah will not degrade the
prophet and those who believe with him", (At-Tahrim 8)

That Allah revealed to His Prophet: Truly, I am assigning the adjudication of
your people to you. He said: No, my Lord, you will deal with them more mercifully
than I. So He said: Then I will not degrade you among them. And it is reported on
the authority of Anas that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” enquired at his Lord concerning the sins of his people and said: O Lord,
assign their adjudication to me, so that no one but myself may scrutinize their evil
doings. So Allah revealed to him: They are your people and they are my creatures,
and I am more merciful with them than you. I shall not assign their adjudication to
other than myself, so that neither you nor anyone else may scrutinize their evil deeds.
And he Muhammad said: My life is good for you and my death is good for you. My
life, because I lay down for you the practice and frame the Law for you; and my
death, because your deeds have been open to me, and whatever I have seen of them
that was good, I have praised Allah for it, and I have asked Allah to pardon you
whatever I have seen of evil.
And he (Muhammad) said on a certain day: O generous Pardoner. So Gabriel
said: Do you know what the interpretation of generous Pardoner is? It is as follows:
Surely He has pardoned evil deeds in mercy; in His generosity He has substituted
good deeds for them. And the Prophet heard a man saying: O Lord I ask You for
the completion of blessing. So he said: Do you know what the completion of
blessing is? He said: No. He said: The entrance into the Garden. The Scholars
said: AJlah has completed His blessing for us in His approving Islam for us, when
He said: "I have completed My blessing for you and have approved Islam as your
religion." (Al-Ma'idah 3)

And according to the tradition: When the creature commits a sin and asks
Allah for pardon, Allah says to His angels: Observe my creature, he has
committed a sin and he knows that he has a Lord who will pardon and take
away his sin; I testify to you that I have pardoned him. And according to the
tradition: If a creature were to sin so that his sins reached the clouds of the
heavens, I would pardon him them in so far as he asked pardon of Me and
hoped in Me. And according to the tradition: If My creature were to meet Me
with sins the equal of the earth, I would meet him with pardon the equal of
the earth. And according to the tradition: Surely the Angel holds the reed-pen
aloft for six hours so as not to make a mark against the creature, when he sins;
and, if he repents and asks for pardon, he will not record it against him; and,
if not, he will record it as an evil deed. And according to another version: If
he performs a good deed after he has recorded it against him, the Angel of the
right hand says to the Angel of the left (for the former has command over the

227
Book three: Fear and Hope
latter): Cast away the evil deed (so that one multiple of ten is cast away from
his good deed) and credit to him nine good deeds. So the evil deed is cast
away from him.
And Anas reported in a tradition that the Prophet said: When the creature
commits a sin, it is recorded against him. So a nomadic Arab said: And, if he
repents of it ? He said: It is erased from him. He said: If he returns to sin?
The Prophet said: It is recorded against him. The nomad said: And, if he
repents? He said: It is blotted out from his page. He said: For how long? He
said: For as long as he begs for pardon and repents towards Allah. Surely
Allah does not grow weary in pardoning until the creature grows weary of
begging for pardon. And, when the creature purposes a good deed, the Master
of the right hand writes it down as a good deed before he performs it; and, if
he performs it, he records ten good deeds. Then Allah multiplies it to seven
hundred multiples. And, when he meditates a sin, it is not recorded against
him; and, when he performs it, one sin is recorded, and beyond it is the
goodness of Allah’s act of pardon.
And a man came to the Prophet and said: O Messenger of Allah, I do not
keep any fast except the month of Ramadan without supererogation, and I
pray only the five prayers without supererogation, and I give no voluntary
alms in respect of my wealth, and there is neither pilgrimage nor obedience
beyond what is obligatory to my credit. Where am I when I die? So the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” smiled and said:
Yes, you are with me; because you have kept your heart from two things,
rancour and envy, and your tongue from two things, slander and falsehood,
and your eyes from two things, looking at what Allah has forbidden and
contemning a Muslim with them, you will enter the Garden with me, because
of my rejoicing at these two things.
And in a lengthy tradition ascribed to Anas (it is reported) that the (abovementioned) nomad said: O Messenger of Allah, who will preside over the
adjudication of the people? So he said: Allah. He said: In Person? He said: Yes.
So the nomad smiled and he (Muhammad) said: Why did you laugh? So he said:
Surely, when the Magnanimous One decrees (punishment) He pardons, and,
when He fixes the reckoning, He forgives. So the Prophet said: The nomad has
spoken the truth, Assuredly there is no one more magnanimous than Allah; He is
without peer among those who are magnanimous. Then he (Anas) said: The
nomad grasped it. And again in it (the Prophet said): Truly Allah has ennobled
the Ka'bah and made it great, and, if a creature should demolish it stone upon
stone, then should set it ablaze, he has not reached the sin of the person who
makes sport of one of the friends of Allah. The nomad said: Who are the friends
of Allah? He said: The believers are all friends of Allah. Have you not heard the
saying of Allah: "Allah is a friend of those who believe, bringing them out of the
darkness into light"? (Al-Baqarah 257)

4©
And according to certain traditions: The believer is preferred more than
the Ka'bah. Also: The believer is good and pure. Also: The believer is
preferred more than the angels in the sight of Allah. And according to the

The quarter of the saviors
228
tradition: Allah created Hell out of the excess of His mercy as a whip. With it
Allah drives His creatures to the Garden. And in another tradition: Allah says:
I have created men solely that they might exploit me and I have not created
them to exploit them. And according to a tradition of Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri on
the authority of the Messenger of Allah: Allah has not created anything but
He has matched it with what dominates it, and He has made His mercy to
dominate His wrath. And according to the celebrated tradition: Truly Allah
inscribed mercy on His Self before He created men; truly, My mercy
dominates My anger.
And on the authority of Mu'adh Ibn Jabal and Anas Ibn Malik it is reported
that he (Muhammad) said: Whoever says: There is no Allah but Allah will enter
the Garden, and the Fire will not touch him whose last words are: There is no
Allah but Allah. And, if a man encounters Allah not having associated anything
with Him, the Fire is denied access to him. And the person in whose heart is the
weight of an atom of faith will not enter it (the Fire). And according to another
tradition: If die unbeliever knew the spaciousness of the mercy of Allah, not a
single one would despair of His Garden. And, when the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” recited His saying: "Surely the
earthquake of the Hour is a mighty thing." (Al-Hajj 1)

i0^

JpUUI iijJj

V

He said: Do you know which day this is? This is the day on which it will be
said to Adam: Arise and dispatch the detachment desdned for the Fire from
among your seed. So he will say: How many? And it will be said: Out of every
thousand nine hundred and ninety nine are for the Fire and one for the Garden.
He (the narrator) went on: So he made the people despair and they began to
weep and while away their days in idleness and inactivity, and so the Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” attacked them and said: What
is the matter with you that you will not work ? They said: And who would occupy
themselves with work after what you have related to us on that point? And he
said: How many are you among the nations? Where are Tawll and Tharlth and
Mansak and Gog and Magog , nations whom only Allah can count? Among the
rest of the nations you are but as the white hair in the coat of the black bull or
the white mark in the fore-leg of the riding-beast.
So observe how he was driving the people with the whip of fear and leading
them with the reins of hope to Allah. He drove them with the whip of fear at
first, and, when that brought them beyond the point of equilibrium to the
extreme of despair, he cured them with the therapy of hope and returned them to
the equilibrium and the goal. And the latter did not contradict the former, but he
made mention in the former of what he considered to be a cause of healing and
confined himself to that. And, when they were in need of treatment with hope,
he mentioned what completed the matter. And it is the responsibility of the
preacher to imitate the Master of Preachers and to be humane in his employment
of the traditions of fear and hope in accordance with need, after taking note of
the inward defects. And, if he does not take care with that, his preaching will
promote more disease than it will health.

229
Book three: Fear and Hope
And according to the tradition: If you had not sinned, Allah would have
created a people who would and would have pardoned them. And in another
version: He would have dismissed you and produced another creation of sinners,
and have pardoned them. Surely, He is the Forgiving, the Compassionate. And
according to the tradition: If you had not sinned, I would have feared of you
what is more evil than sins. It was said: And what is that? He (Muhammad) said:
Pride. And he (Muhammad) said: By the One in whose hand my soul is, Allah is
more merciful with His creature, the believer, than the tender mother with her
offspring. And according to the tradidon: Assuredly Allah will pardon on the Day
of Resurrection with a pardon that has not occurred to a single heart, so that
even the Devil will strain towards it in the hope that it may impinge on him.
And according to the tradition: Truly Allah possesses a hundred mercies; of
these He has stored up ninety nine beside Himself and has revealed one mercy in
this present world. By virtue of it men show compassion to each other and the
mother is compassionate to her child, and the beast is humane with its offspring.
And, when the Day of Resurrection comes, He will join this mercy to the ninety
nine; then He will spread them out upon all His creation and every single mercy
is the match of the heavens and the earth, and only the child of perdition will
perish at the hand of Allah at that time. And according to the tradition: There is
not a single person among you whose work will give him entrance to the Garden
or will save him from the Fire. They said: Not you either, O Messenger of Allah?
He said: Not me either except that Allah should cover me with His mercy. And
he said: Labour and be of good courage, and know that no man's works will save
him.
And he (Muhammad) said: I have reserved my intercession for the great
sinners among my people. Do you think it is for the submissive and the
pious? No, it is for the warped and the dissolute. And he said: I am sent with
the true religion which is both accommodating and conciliatory. And he said:
I desire that the People of the two Books should know that in our religion
there is accommodation. And a pointer to the meaning of this is the reply
which Allah gave to the believers when they said: "And lay not upon us a
burden." (Al-Baqarah 286)
*_aj LJ

L*

Sj ^

And He said: "And He relieves them of their burdens and shackles which
were upon them." (Al-A'raf 157)

And Muhammad Ibn Al-Hanafiyyah related on the authority of 'Ali that he
said: When He sent down His saying: "Be magnanimous on a handsome scale",
(Al-Hijr 85)

4

^

He (Muhammad) said: O Gabriel, and what is a handsome magnanimity?
He (Gabriel) said: When you have pardoned whoever has wronged you and do
not upbraid him. So he (Muhammad) said: O Gabriel, Allah is too

The quarter of the saviors
230
magnanimous to upbraid the one whom He has forgiven. So Gabriel wept and
the Prophet wept, and Allah sent Michael to them both and he said: Truly,
your Lord sends both of you His compliments and says: How would I upbraid
the one whom I have pardoned? This would not be like My magnanimity. And
the traditions which have to do with the means of hope are more than can be
numbered.
Coming now to the reports?: Ali said: If a man commits a sin and Allah puts a
covering over it in this world, He is too magnanimous to withdraw His covering
in the next world. If a man commits a sin and is punished for it in this world,
Allah is too equitable to repeat His punishment on His creature in the next world.
And Ath-Thawri said: I do not desire that He should assign my adjudication to
my parents, because I know that Allah will deal more mercifully with me than
they. And one of the Fathers said: When the believer is disobedient, Allah covers
him from the sight of the angels, that they should not see him and testify against
him. And Muhammad Ibn Mus'ab wrote to Al-Aswad Ibn Salim in his own
hand: Surely, when the creature is profligate and lifts up his hands praying and
saying: O Lord, the angels will screen his voice. And thus the second and the
third time, until, when he says the fourth time: O my Lord, Allah says: How long
will you screen from Me the voice of My creature? My creature knows that he has
no Lord who will pardon sins but Me. I testify to you that I have pardoned him.
And Ibrahim Ibn Adham said: I was performing the circumambulation in
solitude on a certain night, and it was a dark rainy night, and I halted at the
obligatory place beside the gate and said: O my Lord keep me from sin so that I
am never disobedient to You. And the voice of One unseen called out to me
from the House : O Ibrahim, you are asking Me to keep you from sin, and all My
believing creatures seek that from Me. But, if I should keep them from sin, upon
whom should I bestow My bounty and to whom should I grant pardon?
And Al-Hassan used to say: If the believer had not sinned, he would have
been flying in the Kingdoms of the Heavens , but Allah has held him down by
his sins. And Al-Junaid said: If a speck of nobility should be visible, it will
annex the evildoers to the well-doers. And Malik Ibn Dinar met Aban and said
to him: For how much longer will you tell the people about the indulgences of
Allah? So he said: O Abu Yahya, truly, I hope that what you see of Allah’s
pardon on the Day of Resurrection will make you rend these your clothes for
joy.
And in an account of Rib'i Ibn Hirash concerning his brother who was
among the most elect of the Followers, and was one of those who conversed
after death. He (Rib'i) said: When my brother died, he was wrapped in his shroud
and we laid him in his bier. Then he threw back the shroud from his face and sat
upright and said: Truly, I encountered my Lord and He greeted me with intimacy
and delight and was anything but angry, and truly, I experienced the affair as
something easier than you suppose, so do not flag. And now Muhammad and his
Companions are expecting me, so I shall return to them. He (Rib'i) went on:
Then he prostrated himself, and it was as if a pebble had fallen into a dish, and so
we bore him off and buried him.

231
Book three: Fear and Hope
And in the account of two men of the children of Israel who were brothers in
Allah, and one of them was profligate and the other a devotee. And the latter
used to warn the former and chide him, and so the other would say: Leave me
alone. By my Lord, are you delegated to me as a watchman? This went on until he
saw him on a certain day in the act of committing a great sin and was angry and
said: Allah will not pardon you. So Allah will say (to the profligate) on the Day of
Resurrection: Is anyone able to debar My mercy from My creatures? Go your
way, for I have pardoned you. Then He will say to the devotee: As for you-the
Fire is decreed for you. He (the narrator) said: By the One in whose hand my soul
is, He has spoken a word which has destroyed his present world and his next
world.
And it is also reported that a certain robber was pillaging the highway among
the children of Israel for forty years, and Jesus passed by him, and, in his wake,
one of the devotees of the children of Israel, numbered among the disciples. So
the robber said to himself: The prophet of Allah is passing and his disciple is
accompanying him; if I were to go down, I would be a third with the two of
them. So he went down and was moved with the desire to draw near to the
disciple, and he demeaned himself and magnified the disciple, saying to himself:
One like myself may not walk at the side of this devotee. And the disciple sensed
his presence and said to himself: This man is walking at my side. So he braced
himself and made up to Jesus and walked at his side, while the robber remained
behind him. So Allah revealed to Jesus: Say to them both: Assuredly the works of
both of you are under review, and I have annulled whatever proceeded from your
respective works. I have annulled the good works of the disciple because of his
pride in himself, and I have annulled the evil works of the other, according to the
measure of his disparagement of himself. So tell these tidings to both of them.
And the robber joined himself to him (i.e. Jesus) in his itinerary and he made him
one of his disciples.
And it is related on the authority of Masruq that one of the prophets was
prostrating himself and an apostate trod on his neck, so that the pebbles adhered
to his forehead. So the prophet raised his head in rage and said: Be off with you
and Allah will certainly not pardon you. So Allah revealed to him: You are taking
My name in vain in respect of My creatures. Surely I have pardoned him. Axid
what is related on the authority of Ibn 'Abbas approximates to this. That the
Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” was inducing
despair in the polytheists and was cursing them in his prayer, and His saying was
revealed to him: " Not for you, (but for Allah), is the decision: whether He turn
in Mercy to them, or punish them; for they are indeed wrong-doers." (A1 Imran
128).
So he desisted from the prayer in which he was imprecating them, and Allah
guided the body of those people to Islam.
And it is related in the report that there were two devotees equal in devotion.
When they entered the Garden, one of them was elevated to the Highest Degrees
over his companion. So he said: O Lord in what way did this man exceed me in

The quarter of the saviors
232
devotion on the earth? Yet, You have elevated him over me in the Highest
Heaven. So Allah says: Truly, while he was on the earth, he was continually
asking for the Highest Degrees, while you were asking for salvation from the
Fire. So I have given every creature his request. And this is a pointer to the fact
that worship which is on account of hope is the more meritorious, because love
dominates the person who hopes more than it does the one who fears. And what
a distinction is made by kings between the person who serves through fear of
their punishment, and the one who serves out of the hope of their favours and
magnanimity! On that account Allah has enjoined optimism, and for that reason
he (Muhammad) said: Ask Allah for the Highest Degrees, for you are asking One
who is magnanimous. And he said: When you ask Allah set the target high and
ask for the Highest Paradise, for Allah will not think anything too great for him
who asks.
And Bakr Ibn Salim As-Sawwaf said: We came into the presence of Malik
Ibn Anas on the evening on which he was taken away by death, and we said: O
Abu Abdullah, how are you? He said: I do not know what to say to you, except
that you will find help from the pardon of Allah in what was not yours by desert.
Then we did not stir until we had closed his eyes. (i.e. in death). And Yahya Ibn
Mu'adh said in his supplication: My hoping in You along with my sins all but
overcomes my hoping in You along with my good works, because, with respect
to works, I rely on single-mindedness, and how shall I preserve it, since I am
known to be with blemish? And I find myself with respect to my sins relying on
Your pardon, and how will You not pardon them, since magnanimity is Your
attribute?
And it is said: A Zoroastrian asked hospitality from Abraham, the Friend
(sc. of Allah); so he said: If you become a Muslim, I will give you hospitality.
So the Zoroastrian passed on, and Allah revealed to him (Abraham): You
would not give him food except with his religion changed, and We have fed
him for seventy years, notwithstanding his unbelief. If you had given him
hospitality for a night, what responsibility would have fallen on you? So
Abraham set off running after the Zoroastrian and brought him back and gave
him hospitality. So the Zoroastrian said to him: By what means did it become
plain to you? So he mentioned it to him. And the Zoroastrian said to him:
Does He deal with me thus? Exhibit Islam to me that I may become a
Muslim.
And the Spiritual Director Abu Sahl As-Suluki saw Abu Sahl Az-Zajjaji in a
dream and he was speaking about the threat of everlasting punishment. So he
(As-Suluki) said to him: How do you feel? He said: I find the affair easier than I
had contemplated. And a certain individual saw Abu Sahl As-Suluki in a dream,
indescribably fair in appearance. So he said to him: O Spiritual Director, by
what means did you obtain this? So he said: Through supposing the best of my
Lord. And it is related that Abu Al-Abbas Ibn Sarij saw in a dream in his mortal
illness as if the Resurrection were actualized and behold! the Almighty was
saying: Where are the Scholars? So they came. Then He said: What have you
accomplished with what you knew? He (Abu Al-Abbas Ibn Sarij) went on: So

233
Book three: Fear and Hope
we said: O Lord we have come short and we have done evil. So He repeated the
interrogation as if He were not satisfied with the answer and He desired another
answer. So I said: As for me, there is no polytheism on my page, and You have
promised that You will pardon whatever does not partake of it. And He said:
Take him away, for I have pardoned you (all). And he died three nights later.
And it is said: There was a certain tippler who gathered together a party of
his cronies and tossed to his boy four Dirhams and bade him buy some fruit
for his party. And the boy passed by the door of the sitting-room of Mansur
Ibn Ammar, while he was begging something for a poor man and saying:
Whoever tosses him four Dirhams, I shall offer four petitions for him. So the
boy tossed the Dirhams to him and Mansur said: What is it you desire that I
should ask for you? So he said: I have a master from whom I desire to be
released. So Mansur prayed. Then he said: Next request. That Allah would
replace my Dirhams. So he prayed and then said: Next. He said: That Allah
would bring my master to repentance. So he prayed; then he said: Next. He
said: That Allah would pardon me and my master and you and the multitude.
So Mansur prayed and the boy returned and his master said to him: What
detained you? So he told the tale to him. He said: And what did he pray
about? So he said: I asked freedom for myself. So he said to him: Go your
way, for you are a free man. He said: And what was the second prayer? He
said: That Allah would replace the Dirhams. He Said: You possess four
thousand Dirhams. And what was the third prayer? He said: That Allah would
bring you to repentance. He said: I have repented towards Allah. He said: And
what was the fourth prayer? He said: That Allah would pardon me and you
and the multitude, and him who spoke the prayer. He said: This one is not in
my power. So, while he was passing that night, he had a vision in sleep, as if
someone were speaking to him: You have done what was in your power, do
you then think that I shall not do what is in My power? I have pardoned you
and the boy and Man Ibn 'Ammar and the crowd which was present, all of
them.
And it is related on the authority of 'Abd Al-Wahhab Ibn 'Abd Al-Hamid
Ath-Thaqafi who said: I saw three men and a woman bearing a bier. So I took the
place of the woman and we went off to the cemetery, and we prayed over the
corpse and buried it. So I said to the woman: What was the relationship of the
deceased man to you? She said: My son. I said: And did you not have any
neighbours? She said: Yes, but they despised his condition. I said: And what was
it? She Said: He was an effeminate. So I had compassion on her and brought her
to my house and gave her money and corn and clothes. That night I had a vision.
It was as if someone came to me like to the moon on the night when it is full,
wearing white robes. And he began to thank me and I said: Who are you? So he
said: The effeminate whom you buried to-day. My Lord had compassion on me
for that the people contemned me.
And Ibrahim Al-Utrush said: We were sitting in Baghdad with Ma'ruf AlKarkhi by the Tigris, when youths passed by in skiffs, beating with the oars and
drinking and jesting. So they said to Ma'ruf: Do you not see them disobeying Allah

The quarter of the saviors
234
with obscene jests? Pray to Allah against them. So he lifted up his hands and said:
O Allah, as you have given them joy in this world, give them joy in the next world.
So the group said: All we asked of you was to pray against them. So he said: If He
brings them joy in the next world, He will have forgiven them. And one of the
Fathers used to say in his petitions: O Lord, what people was there ever that did
not disobey You? Yet Your favour was bounteous upon them and Your provision
lavish. Praise be to You, how clement You are! By Your Might! if disobedience is
shown to You, You bestow favour in plenty and are lavish with provision, so that it
is as if, O our Lord; You were not angry.
These are the means by which the relief of hope is induced in the hearts of
the fearful and despairing. And, as for the foolish and self-deluded, it is not
expedient that they should hear anything of that; no, they are to hear what we
shall cite of the means of fear. For the most of people are not made healthy
except through fear, just as the bad servant and the naughty boy are not reformed
except through the whip and the stick and speech with an explicit threat. But the
opposite of that would block up against them the door of health with respect to
religion and this world.

PART TWO: FEAR
Part 2 includes eight chapters:
Exposition of essence of fear
Exposition of degrees of fear
Exposition of divisions of objects of fear
Exposition of merit of fear, and whether fear or hope is the optimum
Exposition of remedy of fear
Exposition of meaning of evil of Seal
Exposition of states of those among the prophets in respect to fear
Exposition of the states of those endued with faith who feared

CHAPTER ONE
EXPOSmON OF ESSENCE OF FEAR
It should be known that fear is an expression for the suffering of the heart
and its conflagration by means of the anticipation of what is abhorred as a future
contingency. And this has been made clear in the exposition of the essence of
hope. And whoever is intimate with Allah, whose heart is ruled by truth and who
lives in the present through his seeing the majesty of truth perpetually, no longer
turns to the future and is possessed of neither fear nor hope. More, his state has
become higher than fear or hope, for both of these are reins which preclude the
soul from its excursions into laxness. Al-Wasiti has pointed to this in saying: Fear
is a veil between Allah and the creature. Again he said: When the truth makes
plain the things which are secret, there remains in them no residue for hope and
fear.
And, in general, if the heart of the lover is distracted by fear of separation,
while he is viewing his beloved, that would indicate a deficiency of vision, and the
goal of the stations is simply constancy of vision. But, for the present, we are to
discuss only the initial stations and so we shall say: The state of fear can also be

235
Book three: Fear and Hope
classified in terms of knowledge, state and action. With regard to knowledge, it is
knowledge of the cause which leads to the thing which is abhorred. So that it is as
if someone committed a crime against a king, then fell into his hands and feared
that he would be put to death as an example, while pardon and escape were
possibilities. But the suffering of his heart through fear is in proportion to the
strength of his knowledge of the means which would lead to his being put to
death, such as the enormity of his crime and the fact that the king in himself is
rancorous, wrathful and revengeful, that he is surrounded by such as incite him to
take vengeance and is isolated from such as would intercede with him in his case.
And this than in his fear was destitute of any merit or virtue that might wipe out
the trace of his crime with the king. Hence the knowledge that these means are
manifest is a cause of the strength of the fear and the rigor of the suffering of the
heart.
And fear is faint in proportion to the weakness of those means. And it may
be that fear does not derive from the crime which the person who fears has
committed, but is because of the nature of the object feared. As, for example,
the person who falls into the claws of the lion, for he fears the lion because of
the nature of the lion itself, namely, that, for the most part, it is avid and violent
in pouncing on its prey. Even if its pouncing on its prey were within the
province of choice, it might seem to the person threatened by it to be due to
inborn disposition. Similarly the person who falls into the path of a torrent or
into a blazing pit, for he fears the water because it is endowed by nature with
the power of flowing and drowning, and likewise fire is endowed with burning.
And the knowledge of the means of the thing which is abhorred is the cause
which initiates and fans the conflagration and suffering of the heart, and that
conflagration is fear. And, similarly, fear of Allah may sometimes be due to
'knowledge' of Allah and His attributes, that, if He destroyed the worlds, He
would not care and no person would obstruct Him. And sometimes it may be
due to the multitude of the sins of the creature through his committing deeds
of disobedience; and sometimes it may be due to both of them together. And
the strength of his fear will be in proportion to his 'knowledge' of his own
defects and his 'knowledge' of the majesty of Allah and His self-subsistence,
and that "He will not be asked about what He does, while they will be asked."
(Al-Anbiya' 23)

And the person most filled with fear in respect of His Lord is the man
who has most 'knowledge' of himself and his Lord. For that reason he
(Muhammad) said: I am the one who fears Allah most among you. And
likewise Allah said: "Only the knowledgeable among his creatures fear Allah."
(Fatir 28)

4 (cjp ijilliJi oLf &

ulj

Then, when 'knowledge' is perfected, the majesty of fear and the
conflagration of the heart are produced. Then the trace of the conflagration flows
from the heart into the body and the members and the attributes. In the body by

The quarter of the saviors
236
means of emaciation and paleness and fainting and shrieking and weeping, and it
may be that in this way bitterness is inhaled and it leads to death; or it goes up to
the brain and rots the intelligence; or it intensifies in strength and produces
despair and hopelessness. In the members by restraining them from disobedience
and binding them to deeds of obedience; by repairing what is defective and
making ready for the future. And for that reason it is said: The man who fears is
not he who weeps and wipes his eyes; no, it is he who forsakes that on whose
account he fears punishment. And Abu '1-Qasim Al-Hakim said: Whoever fears
anything flees from it, and whoever fears Allah flees to Him. And it was said to
Dhun-Nun : When is the creature a person who fears? He said: When he has
brought himself down to the level of the sick man who is abstemious for fear that
his sickness may be prolonged. In the attributes by stifling the lusts and
blackening the pleasures, so that the disobediences beloved by him become
abhorrent, just as honey becomes abhorrent to the man who desires it, when he
'knows' that there is poison in it. So the lusts are burned up by fear and the
members are trained, and self-abasement and humility and submissiveness and
lowliness obtain in the heart, and pride, rancour and envy abandon it.
Moreover he is absorbed with concern through his fear and his observing the
peril of its sequel, and has no leisure for other than it. And he has no
preoccupation but vigilance and self-examination and spiritual combat and
consenting breaths and glances and reprehending the soul for the suggestions and
footsteps and words (sc. of Satan). And his condition is that of the man who falls
into the claws of a harmful lion, and he does not know whether it will ignore him
and he will escape, or it will pounce on him and he will perish. So he will be
engrossed outwardly and inwardly with what he fears and there will be no room
in him for anything else. This is the state of the person over whom fear has
prevailed and gained the mastery. The state of the company of the Companions
and Followers was thus. And the strength of vigilance and self-examination and
spiritual combat is in proportion to the strength of fear which is the suffering of
the heart and its conflagration. And the strength of fear is in proportion to the
strength of 'knowledge' of the majesty of Allah and His attributes and His
actions, and in proportion to the defects of the soul and the perils and terrors
which confront it.
And the least of the degrees of fear whose trace is visible in actions is the
blocking of access to the forbidden; and the restraint which excludes the
forbidden is called abstinence. If its strength increases, it restrains from what
directs at it the possibility of the forbidden, and hence also from that whose
forbiddance is not a matter of certainty, and that is called piety, since piety is the
forsaking of that which one suspects so as to arrive at what one does not suspect.
And it may urge a man on to forsake what has no evil in it for fear of what has
evil in it, and this is sincere piety. When fully consecrated worship is joined to it,
the consequence is that one does not build what he does not inhabit nor gather
what he does not eat, nor turn to this world, since he knows that it will abandon
him, nor expend a single breath except towards Allah.
This is sincerity and its owner is worthy to be named Sincere. And piety

Book three: Fear and Hope

237

enters into sincerity and abstinence into piety and chastity into abstinence, for it
(chastity) is a specialized expression for being cut off from the determinism of
lusts. Therefore fear is effective in the members through restraint and
perseverance, and it is in virtue of restraint that it is given the new name of
chastity which is refraining from the determinism of lusts. And abstinence is
higher than it, since it is more universal, because it is refraining from everything
forbidden. And higher than it is piety, since it is the name for refraining from
the sum of things forbidden and dubious. And beyond it is the name Sincere and
He who is brought near. And the course of the most ultimate rank in relation to
what precedes it is from the most general to the most particular, for, when you
have mentioned the most particular, you have mentioned the whole. As if you
were saying: Mankind, whether Arab or non-Arab, and Arab, whether Quraish
or non-Quraish, and Quraish, whether Hashimi or non-Hashimi, and Hashimi,
whether Alid or non-Alid, and Alid, whether Hassani or Hussaini; and, when
you have mentioned, for example, that a man is Hassani, you have described
him totally, and, if you describe him as Alid, you describe him by what is above
him-what is more general than he. Similarly when I have said sincere, I have said
that a man is pious, is abstemious and is chaste. And there is no need for you to
suppose that these numerous names point to numerous dissimilar meanings, for
that would reduce you to confusion, just as confusion reigns over whoever
seeks (different) meanings from linguistic variants, where the meanings have
not followed the variants. So this is a pointer to the concert of the meanings of
fear, and what surrounds it on the higher side, such as the 'knowledge' which
determines it, and on the lower side, such as the actions which derive from it
through restraint and perseverance.

CHAPTER 2
EXPOSITION OF DEGREES OF FEAR AND ITS DIFFERENTIATION INTO
POWER AND WEAKNESS
It should be known that fear is commendable. Often it is supposed that all
fear is commendable, and that the more powerful and frequent it is the more it is
commendable. This is a fallacy. No, fear is the whip of Allah by which He drives
His creatures towards perseverance in knowledge and action, so that by means of
both of these they may obtain the rank of nearness to Allah. And what is most
salutary for the beast is that it should not escape the whip, and thus with the boy,
but that does not point to the conclusion that excessive beating is commendable.
And likewise with fear; it has deficiency and equilibrium, and what is
commendable is the equilibrium and the mean.
The person who is deficient in it is he who tends towards effeminate softness
which alights on his mind, whenever he hears a verse from the Qur'an, and
produces weeping, and the tears overflow; and similarly when he sees a cause of
terror. And, when that cause is absent from his attention, his heart returns to
negligence. So this is a fear which is deficient, of little profit and feeble in utility;
just like the slight stick with which the powerful riding-beast is beaten, which
gives it no serious pain and does not urge it on to the destination, nor is it
salutary for its correction. Such is the fear of all men except the Gnostics and the

i

The quarter of the saviors
238
Knowledgeable. And I do not mean by Knowledgeable (learned) those who are
stamped with the marks of Scholars or are called by their names, for they, of all
men, are the most distant from fear. No, I mean those who are knowledgeable
concerning Allah and His Days and His actions, and that is a thing whose
existence is rare at the present time. And, for that reason, Al-Fudail Ibn 'Iyad
said: When it is said to you: Do you fear Allah?, keep silence. For, if you say: No,
you are an unbeliever; and, if you say: Yes, you are a liar. And he indicated by this
that it is fear that restrains the members from deeds of disobedience and binds
them to deeds of obedience, and whatever does not take effect in the members is
no more than an impulse and a fleeting motion which does not deserve the name
of fear.
The extremist is he whose fear is strong and transgresses the limit of the
equilibrium, so that it goes out towards hopelessness and despair, and it again is
reprehensible, because it stultifies action. Fear may also issue in sickness and
weakness and depression and bewilderment and intellectual atrophy. The aim of
fear is the same as the aim of the whip which is to incite to action. If it is
otherwise, fear is imperfect, because it is deficient in its essence, since its product
is ignorance and impotence. Ignorance, because one does not know the sequel of
his affair; and, if he 'knew' he would not be afraid, since the thing which is feared
is that about which there is doubt. Impotence, because he is exposed to a
forbidden thing which he is unable to repel. Therefore it (fear) is commendable
in connection with human deficiencies, and only knowledge is commendable in
itself and its essence, together with power and everything by which it is possible
to describe Allah. And that by which it is not possible to describe Allah is not
perfect in its essence and only becomes commendable in connection with a
deficiency which is greater than it; just as the enduring of therapeutic pain is
commendable, because it is milder than the pain of disease and death. And
whatever issues in despair is reprehensible, and fear also may issue in disease,
weakness, depression and bewilderment and intellectual atrophy; it may even
issue in death. All that is reprehensible and is to be likened to the beating which
kills the boy and the whip which slays the riding-beast or makes it ill or breaks
one of its limbs.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” mentioned
the means of hope and multiplied them simply in order that he might thereby
treat the shock of excessive fear which leads to despair or one of these
conditions, and all that is implied with respect to a condition. The commendable
part of it is whatever leads to the goal which is intended by it, and whatever
comes short of it or goes beyond it is reprehensible. The profit of fear is caution
and abstinence and piety and spiritual combat and worship and reflection and
recollection, and all the means that bring about union with Allah. And all of that
requires life along with health of body and wholeness of intellect, and whatever
impairs these means is reprehensible.
If you say: Whoever fears and dies because of his fear is a martyr, and how
can his state be reprehensible? Know that the meaning of his being a martyr is
that he possesses a rank in virtue of his death through fear which he would not

Book three: Fear and Hope

239

have attained had he died at that time through a cause other than fear. So that in
connection with him it is meritorious, but in connection with the ordering of his
survival and the prolongation of his life in obedience to Allah and the treading of
His paths it is not meritorious. No, the person who is making a pilgrimage to
Allah by the path of reflection and spiritual combat and the ascent of the degrees
of 'knowledge' possesses at every instant the rank of martyr and martyrs. Were it
otherwise the rank of a lad who is killed or the madman whom a lion mauls
would be higher than the rank of a prophet or saint who dies a natural death, and
this would be absurd. Nor is it proper that this should be supposed. No, the most
valued of blessings is prolongation of life in obedience to Allah, and everything
which annuls life or mind or health (for life is impaired when it is impaired) is a
loss and deprivation in relation to some conditions, even if some parts of it
should have merit in relation to other conditions. Just as martyrdom has merit in
relation to what is below it, not in relation to the degree of the Pious and the
Sincere.
So, if fear does not effect action, its existence and non-existence are alike, just
as the whip which does not accelerate the movement of the riding-beast. And, if
it is effective, it has degrees according as its effects are visible. For, if it is an
incentive only to chastity, it is the refraining from the determinism of lusts, so
that it possesses a degree. And, if it produces abstinence, it is higher (in degree).
And the most ultimate of its degrees is that it should produce the degrees of the
Sincere, which is that it should tear one away outwardly and inwardly from what is
other than Allah, so that there remains in him no room for other than Allah, and
this is the most ultimate of its commendable characteristics, and it is
accompanied with preservation of health and mind. If it goes beyond this
towards the atrophy of mind and health, it is sickness which must be treated, if
there is an effectual treatment. And, if it were commendable, its treatment by
hope and other means until it passes away would not be necessary. For this
reason Sahl used to say to novices who persisted with fasting over a long period:
Keep your wits. Allah has never had a saint who was mentally deficient.

CHAPTER 3
EXPOSITION OF DIVISIONS OF FEAR IN RELATION TO THE OBJECT
WHICH IS FEARED
It should be known that fear does not deserve the name except it concerns
the expectation of what is abhorred, whether it is abhorred in its essence, such as
fire, or because it leads to what is abhorred, as deeds of disobedience are
abhorred, because they lead to what is abhorred in the next world; just as the
invalid abhors the fruits which do him injury, because they lead to death. So
everyone who fears is bound to picture to himself an abhorred thing from one of
the two divisions, and the expectation of it grows powerful in his heart, so that
his heart is burnt up through his terror of the abhorred thing.
And the station of those who fear is differentiated in accordance with the
kind of abhorred things whose dread dominates their hearts. So there are those
whose hearts are dominated by what is not essentially abhorred, but abhorred
because of what is outside itself, such as those who are dominated by the fear

The quarter of the saviors
240
of death before repentance or a fear of a deficiency of repentance and a
breaking of the covenant ; or the fear of a diminishing of strength so as not to
fulfill the complete demands of Allah. Or the fear that the tenderness of the
heart wall pass away and that it will be replaced by hardness; or the fear of
inclining away from uprightness; or the fear of the mastery of custom in the
following of the familiar lusts; or the fear that Allah will entrust a man to his
good works in which he has put his trust, and which he has boasted about
among Allah's creatures. Or the fear of taking Allah for granted by reason of
the multitude of Allah's favours towards him; or the fear of being distracted
from Allah by other than Allah; or the fear of being deceived by the regular
succession of favours. Or the fear that the defections of his obedience will be
uncovered, where there is revealed to him from Allah what he did not take into
the reckoning. Or the fear that people will persecute him with back-biting,
perfidy, dissimulation and premeditated thoughts of evil. Or the fear of his lack
of knowledge of what may happen in the remainder of his life; or the fear of
punishment being brought forward to this world and his being disgraced before
death. Or the fear of being deceived by the blandishments of this world; or the
fear that Allah will scrutinize his secret heart at a moment when he is heedless
of Him. Or the fear of being sealed at death with the Seal of evil; or the fear of
the predestination which has been predestined to him from all eternity.
And all these are things which the Gnostics fear and there is that which is
particularly advantageous to everyone, which is the treading of the path of
caution so as to exclude what leads to the thing feared. And so whoever fears the
mastery of custom over him will persevere in weaning himself from custom. And
whoever fears that Allah will scrutinize his secret heart occupies himself with the
purifying of his heart from the whisperings (of Satan). And thus with the
remainder of the divisions; and among those fears the one which most
overcomes assurance is the fear of the Seal, for its affair is full of danger. The
highest of all the divisions and the one which gives best access to perfection of
'knowledge' is the fear of predestination, because the Seal follows from what has
been predestined, and is a branch which springs from it in accordance with the
interaction of many causes. So the Seal makes manifest what the (eternal) decree
has predestined in the essence of the Book.
The relation of him who fears the Seal to him who fears predestination is like
that of two men in judgement of whom the king has signed a decree, the import
of which might be their beheading or the assigning to them of a Ministry. And
the decree was not yet delivered to them and the heart of one was tied up with
the circumstance of the delivery of the decree and its publication and what it
would disclose; and the heart of the other was tied up with the circumstance of
the decree of the king, its nature, and what it was that had passed through his
mind at the moment of the decree, of mercy or of anger. And this was to turn
towards the cause which is a higher activity than to turn towards what is a
corollary. And likewise to turn towards the eternal decree in promulgating which
the reed-pen flowed is a higher activity than turning towards what is made
manifest at the End.

241
Book three: Fear and Hope
The Prophet pointed to this when he was in the pulpit and clenched his
right hand and said: This is the Book of Allah in which He has written the
people of the Garden with their names and the names of their fathers of
which there shall be no increase and no diminution. Then he clenched his left
hand and said: This is the Book of Allah in which He has written the people
of the Fire with their names and the names of their fathers of which there
shall be no increase and no diminution. And let the people of bliss do the
works of the people of woe, so that it is said: It is as if they were numbered
with them; more, they are identical with them. Then Allah will save them
before death, even if it is in the time between two milkings of she-camel. And
let the people of woe do the works of the people of bliss, so that it is said: It
is as if they were numbered with them; more, they are identical with them.
Then Allah will extract them before death, even if it is in the time between
two milkings of a she-camel. He who is numbered among the blessed is so by
the decree of Allah, as is the reprobate by the decree of Allah, and works are
in the nature of Seals.
And this accords with the division of those who fear into the person who
fears his disobedience and sin, and the one who fears Allah in Person, because of
His attributes and majesty and characteristics which, without a doubt, compel
awe. So this (fear) is the highest in rank, and, for that reason, his fear endures,
even if he enters into the obedience of the Sincere. As for the other it is in the
target area of self-deception, and the safest part of it is if one perseveres in
obedience. So fear of disobedience is the fear of the Sound in Faith, and the fear
of Allah is that of the Unitarians and the Sincere. It is the fruit of 'knowledge'
concerning Allah, and whoever 'knows' Him and 'knows' His attributes, knows
from His attributes how He is worthy to be feared apart altogether from sin.
More, if the disobedient person 'knew' Allah as he ought to 'know' Him, he
would fear Allah and would not fear his disobedience. And were it not that He is
to be feared in His Person, He would not constrain him to disobedience and
smooth its path for him and prepare its means, for the facilitating of the means of
disobedience is alienation. And he has not committed disobedience prior to his
(present) disobedience in virtue of which he deserves to be constrained to
disobedience and to have access to its means. Nor is obedience preceded by
merit in virtue of which favour is shown to him for whom obedience is made
easy and the path of communion smoothed for him. For the disobedient person
has had disobedience decreed to him whether he wills it or not ; and thus with
the obedient person. And He who exalts Muhammad to the Highest Heaven
irrespective of merit which he had acquired prior to its taking place, and abases
Abu Jahl in the Lowest Hell irrespective of sin which he had committed prior to
its taking place, is worthy to be feared for His attribute of majesty.
For whoever obeys Allah, obeys because the will to obedience has dominion
over him and power comes to him, and, after the creation of the irrevocable will
and the complete power, the action comes into being of necessity. And he who is
disobedient is so because a powerful and irrevocable will has dominion over him,
and the means and power come to him, and the action, in the wake of the will

The quarter of the saviors
242
and the power, is of necessity. Would that I knew what it is that determines the
preferment of this man and his being singled out through the dominion over him
of the will to obedience, and what determines the abasement of that man and his
alienation through the dominion over him of the impulses of disobedience, and
how this is transferred to die creature! But, since the transfer goes back to the
eternal decree, irrespective of sin or merit, fear of One who decrees as He wills
and legislates as He desires is a resolution with every intelligent person. And
beyond this meaning is the secret of predestination whose dissemination is not
permissible.
And the understanding of the fear of Him in respect of His attributes is not
possible except by parable. Were it not for the permission of the Law, the man of
insight would not have dared to mention it. So it has come down in the tradition:
Surely Allah revealed to David: Fear Me as you fear the harmful lion. And this is
the parable which lets you understand what is the effect of the meaning, even if it
does not acquaint you with its cause. For to be acquainted with its cause is to be
acquainted with the secret of predestination, and He does not disclose that except
to His ’People'. And the conclusion to be drawn is that the lion is to be feared
not because of the sin which you have previously committed against it, but
because of its characteristics, its violence and rapaciousness and arrogance and
awfulness, and because it does what it will and does not care. For, if it killed you,
its heart would be untouched by compunction, and it would feel no pain at killing
you. And, if it left you alone, it would not leave you out of pity for you or to
preserve your breath. No, you are in its sight too insignificant for it to notice you,
whether dead or alive. More, the killing of a thousand like you and the killing of a
gnat are on one plane with it, since that does not impugn the animal kingdom or
the power and rapaciousness attributed to it. And the parable has its highest
application to Allah. Whoever 'knows' Him 'knows' with inward sight which is
more powerful and trustworthy and transparent than outward sight. He speaks
the truth in His saying: These to the Garden and I do not care; and these to the
Fire and I do not care. And of the things which compel awe and fear 'knowledge'
that He is self-subsistent and that He does not care will suffice you.
As for the second class of those who fear, the thing abhorred is pictured
within them, such as the image of the pangs of death and its rigors, or the
interrogation of Munkar and Nakir , or the punishment of the grave, or the
terror of the resurrection , or the awfulness of the halting-place before Allah
and shame because of the drawing back of the veil, and the interrogation
about the smallest details or the fear of the Bridge and its edge and the
manner of crossing over it; or the fear of the Fire and its shackles and terrors,
or the fear of being banned from the Garden, the House of Bliss and the
enduring Kingdom, and from a diminution of degrees ; or the fear of being
veiled from Allah.
And all these means are abhorred in themselves and are, indubitably, to be
feared. And the states of those who fear are differentiated according to them; and
the highest of them in rank is the fear of alienation and of being veiled from
Allah and this is the fear of the Gnostics. And what comes before this is the fear

Book three: Fear and Hope

243

of the Practitioners and the Sound in Faith and the Ascetics and the body of the
people. He whose 'knowledge' is not perfect and whose inner sight is not opened
up does not feel the pleasure of union nor the pain of alienation and separation.
When it is mentioned to him that the Gnostic does not fear the Fire but fears
only the veil, he finds that inwardly repugnant, and marvels at it in his soul. And
it may be that he would find repugnant the pleasure of looking at the face of
Allah, the Magnanimous One, were it not that the Law precludes him from being
repugnant to it. And his confessing it with the tongue derives from the
compulsion of authority, and, were it otherwise, it would not be inwardly
vouched for, because he 'knows' only the pleasure of the stomach, of sexual
intercourse and of the eye (when he looks at colours and fair faces), and, in
general, every pleasure in which the beasts are his associates. As for the pleasure
of the Gnostics they only attain to it, and its classification and exposition are
forbidden to whoever is not a party to it. And whoever is a party to it himself
possesses the insight, and so has no need that someone else should expound it to
him. The fear of those who fear can be traced to these divisions. Let us ask Allah
for good success through His magnanimity.

CHAPTER 4
EXPOSITION OF MERIT OF FEAR AND INCLINATION TO IT
It should be known that the merit of fear is sometimes 'known' by
consideration and reflection and sometimes by the verses and the traditions .
With regard to reflection its procedure is that the merit of anything is in
proportion to its adequacy to conduct to the bliss of an encounter with Allah in
the next world, since there is no goal except bliss and there is no bliss for the
creature except in meeting His Master and being near to Him. And everything
which assists him possesses merit, and its merit is in proportion to its goal. For it
has been made plain that there is no passage to the bliss of encountering Allah in
the next world except through the attaining of His love and through intimacy
with Him in this world. And love is not obtained except by 'knowledge', and
'knowledge' is not obtained except by constant reflection; and intimacy is not
obtained except by love and constant recollection. And perseverance in
recollection and reflection are facilitated only when the seed of this present world
is cut off from the heart, and it will not be cut off except by the forsaking of the
pleasures and the lusts of this world. And the forsaking of things desired is not
possible except by the strangling of lusts, and a lust is not strangled by anything
as it is by the fire of fear. So fear is the fire which burns up lusts, for its merit is in
proportion to the extent to which it burns up lusts and restrains from actions of
disobedience and incites to actions of obedience. And that is differentiated
according to the different degrees of fear (see above) ’ and how can such fear be
other than meritorious, since by it chastity and abstinence and piety and spiritual
combat are obtained, and these are actions both meritorious and commendable
which promote nearness to Allah.
As for the procedure of quoting the verses and the traditions what concerns
the merit of fear is beyond the range of definition. It will suffice you as a pointer
to its merit that Allah has united in those who fear guidance and mercy and
knowledge and satisfaction and these are the concert of the stations of the

The quarter of the saviors

244

people of the Gardens. Allah said: "And guidance and mercy to those who fear
their Lord." (Al-A'raf 154)
4
p-jyl f-*
^33 <S-A-A ^
And He said: "Only the knowledgeable among Allah's creatures fear Him."
(Fadr 28)

<03JsiZrliSj >
He attributed to them knowledge in respect of their fear and said: "Allah was
well-pleased with them and they with Him." (Al-Bayyinah 8)

4(0) ilp i_^03

2»t

>j >

This refers to whoever fears his Lord. And everything which points to the
merit of knowledge points to the merit of fear, because fear is the fruit of
knowledge. For that reason it has come down in a tradition of Moses: As for
those who fear they possess the Highest Companion . So observe how he has
singled them out for the fellowship of the Highest Companion, and that is
because they are knowledgeable and the knowledgeable possess the rank of the
fellowship of the prophets, because they are the heirs of the prophets, and the
fellowship of the Highest Companion belongs to the prophets and whoever
overtakes them. And for this reason, when the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” was given the option during his mortal
sickness of remaining in the world or going to Allah, he said: I ask of You the
Highest Companion.
Therefore, if one looks to what produces fear, it is knowledge, and if one
looks to its product, it is abstinence and piety, and there is no secret about what
constitutes their respective merits, so that the sequel is stamped with piety as its
special attribute just as praise is the exclusive attribute of Allah and blessing of
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”, so that it is
said: Praise to Allah, Lord of the Worlds, and the sequel to the pious ' and
blessing upon our master Muhammad and all his family. For Allah has connected
piety particularly with Himself, for He said: " It is not their meat nor their blood,
that reaches Allah: it is your piety that reaches Him: He has thus made them
subject to you, that you may glorify Allah for His guidance to you: and proclaim
the Good News to all who do right. (Al-Hajj 37)
lviU’ir

illlj q&Jj IajLo S/j

4 03

^ JLj

^

l3 'fjs-

Piety is simply an expression for the restraint which is regulated by fear and
so He said: "The most preferred of you with Allah are those who are most god­
fearing among you." (Al-Hujurat 13)
j»5CLa_>i 4i)i

o! V

For that reason Allah enjoined piety on those who are first and those who are
last, and said: "We have charged those who were given the Book before you, and
you too show piety to Allah." (An-Nisa1131)

245

Book three: Fear and Hope
4 @) ^O' ^13

'>»j' oidl '-C^j ^

And He said: "But fear me, if you are really believers." (A1 Imran 175)

4®

oj oy ^“5 ^

So He commanded fear and made it compulsory and a condidon of faith. For
that reason it cannot be envisaged that a believer will be disjoined from fear, and,
if it is weak, the weakness of his fear will be in proportion to the weakness of his
'knowledge' and his faith. And the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” said concerning the merit of piety: When Allah musters the first
and the last for the appointment of a Day which is fixed, behold! a voice, which
those furthest away will hear equally with those nearest, will say: O you people, I
have answered your shouts since your creation to this day, so you answer my call
to-day. It is nothing but your deeds which will rebound to you, O you people.
Surely, I have made a standard and you have made a standard, and you have
depreciated my standard and appreciated your standard. I said: "The most
preferred of you with Allah are those who are most god-fearing among you", (AlHujurat 13)
4 CjS

j-^=*' o! ^
And you disdained it except that you say: So and so, son of so and so and so
and so, is richer than so and so. Hence to-day I shall depreciate your standard
and appreciate my standard. Where are the pious? So He will raise a banner for
the people and they will follow their banner to their lodgings and they will enter
the Garden irrespective of what is due to them.
And Muhammad said: The head of wisdom is the fear of Allah . And he
said to Ibn Mas'ud: If you are desirous of meeting me then multiply fear after
me. And Al-Fudail said: If a man fears Allah, fear points him to every good.
And ash-Shibli said: There is no day that I have feared Allah, but that I have
seen in respect of Him a category of wisdom and admonition which I had
never (previously) seen. And Yahya Ibn Mu'ad h said: No believer performs an
evil deed but two good deeds overtake it, namely, the fear of punishment and
the hope of pardon, just like a fox between two lions. And in a tradition of
Moses: As for the abstemious, there remains no one except the abstemious
but that I make the closest examination of him and scrutinize what is in his
hands, for I feel embarrassment on their account (i.e. on account of the
abstemious) and have (too much) respect for them that I should halt them for
the reckoning.
And abstinence and piety are names derived from meanings which are
conditional on fear. If they are divorced from fear, they do not bear those names.
And likewise what constitutes the merits of recollection is no secret, and Allah
has made it the special attribute of those who fear. So He said: " The admonition
will be received by those who fear (Allah)." (Al-A'la 10)
And He said: "He who fears the station of his Lord will have two Gardens."
(Ar-Rahman 46)

The quarter of the saviors

246

i (0)

^

And he (Muhammad) said: Allah said: By My might, I shall not unite in my
creature two fears and two securities, for, if he feels secure in Me in this world, I
shall terrify him on the Day of Resurrection. And, if he fears Me in this world, I
shall make him secure on the Day of Resurrection. And he also said: If a man
fears Allah, everything fears him; and, if a man fears other than Allah, Allah
threatens him with everything. And he said: The most consummate of you in
intelligence are those whose fear of Allah is most rigorous, and who are best at
perceiving what Allah has commanded and forbidden.
Yahya Ibn Mu'adh said: If Miskin Ibn Adam had feared the Fire as he feared
poverty, he would have entered the Garden. Dhu '1-Nun said: Whoever fears
Allah with his whole heart, his love to Allah is intense and his most inward part is
right with Him. Dhu '1-Nun said again: It is fitting that fear should be more
dominant than hope, for, when hope is dominant, the heart is disordered. And
Abu Al-Hussain Ad-Darir used to say: The mark of bliss is fear of being a
reprobate, because fear is a rein between Allah and His creature, and, when his
rein is severed, he perishes with those who perish. And it was said to Yahya Ibn
Mu'adh: Who of AJlah's creatures is most secure for the morrow? He said: Those
of them whose fear of to-day is most intense. And Sahl said: You will not
experience fear, until you eat what is permitted. And it was said to Al-Hassan: O
Abu Sa'id, how can we set about sitting down with parties who threaten us, so
that our hearts almost fly away with terror? So he said: By Allah! if you mix with
parties-who threaten you until security overtakes you, it is better for you than that
you should fraternize with parties who make you feel safe until fear overtakes
you.
Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani said: Fear has never abandoned any heart but a ruin.
And 'A'ishah said: I said: O Messenger of Allah: "Those who give what they
give and their hearts are fearful" (Al-Mu'minun 60)
i©

l*31* ^ Oyyi 0^*3 \

Does this refer to the man who steals and commits adultery? He said: No, but
to the man who fasts and prays (the statutory prayers) and gives supererogatory
alms and fears that it may not be accepted of him.
And the extreme dangers which are involved in feeling secure from the
stratagems of Allah and His punishment cannot be defined and all that is a
eulogy of fear, because the guiltiness of a thing is a eulogy of its contradiction
which negates it. And the contradiction of fear is security, just as the
contradiction of hope is despair. And just as the guiltiness of despair is a
pointer to the merit of hope, so the guiltiness of fancied security is a pointer to
the merit of fear which is contradictory to it. More, we shall say: All that is
involved in the merit of hope is a pointer to the merit of fear, because the two
are interdependent. For everyone who hopes for a desired object cannot but
fear that he should miss it, for, if he did not fear that he should miss it, he
would not be hoping in expectation of it, since he would not be desirous of it.
So fear and hope are interdependent and it would be absurd that one should be

247

Book three: Fear and Hope

severed from the other. Certainly it is possible that one should dominate the
other, while the two are united, and it is possible for the heart to be occupied
with one and to have no regard to the other for the moment, because of its
being negligent of it. This is so, because, from the conditional character of hope
and fear, their interdependence is with an object of doubt, since whatever is
specified is not hoped for nor feared. Therefore the object of desire whose
existence is possible its non-existence is also possible-indubitably. Hence the
assumpdon that it exists refreshes the heart and that is hope, and the
assumpdon that it does not exist pains the heart and that is fear. And the two
assumptions indubitably conflict with each other, since the affair which is
expected is in doubt.
Certainly one of the two aspects of doubt may preponderate over the
other in proportion with the presence of certain of the means and the name
of that is supposition, and that would be a cause of the dominance of one of
the two over the other. And, when the existence of the object of desire
dominates the supposition, hope is strengthened and fear is concealed in
relation to it, and vice versa. And in every circumstance the two of them are
interdependent, and, for that reason, He said: "And they invoke Us through
yearning and awe." (Al-Anbiya 90)

4 © ^33 ^3

^

And He also said: "They invoke their Lord through fear and yearning."
(As-Sajdah 16)

4©

j

33 ^

And, for that reason, Arabic has defined fear in terms of hope, for He
said: "What is the matter with you? You do not hope in Allah with reverence."
(Nuh 13).

4 ©1J ^3 k hyry V

>

That is, you do not fear. And there are the many passages in the Qur'an where
hope has the meaning of fear and that is because of their interdependence, since
the practice of Arabic is to express a thing in terms of what is complementary to
it.
More, I say that everything which constitutes the merit of weeping
through fear of Allah is a demonstration of the merit of fear, for weeping is
the fruit of fear. And He said: "Then let them laugh little and weep much."
(At-Tawbah 82)

4©

_£J3 bLi»

And He said: "They weep and it increases their humility." (Al-Isra' 109)

i©*

\

And He said: "Do you marvel at this discourse, and do you laugh and do you
not weep, while you make merry?" (An-Najm 59-61)

4 ©) Oj

Ij (© 0

^3

(©

^

I^

The quarter of the saviors
And he (Muhammad) said: There is no believing creature whose eye drops
a tear-even if it were like the head of a fly through fear of Allah, and then it
drops on some part of his cheek, but that Allah has precluded him from the
Fire. And he said: When the heart of a believer trembles because of the fear of
Allah, his sins are stripped from him, just as a tree is stripped of its leaves.
The Fire will not penetrate to anyone who weeps for fear of Allah, until the
milk returns to the udder.

248

And 'Uqbah Ibn 'Amir said: What is salvation O Messenger of Allah? He
said: Keep a rein on your tongue, keep to your house and weep for your sins.
And 'A'ishah said: I said: O Messenger of Allah, will anyone of your
community enter the Garden irrespective of desert ? He said: Yes, he who
recollects his sins and weeps. He said: There is no drop more beloved of Allah
than a tear-drop which is for fear of Allah, or a drop of blood which is shed in
the 'path' of Allah. He said: O Allah furnish me with moist eyes which cure
through the shedding of tears, before the tears become blood and the stones
live coals. And he said: Allah will give them shade seven times on a Day when
there will be no shade but His shade, and will remember among them the man
who has remembered Allah in private and whose eyes have overflowed with
tears.
Abu Bakr , the Sincere, said: Whoever is able to weep let him weep and
whoever is not able to weep let him pretend to weep. It was customary with
Muhammad Ibn Al-Munkadix when he wept to wipe his face and beard with his
tears and to say: I have heard that the Fire will not consume a place which tears
have wiped. And Abdullah Ibn Amr Ibn Al-A§ said: Weep and, if you cannot
weep, pretend to weep, for by Him in whose hand my soul is, if one of you
possessed knowledge, he would cry out until his voice was cut off and would pray
until his back was broken. Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani said: No eye fills up with its
water but that neither dearth nor abasement will overtake the face of its master
on the Day of Resurrection. For, if his tears flow, Allah will extinguish with their
first drop oceans of fire. And should one man in a community weep, that
community would not be punished. And Abu Sulaiman said: Weeping is on
account of fear and hope, and delight on account of yearning. And Ka'b AlAhbar said: By Him in whose hand my soul is, because I weep for fear of Allah
until the tears overflow my cheeks, I commend myself more than if I were to give
supererogatory alms of a mountain of gold. And 'Abd Allah Ibn 'Amr said:
Because I weep a tear for fear of Allah, I commend myself more than if I should
give supererogatory alms with a thousand dinars.
And it is related concerning Hanzalah that he said: We were with the
Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” and he preached us
a sermon by which our hearts were made tender and our eyes moist and we
'knew' ourselves. Then I returned to my family and my wife drew near to me and
mundane conversation flowed between us, and I forgot what had occupied our
minds in the presence of the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him”, and we were taken up with this present world. Then I recollected
what it was that had occupied our thoughts and I said within myself: I have

Book three: Fear and Hope --------------- ------------------------------------------- 249
played the hypocrite in that the fear and impressionableness that possessed me
have passed away. So I went out and began to shout : Hanzalah is a hypocrite.
And Abu Bakr, the Sincere, met me and said: No, Hanzalah has not played the
hypocrite. Then I entered the presence of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”, while I was saying: Hanzalah is a hypocrite. So
the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: No,
Hanzalah has not played the hypocrite. So I said: O Messenger of Allah we were
with you and you preached us a sermon by which our hearts were made fearful
and our eyes tearful and we 'knew' ourselves. Then I returned to my family and
we were engaged in mundane conversation, and I forgot what engaged our minds
when we were with you. So he said: O Hanzalah, would that you were always in
that state, then the angels would take you by the hand on your journeyings and
where you lie down, but, O Hanzalah, everything has its appointed time.
Therefore everything which constitutes the merit of hope and weeping and
piety and abstinence and knowledge, and the guiltiness of fancied security, is a
pointer to the merit of fear, because all of these are related to it either by way of
cause or effect.

Exposition That The Optimum Is The Dominance Of Fear Or The
Dominance Of Hope Or The Two In Equilibrium
Know that the traditions concerning the merit of fear and hope are legion,
and often the observer will inspect the two of them and doubt will overwhelm
him as to which of the two is the higher good. The person who says: Is fear or
hope the higher good?, asks a spurious question which resembles the question: Is
bread or water the higher good? The answer to it is to say that bread is the higher
good for the person who is hungry and water for the person who is thirsty. And,
if both are present in union, one has regard to which is the more dominant, and,
if it is hunger, bread is the higher good and, if it is thirst, water is the higher good.
If they are in balance, bread and water are on par. This is so because everything
which is willed in reference to a goal has its merit disclosed in relation to its goal,
not to itself. And fear and hope are therapies by means of which hearts are cured
and their respective merits are in proportion to the extant disease. For, if what
has dominion over the heart is the disease of fancied security from the stratagems
of Allah and being self-deceived thereby, fear is the higher good. And, if the most
dominant factors are hopelessness and a despairing of the mercy of Allah, hope is
the higher good. Similarly, if disobedience has mastery over the creature, fear is
the higher good.
And it is allowable to say absolutely that fear is the higher good, in the
sense that it is said: Bread is a higher good than oxymel, since the sickness of
hunger is treated with bread and that of jaundice with oxymel, and the disease
of hunger is more dominant and frequent, so that the need of bread is the
more frequent, and so it is the higher good. And, in this sense, the dominance
of fear is the higher good, because disobedience and self-deceit are the more
dominant over the creature. And, if one looks at the source of fear and hope,
hope is the higher good, because it is an outlet from the sea of mercy, and the
outlet of fear is from the sea of wrath. And whoever is attentive to those

The quarter of the saviors
250
attributes of Allah which decree kindness and mercy, love will dominate him
and there is no station beyond love. With regard to fear its prop is a turning
towards those attributes which decree severity and love does not mingle with
it as it does with hope.
In sum, it is proper to employ in reference to whatever is willed for other
than itself the expression more salutary and not the expression more meritorious.
So we say: For the most of people fear is more salutary than hope, and that,
because of the dominance of disobedience. As for the pious person who has
forsaken sin, outward and inward, concealed and open, what is most salutary
is that his hope and fear should be in equilibrium. For that reason it was said:
If the fear and hope of the believer were weighed, they would balance each
other. And it is reported that 'Ali said to one of his children: Fear Allah with
such a fear as will make you see that, if you brought Him the good deeds of
(all) the people of the earth, He would not accept them from you; and hope in
Adlah with such a hope as to make you see that, if you brought Him the evil
deeds of (all) the people of the earth, He would pardon you for them. Hence
'Umar said: If it were proclaimed: Let everybody except one man enter the
Fire, I should hope that I was that man. And, if it were proclaimed: Let
everyone enter the Garden except one man, I should fear that I was that man.
And this is an explanadon of the object of fear and hope and their being in
equilibrium, notwithstanding dominance and mastery, by means of
counterpoise and equalization.
And so with a person like 'Umar it is fitting that his fear and hope should
be on par. As for the disobedient man, when he supposes that he is the
person who is excepted from those who are commanded to enter the Fire,
that is a pointer to his self-delusion. And, if you say: It is not fitting with a
person like 'Umar that his fear and hope should be on par. No, it is fitting
that his hope should be dominant (as above, in the first part of the Book of
Hope) and that its strength should be in proporuon to the strength of the
means to it, as was illustrated by the sowing and the seed. And it is known
that whoever sows healthy seed in clean ground and perseveres in culdvadng
it, and fulfils all the conditions of agriculture, the hope of attainment
dominates his heart, so that his fear is not on par with his hope, and it is
proper that the states of the pious should be such.
Know therefore that whoever picks up ’knowledge' from verbal expressions
and parables multiplies his error, and that is so, even if we have cited a parable to
him. So what we were dealing with is not comparable in every respect, since the
cause of the dominance of hope was the knowledge which is the result of
experience. For he knew by experience the health of the soil and its cleanness and
the health of the seed and the salubriousness of the atmosphere and the paucity
of lethal thunderbolts in that area and so on. For the parable of our proposition
would be a seed whose species has not been tried, which has been scattered on
unfamiliar soil, which the sower has.not prepared nor. tested, in a country where
he does not know whether thunderbolts are frequent or not. And with such a
sower as this, even if he exerts himself to the utmost and fulfils all that is in his

Book three: Fear and Hope ------- --------------------------------------------------

251

power, his hope will not be dominant over his fear.
And the seed in our proposition is faith and the conditions of its health are
minute. And the soil is the heart whose hidden and open vices derive from
concealed polytheism and hypocrisy and apostasy, and its hidden properties are
beneath the surface. And the blights are lusts and blandishments of this world
and the turning of the heart towards them in the future. And, even if he is safe at
the moment, that is on account of what he can not verify and does not 'know' by
experience, since it may chance from causes whose succession he cannot
comprehend and whose like he has not experienced.
And the thunderbolts are the terrors of the pangs of death, and the
disturbance of belief in its presence, and that belongs to those things whose
like he has not experienced. Then the Reaping and the Result at the moment
of the departure from the Resurrection to the Garden, and that he has not
experienced. So whoever 'knows' the essentials of these matters, if he were
faint-hearted and cowardly in himself, his fear would indubitably dominate his
hope, as it will be related concerning the states of those who feared among
the Companions and the Followers. And, if he were stouthearted and of a
steadfast nature and complete in 'knowledge', his fear would be on par with
his hope. As for the suggestion that his hope would be dominant, this should
not be entertained.
And 'Umar was in the habit of going over the score in the examination of his
heart. So he used to ask Hudhaifah whether he knew of any traces of hypocrisy
in him, since the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
had made him (Hudhaifah) a specialist in the science of hypocrites. For who is
the person who is able to purify his heart from the hidden things of hypocrisy
and latent polytheism, and, if he has secured the cleansing of his heart to the
exclusion of that, how will he be secure from the stratagems of Allah in
confusing him as to his state and hiding his defects from him? And, if he is
confident about this, whence can he be confident about his being preserved in
that condition, until the completion of the goodness of the Seal ?
And he (Muhammad) said: Let a man do the works of the People of the
Garden for fifty years, so that only a span remains between him and the Garden
(and, in a variant, only the time between two milkings of a she-camel), then the
Book will predestinate and seal him with the work of the People of the Fire. And
the interval between two milkings of a she-camel does not allow the possibility of
an action with the members, It is no more than the duration of a fleeting impulse
which penetrates the heart at death and decrees the Seal of evil, and how can one
be secure from that ?
So the most ultimate objective of the believer is that his hope and fear
should be in equilibrium, and the dominance of hope with the most of people
would be a leaning on self-deceit and a dearth of 'knowledge'. For this reason
Allah has united both of them in the description of the persons whom He has
eulogized. For He said: "They invoke their Lord through fear and yearning."
(As-Sajdah 16)

I

252

-----------------------------------------------------------The quarter of the saviors
And He said: "They invoke Us through yearning and awe." (Al-Anbiya' 90)

i

C*33 &3

-^3 }

And where is the like of 'Umar? So what is most salutary for the people who
are alive at this time, all of them, is the dominance of fear, with the proviso that it
does not bring them to hopelessness and abandonment of action, and severing of
the yearning for pardon, for that would be a cause of shirking work and a
summons to obstinate persistence in disobedience. For that is despair and not
fear, since fear is that which provides an incentive for action and blackens all the
lusts, and snatches the heart away from reliance on this world, and summons it to
withdraw from the home of self-deceit. This is commendable fear; it is not a
passing impulse of the soul which does not take effect in restraint and incentive.
Nor is it hopelessness which decrees despair.
So Yahya Ibn Mu'adh said: Whoever serves Allah with undiluted fear is
drowned in a sea of reflection. And whoever serves Him with undiluted hope
goes astray in a desert of self-deceit. And whoever serves Him with fear and
hope is established in a highway of recollection. And Makhul of Damascus
said: Whoever serves Allah with fear is a Kharijite , and whoever serves Him
with hope is a Murjite, and whoever serves Him with love is a free-thinker ,
and whoever serves Him with fear and hope and love is a Unitarian.
Therefore these three conditions cannot but be united, and the dominance of
fear is most salutary, except at the point of death. At death the dominance of
hope and optimism are the most salutary, because fear has the effect of the
whip which urges to action, and the time of action has passed away, and so
the person who is at the point of death has no power over action. Then the
means of fear do not avail, for they cut the sinews of his heart and assist the
hastening of his death.
But the breath of hope strengthens his heart and commends to him his Lord
towards whom is his hope; and it is not expedient that anyone should leave this
world except out of love for Allah, in order that he may be desirous of meeting
with Allah. For whoever desires to meet with Allah, Allah desires to meet with
him, and hope joins him to love. So whoever hopes for this magnanimity is
beloved, and the goal of all sciences and actions is 'knowledge' of Allah, so that
'knowledge' produces love. For the trend is towards Him and the advance at
death is towards Him, and the joy of him who advances towards his Beloved is
great in proportion to his love, and whoever abandons his Beloved has his
tribulations and punishment intensified.
Wherever the heart is dominated at death by love of family and children and
wealth and dwelling and estates and friends and companions, all the things which
this man desires are in this world and so this world is his Garden, since the
Garden is an expression for the territory which unites all that is desired. Hence
his death is an exit from the Garden and the placing of an obstacle between him
and what he desires, and there is no concealing the state of the man who has had
an obstacle placed between him and what he desires. And, if he had no object of
desire but Allah and the recollection of Him and 'knowledge' of Him and
reflection on Him, this world and its ties would be a distraction to him to the

Book three: Fear and Hope
253
exclusion of the Beloved. So this world is a prison, because a prison is an
expression for the place which obstructs the imprisoned from being refreshed by
the things desired, and so his death is an advance towards his Beloved and is
salvation from the prison; and there is no concealing the state of the man who
has escaped from the prison and is closeted with his Beloved without obstruction
or alloy.
This is the first reward and punishment which everyone who leaves this world
consequent on death will meet, exclusive of what Allah has prepared for His
creatures who are sound in faith, of those things which the eye does not see nor
the ear hear, nor has it occurred to the heart of man; and exclusive of what Allah
has prepared for those who love the life of this present world in preference to the
next world, and are satisfied with it and feel secure in it from bonds and chains
and manacles and blows of disgrace and chastisement. So let us ask Allah to bring
us to die as Muslims and to annex us to the sound in faith. And there is no hope
of an answer to this petition except by the acquisition of the love of Allah, and
there is no path to it except by the expulsion of other than Allah from the heart
and the severing of ties from all that is other than Allah from rank and wealth
and country.
What is most fitting is that you should make petition as the Prophet did,
when he said: O Lord furnish me with Your love and the love of whoever loves
You, and the love of whatever brings me near to Your love and makes Your
love more beloved to me than cold water. And the conclusion to be drawn is
that the dominance of hope is more salutary at death, because it is most
conducive to love; and the dominance of fear is more salutary before death,
because it best kindles the fire which burns up lusts, and best chokes the love
of this world out of the heart. And, for that reason, he (Muhammad) said: Let
not one of you die except he supposes the best of his Lord. And He said: I
identify Myself with what My creature supposes of Me, so let him suppose of
Me what he will. And, when death was present with Sulaiman at-Taimi, he said
to his son: O my son, tell me about the indulgences of Allah and remind me
about hope, so that 1 may meet Allah supposing the best of Him. Similarly
when death was present with Ath-Thawri and his pangs were intensified, the
Scholars gathered around him lending him hope. And Ahmad Ibn Hanbal said
to his son at death: Remind me of the traditions which have hope and optimism
in them. And the goal of all that was that he should commend Allah to himself.
And thus Allah revealed to David: Commend Me to My creatures. And he
said: In what way ? He said: By your recollecting to them My benefits and
bounties. Therefore ultimate bliss is that one should die loving Allah and love
is attained only through 'knowledge' and through the expulsion of the love of
this world from the heart, so that the whole world is like a prison which
denies access to the Beloved. Hence one of the sound in faith saw Abu
Sulaiman ad-Darani in a vision and he was air-borne. So he questioned him
and he (Abu Sulaiman ) said: Now I am escaping. And, when he (one of the
sound in faith) awoke in the morning, he asked after him, and it was said to
him: Truly he died yesterday.

254

The quarter of the saviors

CHAPTER 5
EXPOSmON OF REMEDY BY WHICH STATE OF FEAR IS OBTAINED
It should be known that what we have mentioned concerning the therapy of
patience and have expounded in The Book of Patience and Gratitude will suffice for
this purpose, because patience is only possible after the attaining of fear and
hope, since the first of the stations of religion is assurance which is an expression
for strength of faith in Allah and the Last Day and the Garden and the Fire. And
this assurance necessarily excites fear of the Fire and hope of the Garden, and
hope and fear fortify patience. For the Garden has been enclosed with abhorrent
things, and no one has patience to endure them except through the strength of
hope. And the Fire has been surrounded with lusts and no one has patience to
quench them except through the strength of fear. And, for this reason, 'Ali said:
Whoever longs for the Garden is diverted from lusts, and whoever guards against
the Fire recoils from things forbidden,
Then the station of patience, which is derived from fear and hope, gives
access to the station of spiritual combat and exclusive devotion to the
recollection of Allah and constant reflection on Him. And constant
recollection gives access to intimacy and constant reflection to the perfection
of 'knowledge1. And perfection of 'knowledge' and intimacy give access to
love and the station of satisfaction and trustfulness, and the remainder of the
stations follow it. And this is the order of ascent of the stages of religion; and
no station can succeed the root of assurance except fear and hope, and only
patience can succeed these two, and accompanying it is spiritual combat and
utter devotion to Allah outwardly and inwardly. And for the person to whom
the way has been opened up there can be no station after spiritual combat
except guidance and 'knowledge'. And only the station of love and intimacy
can succeed 'knowledge', and following necessarily on love is satisfaction with
the action of the Beloved and confidence in His care which is trustfulness.
Therefore what we have mentioned concerning the regimen of patience is
sufficient, but we shall single out fear particularly in a summing-up and shall say:
Fear gives access to two diverse ways, one higher than the other. And its parable
is that, if a youth were in a house and a lion or snake came into him, he would
probably not be afraid and would stretch out his hand towards the snake that he
might take hold of it and play with it. But, if his father were with him, since he is
knowledgeable, he would be afraid of the snake and would flee from it. And, if
the lad should look at his father while he was trembling and was making to flee
because of it, he would be identified with him and fear would conquer him and
he would accompany him in flight. So the fear of the father is on account of
insight and 'knowledge' of the attributes of the snake and its poison and its
particular characteristics; and the might of the lion and its violence and lack of
concern. And the fear of the son and his faith are entirely attributable to
authority, because he thinks well of his father and knows that he is not afraid
except on account of what excites fear in itself; and so he knows that the lion is a
threat, but he does not 'know' the cause of it. And, if you 'know' this parable,

255
Book three: Fear and Hope
note that the fear of Allah is on two planes. One is fear of His punishment and
the second is fear of Him.
With respect to fear of Him it is the fear of the Knowledgeable and the
Spiritual Directors; of those who know such of His attributes as decree awe and
fear and caution; of those who scrutinize the inner secret of His saying: Allah
warns you (to remember) Himself. (A1 Imran 28)
4

4Xl\

JJ ^

And His saying: "Fear Allah with the fear which is His due." (A1 Imran 102)
^

(5>- aw 11 jju i ^

With respect to the First it is the fear of the rank and file of the people, and
is a product of the root of faith in the Garden and the Fire, and that they are
respectively the rewards of obedience and disobedience. And its weakness is
due to negligence and weakness of faith. And negligence can only be erased by
recollection and preaching and tenacious reflection on the terrors of the Day of
Resurrection and the classes of punishment in the next world. And it is erased
also by observing those who fear and sharing their company and through the
vision of their states. And, if sight should fail, hearing will not be sealed off
from receiving impressions. With regard to the second it is higher, because it is
Allah Himself who inspires fear. I mean that the creature both fears being
veiled from Him and hopes for nearness to Him. Dhu '1-Nun said: The fear of
the Fire in comparison with the fear of alienation is like a drop which is shed in
a fathomless sea. And this is the fear of the Knowledgeable according as He
said: "Only the knowledgeable among His creatures fear Allah." (Fatir 28)

But the rank and file of the believers also have a portion of this fear, but it
rests exclusively on authority. It is also the fear which the lad had of the snake on
the authority of his father which does not rest on insight and is indubitably weak
and soon fades away. So that the lad may chance to see the snake-charmer
approach and take hold of the snake, and may observe him and be deceived by
him and venture to take hold of it in imitation of him, just as he recoiled from
taking hold of it in imitation of his father. And tenets which rest on authority are,
for the most part, weak, except when they are strengthened by the sight of the
means to them which constantly reinforce them, and by perseverance in what
they decree so as to multiply acts of obedience and avoid acts of disobedience
unremittingly over a long period.
Therefore whoever ascends to the apex of 'knowledge' and 'knows' Allah,
fears Him of necessity, and has no need of the regimen which induces fear; just
as whoever 'knows' the lion and sees himself falling into its claws has no need of
the regimen which will induce fear in his heart. No, he fears it of necessity,
whether he wills it or not. Hence Allah revealed to David: Fear Me as you fear
the harmful lion. And there is no device for inducing fear of the harmful lion
except 'knowledge' of the lion and 'knowledge' of falling into its claws, and there
is no need of any device besides it. So whoever 'knows' Allah 'knows' that He

The quarter of the saviors
256
does what He wills and does not care, and legislates as He desires and is not
afraid. He brought the angels near without prior merit, and He banished the
Devil irrespective of the question of previous sin. More, His character is as His
saying has explained it: These are in the Garden and I do not care, and these are
in the Fire and I do not care. And, if it occurs to your mind that He does not
punish except on account of disobedience, nor reward except on account of
obedience, consider that He has not furnished the obedient man with the means
of obedience, so that he is obedient whether he wills it or not; and He has not
furnished the disobedient man with the motives of disobedience, so that he is
disobedient whether he wills it or not. And, whenever he creates negligence and
lust and power to fulfill the lust, the action follows on them of necessity. For, if
He alienated a person because he was disobedient to Him, and did not incite him
to disobedience, was this because of a prior disobedience? In which case there is
an infinite regress; or else it comes to a halt, doubdess, at a first principle which is
uncaused from the point of view of the creature. No; it was decreed for him from
all eternity.
And he (Muhammad) explained the meaning of this when he said: Adam and
Moses had an argument concerning their Lord, and Adam had the better of the
argument. Moses said: You are Adam whom Allah created with His hand and
into whom He breathed of His breath. And He made the angels do obeisance to
you and he made you a resident of His Garden. Then you caused the people to
fall to the earth through your sin. And Adam said: You are Moses whom Allah
chose for His Apostolate and His Word and gave you the Tablets on which were
an exposition of everything. And He brought you near as one noble-born. By
how many years did you find that Allah wrote down the Law before I was
created? Moses said: By forty years. Adam said: And did you find in it: "And
Adam disobeyed his Lord and was led astray ?" (Ta Ha 121)

4 {JjS

j45j

^

He said: Yes. He said: Do you then blame me because I performed an action
which Allah had inscribed against me before I did it and forty years before He
created me ? Thus Adam out-argued Moses.
And whoever 'knows' the cause in this matter with a 'knowledge' which
stems from the light of guidance belongs to the elite of the Gnostics; to those
who scrutinize the secret of predestination. And whoever hears this and
believes in it and affirms its truth solely on the strength of what he has heard,
belongs to the rank and file of the believers. And everyone in both of these
groups is affected by fear. For every creature is as one falling into the clutch
of predestination, just as the weakly youth who falls into the claws of the lion.
And the lion may chance to be heedless and leave him alone; and it may
pounce on him and maul him and that is regulated by what is contingent.
Connected with this contingency are causes which are graduated in proportion
with how much is known. But, when it (the contingency) is related to one who
does not know it, (the cause) it is called contingency. And, if it is related to
the knowledge of Allah, it is not permissible that it should be called
contingency. As for the person who falls into the claws of the lion, if his
'knowledge' were perfect, he would not be afraid of the lion, since the lion is

257
Book three: Fear and Hope
coerced. If hunger dominates it, it will maul, and, if heedlessness dominates it,
it will ignore and leave alone. So he would be afraid only of the Creator of the
lion and His attributes. And I am not going to say that fear of the lion is a
parable of fear of Allah. No; when the cover is withdrawn, it will be known
that fear of the lion is the very fear of Allah, because the One who kills by
means of the lion is Allah.
And know that the lions of the next world are like the lions of this world, and
that Allah has created the means of punishment and reward, and has created for
everyone a complement. The predestination which is a branch of the irrevocable
and eternal decree drives him towards what is created for him. So He created the
Garden and created for it a complement who are coerced by the means to it,
whether they will it or not. And He created the Fire and created for it a
complement who are coerced by the means to it, whether they will it or not. And
no person sees himself in the buffeting of the waves of predestination but that
fear of necessity dominates him. And these are the things concerning the secret
of predestination which the Gnostics fear. And, if a persona is a party to a
deficiency which precludes the ascent to the station of insight, his procedure is to
treat himself with the hearing of the traditions and the reports, and to search out
the states and sayings of the Gnostics who feared, and compare their intellect and
rank with the rank of those who were self-deceived in their hoping. And there is
no doubt that the imitating of them is most fitting, because they are the Prophets
and Saints and Knowledgeable.
As for those who think themselves secure, they are the arrogant and ignorant
and remiss. As for our Messenger, he is the Master of the first and the last, and
he was of all men subject to the most intense fear. So that it is related that he was
praying over an infant and that (according to one version) he was heard to say in
his petition: O Allah, preserve him from the punishment of the grave and the
punishment of the Fire. And (in a second version) that he heard someone saying:
Congratulations to you, one of the sparrows of the Garden. And he was angry
and said: How did you get to know that it is so ordered ? By Allah! I am the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him,, and I have not
ascertained what He will do with me. Truly Allah has created the Garden and has
created for it a complement which may not be increased nor diminished. And it is
related that he (Muhammad) said that also over the bier of 'Uthman Ibn Maz’un,
who was among the first of the Emigrants, when Umm Salamah said: May you
enjoy the Garden! And Umm Salamah used to say thereafter: By Allah! I do not
eulogize anyone after 'Uthman. And Muhammad Ibn Khawlah Al-Hanafiyyah
said: I do not ascribe merit to anyone except the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”, not even to my father who begat me. And the
Shiites' were roused against him and he began to mention the merits and
attainments of 'Ali.
And it is related in another account concerning a man belonging to the
People of the Bench who died a martyr's death; whose mother said:
Congratulations to you, one of the sparrows of the Garden. You emigrated to the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and you were killed
in the path of Allah. And he (Muhammad) said: And how did you get to know?
Perhaps he conversed in what will not benefit him and proscribed what will not

The quarter of the saviors
258
injure him. And it is related that he (Muhammad) came into the presence of one
of his Companions who was ill and he heard a woman saying: May you have the
joy of die Garden! And he said: Who is this swearing by Allah? So the sick man
said: She is my mother, O Messenger of Allah. So he said: And how did you get
to know? Perhaps so and so conversed in what will not benefit him and was
thrifty in what will not enrich him.
And how will every believer not be afraid when he (Muhammad) says: Hud
and her sisters have made me gray-haired , i.e. Al-Waqi’ah, At-Takwir and AnNaba'. The Scholars said: Perhaps that refers to what is in die Surah of Hud
according to His saying: "Lo! away with Aad, the people of Hud." (Hud 60)
And "Lo! away with Ttiamud

(Hud 68)

And "Lo! away with Madyanas Thamud is far away." (Hud 95)
^

LIS'^J-lJ luL

I ^

This, although he (Muhammad) knew that, if Allah had willed it, they would
not have been polytheists, since, if it were His will, He would bring every soul its
guidance. And in the Surah of Al-Waqi’ah: "None denies its taking place, abasing,
exalting." (Al-Waqi'ah 2-3)
That is, the reed-pen is dry with things as they are fixed, and what is
foreordained has come to completion, so that the event comes down, whether it
be the abasing of a people who were exalted in this world, or the exalting of a
people who were abased in this world. And in the Surah of At-Takwir are the
terrors of the Day of Resurrection and the disclosing of the Seal, namely His
saying: "When Hell will be set blazing, when the Garden will be brought near, a
soul will know what it has brought forward." (At-Takwir 12-14)
4 CjS
1 b*
CjJc-ljji
15Jj (jjj
i*J3 ^
And in the Surah of An-Naba': "The Day when man will see (the Deeds)
which his hands have sent forth, and the Unbeliever will say, "Woe unto me!
Would that I were (mere) dust!"" (An-Naba' 40)
4
y Sb) 1 lJj-b-jj o\ju c—• L
1
Ljy Ljl Jlp
j j_i> I l> I ^
And His saying: "They will not speak except for him to whom the Merciful
may give permission and who speaks aright." (An-Naba' 38)

4 © Gii

3 oJ£ *J

And the Qur'an from first to last is a source of dread to whoever reads it
thoughtfully, and, if there was nothing in it except His saying: "But I am forgiving
to whoever repents and believes and does what is righteous and at last is guided."
(Ta Ha 82)
p

J jUaJ Jjj^

I

259
Book three: Fear and Hope
That would be sufficient, since He has made pardon dependent on four
conditions to fulfill any one of which the creature is impotent. And more
rigorous than it is His saying: But as for him "who repents and believes and
does what is righteous, perchance he may be among those who prosper." (AlQasas 67)

4 1(5
cr?
O'
ijhili ^
And His saying: "That He might question the truthful as to their
truthfulness." (Al-Ahzab 8)

4©

Jllj ^

And His saying: "We shall attend to you at leisure, you prominent beings!"
(Ar-Rahman 31)

4

-o'

^

And His saying: " Did they then feel secure against the Plan of Allah? But no
one can feel secure from the Plan of Allah, except those (doomed) to ruin!" (AlA'raf 99)

4

b*5]

^ & C^>'

>

And His saying: "Such is the grip of your Lord, when He takes hold of a town
in its wrongdoing; surely His grip is painful, terrible." (Hud 102)
4

U.J

^LJl jQ

I jjj ijrllb JjAj (^^oJ I JJy I 151 <jJuj

I dU'dS'j ^

And His saying: "The day We shall gather the righteous to (Allah) Most
Gracious, like a band presented before a king for honours." (Maryam 85)

i <£>

jj

fji >

And His saying: "Not one of you but will pass over it: this is, with your Lord,
a Decree which must be accomplished." (Maryam 71)

And His saying: " Do what you will: verily He sees (clearly) all that you do."
(Fussilat 40)
4

L*-? -»<jj

f* '>LP^ ^

And His saying: "To any that desires the tilth of the Hereafter, We give
increase in his tilth; and to any that desires the tilth of this world, We grant
somewhat thereof, but he has no share or lot in the Hereafter." (Ash-Shura 20)
J

*X>J_

cj

^

And His saying: "Whoever does an atom's weight of good will see it; and
Whoever does an atom's weight of evil will see it." (Az-Zalzalah 7-8)

4 Cp j0's~

(J|S >*ji '5^- v*

^

And His saying: "And We shall turn to whatever deeds they did (in this life),

The quarter of the saviors
260
and We shall make such deeds as floadng dust scattered about." (Al-Furqan 23)

4 © *j*C*
^ JJ
^
And His saving: " By (the Token of) Time (through the Ages), Verily Man is
in loss, Except such as have Faith, and do righteous deeds, and (join together) in
the mutual teaching of Truth, and of Padence and Constancy." (Al-Asr 1-3)
\'y*£>Vy»y

\yiyS-j \y^V, £)i jJ? *i/J

oj

^

So these are the four conditions of salvation from loss . And the fear of the
prophets was (possible) only in association with the grace which overflowed to
them, since they did not think themselves secure from the stratagems of Allah;"
and only the people of perdition think themselves secure from the stratagems of
Allah." (Al-A'raf99)
4

0^jJL) I ^/J

4)1 'j£=LA IjJw-lil ^

So that it is related that the Prophet and Gabriel were weeping for fear of
Allah, and Allah revealed to both of them: Why do you weep, since I have
made both of you secure? So they said: And who is secure from Your
stratagems ? And it was as if both of them, since they knew that Allah Himself
is the Knower of hidden things, and that He does not acquaint them with the
ultimate goal of affairs, did not think themselves secured against His saying "I
have made both of you secure" being a way of trying and testing them and
plotting against them, so that, if their fear had been quietened, it would have
been clear that they thought themselves secure from the stratagems and had
not fulfilled their saying.
Similarly with Abraham who, when he was deposited in the missile, said: Bear
me in mind, O Allah. And this was one of the great petitions. So he was tested
and was joined by Gabriel in the air, so that he (Gabriel) said: Are you in need ?
He said: Not of you. And that was a fulfillment of the significance of His saying:
Bear me in mind, O Allah. And so Allah related of him saying: "And Abraham
who fulfilled ." (An-Najm 37)
That is, what was entailed by his saying: Bear me in mind, O Allah.
And, as a parable of this, it is reported concerning Moses that, when he said:
"Truly we are afraid that He may neglect us or be remiss, he said: Do not be
afraid, surely I shall be with both of you, hearing and seeing." (Ta Ha 45-46)

J>1 Uli Jii 0 j&. 0\jLjp I>:

i£ji2j -jii »

And, in spite of this, when the magicians cast their spells, Moses quaked with
fear within himself, because he did not feel secure from the stratagems of Allah,
and he was confused over the affair until security was renewed to him, and it was
said to him: "Fear not, surely you are the uppermost." (Ta Ha 68)
4 CSS

C-il

V Ills ^

261
Book three: Fear and Hope
And, when the power of the Muslims was weak on the day of Badr , he
(Muhammad) said: O Allah, if you kill this band, no one will remain on the
face of the earth to serve You. And Abu Bakr said: Leave off badgering your
Lord. Surely He will fulfill for you according as He has promised you. For he
was at the station of the Sincere, the station of reliance on the promise of
Allah. And the station of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” was that of fearing the stratagems of Allah and it is the more
complete, because it can derive only from perfection of 'knowledge'
concerning the secrets of Allah and the concealed aspects of His actions and
the meanings of His attributes which He expresses by such actions as derive
from them by way of plotting.
And it is given to no human being to get to the bottom of the attributes of
Allah. And, if a man 'knows' the essence of 'knowledge', and that his 'knowledge'
comes short of getting to the bottom of affairs, his fear will indubitably be great.
For that reason the Messiah said, when it was said to him (by Allah) : "Did you
say to the people: 'Take me and my mother as gods apart from Allah'?: "Glory to
You, what reason have I for saying what does not belong to me by right? If I did
say it, You know it. You know what is in me but I do not know what is in You ."
(Al-Ma’idah 116)
tj L* jUju ALUt j-ii jasM

oj

^

Cti [J

L

Jii y

And he said: "If You punish them they are Your servants: if You do forgive
them, You are the Exalted in power, the Wise."" (Al-Ma'idah 118)
4
kjjjTQjl vibpjj }
He (the Messiah) transferred the affair to the will and disassociated himself
entirely from pronouncing as to his knowledge of it; because he had nothing
to do with the affair, and because affairs are tied to the will with a connection
which issues beyond the boundary of things intelligible and familiar, so that it
is not possible to give a ruling on them by use of analogy or conjecture or
opinion, a fortiori by verification and proof, and this is what the hearts of the
Gnostics have grasped.
For the greatest catastrophe is the tie-up of your affair with the Will of
One who has no concern for you, if He kills you. For He has killed the like of
you, an innumerable company, and He is continually punishing them in this
world with different kinds of torments and diseases, and, in addition, He
makes their hearts diseased with unbelief and hypocrisy. Then He perpetuates
their punishment to all eternity. So it is reported concerning Him that He
says: "If We had so willed, We could have given every soul its guidance, but
now is My saying realized: "Surely I shall fill Hell with jinn and men together
." (As-Sajdah 13)

4 (0)

oVCSf ^

And He said: "And the word of your Lord has been fulfilled: "I will fill Hell
with jinns and men all together."" (Hud 119)

The quarter of the saviors

262

4
0-^33 ^
And how can one fail to be afraid at that part of the saying which has been
realized from all eternity, so that one may not yearn to attain to it? If the affair
were undetermined, yearning would be of use in respect of it. But there is no
alternative except to be resigned to it and to discriminate between the hidden
things of predestination and the clear causes which are visible to the heart and
members. And whoever has easy access to the means of evil has an obstacle
between himself and the means of good, and his relationships are regulated from
the side of this world; and so it is as if a disclosure were made to him by way of
verifying the secret of predestination which predestined him as a reprobate. For,
whenever easy access (to virtue) is created for him, (even if all the virtues are
easily accessible and the heart is entirely cut off from this world and outwardly
and inwardly set upon Allah) this decrees the lightening of fear, if the
permanency of these circumstances is confidently assumed by him. But the peril
of the Seal and the difficulty of safety fans into a blaze the fires of fear and it is
not possible to extinguish them.
And how can the vicissitudes of circumstances offer security, while the
heart of the believer is between two of the fingers of the Merciful, and the
heart is violently overturned by the ferments of fate? And the Reverser of
hearts has said: "Surely from their Lord's punishment none feels secure." (AlMa'arij 28)

4©

Ol }

And the most ignorant member of the populace is he who thinks himself
secure, while He is crying out a warning against fancied security. And were it
not that Allah is gracious with His creatures the Gnostics, when He refreshes
their hearts with the breath of hope, their hearts would be consumed with the
fire of fear. So the means of hope are a mercy to the elite of Allah, and the
means of negligence are, from one point of view, a mercy to the rank and file
of the creatures. Since, if the cover were withdrawn, souls would perish and
hearts would be cut off because of fear of the Reverser of hearts. And one of
the Gnostics said: If a pillar were interposed between me and one whom I
knew to be a Unitarian for fifty years and then he died, I would not conclude
that he was a Unitarian, because I would not be cognizant with what had been
made clear to him in respect of reversal. And one of them said: If the choice
were between martyrdom at the door of the house, and death in Islam at the
door of the room, I would choose death in Islam, because I do not know
what may chance to my heart between the door of the room and the door of
the house.
And Abu Ad-Darda' was in the habit of swearing by Allah: There is no
one who thought himself secure because of his faith from being plundered by
Allah at death, but He plundered him. And Sahl used to say: The fear of the
Sincere at the evil of the Seal is present at every impulse and motion, and they
are those whom Allah has described when He said: "And their hearts are
quaking." (Al-Mu'minun 60)

40

>

And, when Sufyan was at the point of death, he began to weep and be griefstricken, and so it was said to him: O Abu 'Abd Allah, keep hoping, for the

263
Book three: Fear and Hope
pardon of Allah is greater than your sins. So he said: Is it then because of my sins
that I weep? If I knew that I should die a Unitarian, I would not be concerned
should I meet Allah with sins the like of mountains.
And it is related concerning one of those who fear that he charged one of his
brethren and said: When death is present with me, squat by my head. And, if you
see me dying as a Unitarian, take hold of all that I possess and buy with it
almonds and wine, and distribute it to die youths who inhabit the district, and
say: This is the wedding-breakfast of one who has made good his escape. And, if
I die in a state other than that of a Unitarian, acquaint the people to that effect,
so that they be not deceived by the sight of my bier, so that whoever has most
desire after insight may accompany my bier, to the end that dissimuladon may
not overtake me after death. He said: And by what token shall I know this? So he
mendoned a mark to him. And he saw the mark of Unitarianism at his death, and
so he bought wine and almonds and distributed them. And Sahl used to say: The
novice fears lest he may be tried by disobedience, and the Gnostic fears lest he
may be tried by unbelief. And Abu Yazid used to say: Whenever I repair to the
mosque, it is as if a girdle were around my middle ’ and I am afraid that it may
lead me to the Church and the House of Fire, until I enter the mosque and the
girdle is severed from me. And this happens to me five dmes every day .
And it is related concerning the Messiah that he said: O band of disciples,
you are afraid of deeds of disobedience, and we of the band of the prophets
are afraid of unbelief. And it is related in the traditions of the prophets that a
prophet complained to Allah of hunger and lice and nakedness over a period
of years, and his habit was that of a §ufT. And Allah revealed to him: O my
creature, are you not content that I have defended your heart from unbelief in
Me, so that you ask Me for this world? So he took up dust, laid it on his head,
and said: Yes, I am content, O Lord, defend me from unbelief. And, since the
fear of the Gnosdcs, in spite of the imprints of their feet and the power of
their faith, was on account of the evil of the Seal, how will the weaklings not
fear it?
And the evil of the Seal has causes which come to the forefront as death
approaches, such as modernism, hypocrisy and pride, and a host of reprehensible
characteristics. Hence the fear which the Companions had of. hypocrisy was
intense so that Al-FIassan said: If I knew that I was innocent of hypocrisy, it
would be more desirable to me than the place on which the sun rises. And what
is meant in this connection is not the hypocrisy which is the contradiction of the
root of faith. No, what is intended by it is the hypocrisy which unites with the
root of faith, so that a Muslim is (at the same time) a hypocrite. And it possesses
many marks. He (Muhammad) said: There are four ways in which a man may
dissimulate and in each case he is a pure hypocrite, even if he prays and fasts and
claims that he is a Muslim. And, if there is in him an offshoot of these practices,
there is in him also a branch of hypocrisy, so that he abandons them. The man
who, when he relates, falsifies; when he promises, is fickle; when he is relied on,
is false; when he litigates, commits perjury. And (in another version): When he
covenants is faithless. And the Companions and Followers have offered such an
exegesis of hypocrisy that only the person who is Sincere is isolated from every
detail of it. For Al-Hassan said: Surely hypocrisy is differentiated into secrecy and
openness and tongue and heart and what goes in (to the heart) and what comes
out. And who is the man who is isolated from these meanings?

The quarter of the saviors
More, these matters have become commonplace with men through
custom, and it is forgotten that they are entirely abhorrent. More, that almost
had the status of a covenant in the epoch of the Prophethood, and how is the
supposition (otherwise) in our time? So that Hudhaifah said: Let a man but
speak a word concerning the covenant of Allah and he will become thereby a
hypocrite. Truly I hear it from each of you ten times a day. And the
Companions of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” used to say: Should you but do works that are more minute in your eyes
than a hair, we would count them among the major deeds for the sake of the
covenant of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him”. And one of them said: A mark of hypocrisy is that you dislike in other
people that whose like you produce; and that you hanker after anything that is
wrong; and that you loathe anything that is right. And it was said concerning
hypocrisy: When he is praised for anything he does not have, that makes him
pleased.
And a man said to Ibn 'Umar: Truly we go in to these chiefs and we swear
that they are truthful in what they are saying, and when we come out, we talk
about them among ourselves. So he (Ibn ’Umar) said: We counted this hypocrisy
in relation to the covenant of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him”. And it is related that he (Ibn 'Umar) heard a man blaming AlHajjaj and tackled him and said: Is it the case that, if Al-Hajjaj were present, you
would speak as you have spoken about him? He said: No. He said: We counted
this hypocrisy in relation to the covenant of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”. And more extreme than this is what is related
how a certain party of men squatted at the gate of Hudhaifah. awaiting him, and
they were conversing about some item of his business. And, when he came out to
them, they were silent out of respect for him. So he said: Carry on with your
conversation; and they kept silent. He said: We counted this hypocrisy in relation
to the covenant of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him”.

264

And the Hudhaifah in question had been specially endowed with the
knowledge of hypocrites and the causes of hypocrisy. And he used to say: Surely
there comes upon the heart an hour when it is filled with faith, so that there is
not a needle's head of room for hypocrisy in it; and there comes upon it an hour
when it is filled with hypocrisy, so that there is not a needle's head of room for
faith in it. And you know by this that the fear of the Gnostics is on account of
the evil of the Seal, and that its causes are the affairs which precede it. Among
them are modernism and disobedience and hypocrisy. And when is the creature
isolated from every detail of the sum of this? And, if he supposes that he is
isolated from it, he is a hypocrite. For it is said: Whoever feels secure from
hypocrisy is a hypocrite. And one Gnostic said to another: Truly, I fear for myself
with respect to hypocrisy. And he said: If you were a hypocrite, you would not be
afraid of hypocrisy. And the attention of the Gnostic constantly alternates
between predestination and the Seal, for fear of both of them, and, for this
reason, he (Muhammad) said: The believing creature is between two threats; the
term which has run its course in respect of which he does not know what Allah is
doing about it; and the term which is still in being in respect of which he does not
know what Allah is decreeing for it. And by the One in whose hand is my soul,
there is no one to crave boons from after death, and, after this world, there is no

265
Book three: Fear and Hope
dwelling-place but the Garden and the Fire. And Allah is the One of whom to
ask help.

CHAPTER 6
EXPOSITION OF MEANING OF EVIL OF SEAL
And if you say: Surely the fear of many of the people goes back to the evil of
Seal, so what is the meaning of the evil of seal?
It should be known that the evil of Seal has two degrees, one greater than
the other. As for the major degree which most inspires dread, it consists in
the fact that at the throes of death and the appearance of its terrors, the heart
is dominated either by doubt or apostasy, and the spirit is snatched away when
apostasy or doubt is the dominant state. And so what has gained ascendancy
over the heart on account of the binding of apostasy is a veil between it and
Allah forever. And that decrees alienation in perpetuity and everlasting
punishment.
And the second and lesser degree is constituted by a man's heart being
dominated at death by the love of some worldly affair and lust, and this is imaged
in his heart which is swamped by it, so that, in that state, there is room for
nothing else. Then the snatching away of his spirit chances to fall while he is in
that state. For the swamping of his heart by it is the bending of his head towards
this world and the inclining of his face to it. And whenever the face is averted
from Allah, the veil is obtained, and whenever the veil is obtained, punishment is
reached, since the blazing fire of Allah will only take hold of those who are veiled
from Him. And as for the believer whose heart is secured from the love of the
world and whose attention is directed towards Allah, the fire will say to him: Pass
O believer, for your light has extinguished my flame. Whenever the snatching
away of the spirit happens in a state when the love of the world is dominant, the
affair is full of danger, because a man dies according as he lives. And it is not
possible for the heart to acquire another characteristic after death which would
contradict the characteristic which was dominant over it, since you cannot effect
changes on the heart except by the acdons of members, and the members have
been made null by death, and so actions have also been nullified. So there is no
hope of action and no hope of return to this world in order to make amends. In
these circumstances the loss would be great were it not that the root of faith and
the love of Allah, when they have been imprinted in the heart over a long period
and have been reinforced by sound actions, erase from the heart this state which
befell it at death. So, if the strength of a man's faith were up to a Mithqal, it
would bring him out of the Fire in a short time; and, if it were less than this, his
sojourn in the Fire would be lengthy; and, if it were no more than the weight of a
seed, it would inevitably bring him out of the Fire, even if it were after thousands
of years.
And if you say: What you have mentioned decrees that the Fire should speed
to a person consequent on his death. What then is His purpose in delaying until
the Day of Resurrection and procrastinating for the duration of this period?
Know that whoever dislikes the punishment of the grave is a modernist who is
veiled from the light of Allah and the light of the Qur'an and the light of faith.

The quarter of the saviors
266
More, what is sound in die opinion of men of insight is what the traditions
correcdy state, namely, the grave is either one of the pits of the Fire or the
meadows of die Garden, and diere may open on to the grave of one who is to be
chastised seventy gates of Hell. According as the traditions have adduced his
spirit will not leave him except emaciadon has setded on him, if he has been
made a reprobate with the evil of the Seal. And the kinds of punishment vary
with the dmes, and so the interrogation of Munkar and Nakir takes place at the
moment of being deposited in the grave and chastisement is after it. Then the
exhaustive scrutiny in making up the account, and shame because of the company
of those who testify to the Day of Resurrection. Then after that the peril of the
Bridge and it consists in the fact that the Warders of Hell-to the end of what the
traditions adduce in this connection.
And the reprobate will be incessandy revolving in all his states between the
different classes of punishment, and in the sum of his states he will be chastised,
unless Allah covers him with His mercy. And you should not suppose that the
dust will consume the locus of faith. No; the dust will consume all the members
and will scatter them until die Book reaches its term. Then the dismembered
pieces will be collected and the spirit which is the locus of faith will be brought
back to them. From the time of death until its return it has been either in the,
crops of green birds which are suspended beneath the Throne, if it were blessed,
or in a state which contradicts this if it were (may Allah defend us) reprobate.
And if you say: What then is the cause which leads to the evil of the Seal?
Know that the enumeration in detail of the causes of these matters is not
possible, but it is possible to indicate what they are in sum. With respect to the
Seal which is on account of doubt and apostasy its cause is confined to two
things. One of them can be envisaged along with complete abstinence and
asceticism and perfect soundness of action, as, for example, the modernist who is
an ascetic, for his latter end is perilous in the extreme, even if his actions should
be sound. And I do not mean practice and so I say modernism (for an exposition of
that would require a lengthy statement). No, I mean the modernism which a man
believes in respect of the essence of Allah and His attributes and actions, contrary
to reality. And so he believes Him to be the contrary of what He actually is, either
through his opinion and intellect and observation by means of which he conducts
disputation and on which he relies and by which he is self-deceived; or through
his appropriation on authority from whoever possesses the state in question.
And when death draws near and the forelock of the Angel of Death ,s visible
to him and his heart is confused by reason of what is in it, often the
groundlessness of what he had believed through ignorance may be disclosed to
him in the condition of the throes of death, since the state of death is that of the
withdrawing of the cover and his throes have their origin in it. So a certain matter
may thereby be disclosed to him, and, whenever he sees to be groundless what he
had believed and concluded, of whose certainty he had been convinced within
himself, he will not suppose within himself that he has erred in this tenet in
particular, because of his having recourse in it to his pernicious opinion and
deficient intellect. No, he will suppose that all he has believed is without root,

Book three: Fear and Hope

267

since he does not draw any distinction between his faith in Allah and His
Messenger and the remainder of his sound tenets, and his pernicious tenets.
Hence the disclosure that certain of his tenets derive from ignorance is a cause of
making null and void the remainder of his tenets or of awakening his doubt in
them. So, if the departure of his spirit chances to take place at that instant before
he regains his steadfastness and returns to the root of faith, he is sealed with evil,
and his spirit has gone out in a state of polytheistic belief (and Allah is our
defence from that). And it is these things that are intended in His saying: "But
there would appear to them from Allah what they had not been reckoning on."
(Az-Zumar 47)

And in His saying: "Say: 'Shall We inform you who will be the greatest losers
in their works, whose effort goes astray in this present life, though they think they
are doing well'?" (Al-Kahf 103-104)
fr- * oy~4-~

1^ 3jT 5J ^4**—
i

1
.* * *

-

»

^

D* LP ^

’j

And just as there may be disclosed in sleep what will be in the future and that
is because of the lightening of the cares of the world from the heart, similarly
certain matters are disclosed in the throes of death, since the distractions of the
world and the lusts of the body are the things which obstruct the heart from
observing the Kingdom and scrutinizing what is in the Preserved Tablet, so that
things as they are might be disclosed to it. And so the like of this state is a cause
of disclosure, and disclosure is a cause of doubt concerning the remainder of the
tenets. And anyone who believes anything in respect of Allah and His attributes
and actions the contrary of what actually is, whether on authority or by observing
opinion and intellect, is in this danger, and asceticism and soundness of action
will not suffice to repel this danger. No, only belief in what is real will afford
safety from it.
And the simple folk are far from this danger. I mean those who believe in
Allah and His Messenger and the Last Day with a comprehensive and firmlyrooted faith, such as the Bedouin and the negroes, and the rest of those common
folk who have not waded into research and enquiry nor wallowed in systematic
theology as if it were an absolute standard of reference. Nor have they inclined to
the different kinds of systematic theologians, accepting on authority their
divergent sayings; and, for that reason, he (Muhammad) said: The majority of the
people of the Garden are simple folk. And, for that reason, the Fathers
proscribed research and enquiry and the wading into systematic theology and the
examination of these matters. And they commanded the people that they should
restrict themselves to believing in what Allah has revealed in its totality and to
what has come from meanings that are plain, along with its affirmation that
analogy should be disowned. And they forbade them to wade into allegorical
exegesis, because the danger involved in research into the attributes of Allah is
great, and its ascents are steep and its paths are rugged, and the intellect comes

The quarter of the saviors
268
short of attaining to the majesty of Allah. And the guidance of Allah with the
light of assurance is veiled from human hearts according as they bear the inborn
impress of the love of the world.
And what the researchers have mentioned by means of the display of the
wares of their intellects is a source of confusion and contradiction, for hearts are
familiar with what has been inculcated into them at the beginning of their
development and are attached to it. And the feud-promoting factions which
occasion bloodshed among the people are nails which reinforce tenets inherited
and appropriated with good hopes from teachers at the beginning of the affair.
Then there are men of such a stamp that they are infatuated with the love of the
world and turn to it, appropriating the lusts of the world and their strangleholds
and swerving from completeness of reflection. Thus when the door of systematic
theology is opened up in respect of Allah and His attributes by means of opinion
and intellect, in spite of incompatibilities of temperament in people and
differences in their make-up, and so every ignorant person among them is eager
to claim perfection, or that he has encompassed the furthest reach of reality, their
tongues go off with whatever chances to each of them. And that is attached to
the hearts of those who incline to them and is consolidated through long
familiarity with them, and the way of salvation is entirely blocked against them.
For the safety of the populace consists in their occupying themselves with
sound actions and not becoming entangled with what is out with the limit of their
capacity. But at the moment the rein is loose and rubbish is being disseminated
and every ignoramus comes down on the side of what suits his nature, armed with
supposition and conjecture, and believes it is science and proof and unadulterated
faith; and supposes that whatever he alights on by the use of hypothesis and
appraisal is established science and certainty itself. "And you shall surely know
the truth of it after a time." (Sad 88)

4
And it is fitting that it should be declaimed concerning these people when the
cover is withdrawn:
You were optimistic about the days when it was well with you,
And you did not fear the evil which fate brings;
And the nights made you feel safe and you were deceived by them,
For with clear nights comes the onset of murkiness.
Know for a certainty that everyone who forsakes the pure faith in Allah and
His Messenger and His Book and wades into research has become entangled in
this danger, and his parable is that of one whose ship is broken up, while he is in
the buffetings of the waves, wave tossing him to wave; and it may happen that he
will be cast on to the shore, but that is a remote possibility, and the probability is
that he will perish. And everyone who alights on a tenet which he has caught
from the researchers through the display of the wares of their intellects-whether
along with the proofs which they have composed in their partisan squabbles or
without the proofs-if he doubts it, he is corrupt in his religion, and, if he trusts in
it, he is thinking himself secure from the stratagems of Allah, being self-deceived
by his deficient intellect.

Book three: Fear and Hope

269

No person who wades into research can be disjoined from these two
conditions, except when he has gone beyond the limits of the intellect to the light
of disclosure which is the sunrise in the domain of Sainthood and Prophethood,
and it is the purest gold in whatever way it may be facilitated. Only the simple
folk among the commonalty are safe from this peril or those whose
preoccupation is the fear of the Fire along with obedience to Allah, and so they
have not waded into these superfluities, for this is one of the means which
promotes the peril of the evil of the Seal.
As for the second cause, it is weakness of faith in the root; then the mastery
of the love of the world over the heart. And whenever there is weakness of faith,
the love of Allah is weak and the love of the world is powerful. So it comes to
pass that in the proportion that there remains in the heart no place for the love of
Allah, except in respect of a fleeting impulse, no trace of it is visible in the
counteracting of appetite or in the avoidance of the way of Satan. And that
produces an obstinate persistence in the following of lusts, so that the heart is
darkened and hardened, and darkness of appetites is heaped up upon the heart
and constantly extinguishes what it contains of the light of faith, because of its
faintness, so that it (the heart) becomes rusty and corroded.
And, when the throes of death come, the weakness of that love is
intensified in impotence, I mean the love of Allah, with reference to the terror
of separation from this world which appears, since it is the object of desire
which is dominant over the heart. So the heart is afflicted with the terror of
being separated from the world, and sees that it is from Allah, and so its most
inward occupation is the dislike of the power of death over it-and loathing of
it in so much as it is from Allah. So he is afraid that it may arouse in his inner
self a loathing of Allah in the place of love. Just as the person who loves his
son with a weak love, when his son has seized his possessions which are
dearer to him than his son and has consumed them, this weak love is turned
into loathing. And, if the departure of his spirit should happen to fall at that
instant in which he is affected by this impulse, then he has been sealed with
evil and has perished with an everlasting death. And the cause which leads to
a Seal like this is the dominance of the love of the world and reliance on it,
and joy in the means to it, together with weakness of faith which determines
the weakness of the love of Allah.
Hence whoever finds the love of Allah in his heart more dominant than the
love of the world (even if he should be in love with the world also) is more
remote from this danger. And the love of the world is the head of every sin and is
the incurable disease, and includes in its scope different classes of people. And all
of that is due to paucity of the 'knowledge' of Allah, since only he who 'knows'
Him can love Him. And, in reference to this He said: " Say: If it be that your
fathers, your sons, your brothers, your mates, or your kindred; the wealth that
you have gained; the commerce in which you fear a decline; or the dwellings in
which you delight - are dearer to you than Allah, Or His Messenger, or the
striving in His cause - then wait until Allah brings about His decision: and Allah
guides not the rebellious." (At-Tawbah 24)

The quarter of the saviors

270
5>£j

pSjUU o^o! LP ^
<4 ^U->-3

^ ^j? f
^>kJi

4-^“ 1
^ij

0>^^

<[/>■

Therefore everyone whose spirit is severed from him in a state when the
impulse of distaste towards Allah was in his mind and the hatred of the action of
Allah was visible in his heart in respect of its effecting a separation between him
and his family and his wealth and the remainder of his objects of desire, his death
will be an advance upon what he loathes and a separation from what he loves,
and so he will advance upon Allah as would a runaway slave who is odious, when
he is brought forward to his master by force. And there is no concealing what he
deserves of chastisement and punishment.
As for him who dies in a state of loving Allah, he will advance upon Allah as
would the well-doing servant who longs after his master; who has endured the
difficulties of actions and the toils of journeyings out of a yearning to meet him.
And there is no concealing the joys and delights which he will encounter simply
from his reunion, apart from what he will merit in the way of kindnesses of
preferment and new benefits.
As for the second Seal which is inferior to the first and does not decree
eternal punishment in the Fire, it also has two causes. One of them is the
multitude of acts of disobedience, even if faith should be strong. And the other
is weakness of faith, even if acts of disobedience should be few. And this is so,
since the cause of the committing of acts of disobedience is the dominance of
lusts and their being rooted in the heart through much usage and custom. And
the recollection of everything with which a man has familiarized himself during
his life returns to his heart at death. And, if his inclination, for the most part,
was to acts of obedience, what is present with him will, for the most part, be
the recollection of obedience to Allah. And, if his inclination, for the most part,
was to acts of disobedience, the recollection of these will dominate his heart at
death. And his spirit may be snatched away when some worldly lust or act of
disobedience is dominant, and his heart will be shackled by it, and so it will be
veiled from Allah. So the person who commits sin only occasionally is more
remote from this peril, and the person who does not commit sin at all is very
remote from this peril. As for the person whom acts of disobedience dominate
and are more numerous than his acts of obedience; whose heart is more
rejoiced with them than it is with his acts of obedience-in his case this peril is
very great.
We can 'know' this by means of a parable. It consists in the fact that it is no
secret to you that a man sees in his sleep the sum of the states with which he
has made himself familiar during the length of his life, so that he sees only what
images the objects which he has seen in waking life. So that the adolescent who
has a dream will not see the picture of sexual intercourse, since he has never
had intercourse in his waking life. And, if he were to remain permanently in this
condition, he would not see in his dream the picture of sexual intercourse. Then
it is transparent that he who has spent his life in jurisprudence will see more of

Book three: Fear and Hope

271
the states that are related to the science and its practitioners than the merchant
who has spent his life in trade. And the merchant will see more of the states
which are related to trade and its means than the physician and the jurist,
because what is manifest in the state of sleep is simply that to which there has
obtained a relationship with the heart through length of familiarity or some
other cause. And death resembles sleep but is beyond it. Nevertheless the
throes of death and the swooning which precedes it are akin to sleep, and that
decrees the recollecting of what is familiar and its return to the heart.
And one of the causes which is preponderant in effecting its recollection in
the heart is length of familiarity, and so length of familiarity with acts of
disobedience or obedience is also a preponderant factor. And, in the same way,
the dreams of those who are sound in faith are the contrary of those of rakes, and
so the dominance of what is familiar is the cause, because a vicious image is
pictured in a person's heart and his appetite inclines towards it, and his spirit may
be snatched away in this state, and that will be a cause of the evil of his Seal, even
if the root of faith remains to the extent that it gives out hope of salvation from it
(the Seal). And just as what occurs in waking life only does so because of a
particular cause which Allah knows, in the same way every dream has a cause in
Allah. Some of them we 'know', and others we do not 'know'. Just as we know
that the sensation is connected from the object sensed to its correlative, whether
in respect of resemblance or contrariety or contiguity, in the sense that it (the
correlative) has impinged on the attention as a consequence of it (the object
sensed). With regard to resemblance in that one looks at a beautiful thing and
recollects another beautiful thing. With regard to contrariety in that one looks at a
beautiful thing and recollects something foul and reflects on the extreme
incongruity between the two of them. With regard to contiguity in that one looks
at a horse which he has seen previously with a man and recalls that man. And the
sensation may perhaps be connected from one thing to another without one
knowing the rationale of its relationship, and that can be constituted only by one
middle term and two middle terms.
As, for example, when there is a connection from one thing to a second thing
and from it to a third thing. Then the second thing is forgotten and there is no
relationship between the third and the first, but there is a relationship between
the third and the second and the second and the first. In the same way the
relationships of sensations which occur in dreams have causes of this kind, and
similarly in the presence of the throes of death. And bearing on this and the
knowledge which is with Allah is the person whose main occupation is tailoring,
for you see him inclining his head as if he would take up his needle to sew with it,
and moistening his finger which is practised with the thimble, and taking the
garment from above him and appraising and measuring it as if he would address
himself to the cutting of it, and then reaching his hand to the scissors. And
whoever is desirous of curbing what is impressed on him so as to exclude any
connection with acts of disobedience and lusts-there is no way open to him
except lifelong combat to wean himself from them and to throttle lusts out of the
heart. And this is the power which comes under choice, and long perseverance in
virtue and isolation of reflection from evil are equipment and provisions against
the state of the throes of death.

272

The quarter of the saviors

For a man dies as he has lived and is gathered to judgement as he has died,
and, for that reason, it is related concerning a greengrocer that he was
concentrating at death on the Two Words while he was saying five, six, four, and
was preoccupied with counting with which he had long familiarity before death.
One of the Gnostics among the Fathers said: The Throne is a jewel blazing with
light, and the creature has no state but its image is impressed on the Throne
according to the form which it possesses. And, when he is in the throes of death,
the form of it is revealed to him from the Throne, and it may be that he will see
himself in the form of disobedience. And, in the same way, it is disclosed to him
at the Day of Resurrection, and he sees the states of his soul and shame and fear
surpassing description take hold of him. And what he recollects accurately and is
a cause of veracious dreams is akin to that.
For the sleeper attains to what is in the future from the scrutiny of the
Preserved Tablet which is one of the departments of Prophethood. And thus the
evil of the Seal has been traced back to the states of the heart and the
transactions of impressions, and it is Allah who is the Reverser of hearts. And the
contingencies which decree the evil of impressions do not entirely come under
choice, even if length of familiarity should leave its mark on them. And, in this
respect, the Gnostics have a massive fear of the evil of the Seal, because, if a man
desires to see in his sleep nothing but the states of those who are sound in faith,
and the states of acts of obedience and worship, that is hard for him, even if he
possesses a great deal of soundness and perseverance by which he may effect it.
But the confusions of fantasy are not wholly amenable to control, even if, for the
most part, what appears in sleep has a relationship to what is dominant in waking
life.
Thus I heard Shavkh Abu Ali Al-Farmadhi describing to me that good
conduct towards his Shavkh was obligatory on a novice, and that there was not to
be in his heart dissent from anything that he should say, nor, in his tongue, any
disputation with him. So he said: I related to my Shavkh. Abu 'l-Qasim AlKarmani, a vision which I had and I said: I saw you saying to me: Such and such.
And I said: Not so. He continued: So he (the Shavkh) cut me off for a month and
did not converse with me and said: Were it not that an excess of curiosity were
within you and a dissent from what I am saying to you that would not have run
upon your tongue in sleep.
And it is as he said, since a man rarely sees in his sleep the contrary of what
dominates his heart in his waking life, and so this is the predestination of which
we make large mention in the science of the operation of the secrets of the affair
of the Seal. And what is beyond that comes under the science of disclosure. And
it has been made clear to you by this that security from the evil of the Seal would
consist in your seeing all things as they are in themselves without ignorance, and
your being successful all your life in obeying Allah without disobedience.
Consequently, if you know that that is absurd or difficult, the fear which
prevailed over the Gnostics will inevitably prevail over you, so that your weeping
and wailing will be prolonged on this account, and your grief and anxiety will be
permanent because of it, just as we shall relate concerning the states of the
prophets and the Fathers who were sound in faith, that it may be one of the

*

i

273
Book three: Fear and Hope ---------------------------causes which will excite the fire of fear in your heart.
And you 'know' for certain by this that the actions of a lifetime are all
perishable, if the best of which it partook is not secured within the soul at the exit
of the spirit, and that its safety in company with the commotion of the waves of
impressions is very dubious. And, for that reason, Mutarrif Ibn 'Abd Allah used
to say: Truly I do not wonder at the man who perishes how he perishes, but I
wonder at the man who is saved how he is saved. And, for that reason, Hamid
Al-Laffaf said: Whenever the angels bring up the spirit of a creature who is a
believer and has died in (a state of) virtue and Islam, the angels wonder at him
and say: How was this man saved from a world in which the best of us were
corrupted? And Ath-Thawri was weeping on a certain day and it was said to him:
What are you weeping about ? So he said: I have wept for my sins for some time
and now I am weeping for Islam.
And, in sum, he whose ship chances on a fathomless sea with tempestuous
winds assailing him and the waves in commotion is more remote from salvation
than from perishing; and the heart of the believer is in a more intense commotion
than the ship, and the waves of impressions have a greater impact than the waves
of the sea. And the thing dreaded at death is simply the impression of an evil
whose occurrence is unique and this is the thing of which the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” spoke: Truly let a man do the work of
the People of the Garden for fifty years, so that between him and the Garden
there remains but the time between two milkings of a she-camel, then he will
receive the Seal according as the Book has predestined. And the time between
two milkings of a she-camel does not leave room for actions which determine his
reprobation. No; it is the impressions which produce commotion and which are
impressed with the speed of forked lightning. And Sahl said: I beheld as if I were
ushered into the Garden and I saw three hundred prophets and so I asked them:
What was the thing that caused you most fear in this world? They said: The evil
of the Seal.
And, because of this great peril, martyrdom was coveted and sudden death
detested. Sudden death, because it may happen along with the dominance of an
evil impression and its mastery over the heart; and the heart is not isolated from
the like of it, except it repels (it) through repugnance or the light of 'knowledge*.
Martyrdom, because it is an expression for the snatching away of the spirit in a
state when there remains in the heart nothing but the love of Allah, with the exit
from the heart of the love of the world and family and wealth and children and
every lust, since a man does not leap into the front-line disposing himself for
death, except out of love to Allah and in the quest after the satisfaction which is
from Him, exchanging his present world for his after-life and being satisfied with
the bargain which Allah has made with him. For He said: Allah has purchased
from the believers their souls and goods at the price of their possession of the
Garden." (At-Tawbah 111)

iQ}

!

^C

And the seller has, no doubt, taken a dislike to the object sold, and the
love of it is expelled from the heart and the exclusive love of the exchange

M

The quarter of the saviors
274
sought is in his heart. And the like of this circumstance may prevail over the
heart in certain states, but the expiry of the spirit does not occur during them.
And the front-line is a cause of the expiry of the spirit in a circumstance
which resembles this. This is so in respect of whoever is not aiming at
dominion and booty and renown for bravery. For whoever is in this state,
even if he were killed on the battle-field, is remote from the like of this rank,
as the traditions have indicated.
And, since the meaning of the evil of the Seal and its fearful character have
been expounded to you, occupy yourselves in making ready for it and persevere
in the recollection of Allah, and expel from your heart the love of the world, and
guard your members against the doing of disobedience, and your heart from
reflecting on it. And be vigilant against witnessing acts of disobedience and
witnessing those who practise them with all your might, for that also will leave its
trace in your heart and thoughts, and impressions will veer off towards it. And
beware lest you procrastinate and say: I shall prepare for it, when the Seal comes,
for every single breath is your Seal, since it is possible that your spirit may be
snatched away in the course of it. So watch over your heart in every twinkling of
the eye, and beware lest you neglect it for an instant and so that instant may be
your Seal, since it is possible that your spirit may be snatched away in the course
of it. This, as long as you are awake, and with regard to when you are asleep, take
care not to go to sleep except in a state of outward and inward purity and that
sleep overcomes you only after the dominance of the recollection of Allah over
your heart. I am not saying over your tongue, for the movement of the tongue by
itself is weak in its effect.
Know as conclusive that what dominates your heart at the moment of sleep is
only what was dominant over it before sleep, and that nothing is dominant in the
course of sleep which was not dominant before sleep, and that nothing is
awakened from your sleep except what was dominant over your heart during
your sleep. And death and resurrection resemble sleep and awakening. And as the
creature does not go to sleep in a state other than that which was dominant over
him in his waking life and is not awakened in a state other than that in which he
was during his sleep, similarly a man dies as he has lived and is gathered (to
judgement) as he has died. And it is conclusively verifiable and indubitable that
death and resurrection are two of your states just as sleep and waking are two of
your states. So believe in this, affirming its truth with the assent of the heart, if
you are not a party to the seeing of it with the eye of certainty and the light of
insight. And conserve your breaths and glances and see to it that you are not
neglectful of Allah for the twinkling of an eye. For, if you do all that, you are, in
spite of it, in great peril, and how, if you do not do it ? And all men are perishable
except the theorists, and the theorists are all perishable except they are
practitioners, and the practitioners except they are elect, and the elect are in great
peril.
And know that this will not expedite for you what you have not satisfied
from this world according to your necessity. And your necessity is food and
clothing and dwelling, and the remainder, all of it, is superfluous. And the food
which is necessary is what will straighten your back and support your

275
Book three: Fear and Hope
subsistence, and you must obtain it as a distasteful necessity, and your liking for
it is not to be more than your liking for what your need decrees, since there is
no distincdon between inserting food into the stomach and its expulsion, and
both are constitutional necessides. And just as what your need decrees is not
something which occupies your concern and with which your heart is engaged,
so the obtaining of food must not be part of your concern. And know that, if
your concern is with what enters your stomach, your standard of value is what
is expelled from your stomach. And, if your purpose in eadng is nothing but
piety in the worship of Allah, as is your purpose in what your need decrees, the
mark of that appears in three matters. From what you eat, in respect of
frequency, quandty and quality. With regard to frequency the least is that one
should make do with a single meal during a day and night and should persevere
in fasdng. With regard to quantity that one should not exceed one third of the
stomach's capacity; and with regard to quality that one should not seek after
culinary pleasures. No; one should be satisfied with whatever chances (to be
available). So, if you have power over these three items and the burden of lusts
and pleasures falls off from you, you will have power thereafter to forsake
equivocal items and it will be easy for you not to eat anything except what He
has made permissible; for what is permitted is rare and does not fulfill all that is
desired.
With regard to your clothing let your aim in respect of it be the repelling of
heat and cold and the covering of nakedness, and everything that repels cold
from your head, even if it be a cap worth a farthing. Your seeking other than this
is superfluous to you and your dme is wasted in it. It will entail for you constant
labour and unremitting care in obtaining it, in acquiring on one occasion and
yearning after on another what is forbidden and dubious. So take as your
measurement in this matter that by which heat and cold are repelled from your
body, and so everything which attains to the purpose of clothing. If you are not
satisfied with it in the meagerness of its quantity and quality, you will have no
halting-place nor point of return thereafter. No; you will be numbered with the
man whose stomach nothing but dust will fill.
And similarly for a dwelling, if you are content with its purpose heaven will
suffice you as a roof and the earth as a couch. For, if heat or cold overtakes you,
there are mosques for you to shelter in. For, if you seek after a specific dwelling,
it will be a long business for you, and the most of your life will be spent in it, and
your life is your merchandize. Then, if you are prosperous, you will purpose that
the wall should do more than afford you privacy and that the roof should do
more than repel the rains, and so you will begin raising the walls and adorning the
ceilings, and you will have been hurled into a chasm which it will take you a long
time to climb out of.
And thus with all the necessary aspects of your affairs, if you confine
yourself to them, you will have time to devote to Allah and will be able to lay
in provisions for your after-life and to prepare for your Seal. And, if you go
beyond the limit of what is necessary to the wadies of things desired, your
concentration will be distracted and Allah will not be concerned in which
wady He destroys you. So offer this advice to whoever is more in need of it
than yourself.

The quarter of the saviors

276

And know that the space for estimating and provisioning and taking
precautionary measures is this short life, so, if you defer it day after day in your
procrastination or neglect, sudden death will snatch at a time other than you
would wish, and your regret and repentance will never leave you. So, if you were
not able to maintain contact with that towards which you were pointed through
the weakness of your fear (since in what we have described of the affair of the
Seal there was not sufficient to make you afraid), we shall cite for you concerning
the states of those who fear what, we hope, will remove some of the hardness
from your heart. For you will admit as true that the intellect of the prophets and
saints and scholars, together with their actions and their status with Allah, were
not inferior to your intellect and actions and status. So reflect on their states, in
spite of your impaired insight and the defectiveness of the eye of your heart, why
fear was intense within them and grief and weeping protracted in them, so that
some of them would swoon, some be beside themselves, some collapse in a faint,
and some fall to the ground dead. And it is nothing to wonder at, if that were to
make no impression on your heart, for the hearts of the negligent are like stones
or even harder, "for there are some stones from which rivers come gushing, and
some have been split, so that water emerges from them, and some which crash
down out of fear of Allah. Allah is not heedless of what you do." (Al-Baqarah 74)
*jjjLio LU

o13 j-&Cr? 0i3

lip

^
013

CHAPTER 7
EXPOSmON OF STATES OF PROPHETS
AND ANGELS IN RESPECT TO FEAR
A'ishah related that whenever the air was stirred and a tempestuous wind
blew, the countenance of the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him” would alter and he would rise up and pace up and down the
room and would go in and out. All that because of the fear of the
chastisement of Allah. And he (Muhammad) Allah s blessing and peace be
upon him recited a verse from the Surah of Al-Waqi'ah and then he swooned.
And Allah said: "And Moses fell in a swoon." (Al-A'raf 143)
C- X

And the Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” saw
the form of Gabriel at Abtah , and fell in a swoon. And it is related that when he
(Gabriel) engaged in prayer, there was heard in his breast a bubbling like that of a
cauldron. And he (Muhammad) Allah s blessing and peace be upon him said:
Gabriel never came to me but he was trembling because of his separation from
the Almighty.
And it was said: When the news about the Devil was made public, Gabriel
and Michael began to weep and Allah spoke in revelation to them both: What is
the matter with the two of you that you are indulging in all this weeping? So they
said: O Lord, we are not secure from Your stratagems. So Allah said: Thus it is,

Book three: Fear and Hope

277

you are not secure from My stratagems. And according to Muhammad Ibn AlMunkadir who said: When the Fire was created, a troop of angels flew up from
their places, and, when the sons of Adam were created, they returned. And
according to Anas he (Muhammad) asked Gabriel: Why is it that I do not see
Michael laughing? So Gabriel said: Michael has not laughed since the Fire was
created. And it is said: Truly in Allah's service are angels none of whom has
laughed since the Fire was created for fear that Allah would be enraged against
them and would punish them for it.
And Ibn 'Umar said: I went out with the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” until he entered one of the enclosures of the
Helpers and began to pluck fruit from a palm tree and eat. So he said: O Ibn
'Umar, why are you not eating? So I said: O Messenger of Allah, I do not desire
it. So he said: But I desire it, and this is the fourth morning I have not tasted
food nor found it; and, if I were to ask my Lord, He would give me the
Kingdom of the Caesars and Khosraus. So how is it with you, O Ibn 'Umar,
since you have remained among a crowd who lay in their stocks for the year,
while assurance is weak in their hearts? He (Ibn 'Umar) said: And, by Allah, we
did not stir nor rise up until it was revealed: "How many a beast bears not its
own provision, but Allah provides for it and you! He is the One who hears and
knows." (Al-Ankabut 60)

He said: So the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: Truly Allah has not commanded you to hoard up wealth nor to follow lusts.
Whoever hoards dinars desires thereby the life that passes away, for life is in the
hand of Allah. I most certainly will not hoard either dinars or Dirhams or lay up
stocks for the morrow.
And Abu Ad-Darda' said that the bubbling of the heart of Abraham, the
Friend of the Merciful, through fear of his Lord, was heard at the distance of a
mile, when he engaged in prayer. And Mujahid said: David wept for forty days
prostrate in worship, without lifting his head, so that the pastures sprouted
because of his tears and his head was covered over. So he was addressed: O
David, are you hungry? If so, you may eat. Are you thirsty? If so, you may drink.
Are you naked? If so, you may be clothed. Then he wept so bitterly that he
energized the lute, and he was burnt up with the heat of his fear. Then Allah
revealed to him repentance and pardon and he said: O Lord, set my sin in my
palm. So his sin was inscribed on his palm, and he did not extend his palm for
food and drink or for any other purpose without seeing it, and it made him weep.
He (the narrator) continued: And he was brought a bowl two thirds full, and,
when he took it, he saw his sin, and would not put it to his lip until it overflowed
with his tears. And it is told of him that he had not raised his head to heaven up
till the time of his death out of reverence for Allah. And he used to say in his
supplication: O Allah, when I recollect my sin, the earth, for all its breadth, hems
me in, and, when I recollect Your mercy, my spirit is restored. Praise be to You
O Allah, the physicians among Your creatures have come that they may nurse to
health my sin, and they all point me to You. So may reprobation overtake them

The quarter of the saviors
278 ----------------------------who despair of Your mercy.
And Al-Fudail said: I have heard that David recollected his sin on a certain
day and bounded away shrieking, with his hand laid on his head, until he reached
the mountains. And the wild beasts gathered to him and he said: Return, I do not
desire you. My only desire is for the person weeping because of his sin. So let no
one confront me except weeping, and whoever is not a sinner let him not
contrive sin for David. And he was chided for his prolific weeping and so he said:
Leave me alone. I am weeping before the exit of the day of weeping, before the
tearing apart of the bones and the burning of the intestines, and before the angels
ordain severe penalties for me. They do not disobey Allah in respect of what He
commands and they perform what they are commanded. And Abd-Al-Aziz Ibn
Umar said: Whenever David committed a sin, his voice was diminished and he
said: O Lord, my voice is hoarse among the pure voices of the Sincere. And it is
reported that, whenever he wept for a long time and it did not benefit him, his
power was straitened and his perplexity intensified and he would say: O Lord, will
You not pity my weeping? And Allah revealed to him: O David, you have
forgotten your sin and remembered your weeping. So he said: My Allah and my
Master, in what way do 1 forget my sin ? And yet, when I recited the psalms, the
running water desisted from its flow, and the blowing of the wind was stilled,
and the birds furnished shade to my head, and the wild beasts were intimates at
my palace. O my God and my Master, what then is this alienation which is
between me and You? And Allah revealed to him: That was the intimacy of
obedience and this is the alienation of disobedience. O David, Adam was one
of My creatures. I created him with My hand and I breathed into him of My
spirit and I made My angels do obeisance to him; and I clothed him in the robe
of My preferment, and I crowned him with the unique crown of My dignity and
image, and I gave him to wife Eve, My handmaid, and setded him in My
Garden. He disobeyed Me, and so 1 expelled him from My precincts naked and
abased. O David, listen to Me and 1 shall speak the truth. You obeyed Us and
We obeyed you; you asked Us and We gave to you; and you disobeyed Us and
We showed forbearance to you. And, if you return to Us in your former state,
We shall receive you.
And Yahya Ibn Abu Kathir said: I have heard that it was David's custom
when he desired to engage in weeping to pass the time for seven days beforehand
neither eating food nor taking drink, nor approaching women. And, when it was
a day beforehand, the pulpit was brought out to him to the desert, and he
commanded Solomon to cry out with a voice that would cross the countryside
and its environs of thickets and hills and mountains and deserts and monastic
cells and churches' And in it he proclaimed: Are there not those who desire to
hear David's wailing for himself ? Let them then come along. He went on: And
the wild beasts come from the deserts and the hills and the lions from the
thickets and the reptiles from the mountains and the birds from the nests and the
virgins from their bowers. And the people assemble for that day and David
comes to ascend the pulpit, and the children of Israel surround him, and every
kind according to its class surrounds him, and Solomon stands by his side.

Book three: Fear and Hope

279

So David launches into an encomium of his Lord and breaks into weeping
and shrieking. Then he launches into the recollection of the Garden and the
Fire, and the reptiles die together with a group of the wild beasts and the lions
and the people. Then he launches into the terrors of the Day of Resurrection
and into wailing over himself and a group of every class dies. And, when
Solomon saw the large numbers of the dead, he said: O father, you have
decimated your audience. They are all decimated and sections of the children of
Israel and of the beasts and reptiles have died. So he launches into petition, and,
while he is in this posture, one of the devotees of the children of Israel calls out
to him: O David, you are over-hasty in seeking your reward from your Lord. He
went on: And David falls in a swoon, and, when Solomon noted what had
overtaken him, he brought a mattress and carried him on it. Then he
commanded someone to call out: Is there not someone who had a friend or
relative with David? Let him then bring a mattress and carry him off, for the
recollection of the Garden and the Fire has killed those who were with him. So
a woman would bring a mattress and would bear away her relative saying: O
you whom the recollection of the Fire has killed. O you whom the fear of Allah
has killed. Then, when David revived, he stood up and placed his hand on his
head and entered his chapel and locked its door, saying: O Allah of David, are
You angry with David? And he communed ceaselessly with his Lord. So
Solomon arrives and squats at the door and asks for permission to come in.
Then he enters and has with him a barley bannock and he says: O father, build
up your strength with this according as you desire. So he eats of that cake what
Allah wills and then he goes out to the children of Israel and is in their midst.
And Yazid Ar-Raqishi said: David went out among the people on a certain
day to preach to them and inspire fear in them. And about forty thousand
went out and thirty thousand of them died and only about ten thousand
returned. He went on: And he had two slave girls whom he had appointed, so
that, when fear came to him and he collapsed and was agitated, they squatted
on his breast and legs for fear that his limbs and joints would be dismembered
and he would die.
And Ibn 'Umar said: John, the son of Zachariah , went into the Jerusalem
temple (he was a lad of eight years) and looked at their devotees who were clad in
shirts of hair and wool; and he observed their zealots who had bored through
their clavicles and inserted chains in them, and fastened themselves to the
extremities of the temple. And that filled him with awe. So he made to return to
his parents and passed by two lads at play and they said to him: O John, come
and play with us. So he said: Truly I was not created for play. He went on: So he
came to his parents and asked them to clothe him in hair and they did so, and he
returned to the temple, and served in it by day and kept the lamps trimmed by
night, until he attained his fifteenth birthday.
Then he went out and haunted the lofty mountains and subterranean paths of
the earth. So his parents went out in search of him and they overtook him by the
river Jordan, and he had soaked his feet in the water until the thirst was almost
killing him, saying the while: By Your Might and Majesty, I will not taste a cool

w

!

The quarter of the saviors
280
drink, until I know where I stand with You. So his parents asked him to breakfast
on a barley bannock which they had with them and to drink some of that water.
So he did it and made expiation for the breaking of his oath and commended
filial piety.
Thus his parents brought him back to the temple, and, when he stood
praying, he used to weep so that the trees and clods would weep with him,
(and Zachariah would weep because of his weeping) until he (John) would go
into a faint. And he would weep without remission so that the tears pierced
the flesh of his cheeks and his molars were visible to the onlookers. So his
mother said to him: O my son would that you would permit me to fetch for
you something to cover up your molars from those who look on! So he gave
her permission and she procured two pieces of felt and stuck them to his
cheeks. So it came about that, whenever he got up to pray, he wept, and,
when his tears saturated the two pads, his mother came to him and wrung
them out ; and, when he saw his tears flowing over his mother's forearms, he
said: O Allah, these are my tears and this is my mother and I am Your
creature, and of those who are merciful You are the most merciful. So
Zachariah said to him one day: My son, I have asked my Lord to bestow you
on me, that my eyes might be refreshed with you. So John said: O my father,
Truly Gabriel has reported to me that between the Garden and the Fire there
is a desert which only those who weep will cross. So Zachariah said: O my son
in that case weep on.
And the Messiah said: O band of disciples, the fear of Allah and the love of
Paradise produce patience in the face of difficulty and keep you at a distance
from the world. In truth I say to you: Surely the eating of barley and sleeping on
middens with the dogs is a small price in the quest for Paradise. And it was said:
Whenever the Friend recollected his sin, he went into a faint and the commotion
of his heart would be heard for miles. Then Gabriel would come and say to him:
Your Lord greets you with peace and says: Do I see a friend who fears his
Friend? So he would say: O Gabriel, truly, when I recollect my sin, I forget my
friendship.
So these are the states of the prophets and see to it that you reflect on
them, for they are the most 'knowledgeable' of Allah's creatures concerning
Allah and His attributes. May Allah's blessing be on them all and on all the
creatures of Allah who are brought near. And our sufficiency is Allah and the
grace of the Trustee.

CHAPTER EIGHT
EXPOSITION OF STATES OF COMPANIONS, THEIR FOLLOWERS AND
THE RIGHTEOUS PREDECESSORS AND THOSE ENDUED WITH FAITH IN
THE GRIP OF FEAR
It is related that Abu Bakr, the Sincere, said to a bird: Would that I were like
you, O bird, and had not been created as human flesh. And Abu Pharr said:
Would that I were a tree which is pruned. And Talhah said a similar thing. And
'Uthman said: Would that, when I died, I were not raised. And 'A'ishah said:

281

Book three: Fear and Hope

Would that I became a thing forgotten. And it is related that 'Umar used to
collapse in a faint through fear, whenever he heard a verse from the Qur'an and
was restored after some days. And one day he took up a straw from the ground
and said: Would that I were this straw; would that I did not remember anything;
would that I were a thing forgotten; would that my mother had not borne me.
And on 'Umar's face were two black furrows made by tears and he said: Whoever
fears Allah, will not heal his distress, and whoever has reverence for Allah, will
not do what he desires, and were it not for the Day of Resurrection, it would be
other than what you see. And, whenever 'Umar recited: " When the sun (with its
spacious light) is folded up; When the stars fall, losing their luster; When the
mountains vanish (like a mirage); When the she-camels, ten months with young,
are left untended; When the wild beasts are herded together (in human
habitations); When the oceans boil over with a swell; When the souls are sorted
out, (being joined, like with like); When the female (infant), buried alive, is
questioned, For what crime she was killed; When the Scrolls are laid open", (AtTakwir 1-10)
jUuaJT I3jj

^S\ iSJ3 (jjjjj [j*y*-zS\ isij

‘--0I IS 13 ^5
11sij

ISJ ^
J11sj3

He fell in a faint. And he passed by the home of a man one day and he was
praying and reciting the Surah At-Tur, and he stopped to listen, and, when he
reached His saying: "Surely your Lord's chastisement is about to fall; there is
none to avert it" (At-Tur 7-8)
He came down from" his ass and leaned against a wall and stayed for some
time, and returned to his lodging and was ill for a month, with the people visiting
him and not knowing what had made him ill.
And Ali said (he had said the salutation at the close of the dawn prayer and
sorrow came on him while he was upturning his hand): Truly I have seen the
Companions of Muhammad Allah s blessing and peace be upon him and I have
not seen anything to-day resembling them. Truly they got up in the morning
dishevelled, pallid, with dust between their eyes like a funeral cortege. They had
devoted the night to Allah, prostrate and erect, reciting the Book of Allah,
alternating between their foreheads and their feet. And, when they got up, they
recollected Allah and swayed like trees in a day of gale, and their eyes were
swamped with tears, so that their garments were damp. Ajid by Allah! it is as if I
were among a crowd who pass the night in heedlessness. Then he stood up and
after that he was not seen laughing, until Ibn Miljam struck him.
And 'Imran Ibn Hussain said: Would that I were ashes, then the wind would
scatter me in a day of gale. And Abu 'Ubaidah Ibn Al-Jarrah said: Would that I
were a ram and my family slaughtered me and ate my flesh and sipped my gravy.
And it used to be the case with 'Ali Ibn Al-Hussain that, whenever he performed
his ablutions, his colour became pallid and his family would say to him: What is

The quarter of the saviors
282
this that has become habitual with you, whenever you perform your ablutions? So
he would say: Do you know before Whom I am minded to stand? (in prayer) And
Musa lbn Mas'ud said: Whenever we granted an audience to Ath-Thawri, we were
as if die Fire had surrounded us in respect of what we saw of his fear and grief.
And Mudar, die Reader, recited on a certain day: "This Our Record speaks about
you with truth: for We were wont to put on record all that you did." (Al-Jathiyah

29)
And 'Abd Al-Wahid lbn Zaid wept until he swooned; and, when he revived,
he said: By Your Might, I have never disobeyed You so far as in me lies, so assist
me with Your furtherance that I may obey You.
And Al-Miswar lbn Makhramah used to be unable to hear anything of the
Qur’an on account of the intensity of his fear. And there had been recited in his
presence a word and a verse and he gave a shriek and was not mentally composed
for days afterwards, until a man from Khath’am came upon him and recited to
him: " The day We shall gather the righteous to (Allah) Most Gracious, like a
band presented before a king for honours. And We shall drive the sinners to hell,
like thirsty catde driven down to water." (Maryam 85-86)

4©

JJ

© iTij 0^2* JJ

'fy }

So he said: I am among the sinners and not among those who show piety.
Repeat the saying to me, O Reader. So he repeated it to him and he gave his
last gasp and reached the next world. And there was recited in the presence of
Yahya Al-Bakka': Were you to see when they are halted by their Lord." (AlAn'am 30)

4 © Jr*o 'J*

Wy

}

And he gave a shriek and remained ill because of it for the space of four
months, being visited from every corner of Basra.
And Malik lbn Dinar said: I was circumambulating the House, when I came
upon a little slave girl performing her devotions and clinging to the curtains of
the Ka'bah, while she said: O Lord, how many a lust there is whose pleasure has
departed, and whose consequences have remained! O Lord, do You not possess
any other correction and punishment save the Fire? And she was weeping and
maintained her posture until dawn broke. Malik said: So, when I saw that, I
placed my hand on my head, shrieking: I am saying may his mother be bereft of
Malik! And it is related that Al-Fudail was seen on the day of 'Arafat, and the
people were praying and he was weeping the burning hot tears of a woman
bereaved, until, when the sun had almost set, he seized hold of his beard; then he
raised his head to heaven and said: O woe is me with You , even if You are
forgiving. Then he joined himself to the people. And lbn 'Abbas was asked about
those who fear, so he said: Their hearts are ulcerated by fear and their eyes are
tearful. They say: How can we rejoice while death is behind us and the grave
before us and the resurrection our rendezvous and our route is by Hell and in
front of Allah our Lord is our halting place ?

Book three: Fear and Hope

283

And Al-Hassan passed by a youth who was engulfed in his laughter, and he
was sitting in the company of a crowd. So Al-Hassan said to him: Have you
crossed over the Bridge? He said: No. He said: Do you know whether your trend
is towards the Garden or the Fire? He said: No. He said: What then does this
laughter mean ? He (the narrator) said: And that youth was not seen laughing
thereafter. And it was the custom of Hammad Ibn Abd Rabbih when he sat
down to sit on his haunches. And it was said to him: I wish you would relax. So
he would say: That is the posture of security and I am anything but secure, since I
have disobeyed Allah. And 'Umar Ibn Abd Al-Aziz said: It was for nothing but
considerations of mercy that Allah set this negligence, in the hearts of the
creatures, in order that they might not die for fear of Allah. And Malik Ibn Dinar
said: Certainly I have been concerned lest, when I die, He will command them to
shackle and manacle me; then they will bear me off to my Lord just as the
runaway slave is borne off to his master.
And Hatim Al-Asamm said: Do not be deceived by a salubrious place, for
there is no place more salubrious than the Garden and Adam met his deserts in
it. And do not be deceived by the multiplication of worship, for the Devil met his
deserts after the length of his worship. And do not be deceived by much
knowledge, for Balaam (cf. Nu. xxii f.) used to adorn the Greatest Name of Allah
and see what he encountered. And do not be deceived by the vision of the sound
in faith, for there is no person of greater standing with Allah than the Elect 1
(Muhammad) and neither relations nor enemies were benefited by his encounter
(with Allah).
And as-Sari said: Truly I look at my nose several times every day for fear that
my face may have been blackened. And Abu Hafs said: For forty years my belief
concerning myself has been that Allah will direct to me a look of severe
displeasure and my deeds point towards that. And Ibn Al-Mubarak went out
among his companions on a certain day and said: Truly I took a liberty yesterday
with Allah. I asked Him for the Garden. And Umm Muhammad Ibn Ka'b AlQarzi said to her son: O my boy, truly I know you as a good child and a virtuous
adult, but what you do with your nights and days makes it look as if you had
inaugurated a pernicious heresy. So he said: O Mother, what will make me secure
from Allah having come suddenly on me while I was engaged in one of my sins,
so that He has taken a loathing to me and said: By My Might and Majesty! I will
not pardon you. And Al-Fudail said: Truly I do not covet the prophet who is sent
or the king who is preferred or the creature who is sound in faith. Will not these
encounter the resurrection ? The only person whom I covet is he who was not
created. And it is recorded that the fear of the Fire entered a stripling among the
Helpers, and he was weeping to such an extent that it detained him in the house.
So the Prophet came and went in to him and embraced him and he fell dead. So
he said: Prepare your companion for burial, for separation from the Fire has
crushed his liver.
And it is recorded concerning Ibn Abu Maisarah that whenever he retired to
his bed he would say: O that my mother had not borne me! So his mother said to
him: O Maisarah, truly Allah has made a good job of your guidance towards

The quarter of the saviors
284
Islam. He said: Granted, but Allah has made clear to us that we are those who go
down to the Fire, and He has not made clear to us that we shall come up from it.
And it was said to Al-Farqad as-Sabakhi: Tell us die most wonderful thing you
have heard concerning the children of Israel. So he said: I have heard that five
hundred virgins entered the Jerusalem temple, their attire being wool and hair­
cloth; and they were recollecting Allah's reward and punishment, and all of them
died in a single day.
And Ata* As-Sulami was one of those who fear and he would never ask Allah
for the Garden; all he would ask for was forgiveness. And it was said to him
during his illness: Do you not desire anything? So he said: Surely, fear of Flell has
not left a place in my heart for desire. And it was said: Truly he did not lift his
head to heaven nor laugh for forty years, and he raised his head one day and was
stricken with fear and collapsed, and a slit was made in his stomach. And he
would feel his body on certain nights for fear that he had been metamorphosed.
And whenever a gale or lightning struck them or dearness of food, he would
say: This is striking them on my account, would that Ata' were dead for the
relief of the people. And Ata said: We went out with 'Utbah, Al-Ghulam, and in
our company were adults and adolescents, to pray the dawn prayer with the
sunset purification. Their legs had become swollen through their long stand,
their eyes were sunken in their heads, their skin stuck to their bones, and their
veins stood out as if they were whipcords. They became as if their skins were
the rinds of water melons and as if they had come out from the grave to report
how Allah preferred the obedient and deposed the disobedient. So, while they
were going along, one of them passed by a certain place and he fell in a faint
and his companions sat round him weeping on a day when the cold was intense.
And his forehead was dripping sweat, so they brought water and wiped his face
and he recovered. And they asked him about his experience, so he said: Truly I
remembered that I had disobeyed Allah in that place.
And Salih Al-Murri said: I recited to a man who was one of the devotees: "On
the Day when their faces will be turned about in the Fire, they will say: 'Lo!
Would that we had obeyed Allah and the Messenger." (Al-Ahzab 33)

So he fell in a swoon. Then he revived and said: Give me more of it, O Salih,
for I find it perplexing. So I recited: "Whenever they wish to come out of it, they
will be sent back into it." (As-Sajdah 20)

So he fell dead. And it is reported that Zurarah Ibn Abu Awfa led the people
in the morning prayer, and, when he recited: "When the Trumpet is sounded"
(Al-Muddaththir 8)

He fell in a faint and was carried away a corpse. And Yazid Ar-Raqishi came
into the presence of 'Umar Ibn 'Abd Al-'Aziz and he ('Umar) said: Preach to
me, O Yazid. So he said: O Commander of the Faithful, know that you are not

Book three: Fear and Hope
285
the first Caliph to die. So he wept. Then h
®
said:
Cive
me more. He said: O
Commander of the Faithful, there is no a
not a corpse. So he wept. Then he said: Give me
Adam who 1S
Commander of .he Faithful, .here is „0 lodging be
J°,£
°
and the Fire. So he collapsed in a faint.
And Maimun Ibn Mahran said: When this verse was revealed: "Surely the Hell
will be the promised land for them all , (Al-Hijr 43)

4 (©> oi*^1

o]3 >

Salman, the Persian, gave a shriek and placed his hand on his head and went
out as a fugitive for three days during which they could not contain him. And
Dawud A$-Ta'i saw a woman weeping over the head of her son's grave, while she
said: O my son, would that I knew whether or not the worm has bitten you with
its industrious nibble. And Dawud went into a swoon and fell on the spot.
And it was said: Sufyan Ath-Thawri was ill and his symptoms were
disclosed to a Dhimmi physician (non-Muslim living under Muslims' safety)
and he said: Fear has severed the liver of this man. And he came and felt his
arteries and said: I did not know there was his like in the Muslim community.
And Ahmad Ibn Hanbal said: I asked Allah that He would give access to a
gate of fear, so He opened up and I was afraid for my reason and said: O
Lord, according as I can bear it. So my heart was quietened. And 'Abd Allah
Ibn 'Amr. Ibn Al-As said: Weep and, if you cannot weep make pretence of
weeping. By the One in whose hand my soul is, if any of you knew (what was
in store) he would scream until his voice was cut off and would pray until his
back was broken. And it is as if he pointed to the meaning of his
(Muhammad's) saying: If you knew what I know, you would laugh little and
weep much.
And Al-'Anbari said: The Masters of Tradition were assembled at the gate of
Al-Fudail Ibn 'Iyad and he came suddenly into their view at a window. He was
weeping and his beard was quivering and he said: Get down to your Qur'an and
to prayer. Woe unto you, this is not a time for traditions. This is a time for
nothing but weeping and entreaty and humility and prayer like that of a drowning
man. Guard your tongue and preserve your mobility and discipline your heart and
hold on to what you 'know' and let go what you abhor. And Al-Fudail was seen
walking on a certain day and it was said to him: Whither bound? Fie said: I do not
know. And he was walking about dejected with fear.
And Dharr Ibn 'Amr said to his father 'Amr Ibn Dharr : Why is it that the
theologians discourse and no one weeps, whereas, when you discourse, I hear
weeping on every side? So he said: O my son, the weeping of the bereaved
mother is not like the weeping of the woman who is hired. And it is related that a
crowd of people halted by a devotee who was weeping and they said: What is it
that makes you weep? May Allah have compassion on you. He said: An ulcer
which those who fear find in their heart. They said: And what is it ? He said: The
fear of the summons for presentation to Allah. And Al-Khawas used to weep and
say in his supplication: I am lifted up in pride and my flesh is too weak to serve
You, so embrace me.

i

_____.___ _____

The quarter of the saviors

286
me ” huf in a certain quarter of the town and we asked pe,mss,on to enter
was in
in
working with palm fronds and I recited to him:
and behold! a man who was
d their necks, and the chains; they shall be dragged
21; In 2Boiling12droun
fluid; then in the Fire shall they be burned." (Ghafir
71-72)

0

)>

The man gave a gasp and fell in a faint and we went out from his presence
and left him in this state. And we went off to another man, and we entered in to
him and I recited this verse and he gave a gasp and fell in a faint. So we went off
and asked permission to go in to a third man and he said: Enter, if you will not
distract me from my Lord. So I recited: "That is for him who fears My
judgement-seat and fears a threat." (Ibrahim 14)
And he gave a gasp and blood appeared from his nostrils and he wallowed in
his blood until it was dried up. So we left him in this state and went out, and I
took him on a tour of six persons, from the presence of each we went out,
leaving him in a faint. Then I brought him to the seventh and we asked
permission to enter and behold! a woman from within the hut saying: Enter. So
we entered and behold! a Shaykh in a trance, sitting in his oratory. So we greeted
him, but he did not notice our salutation, and so I said to him in a raised voice: Is
there not a morrow appointed for the creature? So the Shaykh said: In whose
Presence? Alas! for you. Then he remained stupefied, opening his mouth and,
with a fixed stare, crying out with his weak voice: Alas! Adas! until the voice was
cut off. So his wife said: Make your way out, for you will not benefit from him
for the moment. And, when that was over, I enquired of the people, and behold!
three had revived and three had attained to Allah. And as for the Shaykh he
remained in his condition, dazed and bewildered, for three days, without
performing a religious obligation, and, when the three days had passed, he came
to his senses.
And Yazid Ibn Al-Aswad used to be of the opinion that he was one of the
Foundation Members, and he had sworn that he would never laugh nor sleep in
a recumbent position, nor eat butter. So he was never seen laughing nor lying
down nor eating butter until he died. And AJ-Hajjaj said to Sa'd Ibn Jubair: I
have heard that you have never laughed. So he said: How could I laugh with
Hell ablaze and the manacles installed and the Warders of Hell given their
assignment? And a man said to AI-Hassan : O Abu Sa’d: How do you fare? He
said: Well. He said: How is your state? So AJ-Hassan smiled and said: You ask
me about my state. What do you suppose concerning people who have travelled
in a ship until they were in mid-ocean, and then their ship is broken up and
every man of them takes hold of a spar. In what state is he? The man said: In a
state of great extremity. Al-Hassan said: My state is one of greater extremity
than theirs.

287
Book three: Fear and Hope
A woman client went in to 'Umar Ibn 'Abd Al-’Aziz and greeted him. Then
she took up her stance towards the oratory in his room and she prayed in it with
two bows and her eyes conquered her and she was lulled to sleep and was
induced to weep in her sleep. Then she was roused and said: O Commander of
the Faithful, by Allah! I have seen a miracle. He said: And what was it ? She said:
I saw the Fire and its flames were licking its people. Then a bridge was brought
and was placed over the centre of it. So he said: Go on. She said: And 'Abd AlMalik Ibn Marwan was brought and was borne on it, and he had gone only a little
way when the bridge capsized him and he was flung into Hell. So 'Umar said: Go
on. She said: Then Al-Walid Ibn 'Abd Al-Malik was brought and he was borne
on it, and he had gone only a little way when the bridge capsized him and he was
flung into Hell. So 'Umar said: Go on. She said: Then Sulaiman Ibn 'Abd AlMalik was brought and he had progressed only a little way over it when the bridge
capsized him and he was thrown in the same way. So 'Umar said: Go on. She
said: Then you were brought and by Allah! O Commander of the Faithful-then
'Umar gave a shriek and fell in a faint. So she came up to his side and began
shouting in his ear: O Commander of the Faithful, truly I saw you and by Allah!
you were saved, truly I saw you and by Allah! you were saved. He (the narrator)
went on: And she was calling out and he was shouting and scraping the ground
with his feet.
And it is related that Uwais Al-Qarni used to be present with the story-teller
and would be weeping because of his word, and when he recollected the Fire,
Uwais would give a scream; then he would rise up and make off. So the people
would follow him saying: Mad! mad! And Mu'adh Ibn Jabal said: Truly the fear
of the believer is not quietened until he leaves behind him the Bridge of Hell.
And Tawus used to roll out his mattress and lie down and toss about like a seed
in the frying-pan. Then he would leap up and fold it up and would face the
Qiblah until morning and would say: The recollection of Hell has dispersed the
sleep of those who fear. And Al-Hassan Al-Basri said: A man emerges from the
Fire after a thousand years. O that I were that man. And he said that solely on
account of his fear of eternal punishment and the evil of the Seal. And it is
related that he did not laugh for forty years. He (the narrator) went on: And
when you saw him squatting, your impression was as if a prisoner had come
forward in order that you might strike off his neck. And when he spoke, it was
as if he were confronting the next world and were reporting on its sights. And
when he was silent, it was as if the Fire were kindled between his eyes. And he
was chided for the extremity of his grief and fear, so he said: What makes me
secure from Allah having come suddenly on me, while I was engaged in
something which He abhors, and His having taken a loathing to me and said:
Be off, for I will not pardon you, since I am dealing with a person who will not
co-operate ?
And on the authority of Ibn as-Sammak who said: I preached on a certain day
in a meeting and a youth in the crowd stood up and said: O Abu Abbas, truly
you have preached to-day such a word that I should not care were I never to hear
another. I said: And what is it? He said: Your saying: The hearts of those who
fear have grasped the duration of the two eternities, whether in the Garden or the
Fire. Then he disappeared from my view and so I lost him in the meeting. Or, in

The quarter of the saviors
288
another version: I did not see him, so I enquired about him, and I was told that
he was sick and was being visited. So I went to visit him and said: O my brother,
what condition is this I see you in? So he said: O Abu 'Abbas, it is the
consequence of your saying: The hearts of those who fear have grasped the
duration of the two eternities, whether in the Garden or the Fire. He went on:
Then he died and I saw him in sleep and I said: O my brother, how did Allah deal
with you? He said: He has pardoned me and shown me compassion and given me
entrance to the Garden. I said: By what means? He said: By means of the word.
And these are the things which terrify the prophets and saints and scholars
and sound in faith, and fear is more appropriate to us than to them. But fear
does not go along with a multitude of sins; no, it goes along with purity of
heart and perfection of 'knowledge1. And, if not, then He has not given us a
feeling of security because of the paucity of our sins and the multitude of our
acts of obedience. No; our lusts have driven us and reprobation has prevailed
over us and our heedlessness and hardness have obstructed us from
inspecting our states. So that neither the nearness of the journey will rouse us,
nor the multitude of sins move us, nor the witnessing of the states of those
who fear terrify us, nor the danger of the Seal disquiet us. So let us ask Allah
to overtake our states with his bounty and generosity and so make us whole, if
the movement of the tongue in asking, totally unsupported by self-help, will
benefit us.
And among the things to be wondered at is that, when we desire wealth in
this world, we sow and plant and trade and cross over seas and deserts and incur
risks. And, if we seek after the status of knowledge, we study and become
fatigued in retaining it, and repeating it, and pass sleepless nights. And we are
energetic in the search for our provisions and do not rely on the pledge of Allah
to us, and do not sit in our houses and say: O Allah provide for us. Then, when
our eyes are lifted towards the Kingdom which is enduring and does not pass
away, we are content to say with our tongues: O Allah pardon us and show us
compassion. And by the One to Whom we return, and by the One in Whom is
our boast! He will call out and say: "A man gets exactly the fruit of his endeavor."
(An-Najm 39)

i©

£ -3j ali yj

o fj >

"And with regard to Allah, let not the deceiver deceive you." (Fatir 5)

40^3 }
And: "O man, what has deceived you as to your generous Lord ?" (Al-Infitar 6)

Then all that does not rouse us nor bring us out from the wadies of our
delusions and wishful thoughts, and what is this if not a fearful trial were it not
that Allah bestows sincere repentance on us by grace, overtaking us with it and
protecting us. So let us ask Allah to bestow penitence on us. More; let us ask Him
to drive towards repentance the secret things of our hearts and not to make the
movement of the tongue in asking for repentance the limit of our portion. For, in

Book three: Fear and Hope --------- —---------------------------------------------- 289
that case, we should be among those who say and do not act who hear and are
not receptive. When we hear the sermon, we weep, and when the time for action
comes in connection with what we have heard, we are disobedient. And there is
no mark of alienation greater than this. So let us ask Allah to bestow on us
success and direction through His grace and bounty.
And we shall cut short our recital of the states of those who fear to what
we have cited. For a little of this will confront the receptive heart and will
suffice, whereas much of it, even if it overflows the negligent heart, will not
be adequate.
Truly the monk spoke the truth of whom 'Isa Ibn Malik, Al-Khawlani, (he
was one of the most elect of the devotees) related that he saw him halted at the
gate of the Jerusalem temple with the appearance of one grief-stricken through
extreme dejection, his tears hardly ever dry, because of the profusion of his
weeping. And 'Isa said: When I saw him, his aspect terrified me and I said: O
monk, lay an obligation on me to keep on your authority. So he said: O my
brother, with what would I command you if you are able to occupy the place of
a man whom wild beasts and reptiles have surrounded, and who is fearful and
watchful, fearing lest he may be negligent and so the beasts will maul him, or
distracted and the reptiles sting him. So his heart is filled with fear and terror,
and he passes his nights in fear, even if those who delude themselves feel
secure, and his days in grief, even if the empty-headed make merry. Then he
turned his back on me and left me. So I said: Will you not tell me something
more, perhaps it would benefit me? So he said: The smallest quantity of water
satisfies the thirsty man. And he certainly spoke the truth, for fear will move
soonest the heart which is pure, but every warning glances off the heart which
is hardened.
And what he mentioned in his hypothesis is that wild beasts and reptiles had
surrounded him. And so one ought not to suppose that it is (merely)
hypothetical. No, it is reality, for, if you were to view your inner man with the
light of insight, you would see it filled with different kinds of wild beasts and
species of reptiles, like anger, lust, rancour, envy, pride, self-esteem, selfrighteousness and the rest. And it is these which are constantly mauling you and
stinging you, if you neglect them for an instant, except that your eye is veiled
from the sight of them. So, when the cover is withdrawn and you are placed in
your grave, you will encounter them and they will be imaged to you according
to the forms and shapes which suit their respective meanings. So you will see
with your eye scorpions and snakes and they will surround you in your grave.
And these are nothing but the attributes present to you now whose forms have
been disclosed to you. So, if you desire to slay and subdue them, you are able
for it before death. So do it. But, if you do not, you will become habituated to
stings and bites in the kernel of your heart, how much more in your outer flesh.

|&&!<

oP

■I*

Oil!

It is the fourth book of the quarter of saviors of the revival of religious
sciences
In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Praise be to Allah with whose praises the sands glorify, to Whom the shades
fall in prostration, and for fear of Whose power, the mountains collapse. He has
created man from sticky clay, and then adorned his form according to the best of
molds and the most perfect proportion, and protected his heart with the light of
guidance from being involved in the muddles of error, and gave him permission
to serve Him every morning and evening. Then He lighted up the insight of the
sincere in his worship with the light of consideration, until he observed therewith
the presence of glory. There seemed to him from the joy, brightness and
perfection what made him regard as ugly all beauty and prettiness else, and render
heavy on himself all that diverted him from continuous watch of it. The apparent
world seemed to him in the form of a beautiful woman strutting and bending as
walking, while its inside as a defective old woman kneaded from the clay of
disappointment and molded in the mold of frustration and regret, and wrapped in
her garment in order to screen her ugly secrets and mysteries with the niceties of
magic and deception. When there has been revealed to the Gnostics its ugly
secrets and evil mysteries, they abstained in it, out of aversion they showed
towards it, and left boasting and mutual rivalry for piling up (the good things of
this world) with offspring and wealth, and rather devoted themselves
wholeheartedly to the presence of glory, and joined themselves with it with an
unbreakable rope, in which they witnessed abiding eternal things.
Allah's blessing and peace be upon the Prophet Muhammad, the chief of all
the Prophets and Messengers, and upon his family, the best of families on the
surface of the earth.
Coming to the point: the world is an enemy to Allah Almighty: with its
deception, those who strayed have strayed, and with its cunning, those who
slipped have slipped. To love it is the greatest mistake and sin, and to hate it is
the best act of worship. We have described it in detail, and dispraised its evils
more enough in the Book of Condemnation of World, but now, we are going to
talk about the excellence of aversion for, and abstinence in it, since it is the most
important savior. There is no hope of salvation but to abandon and desert the
world entirely. But to abandon it is a result of either its remoteness from the
servant, and this is called poverty, or the servant's remoteness from it, and this is
called asceticism. Each has several degrees to attain happiness and a portion of
helping one obtain felicity and success.
Now, let's discuss the real nature of poverty and asceticism, and their degrees,
divisions, conditions and rulings. This will be in two parts: the first will be
assigned to poverty, and the other to asceticism.
290

Book four: poverty and asceticism

291

part One; poverty
In this part, the following topics will be dealt with:
Exposition of real nature of poverty
Exposition of excellence of poverty in general
Exposition of merit of some particular poor
Exposition of superiority of poverty over richness
Exposition of the etiquettes of the poor in his poverty
Exposition of his etiquettes in accepting gifts
Exposition of prohibition of begging with no necessity
Exposition of the extent to which self-sufficiency makes begging unlawful
Exposition of states of beggars
Allah may guide us to the right

CHAPTER ONE
EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE OF POVERTY; AND DIFFERENT STATES
AND NAMES OF THE POOR
It should be known to you that poverty or neediness is to lose what one is in
need of. But to lose what is not needed is not called poverty. If what is needed is
available, one does not become poor. Having understood that, you would know
that everything save Allah Almighty is needy, for all things are in need of
permanent existence which depends upon the bounty and generosity of Allah
Almighty. If there is in the universe an existent whose existence does not depend
on anything else, it would be the absolute self-sufficient; and that is unimaginable
but to be one and only, that is absolute self-sufficient. In existence, there is only
one self-sufficient, and all things save Him are needy of Him, in order to obtain
their permanent existence. To that meaning Allah Almighty refers in His
statement: " But Allah is free of all wants, and it is you that are needy."
(Muhammad 38)

That is the meaning of the absolute neediness
But we intend not to explain the significance of the absolute neediness. We
rather mean to clarify the meaning of the poverty, i.e. the neediness of wealth,
otherwise, the servant's neediness to his things is infinite, for his needs are
unlimited. One of those needs is the wealth; and that is why we want to explain in
more detail.
Let's say that such as loses property is called a poor in relation to that which
he loses, if what is lost is needed by him who loses it. The poor in that meaning
has five states:
The first state is the highest, according to which if wealth comes to one, he
would reject it, dislike it, be harmed by it, thereupon he would escape from taking
it out of aversion towards it, and in flight from its evil and harm. That is called
asceticism, and he is ascetic.
The second is that according to which he does not desire for it in such a way
as to make him rejoice at it, nor dislike it in such a way that it would cause harm

r

!

If

;

; !
ii: ■

*pi

The quarter of the saviors
292
to him if it comes, or that he would abstain in it if it is available to him. That is
called contentment, and he is contented.
The third is that the presence of property is dearer than its absence, out of
desire for it, but not strong enough to stimulate him to endeavor to obtain it: but
if it comes to him easily without effort, he would take it and rejoice at it; and if he
is to trouble himself to obtain it, he should not do so. That is called satisfaction,
and he is satisfied, for he sadsfies himself with what is available, and does not
work to get more, given his weak desire for it.
The fourth is that he leaves seeking because of inability, although he has
desire for property. If there is a way for him to get it, surely, he would follow it.
That is desire, and he is desirous.
The fifth is that one loses what he is compelled to lose, like the hungry who
loses bread, and the naked who loses clothes. That is called necessity, and he is
compelled by necessity, no matter how strong or weak his desire for money
might be. This state is hardly free from desire for obtaining money.
Those are the five states of poverty, the highest of which is asceticism. If
necessity is joined to asceticism, it would result in the utmost degree of
asceticism, as will be shown later. Behind those five, there is a further state,
which is higher than asceticism, i.e. that both existence and loss of money are
equally the same. If it is available, one would not rejoice at nor is harmed by it,
and if it is lost, it would be the same. His state then is like the state of A'ishah
"Allah be pleased with her" who received one hundred thousand Dirhams as a
part of her fixed income, and she distributed all the sum at once. Her servant
maid said to her: "Were you not able to save, from what you have distributed,
even a single Dirham to buy meat to break our fast therewith?" she said: "Had
you reminded me, surely, I would have done accordingly." If the whole world
with all that it contains is given to such a man, it would be the same to him, for
he sees the wealth in the treasury of Allah Almighty, and not with himself,
making no distinction between being in his hand or in the hand of anyone else.
The man of such a state is called the dispenser, for he dispenses with both
presence and loss of money.
We should differentiate between such and the wealthy who has property
among the servants. Whoever has property of which he rejoices is regarded
needy of having the property remain in his hand. He is self-sufficient of
obtaining money, and not of having it remain in his hand. But that dispenser
is self-sufficient of obtaining the money, and of having it remain in his hand.
He is not harmed by it in order to be in need of giving it out, nor he rejoices
at it in order to be in need of having it remain with him. In this way, he is
closer to the absolute self-sufficiency, therewith Allah Almighty is described.
The servant becomes close to Allah Almighty through the attributes and not
in the place.
But we do not give the man of such a state the name self-sufficient, in order
for the absolute self-sufficiency to remain unique to Allah Almighty. But we give
him the name of dispenser. That is because if this man dispenses with money in
general, in no way could he be able to dispense with all things in existence. At the

■

293
Book four: poverty and asceticism
least, he could not dispense with the help of Allah to enable him continue to
dispense with property, as adorned in his heart by Allah Almighty. The heart that
is bound by the love for wealth is like a slave, and that which dispenses with it is
free, and it is Allah Almighty Who emancipates it from that slavery. Thus, one is
in need of having this emancipation remain forever. Hearts always turn from
slavery to freedom, and vice versa, for they are in between two of Allah's fingers.
It should be known to you that asceticism is the degree of the pious, and the
ascetic is among those made close (to Allah Almighty). There is no wonder then
that the asceticism might be a shortcoming in relation to such a man, for the
good deeds of the pious are equal to the evil deeds of these made close to Allah.
That is because both he who dislikes and he who likes the world are engaged in it.
Anything diverts from Allah Almighty is a screen from Allah Almighty. There is
no distance between you and Allah Almighty in order to be considered as a
screen, for He Almighty is nearer to you than your jugular vein. There is no place
where He Almighty exists in order for the heavens and the earth to be a screen
between you and Him. There is no screen between you and Him but your
engagement in anything other than Him. Your engagement in your own self,
desires and lusts is engagement in something other than Him. Since you continue
to be engaged in your own self and desires, you then would remain screened
from Him. Whoever is engaged in loving himself is indeed diverted from Allah
Almighty; and whoever is engaged in disliking himself is also diverted from Allah
Almighty.
As well as two loves could never gather together in one heart simultaneously,
no love and aversion could gather together simultaneously. He who is engaged in
disliking the world is heedless of Allah Almighty, like him who is engaged in
loving it. But he who is engaged in loving it is heedless, and amidst his
heedlessness, he follows the way of remoteness, whereas he who is engaged in
disliking it is heedless, following the way of nearness, and it is hoped that his state
of heedlessness terminates and is replaced with contemplation. Perfection then is
expected from him for disliking the world is a riding mount that conveys to Allah
Almighty.
Think not then that disliking the world is intended in itself. The world
impedes from Allah Almighty, and there is no way to reach Him without
removing that impediment. That is the significance of the statement of Abu
Sulaiman Ad-Darani: "Whoever abstains in this world and devotes himself to that
has indeed hastened to find comfort. That is because one should also, besides his
abstinence from this world, engage in the hereafter." He thus showed that
following the way to the hereafter is beyond asceticism.
It seems from that then that if abstinence from this world means to have no
desire for its presence or absence, it would be the utmost degree of perfection. If
it is to have no desire for its absence, it would be perfection in relation to the
degree of the satisfied, contented and desirous, and imperfection in relation to
the degree of the dispenser. The perfection in relation to money, for example, is
that money becomes, in your sight, equal to water; and both the abundance and
scarcity of water do not harm you unless in so much as is necessary. Although

The quarter of the saviors
294
both money and water are needed, your heart is not engaged in flight from the
abundant water, nor does it dislike it. But you say: "I drink thereof as much as is
needed, and provide therewith the servants of Allah as much as is needed, and
never withhold it from anyone." As such your view of money should be. To be
sure, both bread and water are needed, with the difference that one of them is
much and the other is little.
If you know well Allah Almighty as He should be known, and are confident
of the ordinance therewith He ordains the world, you would learn that your need
of bread would inevitably come to you so long as you are living, just in the same
way as your need of water comes to you as will be explained in detail, Allah
willing in the Book of Reliance. Ahmad Ibn Abu Al-Hawari said: I said to Abu
Sulaiman Ad-Darani: Malik Ibn Dinar said to Al-Mughirah: "Go to the house and
take the parcel you have given as a gift to me, for the enemy (Satan) whispers to
me that the thief has taken it." Sulaiman said: "That is due to the weak hearts of
Sufis." He showed that his aversion that the parcel be in his house is an attention
caused by weakness and shortage.
You may argue: "What is the matter with the Prophets and allies (of Allah)
that they ran away from property and disgusted it so much?" in reply to that, let
me say that they ran away from water in the sense that they did not take from it
but what satisfied their needs, and left what is beyond it. They did not accumulate
it in their water-skins and pots: on the contrary, they left it in the rivers and
springs for the needy and thirsty to drink thereof what they need. That means
that their hearts then were not engaged in love or aversion for wealth. The
treasures of the earth were brought to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" then Abu Bakr and Umar "Allah be pleased with them",
and all took and spent them properly and reasonably on all sides of good. They
did not run away from it in the sense that wealth and water, gold and stone are
equal in their sight. What is reported of the abstention of some pertains to those
who were afraid this might deceive them and tie their hearts with desires and
lusts.
That is the status of the weak. It is out of their perfection to flee away and
refrain from money. That is true of all people for all the creatures are weak save
the Prophets and allies of Allah Almighty. But if refraining is reported of a
strong, it may be that he refrained for he liked to descend to the degree of the
weak in order for them to imitate him in leaving, for were they to imitate him in
taking, they might have been ruined. However, to descend to the level of the
weak to raise them up is the conduct of the Prophets "peace be upon them",
allies and religious scholars.
You have known then that the levels are six, the highest of which is that of
the dispenser, followed by the abstinent, then the contented, then the satisfied
and then the desirous. Such as forced by necessity is imagined to be abstinent,
contented and satisfied. His degree differs by the difference of his states. The
name 'needy' applies to any of those five. But in that sense, the dispenser could
not be named 'needy'. If he is to be named 'needy', it should be in the sense of his
knowledge that he is in need of Allah Almighty in all of his affairs in general, and

295
Book four: poverty and asceticism
his continuous dispensing with money in particular. The name 'needy' in relation
to him is like the name 'servant' in relation to him who knows that he is a servant
of Allah Almighty, given that the name of 'servant' is common to all the people
for all the people are servants of Allah Almighty. Similarly, the name 'needy' is
common to all the people in that sense. Whoever knows that he is in need of
Allah Almighty has more right to have the name of 'needy'. In this sense, the
needy then is common to both.
Having understood that, you would understand well that the statement of the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "O Allah! I seek
refuge with You from neediness", and his statement: "Neediness is about to turn
to disbelief', do not contradict his statement: "O Allah! Cause me to die as a
needy and live as a needy." (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Anas; and Ibn Majah
and Al-Hakim on the authority of Abu Sa'id). That is because the neediness of
such as forced by necessity is that from which he "peace be upon him" took
refuge, whereas it is the neediness to confess of his humiliation and submission
to Allah Almighty is that which he "peace be upon him" asked in his supplication.

CHAPTER TWO
EXPOSITION OF EXCELLENCE OF POVERTY IN GENERAL
From the Qur'an, the following Holy Verses are indicative: "(Some part is due)
to the needy Muhajirs, those who were expelled from their homes and their
property, while seeking Grace from Allah and (His) Good Pleasure, and aiding
Allah and His Messenger: such are indeed the sincere ones." (Al-FIashr 8)
JJ ^

13
4

byA^^ p-*

Cr!
j1

1 b^

t

}

^ bjjyva^j

Do you not notice here how He Almighty has praises neediness, and gives it
preference over emigration?
As for Prophetic narrations in praising neediness, they are countless. It is
narrated on the authority of Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with them" that he
said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to
his companions: "Which of people is the best?" they said: "A wealthy who
gives Allah's right due on himself and his property." He said: "How good is
that. But that is not whom I intend." They asked: "Then, who is the best of
people O Messenger of Allah?" he "peace be upon him" said: "A needy who
gives his effort (in charity)." (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami). The Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said to Bilal "Allah be
pleased with him": "Meet Allah while you are needy, and do not meet him
while you are wealthy." (Al-Hakim on the authority of Bilal; and At-Tabarani
on the authority of Abu Sa'id).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Verily, Allah Almighty loves the refraining needy who has dependents (for
whom he is responsible)." (Ibn Majah on the authority of Imran Ibn Hussain).
He "peace be upon him" said in a famous Hadith: "The needy among my
Ummah would enter Paradise five hundred years before its wealthy." (At-

The quarter of the saviors
296
Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu Hurairah). According to another version, "They
would enter die Garden forty autumns, i.e. years before the wealthy." (Muslim on
the audiority of Abdullah Ibn Amr; and At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Jabir and
Anas). What is intended is that the desirous needy would enter the Garden forty
years before the desirous wealthy; and the abstinent needy five hundred years
before the desirous wealthy. To be sure, the needy are of different levels and
degrees, according to their different states as we have already mentioned. The
desirous needy, for example, is twenty-five degrees far from the abstinent needy.
Think not that the estimation of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" is random or by chance. It is not so for he "peace be upon
him" does not speak (aught) of (his own) Desire. It is no less than inspiration
sent down to him. That is like his statement "peace be upon him": "The good
vision is one of forty-six parts of Prophethood." (Al-Bukhari on the authority of
Abu Sa'id; and Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah and
Ubadah Ibn As-Samit). His estimation here is based on verification. But it is not
within die capacity of any human being to find the reason for it. That is because
Prophethood is an attribute that gives the Prophet many characteristics therewith
he is distinguished from anyone else among the people.
The first is that he knows the real nature of what pertains to Allah, His
attributes, and His angels, and the hereafter in a way different from anyone else
by virtue of strong certainty, verification and revelation.
The second is that he has a characteristic therewith he is able to do the
miraculous and supernatural signs. We also have an attribute that enables us to do
what we like and will, i.e. the power, given that the power and will all are among
the acts of Allah Almighty.
The third is that he has a characteristic therewith he sees the angels in the
same way as the sighted has a characteristic therewith he is distinguished from the
blind.
The fourth is that he has a characteristic therewith he perceives what
would be in the future, whether during wakefulness or sleep. By virtue of that
characteristic, he is able to go through the Preserved Blanket and see the
unseen.
Those characteristics are affirmed to Prophets apart from others, and each of
those could be divided into, say, forty, fifty, sixty, or even forty-six subdivisions
and parts, of which the good vision is a part. But our estimation is not based on
verification in so much as on guess and speculation, and we do not know for
certain whether it is that intended by the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him".
The same is true of the degrees and levels of the needy. But why the desirous
needy is almost one-twelfth the degree of the abstinent needy that he would not
enter the Garden but only forty years before the wealthy, and why the abstinent
needy would enter the Garden five hundred years before the wealthy, it is not
within the capacity of anyone other than the Prophets to verify of it with
certainty. The point is to relegate the belief that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" says such things randomly or by chance; and

297
Book four: poverty and asceticism -------------------the office of Prophethood is deemed far beyond that.
Now, let's return to the Prophetic narrations. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The best of this Ummah are the poor,
and the quickest to lie in the Garden (on the Day of Judgement) are the weak."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "I
have two concerns, and whoever likes them likes me and whoever dislikes them
dislikes me: neediness and Jihad." It is narrated that Gabriel "peace be upon him"
descended on the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
and said: "O Muhammad! Allah is greeting you with peace. Pie asks you: 'Do you
like that I would turn those mountains into gold to be with you wherever you
are?' the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" lowered
his head for a moment after which he said: "O Gabriel! The world is the home of
him who is homeless, and the property of him who has no property, and for the
sake of it only the foolish gathers wealth." On that Gabriel said to him: "O
Muhammad! May Allah make you firm with the well-established word." (This is
reported from two Hadiths, the first by At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu
Umamah, and the other by Ahmad on the authority of A'ishah).
It is narrated that once the Christ "peace be upon him" came during his tour
upon a sleeping man and he was wrapped in a garment. He awakened him and
said to him: "O sleeping man! Get up and remember Allah Almighty." He said to
him: "What do you want from me? I have left the world for its people." He said:
"Then, sleep my beloved." In another context, Moses "peace be upon him" came
upon a man lying on dust, and there was a brick underneath his head, and both
his face and beard were covered with dust, and he was wrapped in a garment. He
said: "O Lord! This slave of You is lost in this world." Allah Almighty revealed to
Moses "peace be upon him": "O Moses! Do you not know that if I turn My Face
to cast a glance of a slave, the whole world would be drawn away from him?"
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Rafi' "Allah be pleased with him" that
he said: A guest came upon the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" and he found nothing to serve him with. He sent me to a Jew
from Khaibar with the following message: "Muhammad asks you to lend or sell
to me on credit baking powder to the new moon of Rajab." I came to him and
reported the message to him but he rejected unless it was by mortgage. I
returned to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
and told him, thereupon he said: "By Allah, I am trustworthy among the
inhabitants of the heavens as well as among the inhabitants of the earth; and
should he sell or lend to me, I would pay to him. Take this armor of mine and
give it to him as a mortgage." When I came out the following Holy Verse was
revealed: " Nor strain your eyes in longing for the things We have given for
enjoyment to parties of them, the splendour of the life of this world, through
which We test them: but the provision of your Lord is better and more
enduring." (Ta Ha 131)
iijjj
^ ji jiXp
%>
That Holy Verse was revealed to console the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" for the world. (At-Tabarani).

298

The quarter of the saviors

The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "Indeed, poverty is to adorn the faithful believer more than the good
sideburns do on the cheeks of the horse." (At-Tabarani on the authority of
Shaddad Ibn Aws). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" also said: "Whoever among you becomes in the morning healthy in his
body, safe among his group, and has the sustenance of his day, seems as if the
entire world has been given to him." (At-Tirmidhi). According to Ka'b Al-Ahbar,
Allah Almighty said to Moses "peace be upon him": "O Moses! If you see
poverty coming, say: 'Welcome to the motto of the righteous!"'
According to Ata' Al-Khurasani: One of the Prophets came upon the coast
and behold! There was a fisher catching fish, and when he threw his net in the
Name of Allah, and took it out, it was empty. He came upon another one who
threw the net in the name of Satan and took it out, and it had a great quantity of
fish. The Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "O Lord! What is that given that all
of this is with Your Hand?" Allah Almighty said to His angels: "Uncover to My
servant (the Prophet) the positions of both." When he saw the dignity prepared
for the former and humiliation prepared for the latter, he said: "I have been
pleased, O Lord."
Our Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "I caught a
glimpse of Paradise, and found that the majority of its inhabitants are from
among the poor; and I caught a glimpse of the fire (of Hell), and found that the
majority of its denizens are from among the rich and women." According to
another version, I asked: "Where are the rich?" It was said: "Their fortune has
detained them (from the Garden."According to a third version: "I found that
the majority of the denizens of the fire (of Hell) are from among women,
thereupon I asked: 'What is their matter?' it was said: 'They have been engaged
in gold and saffron."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "The believer's most valuable thing in this world is poverty." (Ash-Shirazi
and Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of Mu'adh Ibn Jabal). According to
a particular tradition: "The last of Prophets to enter Paradise is Sulaiman "peace
be upon him" due to his great dominion in this World; and the last of my
companions to enter Paradise is Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf "Allah be pleased with
him" due to his great wealth and richness in this World." According to another
narration: "I have seen him enter Paradise crawling." (At-Tabarani).
According to the Christ "peace be upon him": "The rich would hardly enter
Paradise." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
further said: "If Allah Almighty loves one of His servants, He puts him to trial;
and if He loves him so much, He extracts him." It was said: "How does He
extract him?" he said: "He causes neither property nor children to remain for
him." (At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu Utbah Al-Khawlani). According to a
certain tradition: "If you see poverty coming, say 'Welcome to the motto of the
righteous'; and if you see richness coming, say 'That is a sin whose punishment
has been hastened on.'" (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of Makhul
from Abu Ad-Darda*). Moses "peace be upon him" said: "O Lord! Who are Your

299
Book four: poverty and asceticism
beloved from among Your creatures so that I would love them?" He said: "Every
poor from among the people." The Christ "peace be upon him" said: "I indeed
like indigence and dislike luxury." The dearest of names by which he "peace be
upon him" liked to be called by is "O indigent".
It is further narrated that the rich and wealthy among people like Al-Aqra’
Ibn Habis At-Tamimi, Uyainah Ibn Hisn Al-Fazari, Abbas Ibn Mirdas As-Sulami
and others came and found the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace
be upon him” sitting with Suhaib, Bilal, Ammar, Khabbab, and others from the
weak (and poor) among the faithful believers. It was said that due to their
poverty, they used to put on coarse wool, in which they sweated and the smell of
their sweat would exude and cause harm to the rich and wealthy among the
people. When they saw them sitting around the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him”, they looked down upon them and then they
came and sat alone with him and said: “We would like that you should fix a
private gathering for us, with which the Arabs come to know our superiority.
Indeed, the Arab delegates always come to you, and we feel shy of the fact that
the Arabs might see us sitting in the company of those (freed) slaves. So, when
we come to you, drive them away from you, and when we finish (and turn
away), you could sit with them if you like.” He answered in the affirmative,
thereupon they said to him: <fWrite a document for us in confirmation of that.”
He called for a blank document, and he called upon Ali to write that, and we
were sitting in one side (of the gathering). Such being the case Gabriel “Peace
be upon him” came to him and revealed to him (Allah’s saying): “Send not
away those who call on their Lord morning and evening, seeking His Face. In
naught are you accountable for them, and in naught are they accountable for
you, that you should turn them away, and thus be (one) of the unjust.” (AlAn’am 52)
L~jf
>- ^ dlJLP L

bjijy

^3 ^

In connection with AJ-Aqra’ Ibn Habis and Uyainah Ibn Hisn, He (Almighty)
said: “Thus did We try some of them by comparison with others that they should
say: "Is it these then that Allah has favoured from amongst us?" Does not Allah
know best those who are grateful?” then He further said: <fWhen those come to
you who believe in Our Signs, say: "Peace be on you; your Lord has inscribed for
Himself (the rule of) Mercy”, thereupon we came so much nearer to him that we
placed our knees on his. Henceforth, whenever the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” sat with us and then he wanted to go, he would
get up and leave us, thereupon Allah Almighty revealed: “And keep your soul
content with those who call on their Lord morning and evening, seeking His
Face; and let not your eyes pass beyond them, (nor devote yourself to the nobles
among them) seeking the pomp and glitter of this Life; nor obey any whose heart
We have permitted to neglect die remembrance of Us, (i.e. Uyainah and Al-Aqra7)
one who follows his own desires, whose case has gone beyond all bounds.” (AlKahf 28)

------------------------------------------

300
JuJj

The quarter of the saviors

3j uIp ukjj
4 (£0

->ojAl

o^1

^

Aj^A £_~jIj lSllli_pl ^ ^aj *b/j Li jjT 5jI>Jl 4ijj

Then, He set forth for them die parable of two men and the parable of the
life of this world. Khabbab further said: From this day forward, whenever we sat
with die Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and then
it was time for his departure, we would get up and leave him, in order to enable
him to get up (and go as he liked). (Ibn Majah on the authority of Khabbab and
Salman).
It is further narrated that once Ibn Umm Maktum "Allah be pleased with
him" and he was blind and poor, sought the permission to be admitted by the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and he had one of
die nobles of Quraish, thereupon he "peace be upon him" felt it. On that
occasion Allah Almighty revealed: "(The Prophet) frowned and turned away,
Because there came to him the blind man (interrupting). But what could tell you
but that perchance he might grow (in spiritual understanding)? Or that he might
receive admonition, and the teaching might profit him?" (i.e. Ibn Umm Maktum,
the blind) "As to one who regards himself as self-sufficient,
To him do you attend" (i.e. that noble from Quraish). (Abasa 1-6)

0 k/An

Z ^3 o ^ VT \vir o' 0
^ 0 c£

-»U cui li 0

^»

\ (j- UI

(At-Tirmidhi on the authority of A'ishah).
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "On the Day of Judgement, the (poor) servant will be
brought before Allah Almighty Who will excuse to him in the same way as
people excuse to each other in this world, saying: "By My Honor and Glory! I
have not taken the worldly pleasures away from you for your being slight or
humiliated in My Sight. But I have done so for the dignity and superiority I
have prepared for you (in the hereafter). Come out, O My servant, to those
rows (of people), and whoever provided for your sustenance or clothes for
My Sake, seeking thereby My Countenance, is for you: take him by the hand."
On that Day, the people will be in their sweat to the ears. He would break in
rows and look at such as did that with him and take him by the hand and
admit him to Paradise." (Abu Ash-Shaykh on the authority of Anas).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "Multiply your acquaintances from among the poor, and do favor to them as
much as you can for they will have a turn (of power to come)." They asked: "O
Messenger of Allah! What is their turn (of power)?" he "peace be upon him" said:
"When it is the Day of Judgement, it will be said to them: "Seek for whoever fed
you even with a fragment (of food), gave you even a sip of water, or clothed you
even with a garment, and take him by the hand and go with him to admit him to
Paradise." (Abu Na'im on the authority of Al-Hussain Ibn Ali).
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "I entered the Garden and heard a movement nearby and looked and

Book four: poverty and asceticism

301

behold! There was Bilal. I caught a glimpse of its upper part, and behold! There
were the poor of my nation along with their offspring. I then caught a glimpse of
its lower part, and behold! There were a few number of rich and women. I asked:
"O my Lord! What is the matter with them?" He said: "As for women, they were
harmed by both gold and silk. As for the rich, they were engaged in accounting
(their property and wealth) very long." I inspected my companions and did not
see Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf among them. Later on, he came to me weeping. I
asked him: "What has delayed you from me?" he said: "O Messenger of Allah! I
did not reach you until I encountered calamitous things and thought I would
never see you." I asked him: "Why?" he said: "I was being reckoned for my
wealth." (At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu Umamah).
Consider that, given that Abd-Ar-Rahman "Allah be pleased with him" was
the one of the great precedence (in Islam) along with the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and among the ten who were given
the glad tidings of Paradise, and among the rich whom the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" pointed out when he said: "Except
him who said (i.e. spent) with his property such and such." But even, he was so
harmed by richness.
It is reported that once the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" entered upon a poor man and found that he had nothing at all,
thereupon he said: "Were the light of this man to be distributed among all the
inhabitants of the earth, it would extend to cover them all." The Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "Should I not tell
you about the kings of the people of Paradise?" they said: "Yes O Messenger of
Allah." He "peace be upon him" said: "Every weak who is looked down upon by
others, of disheveled hair and (it does not matter to him whether his clothes are
tidy or) covered with dust (out of his humbleness), even though, if he takes an
oath by Allah, He (Almighty) will fulfill his oath.” (Ibn Majah on the authority of
Harithah Ibn Wahb).
It is narrated on the authority of Imran Ibn Hussain “Allah be pleased with
him” that he said: I had a good position and rank with the Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him". One day I came to him and he said to
me: "O Imran! You have a good position and rank with us: do you like to
accompany me to visit Fatimah, the daughter of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” and inquire about her health?" I said: "Yes, let
my father and mother sacrifice their lives for you O Messenger of Allah." He
stood and I stood with him (and we proceeded on) until he came at the gate of
the house of Fatimah “Allah be pleased with her”. He knocked the door and said:
"Peace be upon you! could I enter?" she said: "Yes O Messenger of Allah." He
asked: "I and the man that is with me?" she said: "Yes you and the man that is
with you O Messenger of Allah." Then she said: "By Him Who has sent you as a
Prophet, I have nothing over me but a garment." He said: "Do with it such and
such." He beckoned with his hand to her (to cover her body with it). She said: "I
have then screened my body: what about my head?" he threw to her a worn out
sheet he was having over himself and said: "Put it over your head." Then, she

The quarter of the saviors
302
admitted them, he entered and said: "Peace be upon you O my daughter! What
are you now?" she said: "By Allah, I have become suffering, and what increased
my pain is that I have no food to sustain myself, and hunger has troubled me."
On that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” went
on weeping, and said: "Do not be scared O my daughter. By Allah, I have never
had food for three days; and I am dearer than you to Allah Almighty, and were I
to ask my Lord, surely He would provide me with food. But I have preferred the
hereafter to this world." Then, the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” patted on her shoulder and said to her: "Receive the glad
tidings! By Allah, you will be the chief of women of Paradise." She said: "Then,
what about Asia, the wife of Pharaoh, and Maryam, daughter of Imran?" on that
he said: "Asia is the chief of the women of her own world; Maryam is the chief of
the women of her own world; Khadijah is the chief of the women of her own
world; and you are the chief of the women of your own world: you will have your
homes of pipes in which you will receive no harm nor noise." Then, he said to
her. "Be satisfied with (Ali) your paternal cousin, for by Allah, I have given you in
marriage to a chief in this world, and a chief in the hereafter." (Ahmad and AtTabarani on the authority of Ma'qil Ibn Yasar).
It is narrated on the authority of Ali "Allah be pleased with him" that he said:
"If the people come to dislike the poor among them, give preference to the
construction of this world, and compete each other to collect money, then they
would be afflicted by Allah with four disfavors: draught along the time, injustice
of rulers, disloyalty to leaders, and the harm from enemies." (Abu Mansur AdDailami).
From among the traditions, a mention may be made of the following:
Abu Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased with him" said: "The one who has two
Dirhams is more stingy (or will be reckoned more) than the one who has only
one Dirham (and so on)." Once, Umar "Allah be pleased with him" sent to
Sa'id Ibn Amir "Allah be pleased with him" one thousand Dinars and he
returned home in sadness and grief. His wife asked him: "What has happened?"
he said: "Nothing more severe than that (i.e. this money)." Then he said to her:
"Give me your worn out breast garment." He split it into pieces, and made the
money into parcels which he divided among the people. Then, he stood in
prayer and went on weeping until the morning of the coming day. Then he said:
I heard the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
having said: "The poor among my nation would enter Paradise five hundred
years before their rich to the extent that the rich would try to enter into their
middle and he would be taken by the hand and brought out from among them."
(At-Tirmidhi but on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him" said: "Three will enter Paradise
without reckoning: a man who (is so much poor that when he) wants to wash his
(sole) garment he will have nothing to put on his body (until his garment gets
clean); a man who (is very poor that he) never puts two cooking vessels
simultaneously on the oven; and a man who asks for (something to) drink, and
(as he has nothing other than water to drink) it is not said to him: 'Which drink

Book four: poverty and asceticism -

303

do you want?1." It is said that a poor man entered the gathering of Ath-Thawri
who ordered him to pass over the rows and come close to him. In his comment
on that he said: "Had you been rich, I would not have brought you close to me."
The rich among his companions hoped to be poor for he used to bring the poor
so much close to him, and turn away from the rich. According to Al-Mu’ammar.
"I have never seen more humiliating than the rich nor more honored than the
poor in the gathering of Ath-Thawri,."
According to a wise man: "How poor is mankind! If he fears fire in the same
way as he fears poverty, he would be saved from both; and if he desires for
Paradise in the same way as he desires for self-sufficiency, he would win both;
and if he fears Allah in secret in the same way as he fears His creatures in public,
he would become happy in both abodes (of this world and the hereafter)."
According to Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them": "Cursed is him who
honors people for their richness and humiliates them for their poverty."
According to Yahya Ibn Mu'adh: "Your loving the poor is a part of the moral
character of the Messengers, and giving preference to sit with them is one of the
signs of the righteous, and running away from their company is one of the signs
of the hypocrites."
According to the previous Scriptures, Allah revealed to one of His Prophets
"peace be upon them": "Beware lest I might hate you, thereupon you would fall
from My Sight, with the result that I would pour the worldly pleasures over you
(as punishment)." A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" was in the habit of dividing
among the poor and needy as much as even one hundred thousand Dirhams on
one day sent to her by Mu'awiyah, Ibn Amir and others, given that her breast
garment was full of patches. Her slave-girl said to her: "why have you not given
me a Dirham to buy meat for you to break your fast?" she "Allah be pleased with
her" said: "Had you reminded me, I would have done accordingly." The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" had recommended
her saying: "If you like to join me, stick to the living of the poor, and beware of
sitting with the rich; and do not give up your breast garment until it is extremely
worn out of patches." (At-Tirmidhi and Al-Hakim).
A man brought ten thousand Dirhams to Ibrahim Ibn Adham who
rejected to accept it. When the man insisted he said to him: "Do you like me
to erase my name from the record of the poor by ten thousand Dirhams? I
would never do so."

CHAPTER THREE
EXPOSITION OF MERIT OF SOME PARTICULAR POOR FROM AMONG
THE CONTENTED, SATISFIED AND TRUTHFUL
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Blessed be he who has been guided to Islam and lives only on the minimum
requirements of subsistence therewith he is satisfied." (Muslim). The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "O
assembly of poor! Be contented, from the depth of your hearts, with (what is
given to you by) Allah, perchance you would attain the reward of your
poverty, otherwise, you would attain nothing." (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on
i

w

I!

F’1 *

The quarter of the saviors
304
the authority of Abu Hurairah). The first Hadith points out the satisfied, and
the other the contented. This might give the impression that the thrifty poor
shall have no reward for his poverty. But the general narrations about the
superiority of poverty indicate that he shall have a reward as will be shown
later. What is intended by being discontented here is to dislike that Allah
Almighty holds back from him the worldly pleasures. How many a desirous
for wealth to whose mind there never occurs the idea of disapproving or
disliking such act of Allah Almighty. It is that aversion which makes fruidess
the reward of poverty.
It is narrated on the authority of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased
with him" that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "Every thing has a key, and the key of Paradise is to love the
indigent and needy for their padence: they will be the sitters of Allah Almighty
on the Day of Judgement." (Ad-Daraqatni, Ibn Adi and Ibn Hibban). It is
further narrated on the authority of Ali "Allah be pleased with him" that the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The dearest
to Allah Almighty is the poor who is sadsfied with his sustenance, and wellpleased with Allah Almighty." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" further said: "O Allah! Make the sustenance of the family
of Muhammad no more than the minimum requirements of subsistence."
(Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"There is no one, be he rich or poor, but that he will be reported on the Day of
Judgement to have been given sustenance in this world." (Ibn Majah on the
authority of Anas). Allah Almighty revealed to Ishmael "peace be upon him":
"Seek me with those heartbroken." He asked: "Who are those?" He said: "The
truthful poor and indigent." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" said: "None will be superior to the poor if he is contented." The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "On
the Day of Judgement, Allah Almighty will say: "Where are My chosen from
among My creatures?" the angels will ask: "Who are those O our Lord?" He will
say: "The Muslim poor who are satisfied with My (little) gift to them, and
contented with My decree (concerning them): admit them to Paradise." They
then will enter, eat and drink thereof, while the other people will be still in
reckoning." (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami).
Those narrations point out the satisfied and contented from among the poor.
As for the abstinent poor, we shall make a mention of his superiority in the
second part of this book, Allah willing.
As for the traditions about content and satisfaction, there are so many, and a
mention may be made of the following:
It is not hidden that covet is the opposite of satisfaction. Umar "Allah be
pleased with him" said: "No doubt, covet leads to poverty; and carelessness (of
wealth) is self-sufficiency; and whoever is careless about what is in the hands of
the people, and is satisfied (with what is given to him no matter how little it
might be), will inevitably dispense with them." Abu Mas'ud "Allah be pleased

Book four: poverty and asceticism

305
with him said: No day comes upon you without an angel calling from
underneath the Throne (of Majesty): 'O mankind! The little that suffices you is
much better than the much that makes you fall in transgression." Abu Ad-Darda'
"Allah be pleased with him" said: "There is none of the people but that he has
deficiency in his mind: if he is given increase (in wealth), he will remain cheerful
and pleased, although his lifetime decreases by degrees along day and night, for
which he is not sad. Woe to mankind! How should he get benefit from increasing
wealth and decreasing lifetime?"
One of the wise men was asked: "What is the real self-sufficiency?" he said:
"To have no desire (for wealth), and be contented with what suffices you." It is
said that Ibrahim Ibn Adham was one of those endowed with wealth and
property in Khurasan. One day he was looking from the window of his palace
when he saw a man in the courtyard of the palace having a loaf from which he
was eating, and when he finished he slept. He said to one of his servants: "When
he gets up, bring him to me." When he got up he was brought to him, and
Ibrahim said to him: "O man! Have you been hungry when you ate the loaf?" he
answered in the affirmative. He further asked him: "Then, have you been
satiated?" he answered in the affirmative. Ibrahim further asked him: "Then, have
you slept well?" he answered in the affirmative. On that Ibrahim said to himself:
"Then, what should I make with those worldly pleasures given that the soul is
satisfied only with that litde?"
A man came upon Amir Ibn Abd-Al-Qais and he was eating salt and grains.
He said to him: "O slave of Allah! Have you been contented only with that from
the entire world?" he replied: "Should I not guide you to him who has been
contented with what is worse than that?" he said: "Yes." He said: "It is he who
has been contented with the world in substitution for the hereafter." Muhammad
Ibn Wasi was in the habit of bringing dry bread and wetting it with water and
then eating it with salt, saying: "Whoever is contented from all the world only
with that would never be in need of anyone."
Al-Hassan said: "Allah Almighty cursed a people whom He gave (large
sustenance), and they were not true to Him." Then, he recited the following
statement of Allah: " And in heaven is your Sustenance, as (also) that which you
are promised. Then, by the Lord of heaven and earth, this is the very Truth, as
much as the fact that you can speak intelligendy to each other." (Adh-Dhariyat
22-23) one day Abu Dharr "Allah be pleased with him" was sitting with some
people when his wife came to him and said: "Are you sitting among those
people? By Allah, the house has nothing at all (to eat)." He said to her: "O
woman! Ahead of us is a difficult obstacle (i.e. this world) from which none will
be saved but him who has no thing with him of the burdens (of wealth and
property)." On that she returned home well-pleased. According to Dhu-Nun:
"The closest of people to disbelief is the impatient poor."
One of the wise men was asked about his wealth, thereupon he said: To
beautify (with patience) outwardly, stick to moderation inwardly, and be careless of
what is in the hands of the people." It is reported that Allah Almighty said in one
of the previous Scriptures: "O mankind! If die entire world is for you, you will not

!

The quarter of the saviors
306
have but the sustenance (that is doomed to you). So, if I give to you the sustenance
(that is doomed to you), and loaded the reckoning for the entire world on others
than you, I then will have done good to you."

CHAPTER FOUR
EXPOSITION OF SUPERIORITY OF POVERTY OVER RICHNESS
It should be known to you that the people differ about that matter. Al-Junaid,
Al-Khawas and the majority (of Sufis) give preference to poverty over richness.
But Ibn Ata' says that the thankful rich who fulfills what is due upon him to the
best is better than the patient poor. It is said that Al-Junaid invoked evil upon Ibn
Ata' for his disagreement with him over that matter, thereupon he was given to
affliction. We have previously shown the degrees of difference between patience
and gratitude, and paved the way for seeking excellence in deeds and states, and
that it is impossible to give any of them preference over the other without detail
and explanation.
The same is true of the difference between poverty and richness, in which
none could be given preference over the other in general. Let us say that
suspicion lies in two opposing situations: One with a patient poor in one
extreme, who is not greedy and thus not eager to seek property: but he is
satisfied and contented; and, in the opposing extreme, a rich who spends his
property on all aspects of good, and is not greedy and thus not eager to
withhold property. The other situation has a greedy poor versus a greedy rich.
It is not hidden that the satisfied and contented poor is superior to the greedy
rich, and that the rich who spends his wealth on what is good is superior to
the greedy poor.
The first situation implies a patient poor who is not greedy for property. In
this situation, one might have the impression that the rich is better than the poor,
for they are equal in the lack of greediness for property, and the rich excels the
poor in the objects of charity that bring him closer to Allah Almighty, and the
poor fails to do so. This is what Ibn Ata' thought, as we believe. But even, it is
unimaginable that the rich who enjoys his wealth, even in what is permissible, is
superior to the poor who is satisfied and contented. In support of that, it is
narrated that the poor complained to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" of the fact that the rich had preceded them to the good
deeds by their objects of charity, Hajj, Umrah and Jihad, thereupon he instructed
them to say many words of glorification and magnification of Allah Almighty
which would make them attain beyond the reward of the rich if they said them.
But the rich learnt them and went on saying them. The poor returned once again
to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and made a
mention of that to him, thereupon he said: "That is the bounty of Allah Almighty
which He gives to whomever He pleases." (both Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the
authority of Abu Hurairah).
When Ibn Ata' was asked about why he gave preference to the self-sufficient,
he said: "The self-sufficient is better for self-sufficiency is the attribute of the
Real (i.e. Allah)."
As for his first evidence, it is questionable. Indeed, the context in which the

Book four: poverty and asceticism

307

narration is reported gives a different impression according to which the reward a
poor receives from glorification and magnification is more abundant than that of
the rich, whose attainment of this reward is out of the bounty of Allah Almighty
which He gives to whomever He pleases.
It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: The poor sent me as a messenger to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" and when I entered upon him I said to him:
"I'm the messenger of the poor to you." He said: "Welcome to you and to those
from whom you have come: they are a people whom I like." He (Anas) said:
"They say to you: 'O Messenger of Allah, the rich have taken the entire good
for themselves: they perform Hajj and we could not do, perform Umrah and we
could not do, and when they fall ill, they give the surplus of their wealth as
charity, to be ammunition for them (in the hereafter and we could not do so).'"
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Report
the poor from me the message that 'Whoever of you keeps patient and expects
the reward from Allah Almighty will have three merits, which will not be given
to the rich: the first is that in Paradise, there are mansions to which the
inhabitants of Paradise will look forward in the same way as the inhabitants of
the earth look forward to the stars in the sky, which none shall enter but a poor
Prophet, a poor martyr, or a poor believer. The second is that the poor will
enter Paradise half a day, i.e. five hundred years, before the rich. The third is:
"Glory be to Allah; praise be to Allah; there is no god to be worshipped but
Allah; and Allah is Greater", which, if the poor says, in no way would the rich
join him even if he spends for it as much as ten thousand Dirhams. The same is
true of all acts of righteousness.'" He returned and told them about what the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" had said,
thereupon they said: "We have been pleased, we have been pleased."
That indicates to the fact that his statement "That is the bounty of Allah
Almighty which He gives to whomever He pleases" means the extra reward given
to the poor for their celebration and supplication.
As for the second evidence, i.e. that self-sufficiency is the attribute of the
Real, some scholars replied to him saying: "Do you see that Allah Almighty is
self-sufficient with the help of means and causes?" he failed to answer. Others
replied: "No doubt, superiority is the attribute of the Real, which requires that
superiority should be better than humbleness." Then, they confirmed saying:
"This indicates that poverty is better than richness, for poverty is characteristic of
slavery which is good for the servant, like hope and fear, unlike the attributes of
Lordship over which none should dispute Him. In support of that, Allah
Almighty said about Himself as narrated from Him by our Prophet "peace be
upon him": "Grandeur is My upper garment and magnificence is My lower
garment; and whoever disputes with Me over anyone of both, I would break
him." According to Sahl: "To love honor and eternity is to share Allah in
Lordship, for they are characteristic of the Lord Almighty."
In sum, it is impossible to give preference to any over the other in general.
What is not intended for itself in so much as for anything else should be

!

!!!

III.
ii'

I;
!

'

The quarter of the saviors
308
viewed in relation with that thing. The world is not banned for itself in so
much as for the fact that it hinders one from reaching the presence of Allah
Almighty, nor is poverty required for itself in so much as for removing the
obstacle that hinders from reaching the presence of Allah Almighty. Many are
the rich who were not occupied by their richness from Allah Almighty like
Solomon "peace be upon him", Uthman Ibn Affan and Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn
Awf "Allah be pleased with them"; and many are the poor whose poverty
engaged and diverted them from the real purpose in this world, i.e. the love
for Allah Almighty.
Love for Allah could not be attained before gnosis, which is impossible in the
presence of the worldly occupations; and poverty, like richness, might possibly be
one of the worldly engagements. That is because the real engagement is the love
for this world, and the love of this world and the love for Allah Almighty could
hardly gather together in the heart. The lover of a thing is engaged in it, whether
in connection with or desertion from it. Moreover, his desertion from it might
engage him more than his connection with it, and vice versa. To be sure, the
world is the beloved of the heedless, and the one deprived of it is engaged in
pursuit of it, and the one possessing it is engaged in maintaining and enjoying it.
Thus, if two are supposed to have no love for wealth in the sense that both
wealth and water are equal in their sight, both the possessor and deprived would
be equal. That is because each of both does not get benefit but from what
satisfies his need, and to have what satisfies one’s need is better than to be
deprived of it. By another consideration, the poor is farther from the risk, since
the affliction of prosperity is more severe than that of adversity, and it is out of
protection given to one that hebecomes financially unable. For this reason, the
companions "Allah be pleased with them" said: "We have been tried by the
affliction of adversity, and we kept patient; and we have been tried by the
affliction of prosperity, but we failed to keep patient." That is the character of
almost all mankind except those who rarely exist across time.
But since the religious law addresses all the people and not only these who
rarely exist, and consequendy, since adversity, according to that concept, is of
more benefit for them all, then, richness has been scolded and condemned on
the account of poverty which has been given preference and praised. The Christ
"peace be upon him" said: "Look not at the property of the inhabitants of this
world for the glitter of their wealth extinguishes the light of your faith."
According to a good religious scholar: "Turning (the coins of) money so much
affects the sweetness of faith." According to a certain narration: "Every nation
has a calf (which they worship), and the calf of this (Muslim) nation is the
Dirham and Dinar (i.e. the wealth)." (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority
of Hudhaifah). Certainly you know that the material from which the calf of the
people of Moses "peace be upon him" was made is gold and silver.
It is only the Prophets "peace be upon them" followed by the allies and
devotees of Allah Almighty that in whose sight both wealth and water, both
gold and stone are equal. They attain that degree of carelessness by virtue of
Allah Almighty, and after long mortification and striving. The Messenger of

Book four: poverty and asceticism

309

Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" used to say to this world:
"Keep away from me." (Al-Hakim). It used to appear before him in her
adornment. Ali "Allah be pleased with him" used to address gold and silver
saying: "O yellow (gold)! Deceive anyone else other than me! O white (silver)!
Deceive anyone else other than me!" he seemed to have felt the
commencement of deception by those had he not seen the proof of his Lord.
This is the absolute self-sufficiency. In this context, the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Richness is not to have much
property; but richness is to be self-sufficient." But if this is too difficult for most
of people to do, then, it is of more benefit for most of them to lose wealth, even
if they are to give it in charity and spend it on what is good. That is because,
having the financial capability, they would hardly be free from enjoyment of this
worldly pleasures, and feeling comfort of spending money in it. All of this
summons the intimacy to this world; and as much as the servant gets affable with
this world, he feels aloof from the hereafter; and as much as he gets affable with
anyone of his attributes, other than the attribute of gnosis of Allah Almighty, he
feels aloof from Allah Almighty and from love for Him.
But on the other hand, whenever the means of intimacy to this world are
cut off, the heart deserts from this world and its splendor. To be sure, if the
heart deserts from everything other than Allah Almighty, and rather believes in
Allah Almighty, it would be entirely devoted to Allah, for an empty heart is
unimaginable. In existence, there is nothing but Allah Almighty and the other
things; and whoever devotes himself to the things other than Allah, has
deserted from Allah, and whoever devoted himself to Allah has deserted these
things other than Him. As much as he devotes himself to anyone of both, he
deserts from the other and as much as he comes close to anyone of both, he
moves far from the other. Their example is like both the East and West: both
are directions, and as much as one comes close to one, he becomes far from the
other. Following that concept, to love this world means to dislike Allah
Almighty, and vice versa.
In this way, the superiority of the richness and poverty is determined by the
extent to which the hearts of the rich and poor are attached to wealth and
property. If both are equal in it, they will be on the same degree. But richness is a
place where one is more apt to slip and be deceived. The rich might have the
false impression that his heart is detached from wealth and property, although the
love for it is lurking within himself, and he feels it not unless he loses it. So, let
him try himself by spending in charity all of his property: if he finds his heart
inclined to it, let him know that he has been deceived by that false impression.
How many a man who sold his beloved slave-girl thinking that his heart had been
detached from her, and after delivering her to the purchaser, the flame of love
and affecdon for her that was lurking in his heart was kindled in it, and he came
to know that he had been deceived, and that love was lurking in his heart in the
same way as fire is lurking underneath ashes.
This is the state of all the rich and wealthy except for the Prophets "peace be
upon them" and the allies of Allah Almighty. Being so, let's say that poverty is

The quarter of the saviors
310
more suitable and beneficial for the people than richness, for the poor's relation
and intimacy with the world is weaker. The more his relation with the world is
weak, the greater the reward he receives from his glorifications and acts of
worship is. The tongue movements are not intended for their own sake, but they
are intended to confirm one's intimacy with the celebrated. They are more
effective to raise intimacy in the heart that is empty from anything other than the
celebrated more than in the engaged heart. For this reason, one of the righteous
predecessors said: "The example of your worship while you are engaged in
pursuit of this world is like him who extinguishes fire with grass, or him who
washes his hands from the traces of fish with fish." According to Abu Sulaiman
Ad-Darani: "The breath taken by a poor in avoidance of a desire he could not
fulfill is better than the worship of a rich for as long as one thousand years."
According to Ad-Dahhak: "If one enters the market and finds a thing for which
he has desire (and could not buy it) on which he keeps patient and expects the
reward from Allah Almighty, it would be better for him than one thousand
Dinars to be spent entirely in the Cause of Allah."
A man said to Bishr Ibn Al-Harith: "Invoke good upon me for my
dependents have harmed me." He said to him: "If your dependents complain
to you that they have no baking powder nor bread, then, invoke Allah at that
very moment, for your invocation would be better than mine." He used to say:
"The example of the worshipping rich is like a garden on a trash, and the
example of the worshipping poor is like a necklace of diamond in the neck of
a beautiful woman."
They disliked to listen to knowledge from the rich people. Abu Bakr AsSiddiq "Allah be pleased with him" said: "O Allah! I ask You to put me to
humiliation when the right is taken back from my own self, and make me
abstinent from what is beyond the minimum requirements of living." If one like
As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased with him" in his perfection was cautious of this
world, then, how should one doubt that losing the money is more beneficial than
having it, given that the rich in his best case takes what is lawful and spends on
what is good? But even, he will suffer from a long reckoning on the Day of
Judgement, and whoever is called to account would inevitably be punished. This
is why Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf "Allah be pleased with him" delayed from
Paradise for he was engaged in reckoning as seen by the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him".
For the same reason, Abu Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased with him" said: "I
do not like to have a shop near the gate of the mosque from which I gain a
daily profit of fifty Dinars which I spend entirely in charity in the Cause of
Allah provided that no single prayer or supplication would escape me." He
was asked: "Then, what do you dislike in it?" he said: "The long reckoning
because of it." According to Sufyan: "The poor chose three things, and the
rich chose another three things. The poor chose self-comfort, heart
disengagement (from the worldly benefits), and light reckoning; whereas the
rich chose self-trouble, heart engagement (in the worldly benefits and
enjoyments), and severe reckoning."

Book four: poverty and asceticism

311

As for Ibn Ata's opinion that the self-sufficiency is better for it is one of the
attributes of the Real (Allah), it is true, provided that the servant, in that concept,
is self-sufficient from both the existence and absence of money equally. But
should he be self-sufficient with its existence, and insufficient with its absence,
then, by no means would his self-sufficiency be equal to that of Allah Almighty,
for Allah Almighty is self-sufficient by Himself and not by anything else
perishable like money. Furthermore, that Allah is self-sufficient but not with
means and incidents is true in condemnation of a rich who is self-sufficient only
with the existence of money. That the attributes of the Real (Allah) are unfitting
for the servant is not true, for knowledge is one of His attributes, and it is the
best characteristic for the servant, and the utmost perfection of a servant is to
endeavor to acquire the morals of Allah Almighty.
I heard one of the Sheikhs saying: "If anyone asks you the way to Allah
Almighty, then, before cutting the way, the ninety-nine names of Allah Almighty
become attributes for him, i.e. he would have a share from each one." But the
superiority is unfitting for the servant, for to show grandeur to him who deserves
it not is not among the attributes of Allah Almighty. But to show superiority to
him who deserves it, like the believer's superiority over the disbeliever, the
learned over the ignorant, and the obedient over the disobedient, it is fitting for
him. It is true that superiority might lead to arrogance, haughtiness and vanity,
but in this case, it becomes not one of the attributes of Allah Almighty.
Superiority of Allah means that He is the Greatest of all things, a fact which He
knows well.
The servant is ordered to pursue the highest rank (among all living beings),
as long as he has the power to get it, but with truth and not falsehood and
confusion. The servant has to know that the believer is more grand than the
disbeliever, the obedient than the disobedient, the learned than the ignorant,
and the man than the animals, plants and non-living organisms, and closer to
Allah Almighty. It is in this concept only that the attribute of grandeur becomes
fitting for him. But unfortunately, this is of the things unknown to the man for
it is determined by the conclusion of his deed which none knows but Allah
Almighty. Being so, it is not fitting for him to think himself in a rank higher
than that of the disbeliever, for the deeds of the disbeliever might possibly be
concluded with faith, and his deeds with disbelief. Thus, this thought is
unfitting for him due to the shortage of his knowledge of the consequences and
ends.
In sum, if both the existence and absence of wealth is equal to the man,
that is a kind of independence, that matches, in some point, the selfsufficiency with which Allah Almighty is described. In this case, it is a virtue.
But the self-sufficiency only with the existence of money has no virtue. That
is an explication of the state of the satisfied and contented poor compared
with that of the thankful rich.
The second situation: the comparison between the state of the thrifty poor
and that of a thrifty rich. Suppose there is one person who petitions and seeks
for wealth, but at the same time, he does not have it. But then he finds it. He

!

The quarter of the saviors
312
will have two states: the state of absence (of money) and the state of existence
(of money). Which of both his states then is better? In answering that question,
we should consider: if what he petitions is necessary for his living as to provide
for his sustenance and enable him to undertake his religious duties, then, the
state of existence would be better. That is because the poverty engages him in
seeking for sustenance, and the sustenance petitioner could neither think nor
celebrate (Allah) but to the extent to which he becomes disengaged from
petition; and the one who has what suffices him has the power to do both
(meditation and celebradon). This is why the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "O Allah! Make the sustenance of the
family of Muhammad "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"no more than
the minimum requirements of living." He "peace be upon him" further said:
"Poverty is about to lead to disbelief)." He means of course that kind of
poverty with which one does not have what is even necessary for his living.
But if what is brought is beyond the need, or what is sought or petitioned is
in proportion to the need but will not be used to enable one to undertake his
religious duties, then, the state of poverty will be better and more beneficial. That
is because both the rich and poor have become equal in thriftiness and love for
money, and in the fact that each of them does not intend to seek its aid to
undertake his religious duties, and that each of them is not vulnerable to sin
because of richness or poverty. But they differ in the fact that the rich has
become affable with what he has, whose love is confirmed in his heart, with the
result that he rests assured to the world; whereas the lacking who does not have
even the necessities deserts from the world which becomes in his sight like the
prison that he wishes to get rid of.
If two men, equal in all worldly things, come out of the world, with one of
them more reliant on this world, his state then would be more detrimental, for
his heart will turn to the world and feel aloof from the hereafter as much as he
is affable with the world. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "The Holy Spirit inspired to me that 'It is the same for you to
love whomever you love, for you are going to leave him (by death sooner or
later).’" This indicates to what extent the departure from the beloved is
extremely detrimental. For this reason, you should love Him Who never leaves
you, i.e. Allah Almighty, and love not that which will inevitably leave you, i.e.
this world. If you love this world, you would necessarily dislike (to die and)
meet Allah Almighty.
It has become clear that poverty is more noble, more beneficial and more
suitable to all the people, except in two cases: the first is richness like that of
A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" according to which both the existence and
absence of money are equally the same, with its existence being more
advantageous for it benefits the poor, indigent and needy among men. The
second is the poverty with which one does not have what is necessary for his
living for it is about to lead to disbelief, in which no good lies under all
circumstances, except if its existence will sustain him and enable him to seek the
aid of his power and life to commit sins and misdeeds, and were he to die out of

Book four: poverty and asceticism

313

hunger, his sins would be fewer. So, it is more suitable to him to die out of
hunger and do not find what helps him commit sins.
There remains the comparison between a greedy poor who is extremely eager
to seek property and he has no other concern, and a rich who is less eager to
preserve and maintain his property, whose grief for losing it is less than the
poor's for his poverty. It seems more apparent that they are far from Allah
Almighty to the extent to which their grief for losing money and poverty is
strong; and they are close to Allah Almighty to the extent to which their grief for
it is weak. The full knowledge of that is with Allah Almighty.

CHAPTER FIVE
EXPOSITION OF ETIQUETTES OF THE POOR IN HIS POVERTY
It should be known to you that there are many etiquettes to be observed by
the poor in himself, in his mixing with people and in his behaviors.
As far as his internal etiquettes are concerned, he should not dislike the
poverty in terms of being an act of Allah with which He has tried him, i.e. he
should not hate the act of Allah itself even though he dislikes poverty. His
example is like the one who gets himself cupped: although he dislikes cupping for
it aches him, but he does dislike neither the act of the cupper, nor the cupper
himself, to whom he is under obligation (for he remedies him). That is the least
degree, and it is obligatory; and its opposite is unlawful, and makes fruitless the
reward of poverty. That is the significance of the statement of the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "O assembly of poor! Be
contented, from the depth of your hearts, with (what is given to you by) Allah,
perchance you would attain the reward of your poverty, otherwise, you would
attain nothing." (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
Higher than that is not to dislike poverty in so much as to be contented with
it. Much higher is to petition poverty and be pleased with it, due to one's
knowledge of the evils of richness, and, at the same time, to rely within himself
on Allah Almighty, and be confident of Him that what is necessary for his living
would inevitably come to him, and to dislike what is beyond the minimum
requirements of living. Ali "Allah be pleased with him" said: "Poverty might be a
punishment or a reward from Allah Almighty. Among the signs of its being a
reward is that the poor makes good his manners on it, obeys his Lord with it, not
to complain of it, and to thank Allah Almighty for his state, whatever it might be.
Among the signs of its being a punishment is to make evil hit manners, disobey
his Lord with it, complain of it more often, and be displeased with the fate of
Allah concerning it."
This means that not all poor are praiseworthy, but the praiseworthy among
them is him who is not displeased with poverty, but rather pleased and contented
with poverty, due to his knowledge of its fruits. It is said that "No servant is
given anything of this world but that it will be said to him: 'Take it on three
thirds: occupation, concern and long reckoning.'"
As for his outward etiquettes, it is to show abstaining and patience, and
hide complaint and annoyance of poverty, for he is indeed required to conceal
his poverty, and screen that he conceals it. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's

The quarter of the saviors
314
blessing and peace be upon him” said: "Indeed, Allah Almighty likes the
abstaining poor who has dependents (for whom he is responsible)." In
confirmation of that, Allah Almighty said: " the ignorant man thinks, because
of their restraint, that they are free from want. You shall know them by their
(unfailing) mark: they beg not importunately from all and sundry." (AlBaqarah 273)

p-av*3v3a^ ^
According to Sufyan: "The best of deeds is to beaudfy oneself with padence
when afflicted with disaster." According to another scholar: "To screen poverty is
one of the treasures of righteousness."
As for his etiquettes in behaviors, it is not to humble himself before a rich
just because of his self-sufficiency: on the contrary, he should give him the
impression of superiority over him. Ali "Allah be pleased with him" said: "How
good is the rich's humbleness before the poor in expectation for the reward of
Allah Almighty; and better than it is the poor's superiority over him out of
confidence of Allah Almighty." More less in rank is not to mix or sit with the
rich, for this is the first commencement of covet. According to Sufyan AthThawri: "When the poor mixes with the rich, then, you should know that he is a
hypocrite; and if he mixes with the ruler, you should know that he is a thief."
According to a Gnostic: "If the poor mixes with the rich, his handhold would
be untied; and when he covets of them, his infallibility would vanish; and when
he finds tranquility with them, he would go astray." Therefore, the poor should
not refrain from making public the truth, out of adulation of the rich and covet
of their gifts.
As for his etiquettes in his deeds, he should not weaken or stop from his
acts of worship because of poverty, nor desist from giving in charity what is
beyond his need, no matter how little it might be. This is indeed the effort of
him who has but litde, which is better than a lot of money to be spent by the
rich. In this respect, it is narrated on the authority of Zaid Ibn Aslam that the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "A single
Dirham to be given in charity might be better in the Sight of Allah Almighty
than one hundred thousand Dirhams." It was said to him: "How is that O
Messenger of Allah?" he "peace be upon him" said: "A rich brought out of his
property one hundred thousand Dirhams and gave it in charity; and a poor
brought a single Dirham with good pleasure out of two Dirhams more than
which he possessed nothing, and gave it in charity. In this way, the giver of
the single Dirham became better than the giver of the one hundred thousand
Dirhams." (An-Nasa’i on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
He further should not save money: But rather take what satisfies his need and
give the remaining in charity. There are three degrees about saving: one is to save
only for his day and night; and this is the rank of the sincere lovers of truth. The
second is to save for as long as forty days, and what is more is included in the
long hope. This was understood by the religious scholars from the appointment
given by Allah Almighty to Moses "peace be upon him". This is the rank of the
pious. The third is to save for as long as one year, and this is the maximum

;

Book four: poverty and asceticism

315

period allowed for saving; and this is the rank of the righteous. Whoever saves
for a period longer than that belongs to the laymen and not the private among
men. The self-sufficiency of the righteous whose reassurance is weak is as much
as the sustenance of his year; and the self-sufficiency of the private is as much as
the sustenance of forty days; and the self-sufficiency of the private of the private
is only the sustenance of a day and a night.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" divided his
women according to those three ranks: He gave some of them the sustenance of
a complete year, and others the sustenance of forty days and nights, i.e. the
division of A'ishah and Hafsah "Allah be pleased with them"

CHAPTER SIX
EXPOSITION OF ETIQUETTES OF THE POOR IN ACCEPTING GIFTS
WHEN GIVEN TO HIM WITHOUT BEGGING
The poor should observe three things when a gift is given to him: The
property itself from which the gift is given, the purpose of the giver, and his
rationale for accepting it.
As for the property, it should be lawful, completely free from all suspicions. If
it is suspicious, he should avoid taking it. We have mentioned in the Book of the
Lawful and Unlawful the degrees of suspicion, and what should be avoided, and
what is desirable to be left thereof.
As far as the purpose of the giver is concerned, it might be to please his heart
and seek his love through the gift, or seek reward through the object of charity or
Zakat, or seek reputation and to be heard and seen of men, wither alone or in
combination with other purposes.
As for the first purpose, i.e. the gift, there is no harm in accepting it, in
imitation of the sunnah of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him", provided that the taker should not become under obligation to the
giver, in which case, it should be rejected. If it is learnt that he would be under
obligation for a part and not all of it, let him accept that part and return the other.
It is related that once cooking butter, yogurt and a ram were given as a gift to the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" thereupon he
accepted the cooking butter and yogurt, and returned the ram. (Ahmad on the
authority of Ya'li Ibn Murrah). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" further used to accept the gift from some and return it from
others. (Abu Dawud and At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu Hurairah). In this
respect he "peace be upon him" said: "I intended not to accept a gift but from a
Qurashi, a Thaqafi, an Ansari, or a Dawsi." (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu
Hurairah). A group of Followers did the same in imitation of him.
Once, a parcel of fifty Dirhams was brought as a gift to Fath Al-Mawsili,
thereupon he said: Ata' reported to us from the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" that he said: "Whoever received sustenance
without begging and he returned it, has indeed returned it to Allah Almighty.
Then, he opened the parcel and took a Dirham from it and returned the
remaining of it. Al-Hassan used to relate this narration when a case of money and
a package of fine clothing of Khurasan were brought to him by a man thereupon

The quarter of the saviors
316
he returned them and said: "Whoever sits in this position of mine, and accepts
from the people the like of that would meet Allah Almighty on the Day of
Judgement having no share (in the hereafter)." This means that the religious
scholar and preacher should be more cautious of accepting gifts. But Al-Hassan,
at the same time, used to accept gifts from his companions.
Ibrahim At-Taimi used to ask some of his companions for one or two
Dirhams, given that others offered to him hundreds of Dirhams, and he rejected
it. It was the habit of one that if he was given something by his friend, he would
say to him: "Keep it with you and consider whether I have become better in your
sight after accepting it than I was before accepting it, tell me, otherwise, I would
not accept it." The sign of that is one feels it difficult upon himself if his gift is
returned to him, and rather becomes pleased if it is accepted, seeing himself
under obligation to his friend who accepts his gift. But if the giver feels that the
taker should be under obligation to him because of his gift, then, taking it is
permissible, but unfavorable in the sight of the poor who are sincere lovers of
truth.
Bishr said: "I have never asked anyone for anything except Sari As-Saqati, for
in my sight he is really abstinent from this world: he always is pleased with what
he gives out, and disturbed by what remains in his hand; and when I ask him for
something, I help him do what he loves." On another occasion, a man from
Khurasan brought some money to Al-Junaid and asked him to devour it. He said:
"Let me distribute it among the needy and indigent." The man said: "No, I do not
like this." Al-Junaid said: "Then, to which time should I live to be able to devour
all of this money?" the man said: "I do not like you to consume it on vinegar and
grains, but on sweet and delicious kinds of food." He accepted it from him. The
man from Khurasan said to him: "I do not find anyone in Baghdad more
trustworthy than you." He replied: "Such should not be accepted but from the
like of you."
The second purpose is the mere reward, through the objects of charity or
Zakat. In this way, he has to consider himself whether he deserves Zakat, and if it
seems suspicious to him, then, accepting it would be suspicious. We have
mentioned the details of that in the Book of the Mysteries of Zakat. If he is given
by way of charity for the sake of his religion, then, he should consider his religion
from within: if he commits a sin in secret and should the giver know it he would
not give him, then, accepting it would be unlawful, like the case in which he is
given for the giver thinks he is a religious scholar, and he is not so, then, taking it
would be rendered unlawful.
The third purpose is to seek reputation and intend to be seen and heard of
men. Being so, the poor should disappoint his purpose and reject to take from
him in order not to help him achieve his corrupt purpose. Sufyan Ath-Thawri
was in the habit of returning what he was given saying: "Were I to know that they
do not mention it out of pride, I would accept it." One was blamed for returning
what he was given and he said: "I indeed return their gifts out of pity and
sympathy for them, and sincerity to them, for they mention it out of pride of it,
and like it to be known among the public, with the result that their wealth would
vanish with no reward."

317
Book four: poverty and asceticism
As regards his rationale for taking, he should consider whether or not he is in
need of it. If he is in need of it, and at the same time, it is free from all suspicions
and evils we have previously mentioned, then, it would be better for him to take
it. In confirmation of that, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "The reward received by the giver out of his abundant wealth is
no greater than that received by the taker if he is in need of it." (At-Tabarani on
the authority of Ibn Umar). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" further said: "Whoever is given anything of that property, with
neither begging nor greed, then, it is a sustenance brought by Allah to him." So,
"Let not him return it" according to another version.
According to a religious scholar: "Whoever is given and does not take is like
him who begs and is not given." Sari As-Saqati used to give gifts to Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal. Once, Ahmad returned it, thereupon Sari said to him: "O Ahmad!
Beware of the evil of returning, for it is more grievous than the evil of taking."
Ahmad asked him to repeat his statement to him once again, and he did
accordingly, thereupon Ahmad said to him: "I have not returned your gift to you
but because I have the sustenance of a month. So, keep it for me with you, and
after a month, give it to me."
According to a certain religious scholar: "It is feared that returning with
need might lead to the punishment of testing with covet, or any other
allegation." But if what is brought to him is beyond his need, he is either
responsible for himself only, or in charge of spending on the poor and needy
due to his natural kindness and generosity. If he is responsible only for
himself, then, there is no need for taking it, particularly if he is following the
way to the hereafter, otherwise he would be among those who follow their
own inclinations. To be sure, whoever hovers round the protected zone is
about to fall in it.
As regards taking, one has two positions: the first is to take in public and
return in secret, or to take in public and spend on the poor in secret. That is the
position of the sincere lovers of truth, and it is indeed difficult on the soul, and
none endures it but he who is self-reassured by discipline.
The second is not to take, and rather let the giver direct it to him who is more
needy than him, or to take and convey it to him who is more needy than him,
doing both either in secret or in public. We have previously mentioned whether it
is better to show or disclose taking in the Book of the Mysteries of Zakat and
some rules of poverty.
That Ahmad Ibn Hanbal abstained from accepting the gift of Sari As-Saqati,
was because he was not in need of it, for he had his sustenance for a month. So,
he rejected to engage himself in taking it, and storing more sustenance, and rather
preferred that it be given to him who might be more needy than him. He thereby
intended to avoid whatever evils and risks that might arise.
In this respect, it is related that one living in Mecca said: "I prepared many
Dirhams to spend in the Cause of Allah Almighty when I heard a poor saying
in a very low tone after finishing from circumambulation: "I am hungry as
You see; I am naked as You see: so, what do You see O He Who sees and is

The quarter of the saviors
318
not seen?" I looked and behold! He had two pieces of cloth which hardly
covered his body. I said to myself: "There is no place for my Dirhams better
than this." I carried them to him and he looked at them and took only five
Dirhams and said: "Four for both upper and lower garments, and one to
spend (on food) for three days, and I have no need for the rest." So, he
returned it. On the coming night, I saw him having new upper and lower
garments, and something suspicious arose in myself about him. He turned to
me and took hold of my hand, and made me circumambulate with him for a
week, each round on a kind of diamond from among the land's minerals
clattering underneath our feet up to the ankles, including gold, silver and
pearl, and all of this was not visible to the people. He said: "I have been given
all of this, but I abstained in it, and I preferred to take from the hands of the
people, for the former is but burdens and source of temptation, and the latter
brings about mercy and blessing to the people."
The point is that what is beyond your need comes to you by way of affliction
and trial so that Allah Almighty looks at you to see what you would do with it. At
the same time, what satisfies your need only comes to you out of pity and
sympathy for you. So, do not be heedless of the difference between sympathy
and trial. Allah Almighty said: " That which is on earth We have made but as a
glittering show for the earth, in order that We may test them, as to which of them
are best in conduct." (Al-Kahf 7)

^ (JlJ)

^

^

k»J ^

The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Mankind has no right but in three: food to sustain him, a garment to cover his
private parts, and a house to shelter him; and what is beyond those would draw
reckoning upon him." (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Uthman Ibn Affan).
Then, in taking only your needs from those three, you would be rewarded, and in
taking what is beyond your need you would be vulnerable to reckoning, if you do
not disobey Allah, and to punishment if you disobey Allah.
It is out of testing to have the determination to leave a lawful pleasure, in
order thereby to come close to Allah Almighty, and break the appetites of your
self. But then, this pleasure might come to you effordessly without endeavor to
get it as an examination of the resolute power of your determination. But it is
preferable for you to abstain from it, for if the soul is allowed to repeal
determination, it would gradually get accustomed to repeal the covenant and
pledge, and return to its nature and become too difficult to overpower once
again. So, to leave it is important, and it is asceticism. But if you take it and spend
it on the needy and indigent, it would be the utmost degree of asceticism, which
none is able to achieve but the sincere lovers of truth.
But if you are in the habit of generosity, openhandedness and taking care of
the poor and needy, then, there is no harm to take what is beyond your needs, for
it indeed would not be beyond the need of the poor, and hasten to spend it on
them, and save it not, for to withhold it even for as short as a single night brings
about temptation and seduction, as it might appeal to your heart, and seem to you
to keep it for yourself. A group of people betook themselves to serve the poor as

319
Book four: poverty and asceticism
a means of increasing their property and enjoying food and drink; and this is, to
be sure, the evident destruction.
Whoever aims to show sympathy for the poor, thereby seeking the reward,
there is no harm to loan, depending on the good assumption of Allah Almighty,
and not depending upon the wrongful rulers. If Allah Almighty bestows anything
lawful upon him, he would fulfill his debt, and if he dies before fulfilling it, Allah
Almighty would fulfill it on his behalf, provided that he should disclose his
financial status to the loaner: He should neither deceive him nor give him false
promises about the time of fulfillment. The debt of such a man should be
fulfilled from the treasury, and from Zakat. Allah Almighty said: " Let the man of
means spend according to his means: And the man whose resources are
restricted, let him spend according to what Allah has given him. Allah puts no
burden on any person beyond what He has given him. After a difficulty, Allah
will soon grant relief." (At-Talaq 7)

"C.

irJb

iiii; iL ^4^ /&jj

jA ^3

4 0 VrAjA. 14 Z>1

4l CLfSi;

Crf

^

. It is said that it means to sell one of his two garments, or to loan depending
upon his majesty, and this is of what Allah Almighty has given him.
One of the scholars said: "There are from Allah's servants such as spend
according to their means, and such as spend according to their good assumption
of Allah Almighty." One of the wealthy died and bequeathed that his wealth
should be divided among three kinds of persons: the strong, the generous and the
self-sufficient." It was asked: "Who are those?" it was said in reply to that: "The
strong are those who rely on Allah Almighty. The generous are those who have
good assumption of Allah Almighty. The self-sufficient are those who devote
themselves wholeheartedly to Allah Almighty."
In sum, once those conditions concerning himself, the wealth, and the giver,
are available, let him take what is given to him, seeing that what he takes is from
Allah Almighty and not from the giver, for the giver is but an intermediary
subjugated by Allah to give, in which he is forced to do, due to the motives,
beliefs and wills that are invested with authority over him.
It is related that a man invited Shaqiq among fifty of his companions to a
banquet and when the food was served before them Shaqiq said to his
companions: "This man tells you that whoever of you does not see that it is I
who have made and served this food to you, then, my food would be
forbidden to him." All of them left except for a young man less than them in
rank. The house lord said to Shaqiq: "What have you intended by that which
you said?" he said: "I have liked to test the degree of monotheism of my
companions."
It is further related that Moses "peace be upon him" said: "O Lord! You have
made my sustenance in the hands of the children of Israel: one of them gives me
the early meal one day, and another the evening meal one night and so on!" Allah
Almighty revealed to him: "As such I do with My allies: I make their sustenance
in the hands of the idle among My servants in order that they would be rewarded
for them."

The quarter of the saviors
So the giver should be seen only as somebody subjugated and hired by Allah
Almighty to give (what is doomed to be given by Allah). We ask Allah to guide us
to what pleases Him.

320

CHAPTER SEVEN
EXPOSmON OF PROHIBITION OF BEGGING WITH NO NECESSITY; AND
ETIQUETTES THEREIN IF ONE IS FORCED TO DO
It should be known to you that begging was forbidden by many narrations
although concession might be given in some cases. The Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The beggar has a right (to take)
even if he is coming on horse." (Abu Dawud on the authority of Al-Hussain Ibn
Ali). He "peace be upon him” further said: "Return the beggar with anything even
(as trifling as) a burnt hoof." (Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa’i on the
authority of Umm Majid). Had begging been absolutely prohibited, it would not
have been permissible to aid him as a transgressor in his transgression by giving
him.
But even, the reality is that begging is, in principle, prohibited unless if there
is a dire necessity, or a need close to necessity, in the absence of which, it
becomes prohibited. We say that it is prohibited in principle for it could hardly be
free from three prohibited things:
The first is to complain of Allah Almighty. To be sure, begging is to show
poverty, and the shortage of the favor of Allah Almighty on the beggar. As well
as if the slave begs, he disgraces his master, when people begs from each other,
they indeed disgrace Allah Almighty. This should be prohibited unless there is a
dire necessity, in the same way as the dead becomes lawful when one is forced by
necessity.
The second is that the beggar humiliates himself to others than Allah
Almighty. It is not fitting for a faithful believer to humiliate himself to anyone
other than Allah Almighty. But he has to humiliate himself to Allah, his
Creator and Protector, for to humiliate oneself to Allah is to honor oneself,
unlike to humiliate himself to anyone else, for all the people are but servants
like him. So, he should not put himself to humiliation before them unless
there is a dire necessity. To be sure, begging puts the beggar to humiliation
before the begged.
The third is that he often harms the begged who might not be pleased to give
him. If he gives out of feeling shy of the beggar, or by way of showing off, it
would be unlawful for the taker to take it; and if he withholds it, he might
possibly feel shy and be harmed by prevention, as he would think himself among
the niggards. Giving would decrease his property, whereas withholding would
decrease his majesty, and both are harmful; and it is the beggar who causes such
harm, which is unlawful in itself unless there is a dire necessity.
Having understood those three forbidden things, you would surely
comprehend the significance of the statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him": "Begging the people is among the immoralities,
and no immorality other than it has been made lawful by Allah." Consider how
he "peace be upon him" called it immorality. It is not hidden that immorality

321
Book four: poverty and asceticism
could not be made permissible unless there is a dire necessity, like drinking wine
which is permissible only when food chokes one and he finds nothing other than
it.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Whoever begs although he is free of want, has indeed gained much of the pieces
of the fire of Hell." (Abu Dawud and Ibn Hibban on the authority of Sahl Ibn
Al-Hanzali). He "peace be upon him" further said: "Whoever begs the people and
he has what makes him free of want, would come on the Day of Judgement
having his face of bones smashing with no flesh to cover it" or (according to
another version), "with his begging in the form of scratches and slashes in his
face." (Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah and An-Nasa’i on the authority of
Ibn Mas'ud). Those are clear statements about the severe prohibition of begging.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" accepted
the pledge of allegiance from some people on Islam, provided that they should
hearken and obey, and then he said to them a hidden word, and then resumed:
"And beg nothing from the people." (Muslim on the authority of Awf Ibn Malik
Al-Ashja'i). the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
more often commanded the people to refrain from begging and said: "Whoever
begs us, we would give him, and whoever seeks self-sufficiency, Allah Almighty
would make him self-sufficient; and whoever does not beg us is indeed dearer to
us." (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "Make yourselves self-sufficient from the people; and whoever reduces
his begging is good." They said: "And even from you O Messenger of Allah?"
he answered in the affirmative. (Al-Bazzar and At-Tabarani on the authority
of Ibn Abbas). Once, Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him"
heard a man begging after evening, thereupon he asked one of his people to
serve him with supper. When he did he heard him begging once again,
thereupon he said to the man from his people: "Have I not told you to serve
the man with supper?" He said: "I have done." Umar "Allah be pleased with
him" looked and behold! There was a bag full of bread underneath his hand.
On that he said: "You are not a beggar, but a trader." He then took the bag
and distributed the bread among the camels assigned to charity and beat him
with the stick and asked him not to do so once again. Had his begging not
been unlawful, he would not have beaten him, nor taken the bag from him.
A narrow-minded jurist might estrange that behaviour of Umar saying: "To
beat him with the stick is to discipline him and it is permissible under Sharia. But
it was not fitting for Umar "Allah be pleased with him" to take the property of
the man for it is confiscation. Then, how did Umar render it permissible?" this
argument, to be sure, indicates to shortage of religious knowledge and
understanding. Where are all the religious jurists from the religious knowledge
and understanding of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him" and
well-awareness of the mysteries of the religion of Allah Almighty and the
interests and benefits of His servants? do you see that he did not learn that
confiscation is impermissible in the religion of Allah? Or do you see that he learnt

The quarter of the saviors
322
it and rendered it permissible out of anger, thereby he disobeyed Allah Almighty?
Allah forbid that he might do so! Do you see that he wanted to scold the man in
a way that was not prescribed by the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him"? How far he was from that!
What seemed to him was that the man was self-sufficient of begging, and
whoever gave him would do so, thinking he was in need. But since the man was
false, this property did not become his own, for he took it by way of
dissimilation. Then, it was to be given back to its real owners; and since it was
difficult to be distinguished, as well as to know the owners, it became property
with no owner, and thus it was incumbent to spend it on the public interests of
Muslims; and the camels assigned to charity and their fodder are among the
public interests. The point is that the beggar who takes anything from the people
by deception, i.e. after giving them the false impression of being needy and he is
not so, then, what he takes does not belong to him and it rather should be taken
back from him. This behavior of Umar confirmed diat meaning of which a lot of
religious jurists are heedless.
Having known that begging would be made permissible only when there is
a dire necessity, then, you should know that one might be forced by necessity,
have a dire need or a light need, or be self-sufficient of a thing. Those are
four cases:
The first case in which one is forced by necessity, is like the begging of the
hungry when he fears death or ailment for himself, the begging of the naked
when he is exposed and has nothing to screen his body. It is permissible as long
as the other conditions are available, i.e. the thing to be begged is permissible, the
one from whom it is begged is well-pleased inwardly, and the beggar is unable to
earn his living. To be sure, begging is forbidden to him who is able to earn his
living, except in the case of the student, when the study takes up all his time. But
in general, whoever could write and read is able to earn living through writing.
As for the self-sufficient, it applies to him who asks for a thing and he has the
like or many likes of it. To be sure, his begging is prohibited. This and the
previous case are clear.
As for him who has a dire need, it is like the patient who needs medicine,
and although no death is feared for him if he does not use it immediately, at
least he is probably vulnerable to risk. The same applies to him who has a
cloak without a shirt underneath it in the winter and chill harms him but not
to the point that forces him by necessity. Similarly, the one who begs to hire a
vehicle given that he could hardly walk: Although begging might be
permissible for him for he is in dire need, it is preferable to leave begging, and
by begging, he leaves what is preferable. Anyway, his begging is not
unfavorable as long as he is true to it, saying, for example: "I have no shirt
underneath my cloak, and chill harms me in such a way as I could endure even
though with trouble." If he is true, then, his truthfulness would be expiation
for his begging, Allah willing.
As for the case of the light need, it is like one's begging for a shirt to put on
to screen the holes of his garment from the eyes of the people when he comes

i

323
Book four: poverty and asceticism
out of the house, or him who begs condiment and he has the bread, or begs to
hire a horse on the way and he has as much as enables him to hire a donkey, etc.
If such begs by way of dissimilation, i.e. he tries to show to the people whom he
begs a need different from his real one, his begging then would be unlawful. If he
does not and rather there is anything of the three forbidden things, i.e. the
complaint (of poverty), self-humiliation, and harming him whom he begs, then,
his begging would be also unlawful, since such a light need is alone not sufficient
to make permissible those forbidden things. If there is nothing of those, it would
be permissible, though unfavorable.
You may ask: "Then, how could you free begging from all those forbidden
things?" in reply to that, it should be known to you that complaint (of poverty)
might be averted by giving thanks to Allah Almighty, and being self-sufficient of
anyone other than Him. One should not beg like the begging of the needy, but
rather he might say: "I am free of want with what I have. But my reckless soul
requires me to have a garment to put on over mine, and it is extra beyond the
need." In this way, he would not be a maker of complaint (of poverty).
In order to avoid humiliation, let him ask his father, relative, or friend he
knows he would not contempt him, nor would his position decrease in his eyes
because of begging. Let him also ask the generous man who has prepared his
wealth for those things and is pleased with the like of this beggar and becomes
under obligation to him because of taking from him. In this way, humiliation
would be removed from him, for humiliation is correlated with favor.
In order to avoid harming, he should not designate a particular person by
begging: But rather, let him make his speech indirecdy, so that none would take
the initiative to give but he who has a true desire for doing so willingly and with
good pleasure. If there is among the present people a respected person who
would be blamed in case he does not give, this would be a kind of harming. He
might give only for fear of blame, and were he not to be blamed, he would not
give. In case he begs a particular person, he should speak indirecdy and with
reference, giving a way for him to claim to take no heed if he likes to do so. But if
he does not claim to take no heed, and he is able to do it, it would be out of his
true desire and good pleasure. Furthermore, one should beg only him who never
feels shy of him once he returns him empty or claims to take no heed of his
speech. As well as feeling shy of the beggar is harmful, showing off with anyone
other than the beggar is also harmful.
You may ask: "If he takes it, knowing that what caused the giver to give is
only the feeling of shyness either of him or of the present people, and but for
this feeling he would not have given him anything, then, should what he takes
be rendered lawful or suspicious?" in reply to that, let me say that it is
evidently unlawful, and there is no difference among the religious scholars
about it. It is subject to the same ruling of taking the money of another by
force or confiscation. There is indeed no difference between beating the
surface of a person's skin with the lash or beating his heart with the feeling of
shyness. Beating the heart is more harmful and detrimental than beating the
surface of the skin.

The quarter of the saviors
It is impermissible to claim that he has been pleased with giving it outwardly,
depending upon the statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him": "I only judge depending upon your outward behaviors and
Allah is responsible for the inner secrets." This is the necessity of judgement to
decide the cases, for the foes could hardly be brought back to their inner secrets
and thoughts. For this reason, they were forced to judge depending upon the
apparent speech of the tongue although it more often tells lies; and it is the
necessity of judgement that forced to it. But this is different from the case in
issue, in which the only judge is Allah the Judge of all judges on what is between
the servant and his Lord Almighty, and the hearts to Him are like the tongues to
all the other judges.
So, you do not consider but your heart in such cases, even if the people give
you their opinions differently. The religious Mufti instructs the ruler and judge
to judge in the world of the visibles, whereas the Mufti of the hearts is only the
learned of the hereafter, and with the help of his fatwa is the salvadon from the
punishment of the hereafter, as well as with the fatwa of the religious jurist is
the salvation from the punishment of this world. If, after all of this, he takes it
under compulsion (of the giver), by no means he would be its owner in what is
between him and Allah Almighty, and it becomes incumbent upon him to
return it to its owner. If its owner feels shy of taking it back, the taker should
give him as a gift something in compensadon for it. If he does not accept his
gift, he should return it to his heirs. If it is damaged in his hand, its warranty
remains due upon him in what is between him and Allah Almighty, whereas he
is disobedient by disposing of it, as well as by begging that caused this harm
from the beginning.

324

You may ask: "That is an inward thing too difficult to learn. So, what is the
way of salvation from it? A beggar might think that the giver is pleased, although
he is not so inwardly." In reply to it, let me say that it is for this reason that the
pious left begging entirely. They never took anything from anyone at all. Bishr
never took a thing from anyone at all except for As-Saqati. In justification, he
said: "I take from him for I learn that he is pleased with giving out the money and
(by taking from him) I help him do what he likes to do." For this reason also,
begging was disapproved by them, and abstention from it was confirmed. The
beggar's necessity might cause harm to him who he begs. The beggar might be on
the threshold of death, and he has no way of deliverance but to beg, and he finds
none to give him but under compulsion. In this way, it is made permissible for
him just as eating the flesh of swine and the dead is made permissible for him
who is forced by necessity.
But even, abstention was always the way of the pious among men. There were
also some masters of hearts whose insight enabled them to perceive the states of
men, thereupon they accepted to take from some and not from others. Some of
them did not take but from their friends, and others took some and returned
some of what was given to them, as the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" did with the ram, cooking butter and yogurt, given that it
was brought to them without begging, for what is given without begging indicates

325
Book four: poverty and asceticism -----------------------------------to the true desire and good pleasure of the giver.
They indeed abstained from begging at all except in two cases:
The first is the dire necessity. Three from among the Prophets begged when
they were forced by dire necessity, i.e. Solomon, Moses and Al-Khadir "peace be
upon them". Undoubtedly, they begged only him whom they knew to have
wished to give them.
The other is that they begged their friends and brothers , from whom they
used to take what they needed without permission, for the masters of hearts
knew, for certain, that what is intended is the pleasure of the heart and not the
utterance of the tongue. They confided that their friends and brothers rejoiced at
taking it easy with them. They asked them only when they doubted whether or
not they had what they wanted from them, otherwise, they took what they
needed without asking.
However, what makes begging permissible is to know that he whom you beg
is in such a state as were he to learn your need, he would hasten to fulfill your
need before you beg him, and the impact of your begging on him is that it just
lets him know your need. But it is impermissible to move his emodon by means
of shyness and trickery. The beggar is encountered by two cases: the first is that
in which there is no doubt about the internal pleasure of the giver; and the other
is that in which there is no doubt about his aversion. As for the first case, taking
is lawful, whereas it is illegal in the other. But in between those two cases, there
are many states in which there is doubt. So, let him seek the advice of his heart,
and leave what arouses suspicion in his heart, for it is sinful, to that in which he
has no doubt.
It is easy to know that through the presumptions and states, but easy only on
him who has a good and deep insight versus a weak desire and appetite. But if his
insight is weak, and his desire and greed strong, then, he would see only what
befits his purpose, and make no heed of the presumption indicative of aversion.
It is only with the like of those subtleties that one comes to understand well the
significance of the statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him": "The best (and most lawful) thing to eat is what one gets
from his own earnings." He "peace be upon him" was given the gift of the
shortest expressions that carry the widest and most comprehensive meanings.
To be sure, whoever has no earnings, nor wealth he has inherited from the
property of his father or anyone of his relatives, let him eat from what is in the
hands of the people. If he is given without begging, he then will be given
depending on his religion. But if he is in such a state as were his inside to be
disclosed, he would not be given depending on his religion (as he would prove
wicked), then, what he takes would be rendered unlawful. Furthermore, were he
to be given with begging, where is such as pleases him with giving once he is
begged? Where is he who restricts his begging only to the limit of his dire
necessity? If you inspect the states of those who eat from what is in the hands
of the people, you would find the greatest portion of it illegal, since the good
(and lawful) is that which you eat from your own earnings, or from what you
have inherited.

The quarter of the saviors
It is almost impossible to combine abstention and eating from what is in the
hands of the people. We ask Allah Almighty to remove our covet of anyone else
other than Him, and make us self-sufficient with the lawful from the unlawful in
His Sight, and with His bounty from anything else, by His favor and extensive
generosity: He has power over what He pleases.

326

CHAPTER EIGHT
EXPOSITION OF THE EXTENT TO WHICH SELF-SUFFICIENCY MAKES
BEGGING UNLAWFUL
It should be known to you that the statement of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "Whoever begs and he is self-sufficient
has indeed begged pieces of fire: so, let him beg much (if he so likes) or litde (if
he so likes) thereof' is a clear proclamation for prohibition. But the extent to
which one is self-sufficient is difficult to determine, and it is not up to us to fix
the amounts, since it is learnt from the sunnah. It is narrated that the Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Be self-sufficient with
the self-sufficiency of Allah Almighty of anything else." They asked: "What is
that?" he said: "The early and evening meals of a day and a night." (Ahmad on
the authority of Ali; And the author of Al-Firdaws on the authority of Abu
Hurairah). According to another Hadith the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said: "Whoever begs the people and he has fifty (or forty
according to another version) Dirhams or its like of gold has indeed begged them
importunately (with no just cause)."
However, regardless of the difference of amounts, as long as the narrations
are authentic, it should be believed that they were mentioned in reference to
different states. That is because the truth is only one, in which estimation is
impossible. All to do is to resort to approximation, depending upon an
encompassing division of the states of the needy. The Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Mankind has no right but in
three: food to sustain him, a garment to cover his private parts, and a house to
shelter him; and what is beyond those would draw reckoning upon him." (AtTirmidhi on the authority of Uthman Ibn Affan). Let us make those three the
foundations of needs from which we could know their kinds, and then move to
consider those kinds, and their amounts in relation to the different times and
states.
As for their kinds, they are those three. Attached to them are their likes such
as the charge of hiring a vehicle for the traveler if he could not walk on foot; and
the same applies to the similar tasks and missions. This also includes his
dependents and all things under his guardianship.
As for the amounts, the clothes, for example, should be fitting for him, as a
man of religion, who wears it, i.e. it should consist of a single garment, a shirt
underneath it, a handkerchief, a trousers, an underwear, and a pair of sandals.
That is the necessary, and the second of any kind is always dispensable, whether
in clothes or in anything else. It is on this that you should measure all things like
the furniture, and their like. Furthermore, one should not seek the finest among
the clothes, the most expensive among the furniture, and so on if the cheaper

327
Book four: poverty and asceticism
could fulfill the purpose, provided that he should not be extremely far from the
usage of his people.
As for food, it should be as much as a Mudd per day, as decreed by the
religious law, of any kind of sustenance, even parley. The availability of
condiment perpetually is surplus, whereas deprivation of it entirely is detrimental.
It is required but sometimes, in which there is concession.
As for the residence, the minimum is that which is sufficient to give shelter,
without adornment. To beg for adornment and enlargement is to beg while you
are self-sufficient.
As for time, there is no doubt that what one needs immediately of sustenance
for a day and a night, residence and clothes, is necessary. But to beg for what he
would need in the future, it is of three degrees: The first is what he needs in the
coming day. The second is what he needs for forty or fifty days. The third is what
he needs for a full year. Let us put it decisively that whoever has what suffices
him and his dependents, if he has dependents, for a full year, his begging is
unlawful. What he has is the highest degree of self-sufficiency. To this applies the
estimation of fifty Dirhams in the statement of the Prophet "peace be upon him".
To be sure, five Dinars could suffice a single man for a full year if he is
thrifty. But if he is to help and aid others with money, perhaps this sum would
not be sufficient for him. He may be in need of that before the end of the year.
In this case, if the opportunity of begging is available to him, his begging for it is
unlawful, for he is self-sufficient immediately, and he might not live until the next
day, and in this way, he begs for what he needs not. It suffices him the early and
evening meals of a day and a night. To him applies the narration about that
estimation (we have related earlier).
But if the opportunity of begging would escape him and he would find none
to beg him later, then, it would be permissible for him to beg, for a year stay
expectation is not considered a long hope; and were he to delay begging, he fears
he would fail to aid whomever he used to aid. But if his fear of begging in the
future is weak, and what he begs for is unnecessary, then, his begging would be
unfavorable, and the degrees of unfavorableness differ according to the weakness
of necessity, fear to skip begging, laxity of time, and so on: and all of this could
not be adjusted and rather should be subject to the striving and estimation of the
servant himself in what is between him and Allah Almighty, in which he should
seek the advice of his heart and act upon it, if he is to follow the way to the
hereafter.
The more one is strong in certainty, more confident of the coming of the
sustenance from Allah in the future, and more satisfied with the immediate
sustenance, the higher the degree he will have with Allah Almighty is. If Allah
Almighty bestows upon you the sustenance of you and your dependents for a
day and a night, and you also feel afraid of the future, it would be only due to
your weak certainty and rather paying attention to the intimidation of Satan to
you. Allah Almighty said: " It is only Satan that suggests to you the fear of his
votaries: Be you not afraid of them, but fear Me, if you have Faith." (A1 Imran
175)

-----------------------------------------

328

oi oy^-3

>Ls jQt lljj'

The quarter of the saviors
j£») I

Gjj ^

And: "Satan threatens you with poverty and bids you to commit immorality.
Allah promises you His forgiveness and bounties. And Allah cares for all and He
knows all tilings." (Al-Baqarah 268)
^

^*?*3

*^.ya>3

Ct'jhjuk

4jjlJ cLj

Lj33^-1'

Begging is one of the immoralities that was made permissible only for him
who is forced by necessity. The one who begs for a thing he needs along the year,
but not immediately, is worse than him who has wealth in his possession which
he inherited and saved for something to fulfill after a year. Although both are
permissible, under the fatwa of the religious jurists, to beg, they do so because of
their love for this world, long hope in it, and mistrust of the bounty of Allah
Almighty. This is one of the greatest destructives. We ask Allah Almighty to help
us with His bounty and favor.

CHAPTER NINE
EXPOSITION OF STATES OF BEGGARS
Bishr used to say: "The poor are of three kinds: A poor never begs and even
if he is given, he never takes; and this would be with the angels in the highest
place of Paradise. A poor never begs but if he is given, he takes; and this would
be in the company of those close to Allah Almighty, in the Gardens of Paradise.
A poor begs when he is in need; and this would be in the company of the sincere
lovers of truth, from among the companions of the right hand."
There is consensus then on condemnation of begging, which, even with
deprivation and poverty, degrades one's rank and position. Shaqiq Al-Balkhi said
to Ibrahim Ibn Adham when he came to him from Khurasan: "How have you
left the poor from among your companions?" he said: "I have left them in such a
state as if they were given, they would be thankful, and if they were deprived,
they would be patient." He thought that, by leaving begging, they deserve
appreciation. Shaqiq said: "As such I have left the dogs of Balkh." Then, Ibrahim
asked him: "How have you left the poor in your town O Abu Ishaq?" He said:
"The poor in our town are in such a state as if they were deprived, they would
give thanks; and if they were given, they would favor, with what they were given,
the others over themselves." He kissed his head and said: "You have told the
truth, O mister!"
The degrees of these of different states among people concerning
contentment, patience, gratitude and begging are numerous; and the one who
follows the way to the hereafter should be well-acquainted with them, and how
they are divided and differ in rank, for should he not know them, he could not
know how to upgrade from the lowest to the highest of them. However, man was
created in the highest of moulds, and then abased (to be) the lowest of the low,
and was required to upgrade to the highest of the high once again. Whoever is
not able to distinguish the lowest from the highest would not be able to upgrade
with certainty. But there is doubt about him who learns it and might not be able
to upgrade.

Book four: poverty and asceticism

329

Those of different states might come under a state in which begging increases
them in degree. But those deeds depend upon the intendons. It is narrated that
somebody saw Abu Ishaq An-Nuri stretching his hand and begging the people.
The man felt it and regarded this behavior of him odious. He came to Al-Junaid
and related the story to him thereupon he said: "Do not feel it or regard it odious
in your sight, for An-Nuri did not beg the people but to give them. In other
words, he begged them in order that they would be given reward for that in the
hereafter, whereas he would not be harmed."
He seemed to have referred to the statement of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "It is the hand of the one who is
given that is the higher." They said in comment on that: "The hand of him who
is given is higher for it is he for whom the giver receives reward; and it is the
reward, and not the money that should be appreciated." Then, Al-Junaid said:
"Bring the balance." He weighed one hundred Dirhams and then took a handful
of money and threw it on the one hundred Dirhams and then said to me:
"Bring that to him." I said to myself: "A thing is weighed in order to determine
its amount. Then, how has he mixed with that an unknown quantity and he is a
wise man?" I carried the parcel and went to An-Nuri and he asked for the
balance and weighed only one hundred Dirhams and said to me: "Give him
back that (one hundred Dirhams) and say to him: 'I do not accept anything
from you." He took what was beyond the one hundred Dirhams. I indeed grew
more astonished. I asked him and he said: "Al-Junaid is a wise man. He likes to
take hold of the rope by both ends. He weighed the one hundred Dirhams for
himself seeking thereby the reward of the hereafter, and then threw on it a
handful of Dirhams of unknown amount for Allah Almighty. I took what he
specified to Allah Almighty and gave him back what he assigned to himself." I
took it and gave it back to Al-Junaid who went on weeping and said: "He took
his money and left for us ours. It is Allah Almighty Whose aid is sought."
Consider then how their hearts and states were purified and their deeds done
sincerely to Allah Almighty. Each one of them saw the heart of his companion
without saying a word. That is because they used to contemplate the hearts of
each other, and their mysteries used to engage in private talks with each other, as
a result of eating only the lawful, getting their hearts disengage from the love for
this world, and wholeheartedly devoting themselves to Allah Almighty.
Whoever disapproves of that without experiment is indeed ignorant, and
whoever disapproves of it after a long experiment in which he did not experience
what they experience, is indeed under the influence of a severe ailment. To be
sure, the insightful is one of two men: one followed the path and experienced
what they experienced; and this is endued with good taste and gnosis, and has
reached the certainty of sight. The other did not follow the path, or at least
followed it but did not reach the same degree they had reached. But at the same
time, he believed in and gave trust to it. Thus, he has the certainty of mind, but
he has not attained the certainty of sight. The certainty of mind ranks second to
the certainty of sight.
Whoever does not have the certainty of mind does not belong to the

The quarter of the saviors
330
community of the faithful believers, and on the Day of Judgement, he would be
mustered in the company of the arrogant disbelieving ungrateful, killed by the
weak hearts, and devotees of Satan.
We ask Allah Almighty to make us of those firmly grounded in knowledge, who
say: "We believe in the Book; the whole of it is from our Lord."(Al Imran 7)

4

Part two: asceticism
It has the following chapters:
Exposition of the real nature of asceticism
Exposition of the superiority of asceticism
Exposition of asceticism in detail in food, clothes, residence, furniture, and
all living affairs
Exposition of the sign of asceticism

CHAPTER ONE
EXPOSITION OF THE REAL NATURE OF ASCETICISM
It should be known to you that abstinence from this world is one of the noble
stations attained by the followers of the path (to the hereafter), and it consists,
like all stations, of knowledge, state and deed. That is because all categories of
faith, as put by the righteous predecessors, go back to intention, word and deed.
Since the word is apparent, it is held in the place of the state, for with it the
internal state seems evident. The word then is not intended for itself. If the word
is not produced from an internal state, it is called Islam, and not faith. Knowledge
then in relation to the state stands for the producer of fruit, whereas the deed for
the fruit itself. So, let's mention the state with each of both its ends, i.e. the
knowledge and the deed.
The state is the asceticism, i.e. to turn away from a particular thing and rather
incline to another which is better. Whoever turns away from a certain thing,
whether by way of selling, compensation, or anything else, has indeed done so
because he has no desire for it, and whoever inclines to a particular thing, has
indeed done so because he has desire for it. His state in relation to the thing from
which he turned away is called asceticism, and in relation to the thing to which he
inclined called desire and love. The state of asceticism then summons two things:
A turned away from, and a desired for, and the latter is better than the former.
In order for the asceticism to be valid, it is requisite for the turned away from
to be desired for in some point, for whoever turns away from a thing which is
not wanted in itself is not called ascetic. To be sure, the one who leaves stones,
dust, and the like of them is not called ascetic. The ascetic is he who leaves
Dinars and Dirhams, i.e. money, for stones and dust are not desired for in
themselves.
It is also requisite for the desired for to be better in his sight than the turned
away from, in order for his desire to dominate. The seller does not sell a thing but

331
Book four: poverty and asceticism
because buying in his sight is better than selling. In this way, his state in relation
to the sold thing is called abstinence in it, and in relation to the compensation a
desire and love for it. That is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty
about the Prophet Yusuf "peace be upon him": " The (Brethren) sold him for a
miserable price, for a few Dirhams counted out: In such low estimation did they
hold him!" (Yusuf 20)

Here, He Almighty described Yusufs brothers as abstinent from him in covet
of getting the favor of their father given to them alone, which was dearer, in their
sight, than Yusuf himself, whom they sold in covet of compensation.
Whoever then sells the world for the hereafter is indeed abstinent from the
world; and whoever sells the hereafter for the world is abstinent but from the
hereafter. But the term asceticism is usually given to him who abstains in the
world (and not the hereafter), in the same way as the term atheism is given to
him who inclines to falsehood. Since asceticism is to turn away from a thing
which is loved in general, it is unimaginable but to leave it for a thing dearer
than it. But to leave a dear thing for nothing is questionable. Whoever turns
away from all things, even Paradise itself, and loves none but Allah Almighty,
is the absolute ascetic. Whoever turns away from all things in this world, but
does not abstain from the good fortunes of the hereafter, but rather desires
for its palaces, houris, gardens, rivers and fruits, is also ascetic, but lesser in
rank than the former.
But even, whoever leaves some and not all the worldly fortunes, like him who
leaves property but not majesty, or leaves enlargement in food and not
beautification in adornment, does not deserve the term ascetic at all, and his
position, among the ascetics, is like him who repents from some and not all the
sins of this world. His asceticism in fact is valid, just as the repentance from some
sins is also valid. To repent is to leave the forbidden things, whereas to abstain is
to leave the permissible things. It may be that one has the power to leave some
and not all the forbidden things, and the same applies to leaving the permissible
things. But whoever leaves only the forbidden things is not called ascetic,
although he abstains and turns away from the forbidden. This term, therefore, is
usually given to him who leaves the permissible things.
asceticism then is to turn away from the world to the hereafter, or from all
things to Allah Almighty, and this is the highest degree of asceticism. As well as
it is requisite for the desired for to be good in one's sight, it is also requisite for
the turned away from to be available. To leave what is not available is
questionable, for the disappearance of the desire is confirmed by leaving an
available thing. For this reason, it was said to Ibn Al-Mubarak: "O abstinent
man!" on that he said: "No, the real ascetic is Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz, because
although the world with its pleasures and delights was brought to him in willing
submission, he left it entirely. But as for me, from which thing have I
abstained?"
As for the knowledge which produces this state, it is to know that what is left
is despicable in comparison with what is taken, like the merchant's knowledge

The quarter of the saviors
332
that the compensation is better than the sold thing, thereupon he desires for it. In
the absence of such knowledge, it is unimaginable that he would lose his desire
for the sold thing. Similarly, the same is true of him who knows that what is with
Allah Almighty is abiding, and the hereafter is better and more enduring, just as
the diamond is better and more enduring than ice, for example, and it is not
difficult on the owner of ice to sell it for diamond.
This is the similitude of the world in comparison with the hereafter. The
world is like the ice which is placed under the sun ray, and continues to
dissolve until it vanishes entirely, in comparison with the hereafter which
looks like the diamond that is inexhaustible. The more one's certainty and
knowledge of the great difference between the world and the hereafter is
strong, the more he becomes desirous for selling the former for the latter, to
the extent that when one becomes strong in certainty, he sells his own soul
and property as confirmed by Allah Almighty: " Allah has purchased of the
Believers their persons and their goods; for theirs (in return) is the Garden (of
Paradise)." (At-Tawbah 111)

Then, He showed how profitable their deal is saying: " Then rejoice in the
bargain which you have concluded: That is the achievement supreme." (AtTawbah 111)
This amount of knowledge in ascedcism is sufficient, i.e. that the hereafter is
better and more abiding than the world. This might be known to him who has no
power to leave the world, because his knowledge and certainty are weak, or he is
possessed by the desire and appedte immediately, and seized by Satan, or
deceived by Satan's false promises in procrastination day after day, until he is
snatched away by death, and nothing remains with him except grief and regret
after skipping the opportunity. To the baseness of this world Allah Almighty
refers in His statement: " Say: "Short is the enjoyment of this world: the
Hereafter is the best for those who do right." (An-Nisa 77)

And to the preciousness of the hereafter He refers in His statement: " But
those who had been granted (true) knowledge said: "Alas for you! The reward of
Allah (in the Hereafter) is best for those who believe and work righteousness."
(Al-Qasas 80)

He brought to the attention that the knowledge of the preciousness of the
diamond causes one to turn away from its compensation.
Since asceticism is unimaginable but with opposition and turning away
from what is dear to what is dearer, a man said in his supplication: "O Allah!
Show to me the world just as You see it." On that, the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to him: "Do not say so. But
rather say: 'Show me the world just as You have shown it to the righteous
among Your servants." That is because Allah Almighty sees it despicable just

333

Book four: poverty and asceticism

as it really is. Every creature is despicable in comparison with His Glory. The
servant sees it despicable in his sight in comparison with what is better for
him. It is unimaginable, for example, that the horse seller sees his horse, even
though he turns away from it, just as he sees the larva of the earth, for he is
not in need of the larva, unlike the horse. Allah Almighty is self-sufficient
with Himself and not in need of anything else. Thus, all things are the same in
comparison with His Glory, and different in comparison with anything else. It
is the ascetic who sees it different in comparison with himself and not with
anyone else.
As for the deed that results from the state of asceticism, it is to leave a thing
by way of selling or dealing or exchanging it for what is better. As well as the
deed that results from the contract of selling is to leave the sold thing and rather
take the compensation, the asceticism requires to leave the abstained thing
entirely, i.e. the world with its pleasures and delights (for the hereafter). The
ascetic thus extracts his love for it out of the heart and rather gets into it the love
for the acts of worship, and extracts from the eye, hand and foot, and all parts of
the body what he has extracted out of the heart, and uses them in
implementation of the acts of worship, otherwise, he will become like the seller
who delivered the sold thing and did not take the price. If he meets, the
conditions required in taking and leaving, let him rejoice in the bargain which he
has concluded. That is because the One who took part with him in that bargain
should inevitably fulfill his pledge.
But, on the other hand, whoever sticks to that world, his asceticism is invalid,
in principle. For this reason, Allah Almighty did not describe the brothers of
Yusuf "peace be upon him" as abstinent from Benjamin when they said about
him: "Truly Joseph and his brother are loved more by our father than we: but we
are a goodly body!" (Yusuf 8)

i 0^

J b'u oj

g-5 iL <4

ij>

And intended to get rid of him like Yusuf, but some of them interceded for
him. He Almighty also did not describe them as abstinent from Yusuf "peace be
upon him" when they intended to get rid of him. But they were described as such
when they intended to sell him. This means that the sign of desire is to stick to
the thing, and the sign of asceticism is to abandon it.
If you leave some and not all pleasures of this world, you have become
abstinent only in what you have left, i.e. a partially and not absolutely abstinent. If
you have no property, and are not helped by this world, no asceticism could be
imaginable from you. That is because what is not available is not imagined to be
left. Perhaps Satan allures to you with his deception, and gives you the false
impression that as long as the world with its pleasures and delights has not been
brought to you, you then are abstinent from it. So, you should not hang down by
the rope of his deception without confirmation. If you do not experiment the
state in which a particular thing is available, you would not be sure of your power
to leave it when it is really available.
How many a person who thought he disliked sins when it was difficult upon
him to commit them. But when their means became available to him, and there

The quarter of the saviors
was no fear from the people, he fell in them. If this is how the soul is deceived
concerning the forbidden things, do not be confident of it concerning the
permissible things, but you should experiment it from time to time in the state of
availability. If it fulfills its promise of leaving regularly, in the absence of
engagements and legal excuses outwardly and inwardly, then, there is no harm to
be confident of it to some extent, provided that you should, at the same time, be
cautious of its change.
Once, Ibn Abu Laila said to Ibn Shubrumah: "Do you not see this Abu
Hanifah? We do not give a fatwa about something but that he refutes it with one
better than it." He replied to him: "You should know that the world has come to
him with its pleasures and delights, and he ran away from it, unlike us, for it has
escaped from us and we ran in its pursuit." Similarly, all the Muslims during the
lifetime of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"We love our Lord, and if we know in which thing lies His love, we should do it
immediately." On that He Almighty revealed: " If We had ordered them to
sacrifice their lives or to leave their homes, very few of them would have done it:
but if they had done what they were (actually) told, it would have been best for
them, and would have gone farthest to strengthen their (faith)." (An-Nisa 66)

334

L

3J3

yj 0^1*3 i. ^jlj? ^ \y>-j>-Tji
4 ((Jj) Lf-ij uJl 13

0

ijkst q\ ^Ip

bi 3^3 ^

0

Ibn Mas'ud "Allah be pleased with him" said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said to me: "You are among those (few)." He
resumed: I did not know that from among us there was such as loved this world
until Allah Almighty revealed: " Among you are some that hanker after this world
and some that desire the Hereafter." (A1 Imran 152)

i©

o-* f

$

It should be known to you that asceticism is not to abandon wealth in the
sense that you spend it by way of generosity, attracting hearts, or covet. This is
one of the good habits, but far from the acts of worship. But asceticism is to
abandon this world entirely, because you know well its despicability in
comparison with the preciousness of the hereafter. That is because the real
ascetic is he, to whom the world has been brought in willing submission
effortlessly and with no suffering, and he has the power to enjoy of it, not on the
exclusion of reducing his majesty or putting himself to humiliation; but even he
leaves it for fear he would get affable with it, and thus he becomes affable with
something other than Allah Almighty, loves anything other than Allah Almighty,
and joins anything in love with Allah Almighty; or leaves it in covet of the reward
of Allah Almighty in the hereafter: he leaves the enjoyment of the worldly drinks
in desire for enjoyment of the drinks of the Garden, enjoyment of the women
and girls in desire for enjoyment of the houris in the Garden, the worldly
adornment in desire for the adornment of the Garden, and the delicious kinds of
food in desire for the pleasant fruits of the Garden, or lest it might be said to
him: "You received your good things in the life of the world, and you took your
pleasure out of them." (Al-Ahqaf 20)

Book four: poverty and asceticism

him in this world effortlessly and with no^sufferingX his knowledgfthTt what
“ “ tHe huereuaf‘er 15 be“Cr T Tre abldin&
dealings which have no benefit in the hereafter.
CHAPTER TWO

anything else is but worldly

EXPOSITION OF SUPERIORITY OF ASCETICISM
Allah Almighty said: So he went forth among his people in the (pride of his
worldly) glitter. Said those whose aim is the Life of this World: "Oh! that we had
the like of what Qarun has got! For he is truly a lord of mighty good fortune!"
But those who had been granted (true) knowledge said: "Alas for you! The
reward of Allah (in the Hereafter) is best for those who believe and work
righteousness: but this none shall attain, save those who steadfasdy persevere (in
good)."" (Al-Qasas 79-80)
L

My
&\<L>Vy

4O

y.JQl JlS

djj

J

^

0b

*3] 4-^ Vj

Here, He Almighty attributed ascedcism to the religious scholars and those
endued with knowledge.
He further said in the same Surah: " Twice will they be given their reward, for
that they have persevered." (Al-Qasas 54)
4 0 li/>*» 4? cvj*
oy}*
^
In comment on it, it was said that it refers to the abstinence from this world.
He also said: "That which is on earth We have made but as a glittering show
for the earth, in order that We may test them, as to which of them are best in
conduct." (Al-Kahf 7)
In interpretation of it, it is said that He means which of them is the most
abstinent from it. He Almighty described abstinence in it as one of the best
deeds.
He Almighty said: " To any that desires the tilth of the Hereafter, We give
increase in his tilth; and to any that desires the tilth of this world, We grant
somewhat thereof, but he has no share or lot in the Hereafter." (Ash-Shura 20)
Lj l^L.

U3ill iSy- My.

J /aJ If oy>AM

My

)

He also said: " Nor strain your eyes in longing for the things We have given
for enjoyment to parties of them, the splendour of the life of this world, through
which We test them: but the provision of your Lord is better and more
enduring." QTa Ha 131)

The quarter of the saviors

336
4

<3jj3

(^5^1

\

pr* k'jjl

^ (Jj ^CC^- o*5i ^

He Almighty said too: “Those who love the life of this world more than the
Hereafter." (Ibrahim 3)

i0

ji isSjJT s^JT ooijJT >

He described here the disbelievers, which means that the faithful believers
stand on the opposite extreme, i.e. they love the hereafter more than the world.
As for the Prophetic narrations about condemnation of this world and
abstinence in it, they are numerous; and we have related some of them in the
Book of Condemnation of the World in the quarter of the destructives. To be
sure, the love for this world is among the destructives, whereas aversion for it is
among the saviors. So, let us limit ourselves to the superiority of aversion for this
world, and it is intended by asceticism.
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “He,
upon whom morning has come while his main concern is with the (material
benefits of the) world, Allah will disperse his concerns, make his poverty in front
of him, and he will receive nothing from the world more than what has been
decreed for him; and he, upon whom morning has come while his main concern
is with the hereafter, Allah will make one his main concern, remove poverty from
him, place satisfaction (and feeling of self-sufficiency) in his heart, and further the
(pleasures and delights of this) world will come to him in willing submission.”
(Ibn Majah on the authority of Zaid Ibn Thabit).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "If you see a servant endued with silence and abstinence from this world,
you then should approach him for he gives wisdom." (Ibn Majah on the authority
of Abu Khallad).
Allah Almighty said: “He grants wisdom to whom He pleases; and he to whom
wisdom is granted receives indeed a benefit overflowing." (Al-Baqarah 269)

For this reason, it is said that "If one abstains in this world for forty days,
Allah makes the springs of wisdom flow in his heart, and run on his tongue."
It is narrated on the authority of one of the companions that he said: We said
to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "O
Messenger of Allah! Who among the people is the best (in conduct)?" he said:
"Every faithful believer endowed with clean heart and truthful tongue." We
asked: "O Messenger of Allah! What is meant by the clean heart?" he "peace be
upon him" said: "The pious, clean righteous, which entertains neither rancor nor
cunning, neither transgression nor envy." We further asked: "O Messenger of
Allah! Who is next to him (in good)?" he said: "He, who hates the world and
loves the hereafter." (Ibn Majah and Al-Khara'iti on the authority of Abdullah
Ibn Amr). The point here is that the worst of people is he who loves this world
on the exclusion of the hereafter.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "If
you like that Allah Almighty should love you, then, abstain from this world." (Ibn

Book four: poverty and asceticism
337
Majah on the authority of Sahl Ibn Sa'd). he "peace be upon him" thus made the
abstinence from this world a cause of gaining the love of Allah Almighty.
Whomever Allah loves is in the highest degree. So, abstinence from this world
should occupy the best and highest stations. It also implies that whoever loves
this world incurs the aversion of Allah for him.
It is narrated in a Hadith on the authority of one from the family of the
Prophet that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "Both ascedcism and abstention make a nightly tour on the hearts: if they
meet a heart full of faith and modesty, they would reside in it, otherwise, they
would leave it."
When Harithah "Allah be pleased with him" said to the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "I am really a believer" He asked him:
"Then, what is the reality of your faith?" He said: "I have abstained from this
world, to the extent that its gold and stone have become the same in my sight;
and it seems to me as if 1 do not see but Paradise and Hell, and the Throne of my
Lord prominent before my eyes." On that, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said to him: "You have known the truth. So,
abide by it, O servant whose heart Allah has illuminated with faith." (Al-Bazzar
on the authority of Anas; and At-Tabarani on the authority of Al-Harith Ibn
Malik). Consider how he began to show the reality of his belief by abstinence
from this world, and joined it with the certainty of faith, and how the Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" claimed purity to him when he
said about him: "A servant whose heart Allah has illuminated with faith."
When the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was
asked about the meaning of opening the breast in the statement of Allah
Almighty: " Those whom Allah (in His plan) wills to guide, He opens their breast
to Islam" (Al-An'am 125)
|f ^ ^

4©

01

^

Zji

^

He "peace be upon him" said: "When the light (of faith) enters into the heart,
the breast immediately opens to it, and goes on expansion." It was said: "O
Messenger of Allah! Is there any sign characteristic of that?" he "peace be upon
him" said: "Yes. (Its sign is) to desert from the abode of deception (i.e. this
world), to incline to the abode of eternity (i.e. the hereafter), and get ready for
death before its descent." (Al-Hakim). Consider here how he made asceticism a
prerequisite for Islam, i.e. to desert from the abode of deception.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "Feel shy of Allah Almighty as it is fitting for His Majesty." They said: "We
really feel shy of Him Almighty." He "peace be upon him" said: "It is not so. But
you build what you do not live in, and gather what you do not consume." (AtTabarani on the authority of Umm Al-Walid Bint Umar Ibn Al-Khattab). He
showed clearly that this conduct contradicts shyness from Allah Almighty.
When a particular delegation came upon the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him”, they said to him: "We are really believers." He
asked them: "Then, what is the sign of your faith?" They made a mention of
patience at the time of adversity, gratitude at the time of prosperity, satisfaction

The quarter of the saviors
338
with the fate (be it good or evil), and abstention from gloating at the misfortunes
of their enemies. On that, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "If you are really so, then, (in order to complete your faith)
collect not what you do not consume, build not what you do not live in, and
compete not over that which you would inevitably leave." (Al-Khatib and Ibn
Asakir on the authority of Jabir). In this way, he made asceticism a completion of
their faith.
It is narrated on the authority of Jabir "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" addressed
us with a good sermon in which he said: "Whoever comes (on the Day of
Judgement) with (the testification that) 'There is no god to be worshipped but
Allah', mixing nothing with it, Paradise would be assured to him." Ali "Allah be
pleased with him" stood towards him and said: "Let my father and mother
sacrifice their lives for you O Messenger of Allah! What is that which should not
be mixed with it? Describe and explain it to us." He "peace be upon him" said:
"It is the love for this world in pursuit of it, and following its pleasures, (as shown
from) a people who say the saying of the Prophets and do the doing of the
tyrants. Whoever comes (on the Day of Judgement) with 'There is no god to be
worshipped but Allah' having nothing of that, Paradise would be assured to him."
(At-Tirmidhi in his Nawadir on the authority of Zaid Ibn Arqam).
According to a particular narration: "Munificence results from certainty (of
faith), and no certain would enter the fire (of Hell); and niggardliness results from
suspicion, and no suspicious would enter Paradise." (This is reported by Sahib AlFirdaws on the authority of Abu Ad-Darda').
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "The munificent is close to Allah, close to the people, and close to Paradise;
and the niggard is far from Allah, far from the people, and close to the fire (of
Hell)." (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu Hurairah). To be sure, the
niggardliness is the fruit of the desire for this world, whereas munificence is the
fruit of asceticism; and what is appreciated is the producer of the fruit.
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Al-Musayyab from Abu Dharr "Allah
be pleased with him" from the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" that he said: "Whoever abstains from this world, Allah
Almighty places wisdom into his heart, and runs it on his tongue, and lets him
know the disease and medicine of this world, and takes him out of it safe to
the abode of peace." (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Safwan Ibn
Sulaim).
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" was in his companions when he came upon milch ten-month pregnant shecamels, and they were the dearest of their property to them, and the most
expensive in their sight, for they combined the back (as riding mounts), meat,
milk and wool, and for their high position in their hearts, Allah Almighty made a
mention of them in His statement: " When the she-camels, ten months with
young, are left untended" (At-Takwir 4)

Book four: poverty and asceticism

339

The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" turned
away from them, and reduced his vision from looking at them. It was said to him:
"O Messenger of Allah! Those are the most expensive of our property: why do
you not catch a glimpse of them?" He "peace be upon him" said: "Allah Almighty
has forbidden me to do so." Then, he recited: " Nor strain your eyes in longing
for the things We have given for enjoyment to parties of them, the splendour of
the life of this world, through which We test them: but the provision of your
Lord is better and more enduring." (Ta Ha 131)
4O

t3jj3 ^

s^ii ojij

uiL L Jj sixJLs* o-lL *3} }

It is narrated on the authority of Masruq from A'ishah "Allah be pleased with
her" that she said: I said to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him": "O Messenger of Allah! Do you not ask your Lord for sustenance so
that he would bestow sustenance on you?" I went on weeping out of pity for his
severe hunger. He "peace be upon him" said: "O A'ishah! By Him in Whose
Hand is my soul, were I to ask my Lord to turn the mountains of this world into
gold and become with me, surely, He would do wherever I like. But I have
preferred the worldly hunger over sadadon, its poverty over richness and its grief
over joy. O A'ishah! This world is not fitdng for Muhammad "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him"nor for the family of Muhammad"AJlah's blessing and peace
be upon him". O A'ishah! Allah Almighty did not approve for these of
determination among Messengers but to keep patient on the adversities of this
world, and endure (abstinence) from its dear things; and He did not approve but
to obligate me with the same He had obligated them with, saying: " Therefore
patiently persevere, as did (all) Messengers of determination." (Al-Ahqaf 35)

io

^ 'A1

»

By Allah, I have no way but to obey Him. By Allah, I would keep patient as
they did, as much as is within my capacity; and there is no power but with Allah
Almighty." (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of A'ishah).
It is narrated from Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him" that
when the countries of the different parts of the world were opened (with their
good things) to him, his daughter Hafsah "Ailah be pleased with her" said to him:
"Put on the lenient clothes in order to meet the delegations with whenever they
come to you from the different parts; and order the cookers to make pleasant
food in order to eat and feed those who come to visit you." On that, Umar
"Allah be pleased with him" said: "O Hafsah! Do you not know that one's wife
knows best from among all the people his affairs?" She answered in the
affirmative. He said: "I beseech you by Allah to tell me: Do you know that the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" never put on
during his Prophethood such and such (lenient clothes), and that he and his
family never ate their fill in the morning but that they were hungry in the same
evening, nor ate their fill in the evening but that they were hungry in the coming
morning? I beseech you by Allah to tell me: Do you know that the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" never put on during his
Prophethood such and such (lenient clothes), and that neither he nor his family

340

The quarter of the saviors

ate their fill from the dates until Allah Almighty helped him conquer Khaibar? I
beseech you by Allah to tell me: Do you know that one day the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was served with food on a table
high a bit, thereupon he felt it until the colour of his face changed (out of anger),
and ordered that the table be lifted, and die food be placed on something lower
or even on the ground? I beseech you by Allah to tell me: do you know that the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" did not sleep on a
folded garment and one night it was made into four folds for him and he slept on
it, and when he got up he said: "You have hindered me from standing at night
(for supererogatory prayers) because of (my comfortable sleep on) this fourfolded garment. Make it two folds as you used to do"? I beseech you by Allah to
tell me: Do you know that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" happened to wash his garment, and when Bilal came to inform him of
the time of prayer, he did not find a garment to put on to come out to the prayer
and waited until his garment dried, in order to put on and come out to prayer? 1
beseech you by Allah to tell me: Do you know that a women from the tribe of
Banu Zufar made a pair of garments to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" and sent to him one of them before the other,
thereupon he came out to the prayer while wrapping himself in it, and, having
nothing else over his body, tying its ends to his neck, and then offered prayer in
such a state?" Umar "Allah be pleased with him" continued to remind her of such
things until he caused her to weep and he himself wept, so much that we thought
his soul would leave him (and he would die).
According to another version, the following addition is mentioned in which
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" resumed: "I had two companions (the Prophet
and Abu Bakr), and they followed a certain path. Were I to follow a path
different from theirs, my destiny would be different from theirs. By Allah, I
would patiendy persevere on their austere living perchance I would attain with
them their abundant living (in the hereafter)."
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri "Allah be pleased with
him" that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"It was the habit of the Prophets before me that one of them would be tried with
poverty so extremely that he had no more than a single garment to put on, and
one of them would be troubled by lice so much that lice would kill him; but even,
such things were dearer to them than the gift to you." It is narrated on the
authority of Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them" that he said: the Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "When Moses "peace be
upon him" reached the (spring of) water of Madyan, the greenness of herbs was
visible from his abdomen out of his severe starvation." This was what the
Prophets and Messengers of Allah "peace be upon them" chose for themselves,
given that they knew best, from among all the people, Allah Almighty, and the
right way of attainment in the hereafter.
It is narrated on the authority of Umar "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: When Allah Almighty revealed the following statement: " And there are
those who bury gold and silver and spend it not in the Way of Allah: announce

Book four: poverty and asceticism

341

unto them a most grievous penalty. On the Day when heat will be produced out
of that (wealth) in the fire of Hell, and with it will be branded their foreheads,
their flanks, and their backs, "This is the (treasure) which you buried for
yourselves: taste you, then, the (treasures) you buried!" (At-Tawbah 34-35)
fjh

Jrr*' iX

«S)

ojt

^ y.4) U ^

L. \yj jj

The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Perished be the world! Perished be the Dinar and Dirham!" we said: "O
Messenger of Allah! Allah Almighty forbade us to hoard gold and silver. Then,
which kind of money should we save?" the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said: "Let anyone of you take (instead) a celebrating
tongue (that remembers Allah more often), a thankful heart (to show gratitude to
Allah), or a good righteous wife to help him fulfill the requirements of his
hereafter." (Ibn Majah).
It is narrated on the authority of Hudhaifah "Allah be pleased with him"
from the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" that he
said: "Whoever gives preference to the world over the hereafter, Allah afflicts
him with three things: an anxiety that never leaves his heart, a destitution with
which he never gets self-sufficient, and a greed with which he never gets
satisfied." (At-Tabarani on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "No servant of you will have his faith complete until he becomes in such a
state in which to be anonymous is dearer to him than to be recognized, and to
have little dearer to him than to have much." (the author of Al-Firdaws on the
authority of Ali Ibn Talhah).
The Christ "peace be upon him" said: "The world is but a bridge (to the
hereafter): so, cross it and do not inhabit it." It was said to him: "O Prophet of
Allah! Would that you order us to build a house to worship Allah in it." He said:
"Go and build a house on the water." They said to him: "How should a building
stand straight on the water?" he said: "Then, how should the worship of Allah
stand straight with the love for this world?"
Our Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "Allah Almighty offered to me to
turn the large valley of Mecca into gold for my sake, and I rejected and said: 'No,
0 Lord! But let me become hungry one day and satiated one day. On the day I
am hungry, I would supplicate and implore to You; and on the day I am satiated,
1 would praise You and give thanks to You."
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them" that
he said: One day, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" came out walking and Gabriel "peace be upon him" was with him. He
ascended the Safa (mountain). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said to Gabriel: "O Gabriel! By Him, Who has sent me with
the truth, the evening has come upon the family of Muhammad "Allah's blessing

The quarter of the saviors
342
and peace be upon him"and they have even neither a handful of Sawiq nor a
mouthful of baking powder." No sooner had he said so than he heard a loud
thud coming from the sky that scared him, thereupon the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" asked Gabriel: "Has Allah Almighty
commanded that the day of Judgement be established?" he said: "No, but this is
Israfil "peace be upon him" and he has descended to you when he heard your
speech." Israfil came to him and said: "Allah Almighty has heard your speech and
sent me to you with the keys of the earth and ordered me to offer to you, if you
so liked, to turn the mountains of Tihamah into aquamarine, pearl, gold and
silver for your sake; and if you like, you would be a king Prophet, and if you like,
a servant Prophet." Gabriel "peace be upon him" hinted to him to humble
himself before Allah Almighty, thereupon the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said thrice: "No, I choose to be a servant
Prophet."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "If
Allah Almighty intends good for a servant, He causes him to abstain from this
world, desire for the hereafter, and let him know the defects of his own self."
(Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami in his Firdaws).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to a
man: "Abstain from this world so that Allah would love you, and abstain from
what is in the hands of the people, so that the people would love you."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "If one likes that Allah Almighty should give him knowledge without
learning and guidance without instruction, let him abstain from this world."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "Whoever has longing for Paradise hastens to do good; and whoever fears
of the fire (of Hell) entertains himself from desires and appetites; and whoever
expects death leaves pleasures; and whoever abstains from this world regards
slighdy all calamities." (Ibn Hibban on the authority of Ali Ibn Abu Talib).
It is narrated that our Prophet and the Christ also "peace be upon them" said:
"Four things are not attained without toiling: silence, which is the first
commencement of worship, humbleness, celebration (of Allah) more often, and
(the love for having) little (instead of much) of things." (At-Tabarani and AlHakim on the authority of Anas).
However, it is impossible to bring all narrations and Prophetic Hadiths about
appreciation of the aversion for this world and condemnation of love for it. All
the Prophets and Messengers "peace be upon them" were sent only to instruct
the people and divert them from the world to the hereafter. Most of their speech
with the people goes back to this fact. What we have brought is sufficient, and it
is the aid of Allah that should be sought.
As for the traditions, a mention may be made of the following:
"(The testification that) 'There is no god to be worship but Allah' still averts
harm from the people as long as they do not ask to be given what they are short
of in this world (or according to another version, as long as they do not give
preference to the deal of their world over their religion): Once they do so, and, at

343
Book four: poverty and asceticism
the same time, say: 'There is no god to be worshipped but Allah', Allah Almighty
says to them: "You have told a lie, for you are not true to it.'"
One of the companions "may Allah be pleased with them" said: "We have
pursued all deeds, and did not see, more suitable to the hereafter, better than the
abstinence from this world." One of the companions said to a group of the first
generation of the Tabi'is: "You do more deeds and strive more than the
companions of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
although they were better than you." It was said: "What is the reason for that?"
He said: "Because they were more abstinent than you in this world."
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: "To abstain from this world is to
comfort your heart and body." Bilal Ibn Sa'd said: "It is sufficient for sin that
Allah Almighty encourages us to abstain from this world, and we reject but to
have longing for it." A man said to Sufyan: "I like to meet an abstinent scholar."
He said to him: "Woe to you! That is something too impossible to exist." Wahb
Ibn Munabbih said: "Paradise has eight gates: When the inhabitants of Paradise
come to it the gate keepers start saying: "By the Honor of our Lord, none shall
enter it before these who were abstinent from this world, and had longing for
Paradise."
Yusuf Ibn Asbat said: "I like that my Lord give me three things: When I die, I
have not even a single Dirham in my possession, no debt upon me, and no flesh
on my bone." He was given them all. It is narrated that one of the caliphs sent
gifts to the jurists and they accepted them. He sent ten thousand Dirhams to AlFudail and he did not accept it. His sons blamed him saying: "All the religious
jurists have accepted their gifts, then, do you reject yours given such state of
destitution as in which you are?" He wept and said to them: "Do you know my
and your similitude? It is like a people who had a cow which they used in tilting,
until when it grew old, they slaughtered it to get benefit from its flesh and hide.
As such, you like to slay me in this late age of mine. It is better to me to die out
of hunger, O my family, than to slay Al-Fudail."
Ubaid Ibn Umair said: "The Christ, son of Mary "peace be upon him" used to
put on hair and eat of the trees, and he had neither a child to die (out of hunger),
nor a family to collapse, nor did he save anything for his coming days. But he
would sleep wherever he was once evening came upon him."
It is related that the wife of Abu Hazim said to him: "Winter has come upon
us, and we are in need of food, clothes and fire wood." He replied: "Well, all of
this is necessary. But at the same time, we also should die, be resurrected, and
then stand in front of Allah Almighty, in order to go at last either to Paradise or
to the fire (of Hell)."
Al-Hassan was asked: "Why do you not wash your garment?" He said: "The
matter (of the hereafter) is more hasty (to come) than that." According to
Ibrahim Ibn Adham: "Our hearts have been veiled with three covers, and the
certainty (of faith) would not be disclosed to the servant unless those are
removed: to rejoice of what is present, to grieve for what is lost, and to exult of
praise. If you rejoice of what is in existence, then you would be greedy; and if you
grieve for what is lost, then, you would be displeased, and to be sure, the

The quarter of the saviors
344
displeased would be punished; and if you exult of praise you would be conceited,
and conceit always makes deed fruitless."
According to Ibn Mas'ud "Allah be pleased with him": "A two-rak'ah prayer
to be offered by an abstinent from this world is much better for him and dearer
to Allah Almighty than the worship of the striving worshippers who worship
Allah perpetually to the end of time."
According to one of the righteous predecessors: "The favor of Allah upon
us in what He has taken from us is greater than His favor in what He has
given us." He seems to have paid attention to the significance of the
statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him": "Indeed, Allah Almighty protects His believing servant from this world
for He loves him in the same way as you protect the sick among you from
(the harmful) food and drink, out of fear for him." Having understood this, it
should be learnt that the favor of prevention which leads to health is greater
than the favor of giving that leads to harm.
According to Ath-Thawri: "The world is an abode of crookedness and not an
abode of straightness; an abode of grief and not an abode of joy. Whoever knows
it well never rejoices of prosperity nor grieve for adversity."
According to Sahl: "The deed would not be done by a worshipper with
perfect sincerity until he is free from four things: hunger, nakedness, destitution
and humiliation."
According to Al-Hassan Al-Basri: "I have caught a people, and accompanied
various groups of persons, and they never rejoiced of anything they received in
this world, nor grieved for anything they lost in it. The world was in their sight
more trivial than the dust. One of them lived fifty or sixty years, during which he
never changed his garment nor set up a cooking vessel, nor placed a thing
between his body and the ground (when he slept), nor ordered his family to
prepare fine food for him. When it was night, they would stand on their feet (to
perform the supererogatory prayers), with their tears flowing on their cheeks.
They supplicated their Lord privately to release them (from the fire). Whenever
they did a good deed, they would go on giving thanks to Allah Almighty, and ask
Him to accept it from them; and whenever they committed an evil deed, they
would grieve and ask Allah Almighty to forgive it for them. They remained as
such (until they died). By Allah, they were not free from sins, nor saved but by
virtue of the forgiveness of Allah Almighty. May Allah bestow mercy upon them,
and be pleased with them."

CHAPTER THREE
EXPOSmON OF DEGREES AND DIVISIONS OF ASCETICISM IN
RELATION TO ITSELF, THE THING ABSTAINED FROM,
AND THE THING DESIRED FOR
It should be known to you that asceticism is divided into three degrees
according to its strength.
The first is the lowest, according to which one abstains from this world,
although he has longing for it, his heart inclines to it, and his soul turns to it. But

Book four: poverty and asceticism ---- —---------------------------------------345
at the same time, he strives, as much as he could, to refrain from it. This man is
called the absdnent-seeming. That is the first step towards asceticism. The
difference between him and the real ascetic is that he strives his utmost to force
himself to abandon the world, whereas the latter devotes himself wholeheartedly
to do the acts of worship in obedience of Allah Almighty. But the abstinentseeming is at risk of being overpowered by his soul, and attracted by his desire to
return to the world once again, and get comforted with it in more or less.
The second degree applies to him who leaves this world willingly for he
regards it with slightness in comparison with what he covets for (in the hereafter).
He is like him who leaves a single Dirham in covet of two. Although the matter
might not seem difficult on him, he needs to wait a little. But this ascetic sees his
asceticism and cares about it, like the seller who sees what he sells and is fond of
it. In this way, he is about to be proud of himself and of his asceticism, thinking
that he has left something significant for another more significant. This,
therefore, is a kind of deficiency.
The third degree is the highest, according to which one abstains (from this
world), and further abstains from his asceticism, and sees not his asceticism, for
he does not think that he has left anything of significance. That goes back to his
belief that the world is nothing at all. His example is like him who leaves a piece
of pottery and takes a piece of diamond instead. This is not seen by him as
compensation. However, the world with all it contains in comparison with the
eternal bliss of the hereafter that is with Allah Almighty is less than a piece of
pottery in comparison with a piece of diamond. That is, to be sure, the
perfection in asceticism, caused by the perfect knowledge. Such ascetic is safe
from the risk of caring about the world, just as the one who leaves the piece of
pottery for the piece of diamond is safe from the danger of cancelling the deal
once again.
Abu Yazid said to Abu Musa: Abd-Ar-Rahim: "In which subject do you
speak?" he said: "In asceticism." He further asked: " asceticism from which
thing?" he said: "From this world." He shook off his hands and said: "I thought
he speaks in anything of significance; and the world is of no significance: from
which thing do he abstain in it?"
The example of him who leaves this world for the hereafter, in the sight of
those of gnosis and masters of hearts filled with contemplations and
revelations, is like one who liked to enter the palace of the king, and was
prevented by a dog standing at the gate, thereupon he threw to it a morsel of
food to engage it and he thus was able to enter the palace, and attain the
closeness to the king until he achieved his commands concerning the entire
kingdom. Do you see that this man thinks the king is under obligation to him
just because of a morsel of food he threw to the dog in return for what he
received? However, Satan is a dog standing at the gate of Allah Almighty,
preventing the people from entering, given that the gate is opened and the veil
is lifted.
The world is but a morsel of food: if you eat it you would take pleasure in it
just at the time of chewing, and this pleasure vanishes once it is swallowed up. It

The quarter of the saviors
346
is only its waste matter that remains in the stomach, and in the end, it becomes
putrefied filth, which should be extracted. Being so, if one leaves it in order to
receive the honor of the king, then, how should he care about it once again? The
entire world, in case all tilings is free from evil and harm in it, compared with the
eternal bliss of the hereafter, is less than the morsel of food compared with the
kingdom of this world. By no means could the limited be compared with the
infinite. The world, no matter how long it would last, is limited, given that the
lifetime of any person who lives the longest in it is very short, and its pleasures
are not pure and life in it is not free from evils, whereas the hereafter is neverending. Which comparison then could be made between the world and the
hereafter, which has the eternal bliss?
The ascetic then does not care about his asceticism unless he cares about
what he abstains from, and he does not care about what he abstains from unless
he sees it something of importance, and he does not see it something of
importance unless he is short of gnosis.
Those are the different degrees of asceticism, and each of them has various
levels. The ascetics are different in their patience and endurance by the difference
of suffering and difficulty; and these who admire their asceticism differ by their
difference in caring about their asceticism, and so on.
Asceticism also in relation with the desired for is divided into three degrees:
the lowest, according to which the desired for is only salvation from the fire and
from all pains and torments, like the grave punishment, calling to account, the
risk of the bridge that is over the Hell, and all terrors one is going to encounter
(in the hereafter), according to the different narrations about them. It is narrated,
for example, that the Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "The man would be
made to stand for accounting (in abundant sweat) so that if a hundred thirsty
camels come upon him, they would quench their thirst out of his sweat." (Ahmad
on the authority of Ibn Abbas). That is the asceticism of the fearful who would
accept to die and become nonexistent, for salvation from pain and suffering ends
by death.
The second degree is to abstain from this world out of desire for the reward
of Allah Almighty and His great bliss, and the promised pleasures in the Gardens
of Eden, as regards the houris, palaces, etc. that is the asceticism of the hopeful,
who do not leave the world out of satisfaction with nonexistence, and salvation
from pain and suffering, but they do in covet of permanent existence and eternal
never-ending bliss.
The third degree is the highest, and it applies to those who abstain with no
desire but for Allah and for meeting with Him. One’s heart does not care about
pain in order to seek salvation from it, nor does it think about the pleasures and
delights in order to attain and achieve them. On the contrary: he is
wholeheartedly devoted to Allah Almighty. It is he that upon whom morning
comes while all his concerns turn into only one. He is the real monotheist who
seeks none but Allah Almighty, for whoever seeks anything other than Allah
Almighty has indeed worshipped it, and every sought is worshipped, and every
seeker a servant of it. Indeed, to seek anything other than Allah Almighty is a part
of the hidden polytheism.

Book four: poverty and asceticism

347

That is the asceticism of the lovers and Gnostics, for none loves Allah
Almighty but he who knows Him well. As well as he who knows both the Dinar
and Dirham and is well-aware of the impossibility of combining them together,
loves the Dinar only, similarly, he who knows well Allah Almighty, and the
pleasure of looking at His Holy Countenance, and is well-aware of the
impossibility of combining that pleasure and the pleasure of enjoying the
beautiful houris and graceful palaces in the Garden, loves and gives preference to
the pleasure of looking at the Countenance of Allah Almighty. Think not that
when the inhabitants of the Garden attain the pleasure of looking at the Holy
Countenance of Allah Almighty, their hearts would extend to the pleasure of
houris and palaces.
As for its division as regards the abstained from, there are as many as more
than one hundred sayings and statements about that. So, we would not engage in
transmitting those different statements. But let us refer to these of them that
comprehend the details most, for indeed most of those statements are short of
encompassing the whole matter.
Let us say that the abstained from has many general principles and detailed
issues, some of which explain its divisions. As for the first general principle, it
includes all things other than Allah Almighty: all things other than Allah should
be abstained from even in themselves. The second general principle is to abstain
from all enjoyments, and this includes the desire, anger, arrogance, authority,
majesty, property, etc. the third general principle is to abstain from the property
and majesty and all their means and causes, to which all fortunes of the soul, go
back. The fourth general principle is to abstain from knowledge, power, Dinar
and Dirham. By knowledge and power, I mean that which is intended to possess
hearts.
The details, which might be more explanatory, might probably, make the
things from which one is to abstain beyond calculation. Seven of them are
mentioned by Allah Almighty in one Holy Verse in which He says: " Fair in
the eyes of men is the love of things they covet: women and sons; heaped-up
hoards of gold and silver; horses branded (for blood and excellence); and
(wealth of) cattle and well-tilled land. Such are the possessions of this world's
life; but in nearness to Allah is the best of the goals (to return to)." (A1 Imran
14)
a \\j

i (@) VllJT

All

/alif 5M} Lijjt

£11*

They are reduced to five in another Holy Verse in which He Almighty says:
"Know you (all), that the life of this world is but play and amusement, pomp and
mutual boasting and multiplying, (in rivalry) among yourselves, riches and
children." (Al-Hadid 20)

4©

* J-2jj j-Aj cLxJ Li jJ 15

I LL> l

I^

Those are reduced once again to two in another place where Allah says: "The
life of this world is but play and amusement." (Muhammad 36)

The quarter of the saviors

348

i 0 C^Jj 4-J15 ill

Loj >

However, all are reduced to one in His statement: “And for such as had
entertained the fear of standing before their Lord's (tribunal) and had restrained
(their) soul from lower Desires, Their Abode will be the Garden." (An-Nazi'at
40-41)
The asceticism then is to turn from all fortunes of the self, and once a man
turns from the fortunes of the self, he turns from abidance in this world, and
further shortens his hope in it. What causes him to like to abide is to enjoy of this
world, and of course, one seeks the eternal abidance and enjoyment. But if one
turns away from it, he surely does not like it. For this reason, “When (at length)
the order for fighting was issued to them, behold! a section of them feared men
as - or even more than they should have feared Allah; they said: "Our Lord!
why have You ordered us to fight? Would You not grant us respite to our
(natural) term, near (enough)?" Say: "Short is the enjoyment of this world: the
Hereafter is the best for those who do right; never will you be dealt with unjustly
in the very least!" (An-Nisa 77)

I

At that time, the ascetics appeared distinct from the hypocrites.
As for the ascetics and lovers of Allah Almighty, they fought in the Cause of
Allah in one row, as if they were a solid cemented structure, in expectation of
either of both good things; and whenever they were invited to fighting, they
would smell the smell of Paradise, and hasten to it just like a thirsty hastens to the
cold water, out of eagerness to support the religion of Allah or attain the rank of
martyrdom. Whoever among them died on his bed grieved for his loss of such
rank of martyrdom. Khalid Ibn Al-Walid "Allah be pleased with him" said while
breathing his last: "How many times I regarded with slightness my soul and
attacked the rows of enemies in covet of martyrdom, and now, I am dying on my
bed like the old women." When he died, about eight hundred injuries were
counted on his body. As such was the state of these who were true to their faith
"Allah be pleased with them".
But the hypocrites fled away from the battlefield for fear of death, thereupon
it was said to them: "The Death from which you flee will truly overtake you: then
will you be sent back to the Knower of things secret and open: and He will tell you
(the truth of) the things that you did!” (Al-Jumu'ah 8)
0 J 1 g .~jTj

JJ

^

jAjji <L*

J

(J jji

Ol

^

^
0
by
By giving reference to abidance over martyrdom, they have exchanged better
for worse: " These are they who have bartered guidance for error: but their traffic
is profitless, and they have lost true direction." (Al-Baqarah 16)

Book four: poverty and asceticism ------ —---------------------------------------- 349

As for the sincere in faith, Allah Almighty bought from them their own souls
on condition that they would have Paradise in return. When they knew that they
had left, say, twenty or thirty years of enjoyment (in this world for eternal
enjoyment), they rejoiced of the bargain they have concluded.
Being so, you would learn that the deGnitions given by the righteous to
asceticism do not comprehend it entirely in so much as they refer only to some of
its parts. Each one talked about asceticism from his own point of view, and in
consideration to those whom he addressed:
Bishr, for example, said: "Abstinence from this world is to refrain from the
people." That is a reference to abstinence in majesty in particular. According to
Qasim Al-Jaw'i: "Abstinence from this world is to refrain from (eating and filling)
your inside. The more you have control over your belly, the more you become
abstinent." That is a reference to abstinence in one desire, which, by my life,
prevails over, if not provokes almost all the other desires. According to Al-Fudail:
"Abstinence from this world lies in satisfaction." That is a reference to property
in particular. According to Ath-Thawri: "Abstinence from this world is to shorten
the hope." It indeed comprehends all desires. Whoever wishes to abide have a
long hope (in this world), and whoever shortens his hope seems as if he has
turned away from all desires.
According to Uwais: "If the ascetic comes out seeking (property), asceticism
leaves him." This means that he made reliance (on Allah Almighty) one of the
conditions of asceticism. According to him once again: " asceticism is not to seek
what is guaranteed." By saying so, he refers to sustenance. According to the
traditionalists and scholars of Hadith: "To love this world is to act upon the
opinion and mind, and to abstain in it is to follow the knowledge and abide by
sunnah." If this is intended to refer to the corrupt opinion and mind with which
the majesty in this world is pursued, it would be valid. But it indeed refers to
some unnecessary desires. To be sure, some sciences are pointless for the
hereafter, and one of them is so long that man might spend his whole lifetime in
engagement in it. The condition of the valid ascetic is that any unnecessary thing
should be the Grst to turn away from.
According to Al-Hassan: "The real ascetic is him who would say, if he sees
anyone: 'This is better than me."' He means that asceticism lies in humbleness, in
reference to the denial of majesty and conceit; and those are but parts of
asceticism. Another one said: " asceticism is to pursue the lawful." But where is
this from him who says that " asceticism is not to seek (property)" as Uwais put
it? Undoubtedly, he intended by it not to pursue even the unlawful. According to
Yusuf Ibn Asbat: "Whoever perseveres harm, leaves the desires and eats bread
(sustenance) from unlawful (earnings) has indeed acted upon asceticism in
principle."
There are other statements about asceticism, and all of them, as we have
seen, include only some and not all parts and aspects of it. They are not
defective in themselves, since they might express the current state of the
sayer, or of the people whom he addresses. However, the most

The quarter of the saviors
350
comprehensive statement about asceticism, regardless of being brief, is that of
Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani in which he said: "WE have heard many statements
about asceticism. However, asceticism, in our sight, is to leave everything that
engages you from Allah Almighty." He said the same in more detail:
"Whoever gets married or sets out on journey in pursuit of living or even
Hadith has indeed relied on this world." He made all things in this world in
opposition to asceticism. Abu Sulaiman recited the following statement of
Allah Almighty: "But only he (will prosper) that brings to Allah a sound
heart."
Then he commented on it saying: "It is the heart that has nothing other than
Allah Almighty." He further said: "They abstain from this world for they have
disengaged their hearts from all concerns of this world and rather devoted
themselves wholeheartedly to the hereafter."
As for the division of asceticism on the basis of its rulings, it is divided into
obligatory, supererogatory and safe, as Ibrahim Ibn Adham put it. The obligatory
asceticism is to abstain from the unlawful. The supererogatory asceticism is to
abstain from the lawful. The safe is to abstain from the suspicious things. We
have mentioned the details of abstention in our talk about the degrees of
abstention in the Book of the Lawful and Unlawful. Abstention is a part of
asceticism. It was said to Malik Ibn Anas: "What is asceticism?" he said: "
asceticism is the piety."
As for the traces left by asceticism on the soul, they are endless. That is
because the passing thoughts, states and movements of which the soul enjoys are
infinite and never-ending. The same applies to the apparent states in which the
degrees of asceticism are endless. The utmost of asceticism in this respect is that
of Jesus "peace be upon him" when he took a stone as a cushion on which he put
his head during his sleep. Satan said to him: "Have you not left this world
entirely? Then, what has seemed alluring to you from it?" he asked him: "What is
that which seemed alluring to me from it?" He said: "You have taken the stone as
a cushion." He meant that he blessed himself in elevating his head a bit from the
ground. On that he threw the stone and said to him: "Take it along with what I
have left for you."
It is narrated from John, son of Zechariah "peace be upon them" that he
kept wearing the coarse and rough cloth until it holed his skin in order to
leave enjoyment of lenient clothes and comforting the sense of touching. His
mother asked him to replace it with a woolen cloak, and he did accordingly.
Allah Almighty revealed to him: "O John! You have given preference to this
world over Me!" on that he wept and removed the wool cloak, and returned to
his first state.
The degrees of asceticism then outwardly and inwardly are endless and
beyond calculation. The least degree of it is to abstain from all suspicious and
forbidden things. But some people said: "The real asceticism is to abstain from
the lawful, but to abstain from the suspicious and forbidden things does not
belong to asceticism at all." But later on, they saw that nothing lawful has
remained in the wealth and property of this world, and thus no asceticism could
be imaginable now.

351
Book four: poverty and asceticism
You may argue: "It is true that the real asceticism is to leave all things and not
to engage in anything other than Allah Almighty. But how could this be imagined
with eating, drinking, clothing, mixing with the people, and talking to them, in
which one engages in things other than Allah Almighty?"
In reply to that, it should be known to you that to turn away from all things in
this world and come to Allah Almighty is to wholeheartedly devote oneself to
Him in thought and celebradon, and this could hardly be imagined without
abidance, and one could not abide without the necessities of living. Thus, if you
restrict yourself in this world only to what maintains your body from destruction,
and your purpose is to seek the aid of your body in your acts of worship, you
would not be considered to engage in things other than Allah Almighty. The one
who is providing the she-camel with fodder and watering it on the way to Hajj
does not engage from Hajj in anything else. But your body should be on the way
to Allah Almighty like the she-camel on the way to Hajj. Your purpose should
not be to have your riding mount enjoy of pleasures and delights, but only to
maintain it from the means and causes of destruction until it conveys you to your
destination. Similarly, you should maintain your body from destructive hunger
and thirst by eating and drinking, from the destructive cold and heat by clothes
and residence. You should, in so doing, restrict yourself only to the necessities,
and not aim at enjoyment of pleasures, but rather stick to piety in obedience of
Allah Almighty. This, indeed, is not opposite, but rather requisite to asceticism.
But you may say: "But even, I should inevitably take pleasure in food while
eating." In reply to that, it should be known to you that no harm befalls you in
that, as long as your purpose is not the pleasure in itself. The one who drinks
cold water might take pleasure in it, simply because it has quenched his thirsty.
Similarly, whoever urinates or defecates is relieved by answering the call of
nature. But at the same time, this relief is not intended in itself. The one who
stands at night (for supererogatory prayers) might get comforted with the breezes
of dawn and the sound of birds. But as long as this is not intended in itself, it
does not harm him. From among the fearful, there was such as sought a place
where he could not receive the breezes of dawn for fear he would get comforted
with it, and his heart become familiar with it, which means the intimacy with this
world on the account of the intimacy with Allah Almighty. For similar reasons,
Dawud At-Ta’i had a basin of water exposed to the heat of sun, and he used to
drink the hot water saying: "Whoever senses the pleasure of the cold water finds
it difficult on himself to leave this world."
Such are the concerns of the cautious and careful among the righteous. To be
sure, precaution in all of this is more decisive, regardless of being difficult, since
this difficulty, no matter how severe it might be, is short-lived, and not heavy on
those who know well the opposition of the world to the religion.

CHAPTER FOUR
EXPOSmON OF PREFERENCE OF ASCETICISM IN LIFE NECESSITIES
It should be known to you that the things in which the people engage are
divided into essential and superfluous. The superfluous is like the horses branded
(for blood and excellence) and the like of them. Most people keep them as an

The quarter of the saviors
352
aspect of luxury and comfort through riding them, given that they are able to
walk on foot. What is essential is like eating and drinking, and all that is necessary
for life. Anyway, to enumerate all kinds of the superfluous is impossible for they
are beyond calculation. But this is possible concerning the essential and
necessary. Since the necessary itself might turn into superfluous, in some cases, as
regards the amount, kind and time, it is then important to explicate the way of
abstinence in it. Let’s say that six things comprise the necessities and essentials:
food, drink, clothes, furniture, marriage, and property; and majesty for many
purposes, including those six. We have previously mentioned majesty, and why
people love it and how they could avoid it in the book of Showing Off in the
quarter of destructives. Now, we are going to explain those six essentials.
First necessity: food. Man should have lawful food to sustain himself. But at
the same time, it should not go beyond a certain extent in terms of length and
breadth in order for man to be able to observe abstinence in it. As for length, it is
limited by the duration of one's lifetime. To be sure, whoever has only the food
of his day is not satisfied with it. The breadth of food pertains to its amount, kind
and time of having it. The length could not be shortened unless one's hope
becomes short. The minimum extent of it which gives the highest degree of
asceticism is only to avert hunger from oneself once it is severe and there is fear
of disease because of it. Such one does not save from his early meal for his
evening meal. That is the highest degree of asceticism. The second degree is to
save as much as is sufficient for a month or forty days. The third degree is to save
as much as is sufficient for a whole year. That is the rank of the weak among
ascetics. Whoever saves more than that is not called ascetic, for whoever has a
hope to stay more than a year is of very long hope. He would nod be considered
ascetic unless he has no earnings, and does not accept to take from the people,
like Dawud At-Ta’i who inherited twenty Dinars which he kept and spent along
twenty years. This does not contradict asceticism in principle except in the sight
of him who makes reliance a necessary condition for it.
As for its breadth in relation to the amount, half a pound is the minimum per
day, a complete pound the middle, and a single Mudd the highest, and it is that
which Allah Almighty decreed to feed the indigent and needy as expiation. But
what is above that is out of asceticism. Whoever could not satisfy himself with a
single Mudd at maximum per day has no share in the asceticism of the stomach
for he engages himself in food.
As for its breadth in relation to kind, the least amount is that which sustains
the body, even bread made of dregs; and the middle amount is the parley and
com bread; and the highest is the bread made of unsifted wheat. But if it is sifted,
then, one would enter the area of luxury, and leave that of asceticism. As for
condiment, the minimum is salt or herb and vinegar, the middle is oil or any kind
of similar fat, and the highest is meat of any kind, once or twice a week, and more
than that turns one from the area of asceticism.
As for its breadth in relation to time, the minimum is only once per night and
day in case he is fasting. The middle is to observe fast and drink only and do not
eat one night, and eat and do not drink on the coming night and so on. The

353
highest is to remain hungry at least three days up to week, and more. We have
previously mentioned the way to reduce food, and curb its appetite in the quarter
of destructives. Let such one reflect the state of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" and the companions "Allah be pleased with
them", as to how they abstained from most kinds of food and dispensed with
condiment.
It is narrated on the authority of A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" that she
said: "It happened that as long as forty days came upon us without a lamp or a
fire (for cooking) to be kindled in our house." She was asked: "Then, with which
sustenance had you sustained yourselves?" she said: "With both brown things,
dates and water." (Ibn Majah). Consider how they abstained from meat, soup and
even any kind of condiment.
Al-Hassan said: "the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" used to ride the donkey, wear wool, put on sandals which might be sewed,
lick his fingers (after finishing from food), and eat on the ground. On that he
used to say: "I am only a servant (of Allah), and I eat as the servants eat, and sit as
servants sit."
The Christ "peace be upon him" said: "Let me tell you the truth: whoever
seeks Paradise should eat more often from the parley bread and sleep near
dunghills besides dogs." Al-Fudail said: "the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" has never eaten his fill from the wheat bread for three
consecutive days since he arrived in Medina." The Christ "peace be upon him"
used to say: "O children of Israel! I advise you to stick to water, wild herbs and
parley bread; and beware of the wheat bread for you would not be able to give
due thanks for it."
We have previously mentioned the biography of the Prophets and
Messengers "peace be upon them" and the righteous predecessors and their
abstinence in food and drink. So, there is no need to repeat it once again here.
when the inhabitants of Quba' brought to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" who came to visit them a drink of milk mixed
with honey, he placed the utensil and said: "I indeed do not forbid it; but I rather
leave it out of humbleness before Allah Almighty."
Once, a drink of milk mixed with honey was brought to Umar "Allah be
pleased with him" and it was a very hot day, thereupon he said: "Provided that
you should take away the reckoning for it from me." Yahya Ibn Mu'adh said:
"The truthful ascetic is he, whose sustenance is just what he finds, dress what
screens his body, and residence wherever he is. The world is his prison, the grave
his lying place, the space his sitting place, meditation his thought, the Qur'an his
talk, the Lord his companion, the celebration his friend, asceticism his
acquaintance, grief his state, modesty his motto, hungry his condiment, wisdom
his speech, earth his bed, piety his provision, silence his booty, patience his
support, reliance his sufficiency, mind his guide, worship his profession, and
Paradise his destination Allah willing."
Second necessity: Clothes. The minimum thereof is just what averts cold
and heat and screens the private parts, or in other words, a covering to cover his
Book four: poverty and asceticism

The quarter of the saviors
354
body therewith. The middle thereof consists of a shirt, a hat and a pair of sandals.
The highest is to have handkerchiefs and trousers besides. What is more than that
goes beyond the limit of asceticism. It is requisite for a real ascetic to have no
other garment at the time his garment is being washed. But rather he should
abide in the house at that time. If he possesses a pair of shirts, a pair of
handkerchiefs and a pair of trousers, he would not become an ascetic in terms of
amount.
As regards the kind, the minimum is the rough cloth, the middle the coarse
wool, and the highest the heavy cotton.
Concerning the time, the maximum is what screens for a whole year, and the
minimum is to remain only for a day, to the extent that one of them patched up
his garment with the tree leaves although dryness would damage it soon. The
middle is that which endures for a month or so. But to seek for what is more
than a year is to go beyond the limit of asceticism, for it is out of the long hope.
Whoever has more than that should give it in charity, otherwise, he would not
become an ascetic, but rather a lover of this world. Let one consider the states of
the Prophets and Messengers "peace be upon them" and the companions "Allah
be pleased with them" in this respect, and how they abandoned the lenient and
expensive clothes.
Abu Burdah said: A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" brought out to us a
matted clothing and a heavy loin garment and said: "the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" died while he was putting on those two
garments." (Al-Bukhari and Muslim).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Indeed, Allah Almighty loves him who puts on the cheap of clothes and does
not care about its kind."
Amr Ibn Al-Aswad Al-Ansi said: "I never put on the expensive clothes for
which I am recognized (among the people), nor do I sleep at night on a covering,
nor do I ride on a comfortable mount, nor do I fill my belly with food." On that
Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him" said: "Whoever is pleased to
see the guidance of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" let him look at Amr Ibn Al-Aswad." (Ahmad).
In another narration the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "No servant puts on an expensive garment for which he likes to
gain fame, but that Allah Almighty turns away from him until he takes it off, no
matter how dear he is in His sight." (Ibn Majah on the authority of Abu Dharr).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" bought a
garment for four Dirhams, and both his upper and lower garments were no more
than ten Dirhams, and four and a half cubits in length. He "peace be upon him"
bought trousers for three Dirhams. He "peace be upon him" used to put on two
white woolen garments called a suite for they were of the same kind. Sometimes
he put on two Yemenite heavy Burdahs.
Once, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" put
on a two hundred-Dirham silk garment only for one day, and his companions
went on touching it and saying with exclamation: "O Messenger of Allah! Has it

355
Book four: poverty and asceticism ---------------------------been sent down upon you from the Garden?" indeed, he was a gift from AlMuqawqis, the chief of Egyptian Copts, and he liked to honor it by wearing it.
Then, he "peace be upon him" took it off and sent it as a gift to a man from the
polytheists. Afterwards, he forbade putting on silk and heavy brocade. He seemed
to have put it on at first in order to confirm the prohibition, the same as he did
with the gold ring, which he wore one day and then took it off and forbade men
to wear gold rings.
He "peace be upon him" did the same with Barirah when he said to A'ishah
"Allah be pleased with her": "Buy her and put the condition of allegiance on her
family." Then, he came up the pulpit and forbade that the slave's allegiance
should continue to be to the owners after they sell him. (both sheikhs on the
authority of Wahb).
He "peace be upon him" also made permissible the Mut’ah marriage for three
days after which he prohibited it by way of confirming the sanctity of marriage.
(Muslim on the authority of Salamah Ibn Al-Akwa').
One day, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
prayed in a square garment with marks, and when he finished and concluded the
prayer with Taslim, he said: "I have been engaged in this (square garment of
marks). Take it and give it to Abu Jahm and bring me his coarse mande instead."
he thus favored the coarse mande to his soft square garment.
On another occasion, the strap of his sandal was torn thereupon he replaced
it with a new one, in which he offered prayer. But when he ended it with Taslim
he said: "Take away that new strap, and bring me back the torn one, for it drew
my attention during the prayer." Once, he "peace be upon him" put on a gold
ring and caught a glimpse of it while he was on the pulpit, thereupon he threw it
away and said: "This (gold ring) has diverted my attention from you: I took a
glance of it and a glance of you."
One day he "peace be upon him" put on a new pair of sandals, whose
smartness appealed him, thereupon he fell in prostration and said: "Their
smartness has appealed me thereupon I humbled myself before my Lord lest He
would be displeased with me." Then, he came out with them and gave them to
the first indigent person he met.
It is narrated on the authority of Sinan Ibn Sa'd "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: A cloak of fine wool was woven for the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" with a black fringe. When he put it on he said:
"Look how smart it is! How soft it is!" a Bedouin stood up and said to him: "O
Messenger of Allah! Grant it to me." However, whenever the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was asked for anything, he would never
withhold it. He "peace be upon him" gave it to him and commanded that another
one be woven for him, and he "peace be upon him" died before it was finished.
(Abu Dawud and At-Tabarani on the authority of Sahl Ibn Sa'd).
It is narrated on the authority of Jabir "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: One day, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
entered upon Fatimah "Allah be pleased with her" while she was grinding with
the millstone, and she was having a clothing of camel hair. When he caught a

The quarter of the saviors
356
glimpse of her he wept and said: "O Fatimah! Taste die bitterness of this world
for the bliss of the hereafter." On that occasion Allah Almighty revealed to him: "
And soon will your Guardian-Lord give you (that wherewith) you shall be wellpleased." (Ad-Duha 5)
4©

j

Cjyl]j }

(Abu Bakr Ibn Lala).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "The best of my people, as I was told by the highest company (in the
heaven), are those who laugh publicly because of the extensive mercy of Allah
Almighty, and weep in secret out of fear of His punishment. Their burden is light
on the people and heavy on themselves. They wear the old torn pieces of
clothing and follow the holy men (of religion). Their bodies are on earth and their
hearts are near the Throne (of Authority)." (both Al-Hakim and AJ-Baihaqi).
That was the biography of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" in the clothes, and he recommended all of his people to follow him
saying: "Whoever loves me should act upon fny sunnah." He "peace be upon
him" further said: "I advise you to stick to my sunnah and the way of the rightlyguided caliphs (my successors) after me: abide by it stricdy." (Abu Dawud, AtTirmidhi and Ibn Majah on the authority of Al-Irbad Ibn Sariyah). In
confirmation of that Allah Almighty said: " Say: "If you do love Allah, follow me:
Allah will love you and forgive you your sins; for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful."" (A Imran 31)

The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" advised
A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" saying: "If you like to join me, then, avoid
sitting with the rich and wealth among the people, and do not abandon a garment
until you patch it (and it becomes useless because of patches)." (At-Tirmidhi and
Al-Hakim).
The shirt of Umar "Allah be pleased with him" had as many as twelve
patches, with some of which of leather. Once, Ali Ibn Abu Talib "Allah be
pleased with him" bought a garment for three Dirhams and put it on while he
was the caliph, and cut its sleeves from the wrists and said: "Praise be to Allah
Who has dressed me in that good dress."
According to Ath-Thawri and others: "Put on of clothes what makes you
neither famous in the sight of the learned, nor contemptible in the sight of the
ignorant." He said: "Whenever a poor came upon me during my prayer, I would
let him pass, and whenever anyone of the world seekers having an expensive suite
came upon me, I would be displeased with him, and not let him pass." One of
the learned said: "I evaluated the garment and pair of sandals of Sufyan for a
Dirham and four Daniqs."
Ibn Shubrumah said: "The best of my clothes is that which serves me; and the
evil of my clothes is that to which I am a servant." One of the wise said: "Put on
of clothes what helps you mix with the laymen, and do not put on of them what
makes you famous for it and causes the people to look at you because of it." Abu

357
Book four: poverty and asceticism
Sulaiman Ad-Darani said: "Clothes are of three kinds: a dress for Allah Almighty,
and it is that which screens the private parts; a dress for oneself, whose softness
is required; and a dress for the people, whose essence and smartness are
required." According to another one: "He whose dress becomes soft, his religion
turns weak accordingly."
The dress of anyone of the majority of religious scholars from among the
Tabi'is was as cheap as 20-30 Dirhams. The dress of Al-Khawas, for instance was
of two pieces: a shirt and a lower garment underneath it, and perhaps he put the
tail of his shirt over his head. It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Whoever leaves a dress of beauty and
smartness, just out of humbleness to Allah and seeking His Countenance,
although he has the power to have it, it becomes incumbent upon Allah Almighty
to save for him from the most beautiful women of Paradise in tents of pearl."
Allah Almighty revealed the following to one of His Prophets: "Tell My
devotees not to dress themselves in the dresses of My enemies, nor enter the
gateways of My enemies, lest they would become of My enemies." Rafi' Ibn
Khadij "Allah be pleased with him" looked at Bishr Ibn Marwan while he was
teaching religion in the mosque of Kufah, thereupon he said to the people:
"Consider how your commander teaches you religion and he has over his body
the dress of the dissolute." Indeed, he had very soft clothes. On another
occasion, Abdullah Ibn Amir Ibn Rabie'ah came to Abu Dharr "Allah be pleased
with him" and he had an expensive suite, and he started talking about asceticism,
thereupon Abu Dharr "Allah be pleased with him" put his palm on his mouth
and gave no care to Abdullah, who grew angry. He made a complaint against him
to Umar "Allah be pleased with him" who said: "It is you that have done so with
yourself. You talked about asceticism in front of him while having this expensive
suite."
Ali Ibn Abu Talib "Allah be pleased with him" said: "Allah Almighty took the
pledge from the imams of guidance to be in the state of the lowest among the
people in order for the rich to imitate them, and the poor not to be contemptible
for his poverty. When he "Allah be pleased with him" was blamed for his rough
and coarse clothes he said: "It is closer to humbleness, and more convenient to
cause the Muslim to follow it." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" forbade luxury and said: "Allah Almighty has servants who
do not lead a luxurious life."
Fadalah Ibn Ubaid who was the governor of Egypt was seen disheveled and
barefooted thereupon it was said to him: "Do you behave like this although you
are the governor?" On that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" commanded us to be barefooted sometimes." (This is
reported by Abu Dawud). Ali Ibn Abu Talib said to Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah
be pleased with them": "If you like to join your two companions (The Prophet
and Abu Bakr), then, raise the shirt, lower die loin cloth, sew your sandals, and
do not eat your fill." Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: "Be austere in your
life, and do not imitate the non-Arabs in their uniform, those of Caesar and
Khosrau." Ali "Allah be pleased with him" said: "Whoever gets dressed in the
dress of a people belongs to them."

The quarter of the saviors
The Messenger of AUah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Among the worst of my people are some who are fed with all kinds of pleasure:
they seek die delicious kinds of food and expensive clothes, and speak
ostentatiously." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" further said: "The lower garment of a faithful believer should reach half his
legs, and there is no harm on him in what is below it down to the ankles, and
what is below that would be in the fire (of Hell); and on the Day of Judgement,
Allah Almighty would never look at him who used to drag his garment (on the
ground) out of arrogance." (Malik, Abu Dawud, An-Nasa’i and Ibn Hibban on
the authority of Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri and Abu Hurairah).
Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani told that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said: "None among my people puts on hair (clothes)
except for a hypocrite or a foolish." According to Al-Awza'i: "Putting on wool is
out of sunnah on journey, and a religious innovation in residence." Once
Muhammad Ibn Wasi' entered upon Qutaibah Ibn Muslim, and the former had a
cloak of wool. Qutaibah asked him: "What has forced you to put on that woolen
clothing?" He kept silent, thereupon Qutaibah said once again: "Do I talk to you
and you do not answer me?" He replied: "Indeed, I dislike to say that I have done
so by way of asceticism, thereby claiming purity to myself, or out of poverty,
thereby making a complaint against my Lord."
Abu Sulaiman said: "When Allah Almighty took Abraham "peace be upon
him" as a bosom friend, it was revealed to him to screen his private parts
from the earth. He used to take a single one from everything except that he
had a pair of trousers so that whenever one was being washed, he would put
on the other in order for his private parts to be always screened." It was said
to Salman Al-Farisi "Allah be pleased with him": "Why do you not put on the
fine of clothes?" He said: "What could a servant do with the fine dress? If he
is set free (from life by death), he would have, by Allah, a dress that is never
torn out." It is narrated from Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz that he had a cloak and
mantle of hair which he used to put on at night whenever he stood for prayer.
Al-Hassan said to Farqad As-Sabakhi: "Do you think you are superior to the
people by virtue of your mantle? I have been reported that most of those who
put on mantles are hypocrites."
Third necessity: Residence. The abstinence in it also has three degrees: the
highest is not to demand a particular place for oneself, but he is rather satisfied
with a comer in any mosque, like the people of Suffah (the poor among
emigrants). The middle is not to demand a particular place for himself, more than
a shed or a hut of leaf stalks. The lowest is to demand a built chamber for himself
by way of buying or hiring. If the residence is as large as to satisfy his need and
no more, and has no decoration or adornment, this would not turn him out of
the last degree of asceticism. In general, what is intended for necessity should by
no means go beyond the limit of necessity. Thus, one should take from this world
only what is necessary, i.e. to regard it no more than the equipment and means of
religion, and what is beyond that opposes religion. The purpose of residence is to
avert cold and rain, and to protect oneself from sights and harm.

358

359
Book four: poverty and asceticism
It was said that the first aspect of the long hope after the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" appeared in embroidery of clothes and
construction of buildings. During his lifetime, most people used to build with leaf
stalks, and later on, they came to build with stones, gypsum and bricks. It is
related in a particular narration: "A time will come upon the people in which they
would embroider their dresses in the same way as the Yemenite Burdahs are
embroidered." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
commanded his paternal uncle Al-Abbas "Allah be pleased with him" to destroy a
dome he had built to make high his residence.
It is narrated on the authority of Anas Ibn Malik "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
came out one day and found a high dome, thereupon he asked: "What is this?"
his companions told him: "It belongs to so and so, a man from amongst the
Ansar." He remained silent, and kept it in himself, until when that very man came
to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and saluted
him among the people, he turned back from him. He did the same many times,
until the man came to know that he was angry with him, and that he had
estrangement towards him. He complained of that to his companions and said:
"By Allah, I disapprove of the conduct of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" towards me." They said: "He came out and saw
your dome." He then went to his dome and put it down, and leveled it with the
ground. One day, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" came out and did not see the dome. He asked: "What has happened to the
dome?" they said: "Its owner complained to us your estrangement towards him,
and we told him, thereupon he put it down." On that the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "No doubt, even.7 building might
be (a cause of) destruction to its builder unless it is inevitably necessary." (Abu
Dawud).
According to AJ-Hassan: "the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" died and he did not even place a stone over a stone, nor a pipe
over a pipe (i.e. he did not build anything." (Ibn Hibban, Abu Na'im and AtTabarani). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "If Allah intends evil for a servant, He causes him to consume his wealth in
water and clay (i.e. in the bricks of building)." (Abu Dawud on the authority of
A'ishah). It is narrated on the authority7 of Abdullah Ibn Amr "Allah be pleased
with him" that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" came upon us and we were setting right a bower belonging to us,
thereupon he asked: “What is that (which you are doing)?” we said: “It is a bower
belonging to us, and it was about to collapse; and we are mending it.” On that the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “I do not
think but that the matter (of death) will be sooner than that.” (Abu Dawud, AtTirmidhi and Ibn Majah).
Noah "peace be upon him" took a house of pipes and it was said to him:
"Would that you build a house (from stones)!" On that he said: "This is very
much for him who is going to die." Al-Hassan said: "We entered upon Safwan

f
The quarter of the saviors
360
Ibn Muhairiz "Allah be pleased with him" and he had a house of pipes which
inclined on him. We said to him: "Would that you repair it!" He said: "How many
a man died while this remained standing." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "Whoever built beyond what
suffices him would be required to carry it on the Day of Judgement." (AtTabarani on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud). According to a certain narration: "One
should receive reward for everything he spends on earth, except what he spends
on water and clay (i.e. on building)." (This is reported by Ibn Majah on the
authority of Khabbab Ibn Al-Aratt).
In comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: " That House of
the Hereafter We shall give to those who intend not high-handedness or mischief
on earth: and the End is (best) for the righteous" (Al-Qasas 83)

,11

4 s2s

^3

15^

“5 oiAU

Vy^\ j\Alt dlb ^

It is said that it refers to authority and competition in constructing high
buildings. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Every building would be a means of evil on its builder on the Day of Judgement
except for what is intended only to protect from heat and cold." (Abu Dawud on
the authority of Anas). The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said to the man who complained to him of his narrow house: "It
would be spacious in the heaven" i.e. in Paradise. (Abu Dawud and At-Tabarani
on the authority of Khalid Ibn Al-Walid, and he is the man who made the
complaint).
Once, Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him" saw on his way to
Sham a building of bricks, stone and gypsum, thereupon he said: "I have never
thought that from among this Muslim nation, there is such as builds like the
building of Haman to Pharaoh." He meant the statement of Pharaoh to Haman: "
O Haman! light me a (kiln to bake bricks) out of clay, and build me a lofty palace,
that I may mount up to the god of Moses. (Al-Qasas 38)

i’ii •

OiL-h

^f

4©
)

!

culip U

Lfjlij oy-'J

^

J

It is said that Pharaoh was the first to use bricks and gypsum in building,
which Haman made for him, and then they were followed by the tyrants. That is
the adornment in this life.
Al-Hassan said: "Whenever I entered anyone of the dwelling places of the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" I would touch the
roof with my hand (for it was very short)." According to Amr Ibn Dinar: "If a
servant makes his building as high as more than six cubits, an angel would call
him: "Where are you going O most wicked of those who are wicked?"" Sufyan
forbade people to look at the high constructed buildings and said: "Had it not
been for the looking of people to such buildings, they would not have
constructed them." Looking at such buildings then helps make them high and
well-constructed. According to Al-Fudail: "I do not wonder at him who built and
then left his building when he died. But I wonder at him who sees and does not

361
Book four: poverty and asceticism
take consideration.” According to Ibn Mas'ud ’’Allah be pleased with him”: "A
people will come, and they will raise clay (in buildings), and degrade religion.
They will pray to your Qiblah, and die not on your religion."
Fourth necessity: The house furniture. Abstinence in it also has three
degrees: the highest is the state of Jesus "peace be upon him". He did not have
but a comb and a mug (for water). Once, he saw a man combing his head with
his fingers, thereupon he threw away the comb. On another occasion, he saw a
man drinking from the river with his hand, thereupon he threw away the mug.
That is the ruling of all furniture, i.e. it should be intended to fulfill the purpose,
and no more, and what is beyond that, i.e. what is dispensable would be a source
of evil on its owner in the world and hereafter. As for what is indispensable, one
should restrict himself to the minimum, i.e. pottery in all that for which pottery is
sufficient.
The middle is to have furniture, as much as only satisfies his need. But here,
he uses the same item on a multi-purpose basis, like using the same bowl in
eating, drinking, and saving things. The righteous predecessors liked to use the
same element in many things for the purpose of lightening the burden.
The lowest is to have for each purpose a certain item, but not from the
highest kind. But if those increase in number or in the quality, one would turn
out of the class of the ascetics. Let such reflect the biography of the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and the companions "Allah be
pleased with them".
A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" said: "The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" used to lie on a cushion of leather stuffed with
fibre palm leaf." (Abu Dawud, At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah). According to AlFudail: "The bed of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" was no more than a folded garment and a cushion of leather stuffed with
fiber palm leafs." (At-Tirmidhi in Ash-Shama'il on the authority of Hafsah). It is
further narrated that Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him" entered
upon The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and he
was lying on a mat made of fibre palm leafs whose marks left their traces on his
side, as there was nothing between him and the mat. Underneath his head there
was a leather pillow stuffed with palm fibres, and leaves of a saut tree were piled
at his feet, and above his head hung a few water skins. On seeing the marks of
the mat imprinted on his side, I wept. He said: ”Why are you weeping?” I replied:
“O Allah's Apostle! Caesar and Khosrau are leading the life (i.e. Luxurious life)
while you, The Messenger of Allah, though you are, is living in destitution." The
Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” then replied: "Won't you be
satisfied that they enjoy this world and we the Hereafter?” He answered in the
affirmative, thereupon the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "Then, it would be so." (both Al-Bukhari and Muslim).
A man entered the house of Abu Dharr "Allah be pleased with him" and
started to turn his eyes inside it thereupon he said: "O Abu Dharr! I do not see
any luggage or furniture in your house." On that he said: "We have a house to
which we direct the benefits of our luggage." He said: "But you should have

The quarter of the saviors
362
luggage as long as you are living here.” He said: "Then, the owner of the house
would not let us in it." When Umair Ibn Sa'id came from Hims and entered upon
Umar "Allah be pleased with them" the latter asked him: "What do you have
from this world?" he said: "1 have a stick to recline on and kill a serpent once I
encounter it, a leather container to save my provision in, a bowl to eat in, and a
pot to carry water in to drink and perform ablution for prayer; and what is
beyond that from this world is dispensable." Umar "Allah be pleased with him"
said: "You have told the truth, may Allah bestow mercy upon you."
It is further narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" returned from journey and came to visit Fatimah "Allah be pleased
with her" but he found at the gate of her house a curtain and two heart-shaped
bracelets of silver, thereupon he returned and did not enter upon her. Abu Rati'
"Allah be pleased with him" entered upon her and found her weeping. He asked
her about the reason and she told him the story. Abu Rafi "Allah be pleased with
him" asked him and he said to him: "I have returned for the sake of the curtain
and the two silver bracelets." She "Allah be pleased with her" sent them with Bilal
"Allah be pleased with him" to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" with the following message: "I have given them in charity.
So, put them wherever you see it fitting." He said to Bilal: "Go and sell them and
distribute the price among the people of Suffah." He sold the two heart-shaped
bracelets for two Dirhams and a half and then gave them in charity. Then, the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" entered upon her.
He greeted her and said: "Let my father sacrifice his life for you! You have done
well!" ^This narration is collected from Abu Dawud and Ibn Majah on the
authority of Safinah; and An-Nasa’i on the authority of Thawban).
Once, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" saw a
curtain hung at the gate of the chamber of A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her"
thereupon he removed it and said: "The more I see it, the more I remember the
world. Send it to the family of so and so." (At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i).
One day, A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" spread for him a new mattress,
and the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" used to lie
on a folded garment. He continued to turn on it during the night and when it was
morning he said to her: "Return the old folded garment, and take away this new
mattress from me, for it made me sleepless this night." (Ibn Hibban on the
authority of A'ishah).
On another occasion, five or six Dinars were sent to the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" at night, thereupon he kept them in the
house until morning. But during the night he remained sleepless, and did not get
comforted until he distributed them all towards the end of the night, after which
he slept. A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" said: "At that time, he slept so deep
that I heard his snoring. In the morning he said: "What should Muhammad think
his Lord (would do with him) should he meet Allah with those Dinars still in his
house?" (Ahmad on the authority of A'ishah and Umm Salamah with a slight
variation of wording).
Al-Hassan said: "I have caught seventy good men, and none of them had

363
Book four: poverty and asceticism
anything more than his garment, and none of them put anything between him
and the ground; and whenever he slept, he would place his body direct on the
ground, and cover himself with his garment."
Fifth necessity: Marriage. Many say that there is no significance of
abstinence in marriage in principle, nor in getting married so much. This opinion
was adopted by Sahl Ibn Abdullah who said: "Women were made lovable to the
chief of ascedcs (i.e. the Prophet), so, how should you abstain from them?" Ibn
Uyainah concurred saying: "The most abstinent among the companions was Ali
Ibn Abu Talib "Allah be pleased with him", although he had four wives and over
ten slave-girls." The right is what Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani said: "Every thing
that diverts you from Allah Almighty, be it a wife, a wealth, or a child, is a cause
of bad omen upon you." One's woman might divert him from Allah Almighty.
The right is that sometimes spinsterhood might be better than marriage, as
has previously been shown in the Book of Marriage; and in this way, to leave
marriage becomes out of asceticism. But whereas marriage is better to avert the
overwhelming sexual desire, then, it becomes obligatory. Then, how should
leaving it become out of asceticism? It is true that there is no sin in marriage or
spinsterhood, leaving marriage might be better if one knows that it would engage
in women from the celebration of Allah Almighty. But if it is learnt that one's
wife would not divert him from Allah Almighty, and at the same time, he leaves it
in avoidance of the pleasure of looking at her beauty, having sexuai relation with
her, and so on, then, leaving marriage would not be asceticism. To be sure,
children are intended for his lineage to continue, and proliferation of people from
among the nation of Muhammad "peace be upon him" is one of the acts of
worship. The pleasure that befalls one in what is necessary does not harm him, as
long as it is not intended in itself.
It is like him who leaves food and drink in avoidance of the pleasure of eating
and drinking: it is not asceticism for by so doing, he would lose his life entirely.
Similarly, to leave marriage is to cut off his lineage. So, it is impermissible to leave
marriage in abstinence from its pleasure, for another evil would ensue from that.
It is for this reason that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" got married.
Whoever finds himself in the same state of the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him" in the sense that his heart would not engage in
women and spending on them from the celebration of Allah Almighty, then, his
abstinence in them would be of no significance. But this state is unimaginable to
anyone other than the Prophets and devotees of Allah Almighty. Most people
engage in their wives and women from anything else. If one fears more than one
of them, or the beautiful among them would engage him, let him marry only one
whose share of beauty is little. Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani said: "The abstinence in
women is to prefer the unattractive and orphan to the beautiful and noble."
According to Al-Junaid: "It is better for the novice beginner not to engage his
heart in three things, otherwise, his state would change: earning, pursuing Hadith
and getting married."
Sixth necessity: The wealth and majesty. They are means to achieve the

The quarter of the saviors
364
previous five. As for majesty, it is to have possession of and influence on hearts
in order to be able to do tilings through others in case he is not able to do them
by himself. Whoever is not able to do a certain thing, and is lacking anyone to
serve him in it, he then is lacking majesty in the heart of his servant, for should he
have no influence on him, he would not serve him. One needs to have influence
on die hearts of others either to bring about benefit, avert harm, or get rid of
injustice. The benefit might be brought about by money. One might serve
another for charge, regardless of his influence on him. Influence is needed for
him who serves for no charge.
As for averting harm or injustice, majesty is needed where there is no
justice, or where he lives among wrongful neighbours whose evil he could not
avert unless he has influence on them or majesty in the sight of the ruler. The
extent to which this is needed could not be adjusted, given the fear and bad
assumption of the consequences. But even, whoever goes on in pursuit of
majesty is indeed in the way of destruction. It is not fitting for an ascetic to
seek majesty in principle, for his engagement in religion and worship paves
the way for him to have influence on the hearts which averts harm from him
even if he lives among the disbelievers, let alone the Muslims. In sum, there is
no concession, in principle, to seek majesty and influence on the hearts, and
the littie thereof inevitably leads to causing harm to others. So, let one avoid it
entirely.
As for wealth, it is necessary for living, and I mean of course the littie thereof.
If the ascetic works to get his daily earnings, he should leave earning what is
beyond that. One of them used to stop from working once he earned what is
equal to two fruits or grains. That is the condition of asceticism. If one goes
beyond that to what suffices him for a year and above, he would turn out from
the class of the ascetics, their weak and strong, i.e. would be deprived of the
promised reward in the hereafter, even though the term of ascetic does not leave
him. But if he has an estate from which he withholds the income of a year, due to
his weak certainty of reliance on Allah, there would be no harm, provided that he
should give in charity what is beyond that. But in this way, he becomes a weak
abstinent, for the perfect reliance on Allah is requisite for asceticism to be valid.
To be sure, the burden of a single in all of that is lighter than that of the
guardian of a family. Abu Sulaiman said: "One should not trouble his family by
forcing them to asceticism. But he might rather invite them to it: If they respond
to him, that is good, otherwise he should leave them and do what he likes with
himself." But this requires, on the other hand, that he himself should not respond
to them in what is beyond the limit of moderateness. Let him learn from the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" when he left the
house of Fatimah "Allah be pleased with her" for the curtain and two heartshaped bracelets, for this belong to adornment and not the necessary things for
living.
It seems clear then that seeking majesty and property is not forbidden in
itself as long as it serves the need, and what is forbidden is that which goes
beyond the need. What goes beyond the need is a deadly poison and what

365

Book four: poverty and asceticism

serves the need is beneficial medicine. Between both extremes, there are many
degrees. It is forbidden to drink poison, where as it is obligatory to get
medicine; and what is between them is suspicious. Whoever takes precautions
does so for himself, and whoever indulges in it does so with himself. But
whoever clears himself for the sake of his religion, and leaves what arouses
suspicion to what does not arouse suspicion, and restricts himself only to the
necessary, belongs to the saved sect, whoever limits himself to only what is
necessary should not be attributed to the world in so much as to the hereafter.
That is because this necessary is the core of religion, for it is its perquisite and
an integral part of it.
This is attested by the narration that Abraham "peace be upon him", the
bosom friend of Allah Almighty, became once in need, and he went to ask one of
his companions for a loan, and his companion gave him nothing. He returned in
a state of grief. Allah revealed to him: "Had you asked your bosom friend (Allah),
surely, He would have given you." He replied: "O Lord! I know your aversion for
(the splendor of) this world, and so I felt afraid to ask You for anything of it."
Allah Almighty revealed to him: "No doubt, the need does not belong to (the
splendor of) this world."
What is equal to the need then belongs to religion, and what is beyond that to
this world. Woe to him who dies while his heart is attached to this world, for on
the Day of Judgement, he would be veiled from (the light and glory of) Allah
Almighty, and it is those veiled from Allah whom the fire would touch, and none
else. That is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty: "Verily, from
(the Light of) their Lord, that Day, will they be veiled. Further, they will enter the
Fire of Hell." (Al-Mutaffifin 15-16)

i

frj p (0)

O* fr) ^ ^

The ranks of punishment with fire follow the pain of that veil, although the
pain of the veil itself is sufficient for torment and punishment. We ask Allah
Almighty to inculcate in our hearings what He inspired to the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" when it was said to him: "Love
whomever you love (it is of no avail) for you would leave him (by death)."
When it was revealed to the devotees of Allah Almighty that the servant helps
destroy himself by virtue of his deeds and following his inclinations, they left the
world entirely. Al-Hassan said: "I saw seventy from Badr warriors, all of whom
were abstinent from what was made lawful for them by Allah in the same way as
you are in what was made by Allah unlawful for you. Had you seen them, you
would have ascribed them to madness, and had they seen the best among you,
they would have say that they would have no share (in the hereafter); and had
they seen the evil among you they would have said that those never believe in the
Day of Reckoning. Whenever the lawful property was offered to anyone of them,
he would reject it saying: "I feel afraid it would corrupt my heart on me."" Of a
surety, whoever has a sound heart like them should feel afraid of becoming
corrupt on him. As for those whose hearts died because of the love for this
world, Allah Almighty told about them saying: "Those who rest not their hope on
their meeting with Us, but are pleased and satisfied with the life of the Present,

The quarter of the saviors
366
and those who heed not Our Signs, Their abode is the Fire, because of the (evil)
they earned." (Yunus 7-8)
jj-XiU Up ijjtil*!} US-UT
4

Lj

---5o *tyjl£=> lL* jUl

bt lL)

Oj ^

uiAylJjl {(|5

He Almighty further said: " nor obey any whose heart We have permitted to
neglect the remembrance of Us, one who follows his own desires, whose case has
gone beyond all bounds." (Al-Kahf 28)

4^

£h'3

'4b luIpi ^ (*4a3 V) }

He also said: " Therefore shun those who turn away from Our Message and
desire nothing but the life of this world. That is as far as knowledge will reach
them. Verily your Lord knows best those who stray from His Path, and He
knows best those who receive guidance." (An-Najm 29-30)
dtfj Oj

& >4^ &}!* <D Iblll SJ^J! Yj ^ JJj b/>

4

£r*i &1 >3 ‘-5^7—

‘-4=> cr-H

Jj3 ^ ^

»

1

For this reason, a man said to Jesus "peace be upon him": "Take me with
you in your tour." He said to him: "Then, give out your property and then
follow me." He said: "I could not do so." On that Jesus "peace be upon him"
said: "The Wealthy could hardly enter Paradise." A wise man said: "There is
no day on which the sun rises but that four angels from the four directions of
the land call, two from the East and other two from the West. One of those in
the East says: "O seeker of good! Come to do good! O seeker of evil! Hold
back yourself." The other says: "O Allah! Recompense the one who spends (in
charity), and damage the property of him who withholds (it from spending in
the Cause of Allah)." As for those in the West, one of them says: "Keep away
from death and rather build for destruction." The other says: "Eat and enjoy
for the long reckoning."

CHAPTER FIVE
EXPOSITION OF SIGNS OF ASCETICISM
It should be known that one might think, though falsely, that whoever leaves
property is an ascetic; and it is not so, for to leave property and claim austerity is
easy on him who likes to be praised for asceticism. How many a monk who
reduces himself to a very little quantity of food daily, and lives in a hermitage
without a gate, but just for the sake of showing his state to the people, perchance
they would appreciate and praise him. But even, this does not indicate to
asceticism incisively. Asceticism should include both property and majesty in
order to be complete. Some people might claim asceticism, although they put on
expensive wool and fine clothes.
Consider the account given by Al-Khawas in description of the asceticism
claimants: " A people claim asceticism and at the same time put on the
expensive clothes, in order to deceive the people perchance they would give
t cm as gifts the like of their expensive clothes, and not see them with the

367
Book four: poverty and asceticism
same eye with which they see the poor with contempt, and thus give them the
same as they give the poor and indigent. They claim knowledge and that they
belong to sunnah, and that things are given to them although they keep away
from them, and that they take just for the sake of those other than them. It is
those who eat the world with religion. They are not concerned with purifying
their intention, nor with edifying their morals. They indeed are inclined to this
world, and following their passions and desires." However, to know the
ascedc is problematic, for the state of the ascetic himself is problemadc in
relation to him too.
Any way, there are three signs on which the ascedc should depend within
himself: the first is that he should neither exult for a present thing, nor grieve
for a lost thing, in compliance with the statement of Allah Almighty: " In
order that you may not despair over matters that pass you by, nor exult over
favours bestowed upon you. For Allah loves not any vainglorious boaster."
(Al-Hadid 23)
i (|:o

U-, i% -fSGli a JZ iy.l6 £SO >

He should rather be in opposition to that: he should grieve for the existence
of wealth, and exult for losing it.
The second sign is that both his praiser and dispraiser should be equal in his
sight. The first is the sign of absdnence in property, and the second is the sign of
majesty.
The third sign is that his indmacy and sociability with Allah Almighty prevail
over his heart. That is indeed the sweetness of obedience, and the heart could
hardly be free from the sweetness of love. Love is either for this world or for
Allah Almighty. But both never gather in one heart. It is indeed, the love for
Allah Almighty, which should occupy the heart endrely, with nothing to share
with it. For this reason, one of them was asked: "To what thing did asceticism
lead them?" He said: "To being affable and sociable with Allah."
Some Gnostics said: "If faith is attached to the outward of the heart, it would
love both the world and hereafter and work for them together, and if faith is
attached to the inward of the heart, it would hate this world, and not work for it
at all." According to Abu Sulaiman: "Whoever engages in himself is indeed
occupied from the people - and this is the station of the workers; and whoever
engages in his Lord is indeed occupied from himself — and this is the station of
the Gnostics." The ascetic should be in one of both stations. In his first station,
he engages himself with himself, and at that point, both existence and
nonexistence, praise and dispraise become equal to him.
But he does not become really ascetic just because he has little property. Ibn
Abu Al-Hawari asked Abu Sulaiman: "Was Dawud At-Ta’i an ascetic?" he
answered in the affirmative. He further exclaimed: "But I have learnt that he
inherited twenty Dinars from his father which he withheld and spent along
twenty years. Then, how should he be considered an ascetic?" On that he said:
"You mean that he should fulfill the reality of asceticism, whereas if you intend
the finale, you should know that there is no finale for asceticism for the attributes
of the soul are very numerous. The asceticism would not be perfect unless one

The quarter of the saviors
368
abstains from all of them. But whoever leaves anything in this world, given that
he is able to get it, simply for fear of his heart and religion, should have a share in
asceticism as much as is equal to what he leaves. The highest degree is to leave all
things other than Allah Almighty, and even taking a cushion from a stone, as did
Jesus "peace be upon him".
The sign of ascedcism, in sum, is to have all things equal to you, be it richness
or poverty, praise or dispraise, and so on. Of course, there are many subsequent
signs, like, for instance, to leave the world careless of to whom it is given. It is
said that its sign is to leave the world as it is, without seeking to do anything in it.
According to Yahya Ibn Mu'adh, the sign of ascedcism is to be openhanded with
what is available. According to Ibn Khafif, its sign is to get comforted with
leaving kingdom. It is also, according to him, that the self abstains from this
world with no difficulty. According to Abu Sulaiman: "Wool is one of the
characteristics of asceticism. So, none should put on wool for three Dirhams
while he has a desire for five." According to Ahmad Ibn Hanbal and Sufyan:
"The sign of asceticism is the short hope." According to Sari: "The living of the
ascetic does not become pleasant if he engages from himself, and the living of the
Gnostic does not become pleasant if he engages in himself." According to AnNasrabadhi: "The ascetic is strange in this world, whereas the Gnostic is strange
in the hereafter." According to Yahya Ibn Mu'adh: "The signs of asceticism is
three: deed without relation, saying without covet, and honour without
authority." A man asked him: "When should I enter the shop of reliance, put on
the dress of asceticism and sit in the company of the ascetic?" he said to him:
"When you discipline yourself in secrecy to the extent that if Allah withholds
form you sustenance for three days, you would not weary. But without attaining
that degree, to sit on the carpet of the ascetic is out of ignorance, and I do not
feel safe that you would be scandalized." According to As-Sari: "I have practiced
asceticism and had power over what I intended from it except the abstinence in
the people, which I could not do." According to Al-Fudail: "Allah has made all
evil in my house, with its key being the love for this world, and He has made all
good in my house, with its key being the abstinence from this world."
That is the reality and rulings of asceticism; and if asceticism is not complete
without reliance, let us go to explain it, Allah willing.

—

ijg&.gg an

eliance 01

This is the fifth book of the quarter of Saviors of the Revival of Religion's
Sciences
In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Praise be to Allah, the regulator of kingdom (of this world) and dominion (of
the hereafter), Whose Alone is honor and supremacy, Who elevated the
firmaments of heaven without pillars, and decreed therein the sustenance of
servants. It is He Who diverted the eyes of those endued with sound hearts and
minds from observing the intermediaries and causes to observe only the causer of
causes, and removed their concern with anything other than Him, and
dependence on any disposer other than Him. They worship none but He, putting
in mind that he is Allah the One and Only, the Absolute, Eternal, and that all the
creatures are but servants like them, with whom no sustenance is sought, and that
there is no atom but that its creadon is due to Allah Almighty, and there is no
creeping creature but that its sustenance is incumbent upon Allah Almighty.
When they were certain that He ensures and guarantees the sustenance of His
servants, they put their trust in Him saying: "Allah suffices us for the best
disposer of affairs."
May the blessing and peace of Allah, as much as is fitting for him, be upon
Muhammad, the suppresser of falsehood, and the guide to the straight path, as
well as upon his family and companions.
Coming to the point: reliance (on Allah) is one of the stations of religion, and
one of the positions of the certain (believers). It is among the high degrees of
those near to Allah Almighty. But at the same time, it is abstruse and difficult as
far as knowledge of and work on it is concerned. The point of abstruseness is
that to observe and depend only on the causes and means contradicts
monotheism and rather leads to polytheism. But to leave them all is to have
doubt in the sunnah and criticize Sharia. To depend on causes and means without
seeing them is to change the validity of mind and rather plunge into ignorance. It
is too difficult and abstruse to verify of the significance of reliance in a way that
achieves harmony between monotheism, Sharia and transmitted texts. None has
the power to disclose that issue but the great learned whom Allah has endowed
from His favor and bounty with the light of facts, thereupon they saw and
verified, and then talked about what they witnessed, once they were asked to talk.
Now, we are going, Allah willing, to adopt the following methodology in this
book:
We shall begin with exposition of the virtue of reliance (on Allah Almighty) as
introductory to the book
Then, we shall follow up with the first part, which will be about monotheism
(Tawhid)
Then, we shall talk about the state and work of reliance on Allah Almighty in
the second part.
369

The quarter of the saviors

370

INTRODUCTION
EXPOSITION OF VIRTUE OF RELIANCE ON ALLAH
mendon may be made of the
From among the Qur’anic Holy Verses,
following:
Allah Almighty said: " But on Allah put your trust if you have faith." (AlMa'idah 23)
4
Oj
}
He further said: "and let all that trust put their trust on Him." (Yusuf 67)

4 CjS oP4==s3^-^

^

He said too: " And if anyone puts his trust in Allah, sufficient is (Allah) for
him." (At-Talaq 3)
3-fr* ^
IP’}*'* Cr*j t
He also said: " put your trust in Allah. For Allah loves those who put their
trust (in Him)." (A1 Imran 159)
How excellent is a posidon in which one attains the love and sufficiency of
Allah Almighty. Whomever Allah Almighty suffices, cares, and loves has indeed
achieved a great felicity. By no means would the beloved be punished, removed
or even veiled (from his lover).
Allah Almighty further said: " Is not Allah enough for His servant?" (AzZumar 36)
4
4i)T^
Indeed, whoever demands sufficiency from, and relies on anyone other than
Allah Almighty denies and belies this Holy statement. The interrogadon here is
intended to decide the truth with certainty, like the statement of Allah Almighty:
" Has there not been over Man a long period of Time, when he was nothing, (not
even) mentioned?" (Al-insan 1)
Allah said too: "But if any trust in Allah, behold! Allah is Exalted in might,
Wise." (Al-Anfal 49)
~=v>-

^ op

Ji LU=3^ 0^3 ►

He is exalted in might in the sense that whoever takes shelter to Him is never
humiliated, and whoever resorts to Him never loses protection. Furthermore, He
is Wise in the sense that He never falls short of regulating the affairs of him who
relies on His manipulation.
Allah Almighty says too: "Verily those whom you call upon besides Allah are
servants like unto you: call upon them, and let them listen to your prayer, if you
are (indeed) truthful!" (Al-A'raf 194)
i©

^Oj

I&OjZoi4)l oj >

371
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
He showed that anyone other than Him is but a subjugated servant, whose
need is like yours: then, who could dare to rely on him? He also said: " The things
that you worship besides Allah have no power to give you sustenance: then seek
you sustenance from Allah, serve Him, and be grateful to Him: to Him will be
your return." (Al-Ankabut 17)
*. jj txll
4

*Jj

oj

lijji
(3axil JU*P

^jijS: lljj ^
Lsjj

He also said: " But to Allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth;
but the Hypocrites understand not." (Al-Munafiqun 7)

4®

"5

cyj>- ^13 ^

He said: "regulating and governing all things. No intercessor (can plead with
Him) except after His leave (has been obtained). This is Allah your Lord; Him
therefore serve you: will yet not receive admonition?" (Yunus 3)
4O

Oj-UPLi jL^=4)

f

<-4j31 -Uj

^fl

L ^

Concerning the Prophet Hadiths, a mendon may be made of the following:
It is narrated that Allah's Apostle "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “Nations were displayed before me; I saw a Prophet passing by with a few
followers; a Prophet passing by with a man or two (of his followers); and a
Prophet passing by with nobody. Then a big crowd of people passed in front of
me whom 1 thought to be my followers. It was said: “No. It is Moses “Peace be
upon him” and his followers, but, look at the horizon.” Behold! There was a
multitude of people (filling the horizon). Then it was said to me: “Look there
and there about the stretching sky!” Behold! There was a multitude of people
(filling the horizon). It was said to me: “This is your nadon out of whom
seventy thousand shall enter Paradise with neither reckoning nor torture” .”
Then The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" entered his house
without telling his companions who they (the 70,000) were. So the people
started talking about the issue. Some of them said: "They might be those, who
(believed in and) accompanied The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him”.” Others said: “They might be those, who have been born
in the Islamic era, and have not associated anything with Allah (in worship).”
They mendoned other things. Then, The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" came out and asked them: “What is that about which you are
talking?” they told him. Upon this he said: "They are those who do not treat
themselves by practising charm, or asking others to practice it, nor do they
believe in bad or good omen (from birds etc.). But they put their trust (only) in
their Lord.” On that, Ukashah Ibn Muhsin got up and said: "Invoke Allah for
me to be one of them.” The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "You would be one of them.” Then another person got up and said:
"Invoke Allah for me to be one of them". The Prophet "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: "Ukashah has anticipated you.” (Al-Bukhari and
Muslim on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further

The quarter of the saviors
372
said: "Were you to rely on Allah Almighty as it is fitting for him, He would
sustain you in the same way as He sustains birds: they go hungry early every
morning and return satiated in the evening." (At-Tirmidhi and Al-Hakim on the
authority of Ibn Umar).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "Whoever devotes himself wholeheartedly to Allah Almighty, He Almighty
suffices him all subsistence, and sustains him from wherever he expects not; and
whoever dedicates himself to this world, Allah Almighty entrusts him to it." (AtTabarani, Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Imran Ibn
Hussain).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Whoever is pleased to be the richest of the people, let him be sure of what is
with Allah Almighty more than of what is in his hand." (Al-Hakim and AlBaihaqi on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
It is narrated from the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" that whenever his family were given to hunger he would say to
them: "Stand up to perform prayer." He used to say in this context: "With that
my Lord Almighty commanded me." He recited: " Enjoin prayer on your
people, and be constant therein. We ask you not to provide sustenance: We
provide it for you. But the (fruit of) the Hereafter is for righteousness." (Ta
Ha 132)

i ggj ay&i

> ’Jt- 6,'jjiiilzS y

►

(At-Tabarani on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Salam).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" also said:
"Whoever seeks charm or gets himself cauterized has indeed not relied on Allah
Almighty." (At-Tabarani, At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa’i on the authority of AlMughirah Ibn Shu’bah).
It is narrated that when Gabriel "peace be upon him" said to Abraham "peace
be upon him" as he was thrown away into the fire with the catapult: "Do you
have a need?" he "peace be upon him" said to him: "As for a need from you, it is
not." He said so in fulfillment of His engagements as stated by Allah: "Allah
suffices me for the best disposer of affairs." He said it when he was being thrown
away, thereupon Allah Almighty revealed: " And of Abraham who fulfilled his
engagements." (An-Najm 37)
Allah Almighty revealed to David "peace be upon him": "O David! No
servant holds fast to Me from any of My creatures, and even the earth and
heaven make a plan against him, but that I would make a way out for him."
As for the traditions and sayings, a mention may be made of the following:
Once Al-Khawas recited the following statement of Allah: " And put your
trust in Him Who lives and dies not; and celebrate His praise; and enough is He
to be acquainted with the faults of His servants." (Al-Furqan 58)

Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah

373

Then, he said commenting: "It is not fitting for a servant, after this Holy
Verse, to refuge to anyone else other than Allah Almighty."
It was said to one of the religious scholars during his sleep: "Whoever is
confident of Allah Almighty has indeed got his sustenance."
Another religious scholar said: "Let not the guaranteed sustenance divert you
from the work that is enjoined upon you, with the result that you would waste
your hereafter and get from this world no more than what has been doomed by
Allah Almighty to you."
According to Yahya Ibn Mu'adh: "In the presence of a servant, getting
sustenance without seeking for it indicates that sustenance is commanded to seek
the servant." Ibrahim Ibn Adham said: "I asked a monk from where he eats, and
he said to me: "The knowledge of that is not with me. But ask my Lord from
where he feeds me." Haram Ibn Hayyan asked Uwais Al-Qarni: "Where do you
command me to go and live?" He beckoned to Sham. He asked: "Then, how is
living there?" He said: "Woe to those hearts with which doubt has mixed
thereupon no admonition could avail them." Another one said: "Once I accept
Allah as the best disposer of my affairs, I find a way to every kind of good." We
ask Allah Almighty to provide us with the good etiquettes.

PART ONE: MONOTHEISM
CHAPTER ON EXPOSITION OF THE REAL NATURE OF MONOTHEISM,
WHICH IS THE FOUNDATION OF RELIANCE
It should be known to you that reliance (on Allah) belongs to faith; and all
items of faith consist of knowledge, state and work. The same is true of reliance,
which consists of knowledge, which is the foundation, work, which is the fruit,
and state which is intended by the name reliance.
Let's begin with the knowledge which is the foundation. It is called faith in
language, for faith in general is to believe in something with the heart, and every
kind of trust with the heart is knowledge, and once it is strong, it is called
certainty (of faith). There are numerous branches under certainty of faith. We
need of them only that on which we could establish reliance, i.e. monotheism,
translated by your statement: "There is none worthy of worship except for Allah
alone, Who has no partner", faith in the power which is translated by your
statement: "Whose is the dominion", and faith in munificence and wise which is
indicated by your statement: "To Him be all perfect praise". Whoever then says:
"There is none worthy of worship except for Allah Alone Who has no partner,
Whose is the dominion and to Whom be all perfect praise, and He has power
over all things", his faith would become perfect, I mean the faith which is the
foundation of reliance, or in other words, this statement would become an
attribute inherent to his heart.
As for monotheism, it is the foundation. It is too long to discuss in detail. It
indeed belongs to the sciences of revelation (Mukashafah). But many of
Mukashafah sciences are relevant to works through the states in such a way that
the science of practical religion (Mu'amalah) could not be achieved without them.
So, we should not explain but only what is relevant to the science of practical
religion, otherwise, monotheism becomes like an infinite ocean. Let's say that

The quarter of the saviors
374
monotheism is of four ranks: the core, the core of the core, the husk, and the
husk of the husk. It is like a nut which has two external husks, and a core and fat
inside it called the core of the core.
The first rank is that man says with his tongue: "There is none worthy of
worship except for Allah", while his heart is heedless of or denying it; and this is
like the monotheism of the hypocrites.
The second is that his heart gives trust to the meaning of the statement just as
the common Muslims believe in general; and this is the faith of the laymen
among Muslims.
The third is to view that by way of revelation, i.e. through the lights of the
truth; and that is die stadon of these close to Allah Almighty. It is to see many
things, but see all coming from the One and Irresisdble, i.e. Allah Almighty.
The fourth is to see in the whole existence only One, i.e. Allah Almighty.
That is the contempladon of the sincere affirmers and lovers of truth. It is what
the Sufis call self-consumption for the sake of monotheism, for as a Sufi sees
only One, he does not see himself, and as he does not see himself as being
engrossed in monotheism, he thus consumes himself for the sake of
monotheism, i.e. he fails to see himself or anyone else in existence.
The one of the first rank is a monotheist only by his tongue, which protects
him in this world from being killed. The second is a monotheist with his heart,
i.e. he believes with his heart in what he testifies with his tongue. It becomes then
a knot on his heart, with no expansion of the breast for more. It indeed keeps
one from the punishment in the hereafter if he dies on it, and its knot does not
weaken by sins. There are many tricks to be done (by Satan) to weaken and
dissolve that knot called religious innovations, and others to avert them intended
to straighten and tighten that knot on the heart, called scholastic theology, and
the knowledgeable of it is called scholastic theologian. He stands on the other
extreme opposite to the religious innovator, for his work is to avert the religious
innovator from dissolving or weakening this knot in the hearts of men. The
scholastic theologian might be called a monotheist in the sense that he protects,
with his speech, the concept of monotheism in order for its knot not to get
loosened in the hearts of the laymen. The third also is a monotheist as he does
not contemplate but one doer and maker, since the truth is revealed to him as it
is, and does not see in reality but one doer and maker, since the truth is disclosed
to him as it is. The fourth is a monotheist as nothing is present in his
contemplation but the One and Only: he does not see all things as many but as
One. That is the highest finale of monotheism.
The first is like the nut's outer husk, the second like the internal husk, the
third like the core, and the fourth like the fat that is extracted from the core. To
be sure, there is no good in the nut's outer husk, and if it is eaten, it would taste
bitter, and if it is seen from within, it would seem odious, and if it is taken as fire
wood, it would extinguish the fire and intensify smoke, and if it is left in the
house, it would make narrow the place: in other words, it has no benefit other
than to be left for a time on the nut to maintain it after which it should be
removed from it and thrown away. Similarly, monotheism only with the tongue,

375

Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah

regardless of the trust of the heart is of no use, but rather it has much harm and
is outwardly and inwardly blameworthy. But it benefits for some time to keep the
internal husk until the dme of death; and the internal husk stands for the heart
and body. The monotheism of the hypocrite saves his body from the sword of
the fighters, for they were not commanded to split open the hearts (to know what
is lurldng in them). The sword affects only the body, which stands for the husk,
and the soul leaves the body after death, and in this way, no significance remains
for his monotheism.
It is true that the internal husk is beneficial in comparison with the outer
husk, as it protects the core and keep it from damage, and if it is removed from
the nut, it could be used as fire wood. But it is less significant than the core.
Similarly, only belief without uncovering (the reality of faith) has much benefit
in comparison with only the utterance, though is less significant in comparison
with faith that is accompanied by uncovering and contempladon, which occurs
by the breast expansion in order for the light of faith to enter and shine in it. It
is this expansion which is intended by the statement of Allah Almighty: "Those
whom Allah (in His plan) wills to guide, He opens their breast to Islam; those
whom He wills to leave straying, He makes their breast close and constricted."
(Al-An'am 125)
4
<1)1
^
And: "Is one whose heart Allah has opened to Islam, so that he has received
enlightenment from Allah, (no better than one hard-hearted)?" (Az-Zumar 22)
4©

cr? jy

V-!

^

cr*-*1 ^

Furthermore, although the core is precious in itself, as it is that which is
intended from the nut, at the same time, it is not completely free from the
admixtures that result from juice in comparison with the fat that is extracted from
it. Similarly, the monotheism by acts and deeds is the high purpose of the
followers of the path. But it is not completely free from the admixtures of paying
attention to others, and turning to the things in comparison with him who does
not see but Allah the One and Real.
You may argue: "How could it be imaginable that one does not see but One,
given that he sees the heaven and the earth, and all the physical bodies, and they
are numerous? How should the numerous be only one?" in reply to that, it should
be known to you that this is the highest finale of the sciences of Revelation
(Mukashafah), whose mysteries are impermissible to be lined in a book.
According to the Gnosdcs: "To divulge the mystery of lordship is disbelief." It
also does not pertain to the science of practical religion (Mu’amalah). It is true
that the same thing might be seen as one by a pardcular kind of vision and
according to a certain consideradon, and numerous by another kind of vision and
according to another consideradon. Take, for example, the man who might look
at himself and seem to himself numerous if he views himself as a composite of a
soul, a body, organs, limbs, veins, nerves, bones, flesh, but according to another
vision, and by another consideradon, he seems only one as being only one man
(i.e. one endty). He is one in reladon to humankind. How many a man who sees

The quarter of the saviors
376
another and it does not occur to his mind the numerous things of which he
consists.
Similarly, all that is in existence, the Creator and the creatures, have many
considerations and perspectives from which they could be seen. By one
consideration, all might seem only one, and by another consideration, they might
seem numerous. It is only in this way that you should abandon your rejection of
that high station in which you might not have attained the degree of giving trust
to it; and with this faith of yours in such monotheism, you would have a share
from it, just as if you believe in Prophethood although you yourself are not a
Prophet, you would have a share from it, as much as is equal to the power of
your faith.
This contemplation in which only the One and Real appears, sometimes
remains long and sometimes sparks and flashes like the swift lightning, and this is
more prevailing than the first, which happens only in rare cases. To this AlHussain Ibn Mansur referred when he saw Al-Khawas going here and there on
journeys, thereupon he asked him: "What are those journeys of yours?" he said:
"I am on the way to rectify my status of reliance." Indeed, he was one of the
reliant (on Allah Almighty). On that Al-Hussain said to him: "No doubt, you
have consumed your lifetime in the construction of your inside, then, where is
the similar self-consumption in monotheism?" AJ-Khawas seemed to have
intended to rectify the third station of monotheism, thereupon Al-Hussain
demanded him to move up to the fourth station. Those are the different stations
of the monotheists in brief.
You may argue: "But, an explanation is needed in order to know and
understand how reliance is based on it." In reply, let me say that as for the fourth
station, none could dare to speak about it. Furthermore, reliance is not built on it.
The reliance might happen depending on the third station. As for the first station,
i.e. the monotheism of the hypocrite, it is clear hypocrisy, and it is self-evident.
As for the second, i.e. the belief, it is common to the laymen of Muslims, and the
ways to affirm it by theology, and avert the tricks of religious innovators are
included in the sciences of scholastic theology. It is the third station that on
which the reliance is built. So, let's make a mention of it to the extent to which
reliance is relevant, without the details that are beyond the power of such a book.
It means that it is revealed to you that there is no actor or maker but Allah
Almighty the Creator, and everything in existence, sustenance, withholding and
giving, death, poverty, richness, etc: all is invented and created by Allah Almighty,
with Whom there is no partner. Once this is revealed to you, you would not see
anything else: but your fear would be from Him, your hope would be in Him,
your confidence would be of Him, and your reliance would be on Him, for He is
the sole Actor and maker, and anything other than Him are subjugated and could
not alone move even a single gnat in the dominion of the heavens and the earth.
If the gate of revelation is opened to you, this fact seems clearer to you than
when you see it with the eyes.
It is Satan who keeps you off that monotheism, in a station in which he
seeks to place the stain of polytheism in your hearts through two means: the

377

Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah

first is to turn to the choice of living beings; and the second is to turn to the
non-living beings. An example of turning to non-living beings is your
dependence on rain in producing plants, on die cloud in the rainfall, on the air
in gathering the clouds, and on the wind in balancing the ship, and so on. All of
this is out of polytheism and ignorance of the real nature of monotheism. That
is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty:
And when they board a ship, they supplicate Allah , sincere to Him in
religion. But when He delivers them to the land, at once they associate others
with Him." (Al-Ankabut 65)
4OJJ

O-Ah

* ^TLojT Ji \y^==*j

^

It is said in its interpretation that they say that had it been for the wind, they
would not have been saved.
If the real nature of the world is revealed to anyone, he comes to know
that the wind is no more than the air which could not move by itself in the
absence of a mover, and so he goes on associations until he reaches the first
Mover for Whom there is none to move, nor is He movable, i.e. Allah
Almighty. It is He Almighty Who moves and acts and not the servant,
although it seems to himself that he acts and makes. This meaning is clear in
the statement of Allah: "when you threw (a handful of dust), it was not your
act, but Allah's." (Al-Anfal 17)

Once it is revealed to you that all things in the heavens and on earth are but
subjugated creatures, Satan turns away from you disappointed, in despair of
mixing your monotheism with the stain of polytheism.
But at this stage, he comes to you through the other means, i.e. to make you
turn to the choice of living beings in the voluntary acts. He says to you: "How
could you see all things from Allah although you see that this man gives you your
sustenance willingly, and he could give you if he so likes, or withhold from you if
he so likes? It is this man who could chop off your head with his sword, and he
has power over you, in the sense that he could behead you if he so likes, or give
you life if he so likes. So, how should you not fear him? How should you not put
your hope in him? Your affair is in his hand: A fact which you see clearly with
your eyes."
At that point, most people slipped, save the sincere and truthful servants of
Allah Almighty, over whom Satan has no authority. But he whose heart and
breast are not expanded for the light of Allah, falls short of observing the real
nature of the Compeller of the heavens and the earth, and seeing that He is
irresistible from behind all things in existence; and that is, to be sure, evident
ignorance. Indeed, the masters of hearts are on the opposite extreme, to whom
Allah Almighty made every gnat and atom in the heavens and on earth speak,
announcing His power, with which everything spoke, and they heard their
glorifications and magnifications of Allah Almighty, and witness of their failure
without that power. This is not heard by those who depend only on their
apparent hearing which does not go beyond sounds, and of course it is not this

The quarter of the saviors
which I mean, for both man and animals share in it. But I really mean hearing
that perceives words with neither sound nor letters, neither in Arabic nor in any
other language.
But you may argue: "That is a far-fetched miracle, which is beyond the
reach of the mind. Anyway, describe to me how it speaks, and with which it
speaks, and how it glorifies and magnifies Allah, and how it witnesses to itself
of failure." In reply to that, it should be known to you that every gnat and
atom has a private conversadon in secret in the sight of the masters of hearts.
This secret private conversadon is infinite for it stems from the endless
oceans of words of Allah Almighty: "Say: "If the ocean were ink (wherewith
to write out) the words of my Lord. Sooner would the ocean be exhausted
than would the words of my Lord, even if we added another ocean like it, for
its aid."" (Al-Kahf 109)

378

4

-Lfljjj

jJuJ jJjo-iLfcsl ISIju

y

On the other hand, it speaks in private with the mysteries of the dominion of
the heavens and the earth, and it is out of wickedness to divulge the mysteries.
That is because die breasts of the free men act as the graves of mysteries. Have
you ever seen that a keeper of a king's mysteries divulged the mysteries of his
king in public? If it is permissible to divulge every secret, the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" would not have said: "Were you to
know what I know, you would laugh little and weep much." He rather mendoned
that to them in order to weep much and laugh but little. He would not also have
been forbidden to divulge the mystery of the Divine Decree, saying: "If stars are
mentioned, then, you should abstain from talk; and when the Divine decree is
mendoned, you should also abstain from talk; and when my companions are
mentioned (with evil), you should abstain from talk." (At-Tabarani and Ibn
Hibban). He would not also have favored Hudhaifah "Allah be pleased with him"
with some secrets.
There are two impediments from divulging the private talk of the gnats
and atoms of the heavens and earth with the masters of hearts: the first is the
impossibility to divulge the mystery. The other is that their words are infinite
and incalculable.
In sum, the mover, maker and actor of all things is only One, i.e. Allah
Almighty, other than Whom there is no deity. All things other than him in
existence are but subjugated creatures, under His disposal and command, and
within His power: He is the First and the Last, die Evident and the Hidden. One
might ask: "How should He have two opposing attributes? The first could not be
the last, and die evident could not be the hidden." In reply to that, let me say: He
is the First in relation to all existing things that emanate from Him Only, one
after die other; and He is the Last in relation to the path the followers follow to
Him: they indeed continue to move from one station to another until they reach
His presence, which is the end of journey. In this way, He is the last in
contemplation, and the First in existence. On the other hand, He is the Hidden in
relation to those who devote themselves in the world of visibles in pursuit of
perceiving Him with their five senses; but He is evident for him who seeks to see

Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah

379

Him on the light of the illumination of the heart with the deep insight that
penetrates into the dominion of the invisibles. That is the way of monotheism of
the followers of the path of monotheism in acting, i.e. those to whom it has been
revealed that the actor and maker is only One.
You may argue: "Then, the conclusion is that this monotheism is built on the
faith in the dominion of the invisibles. But whoever does not understand it, or
even rejects it, what would his treatment be?" In reply to that, let me say that as
for him who rejects the dominion of the invisibles, there is no remedy for him or
at least his treatment is very difficult.
As for him who does not reject in so much as he does not understand, the
followers of the path should first consider his eye with which he sees the
dominion of the invisibles: if it is sound, but stained with blackness which is
anyway remediable, let them engage in removing that blackness and cleaning it,
and once it is repaired, he should be instructed to the path to follow it. This is
just what the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" did
with his private companions. But in case it is not remediable, then, he would have
no power to follow the path we have previously mentioned in monotheism, nor
to hear the private conversation of the gnats and atoms of the kingdom of the
visibles and the dominion of the invisibles only depending upon the testimony of
monotheism. In this way, they talk to him with sounds and letters, for in the
world of the visibles, there is also a kind of monotheism. Every one endued with
mind knows that the house which has two lords would be vulnerable to
corruption, and the same is true of the country when it has two rulers. He thus is
addressed according to the capacity of his mind, and told that the Lord of all the
worlds is only One, and the ordainer is only one, for indeed " If there were, in the
heavens and the earth, other gods besides Allah, there would have been
confusion in both! But glory to Allah, the Lord of the Throne: (High is He)
above what they attribute to Him!" (Al-Anbiya 22)

Thus, on the basis of his experiences and observations in the world of
visibles, the belief of monotheism is planted in his heart in a way that befits
his mind. Allah Almighty obligated the Prophets "peace be upon them" to
address the people according to their limited minds, and this is why the Holy
Qur'an was revealed in the Arabic language in accordance with the Arabic
style of discourse.
You may argue: "Is this monotheism based on belief fitting to be a
foundation and principle of reliance?" In reply to that, let me answer in the
affirmative. However, if the belief becomes strong, it gives the same effect of
revelation in arousing the states. But unfortunately it often weakens and is soon
exposed to trouble and shake. For this reason, the one as such needs a scholastic
theologian to protect him with his theology, or to learn theology by himself in
order to guard his belief and faith. But whoever sees the path and follows it by
himself, there is no fear on him. The example of those of only belief in
comparison with those of revelation is but like the example of the Pharaoh's
sorcerers in comparison with the companions of Samin. Since the sorcerers of

The quarter of the saviors
380
Pharaoh knew, through their long experience and practice, the furthest point to
which the effect of magic might reach, and when they saw from Moses "peace be
upon him" what went beyond the limit of magic, and the real nature of the matter
was revealed to them, they gave no care at all to the Pharaoh's threat to them:
"Be sure I will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides, and I will
cause you all to die on the cross..." They said: "Never shall we regard you as
more than the Clear Signs that have come to us or than Him Who created us! So
decree whatever you desire to decree: for you can only decree (touching) the life
of this world." (Ta Ha 71-72)

^

d jjLA

tljl

b*

3 (_£ jjTj

I ^ j*

That is because revelation and clarification always prevent change. Those are
unlike the companions of Samiri, who, because their belief was based only on
what appeared to them from the snake, so, when they saw the calf made to them
by Samiri and heard a sound coming out of it, they soon changed and hearkened
to his saying: "This is your god, and the god of Moses."
But even, "Could they not see that it could not return them a word (for
answer), and that it had not power either to harm them or to do them good?" (Ta
Ha 89)

}S liiL; % h?

y-y. ojy.

>

Whoever bases his belief only on the outward show of a snake is more likely
apt to disbelieve when he sees a calf for both belong to the world of visibles, and
things in the world of visibles are contradictory. This defect is missing in the
dominion of invisibles for it belongs to Allah Almighty.
You may argue: "All you have mentioned concerning monotheism is evident,
even in the matter of the intermediaries: all things are subjugated, except in the
human movements: it is learnt that man moves whenever he wills and stops
whenever he wills. So, how could he be subjugated?" in reply to that, it should be
known to you, that even if man wills to do whenever he likes to will, or does not
will to do whenever he does not like to will, it would remain also in this point
that one could slip and err. But it is learnt that he does what he wills to do,
willingly or unwillingly, for the will, in principle, is not up to him, as had it been
up to him, it would have been lacking another will, and so on in an endless series
of associations. But, since the will is not up to him, then, once the will that
manipulates the power is available, then, the power would be manipulated in
willing submission, and would have no way of opposition. To be sure, the
movement necessarily results from the power, and the power necessarily moves
whenever the will is determined. Those necessities are caused by, and result from
each other. The man could, by no means, avert the present will or the
manipulating power in subjugating the things decreed. In all, he is forced by
necessity.
You may further argue: "This is merely necessitarianism, and necessitarianism

381
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
contradicts the freedom of choice, and you do not reject the freedom of choice:
Then, how could one have the freedom of choice and also be forced by necessity
simultaneously?" In reply to that, let me say that if the cover is Lifted, you would
learn that one is also forced by necessity even in his choice. That is, he is forced
to choose. But how such as does not understand the significance of the freedom
of choice learn that? Let's explain the significance of the freedom of choice in
brief from the theological perspective but without making it lengthy for this book
is intended only to concentrate on the sciences of practical religion.
The verb to act is ascribed to man in three things: it is said that man writes
with his fingers, breathes with the help of his lungs and throat, and holes the
water once he stands upon its surface with his body. In this way, holing (of the
water), breathing and writing are ascribed to him. All three stand on the same
footing in relation to necessitarianism, but they have many differences between
themselves. Let me express it for you in three phrases: one's holing the water
when he is on the surface of the water is a natural act, his breathing is a willful
act, and his writing is an optional act. Necessitarianism is clear in the natural act
for if one stands on the surface of the water, or jumps up to the air, either the
water or the air would inevitably be holed. This holing might occur necessarily
after jumping. The same is true of breathing: the movement of the lungs and
throat in relation to the will of breathing is like the holing of the water in relation
to the weight of the hands. As there is a weight, it should lead to holing after it.
But as well as the weight does not go back to him, similarly, the will is not up to
him. For this reason, if one's eye is aimed at by a needle, his eyelids would
necessarily be folded, and if he likes to leave it open, he would not be able to do
so, given that closing the eyes necessarily is a willful act. This then has joined the
natural act in so far as it occurs necessarily.
As for the third act, i.e. that which belongs to the freedom of choice, it is the
cause of confusion and suspicion, like writing with the fingers, speaking with the
tongue and so on. In other words, it is that in which it could be said: "He could
do if he so likes, and he could not do if he so likes." Thus, he thinks that the
freedom of choice is up to him. But indeed, this is out of ignorance. So, let's
reveal it. The will always follows the knowledge whether or not a particular thing
agrees with your disposition. Things are divided into those which your external or
internal observation judges to agree with you without confusion or hesitation,
and those in which the mind might hesitate. What we admit without hesitation is
that if anyone aims at your eye with a needle, or at your body with a sword, your
knowledge would soon judge, without reluctance or doubt, that averting this
from yourself is better to and thus agrees with you. No doubt, in this case, the
will is aroused by knowledge, and the power by the will, which leads to the
movement of the eyelids to avert the needle, and the movement of the hand to
avert the sword. But this happens without reflection or thinking, although it is
willful.
The other kind of things in which the mind is confused and hesitates
whether or not they agree with one's disposition. It thus needs some
reflection and meditation in order to be able to distinguish whether good lies

The quarter of the saviors
382
in doing or leaving that thing. If, by virtue of reflection and meditation, there
is knowledge that any of both (doing or leaving) is better, this thing then
would join the first kind which needs not reflection nor meditation. In this
case too, the will would be stimulated as it is to avert the sword and needle. If
the will is stimulated to do an act whose good appears to the mind, it is called
the freedom of choice (Ikhtivar), derived from good (Khayr), i.e. to be
stimulated to do what seems to the mind to be good. The freedom of choice
then is a particular will to be stimulated by what seems to the mind to be good
after reflection and meditation.
It is this reflection and meditation which the mind needs to distinguish
between the better of both good things and the worse of both evil things. The
will is unimaginable to be stimulated in the absence of sense and imagination or
the firm determination of the mind itself. For this reason, if one wants to cut off
his neck, he could not do so, not because he has no power to do so, nor because
there is no weapon to use, but because he lacks the will that gives rise to the
power to do so. This will is lost because it is stimulated by the mind's judgement
that this act agrees with the disposition. However, to kill himself does not agree
with his disposition. One could, by no means, then kill himself although he has
the power to do so unless there is an extremely painful unbearable punishment
awaiting him, in which case the mind hesitate to judge which is the worse of both
evils. If it becomes preponderant to it, after reflection and meditation, that killing
himself is less harmful, and its judgement is decisive in which there is no
hesitation, he could kill himself, and if it judges that killing is more harmful, then,
he could not kill himself.
In sum, the will is motivated by the judgement of the mind and senses, and
the power is motivated by the will, and the movement is motivated by the power,
and all are decreed in man even though he does not know. Man is no more than a
place where all those things happen in him. But to say that they are up to him is
false. That he is forced by necessity means that all what happens in him is
subjugated by another one and not by him; and that he has the freedom of choice
means that he is a place of will to happen in him by force after the judgement of
the mind that this act is good and agrees with his disposition, and in this
judgement also he is forced by necessity. In this way, he is forced by necessity to
choose. The fire's act of burning is mere necessitarianism, while Allah in His act
has full freedom of choice. Man in his act stands in a position between both
extremes, for he is forced to choose.
You may argue: "If you adopt the opinion that knowledge gives rise to will,
will to power, and power to movement, in such a way that the latter results from
the former, this means that at some point, things do not result from the power of
Allah Almighty. But at the same time, if you reject this argument, then, what is
the significance that some of those are caused by others?" in reply, it should be
known to you that to argue that some of those are caused by others in an endless
series of associations is evident ignorance. All of this is due to what is called the
eternal power, the foundation which all the people are unable to fathom, except
those well-established in knowledge, who were able to be acquainted with its

383
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
meaning. But anyway, some of those things are caused by others in occurrence in
the same way as a conditioned thing occurs after the condition. No will springs
from the eternal power except after knowledge, and no knowledge springs except
after one's coming into life. As well as it is impossible to say that life does not
occur only from the body which is the condition for life, the same applies to all
things that seem to be caused by each other. However, some causes might appear
to the laymen, and others only to the private to whom the light of the Real is
revealed.
Had it not been so, i.e. nothing precedes or delays but with necessary justice
and truth, all acts would have occurred in jest: Exalted and Hallowed be Allah
from that. That is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty: " 1 have
only created Jinns and men, that they may serve Me." (Adh-Dhariyat 56)

And: "We created not the heavens, the earth, and all between them, merely in
(idle) sport; We created them not except for just ends: but most of them do not
understand." (Ad-Dukhan 38-39)

AH that is between the heaven and the earth occurs according to an
obligatory order and necessary truth, and it is not imagined to be different
from what is really is, and in accordance with the very order in which it exists.
On the basis of that, nothing precedes or delays but in expectation of its
prerequisite, anything conditioned is impossible to precede its condidon. The
knowledge does not join rhc dropped sperm but for the loss of the condidon
of life, nor does will after knowledge but for the loss of the condidon of
knowledge, and so on. AH of this is subject to an obligatory method and
necessary manipulation made by the Real, which does not occur by chance or
in idle sport.
You may argue: "Then, how could monotheism in that sense be combined
with Sharia? The purpose of monodieism is to affirm aH acts to Allah Almighty',
since He is the sole doer and maker, whereas the purpose of Sharia is to affirm all
acts to servants. Then, if the servant is the doer, how could Allah Almighty be the
doer? If Allah is the sole doer, then, how could a servant be a doer?" in reply, let
me say that diis is reaUy too hard to understand if the doer has only one meaning.
But if it has two meanings, it might be understandable. It is said, for example:
"The ruler has killed so and so" and "The executer has kiUed so and so." But the
ruler is a kiUer in one sense, and the executer is a kiUer in another sense. Similarly,
the servant is a doer in one sense, and AUah Almighty is die doer in another
sense. The act of Allah Almighty is that He is the inventor, creator and originator
and causer of existence, and the act of the servant is that he is the place in which
the power is created after will was created in it, after the knowledge had been
created in it too. In this way, power is related to will, and movement to power
just as the condidoned is related to the condidon, whereas all is related to the

The quarter of the saviors
384
power of Allah Almighty in the same way as the caused is related to the cause,
and die invented to the inventor. Anything related to a certain power, the holder
of the power is called an actor. In this sense, both the ruler and the executer are
called killers, for killing is related to their power but from two different
perspectives.
For this reason, Allah Almighty attributes acts in the Qur'an sometimes to the
angels, sometimes to the servants and sometimes to Himself. Consider the
following Holy statements:
" Say: "The Angel of Death, put in charge of you, will (duly) take your souls
then shall you be brought back to your Lord."" (As-Sajdah 11)
j^y
Jj ^
JO <£$
^
"It is Allah that takes the souls (of men) at death." (Az-Zumar 42)
4 © U^jJj^ ^ ^
"See you the seed that you sow in the ground?" (Al-Waqi'ah 63)
In this Holy Verse, He Almighty attributed the act to us, His servants. Then,
He said in another Holy Verse: " For that We pour forth water in abundance,
And We split the earth in fragments, And produce therein Corn, And Grapes and
nutritious Plants, And Olives and Dates, And enclosed Gardens, dense with lofty
trees, And Fruits and Fodder, For use and convenience to you and your cattle."
(Abasa 25-32)

byjjj {jgj CLij lifj (jgj i£i ly uliS {j|j
4

Li*

ulil

gj iL4 ;UJi uLi bi $

143 <$^3

^“3

Then, He Almighty said: "then We sent to her Our angel, and he appeared
before her as a man in all respects." (Maryam 17)
4 CjS

li*0. 4-^ cJ-i-*-5

jj L^ilJ LL-J li ^

Then He said: " We breathed into her of Our Spirit, and We made her and
her son a Sign for all peoples." (Al-Anbiya 91)
jvJkaJL)
L^lj I4II1: *"3 ^JJ cr?
But it was Gabriel "peace be upon him" who undertook the process of
breathing into her. It is like His statement: " But when We have promulgated it,
follow you its recital (as promulgated)." (Al-Qiyamah 18)

i @j /*Sir£ yfc

iSji >

In interpretation of it, it is said that it means when Gabriel "peace be upon
him" recites it to you. Allah also said: " Fight them, and Allah will punish them by
your hands." (At-Tawbah 14)

In this Holy Verse, He Almighty ascribed killing to them, i.e. the servants,
and punishment to Himself. To be sure, punishment is the same killing as

