Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
------------------------------- 385
shown in this clear statement: " It is not you who slew them; it was Allah:
when you threw (a handful of dust), it was not your act, but Allah's." (Al(Anfal 17
i &&

k

Cjy

He also said: " He Who taught (the use of) the Pen, Taught man that which
he knew not." (Al-Alaq 4-5)

Then He said on another occasion: "(Allah) Most Gracious! It is He Who
has taught the Qur’an... He has taught him speech (and Intelligence)." (ArRahman 1-4)
4 dJ)

({|j)0 oU^ilT '^s. 0^

Then, He said: " Nay more, it is for Us to explain it (and make it clear)." (AlQiyamah 19)

4 CD

oj p ^

He said too: " Do you then see? The (human Seed) that you throw out, Is it
you who create it, or are We the Creators?" (Al-Waqi'ah 58-59)
4
fi
(£§j, oy~+-> C vj±\
In his description of the angel of womb, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Then, he enters into the womb and takes
hold of the dropped sperm and forms it into a human body and then says: "O
Lord! Would it be a male or a female? Would it be straight or crooked?" Allah
Almighty then says what He likes to say, and the angel creates (in compliance
with Allah's order)." According to another version: "Then the angels forms it and
breathes into it of the spirit with either happiness or wretchedness." (Al-Bazzar
and Ibn Adi on the authority of A'ishah).
Allah Almighty further said in the Holy Qur'an: " Soon will We show them
Our Signs in the (furthest) regions (of the earth), and in their own souls, until it
becomes manifest to them that this is the Truth. Is it not enough that your Lord
does witness all things?" (Fussilat 53)
JS"

/aj \ dX>^

jjjl

<j\ J^J

is* pyr-*-1* <J?J

<J$ IA14U

^

4 (JfJ J^ru *
fls“
In confirmation of that, He said: " There is no god but He: that is the witness
of Allah." (A1 Imran 18)

4

X! iJj y £fSi

>

Allah Almighty described Himself as the giver of life as well as the causer of
death, then He authorized two angels to undertake both, one to each. It is
narrated that both angels of death and life argued each other. The angel of death
said: "It is I who sends the living to death." The angel of life said: "It is I who
brings life to the dead." Then, Allah Almighty revealed: "Let each of you engage

The quarter of the saviors
386
in his job and work I have subjugated him to do, and it is I who give life and
cause death, and none causes to die or brings to life other than Me."
Overall, the act might be used in different ways, and all are not contradictory
once they are understood and comprehended well. For this reason, the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to him whom
he gave the date: "Take it: Had you not come to take it, it would have come to
you." (Ibn Hibban and At-Tabarani on the authority of Ibn Umar). He thus
ascribed the act of coming to him as well as to the date, and it is well-known that
the date never comes in the very way man comes. Similarly, when the repentant
said: "I turn in repentance to Allah Almighty and not to Muhammad "peace be
upon him", the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "No doubt, he has attributed the right to Him Who is more liable to it."
Whoever then ascribes all things to Allah Almighty has indeed known and
told the truth, and whoever attributes anything to someone else other than Allah
Almighty does so by way of allegory and metaphor. When some of the Arabs
expressed this fact, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" confirmed it It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: "The truest poetic verse said by a poet is the statement
of Labid: "Behold! Everything except for Allah is false; and every kind of blessing
is inevitably perishable."
You may argue: "Then, it has seemed clear that man, in his will, power and
act, is forced by necessity. Then, what is the significance of reward and
punishment, of pleasure and displeasure? And moreover, how could He be
displeased with the act He does?" In reply, it should be known to you that we
have previously referred to the answer of that question in the Book of Gratitude.
So, we need not repeat it now.
That is the extent to which the monotheism summons the state of reliance
(on Allah Almighty). This could be achieved only with faith in the mercy and
wisdom. Monotheism summons the consideration of the causer of causes,
whereas faith in the mercy and its extension summons the confidence of the
causer of causes; and anyone could rely but on him of whom he is confident, and
his heart is reassured. That is indeed one of the greatest doors of faith.
It is that one should give to trust in which there is neither suspicion nor
weakness to the fact that were Allah Almighty to create all the creatures with
the mind of the most intelligent among them, and give them of knowledge as
much as is given to the most knowledgeable among them, and create for them
of knowledge what lies within their capacity to endure, and pours over them of
indescribable wisdom, and then increase all of them in knowledge, reason and
wisdom as much as the like of what they have, and then reveal to them the
consequences of matters, and inform them of the mysteries of the dominion of
the invisibles, until they come to know good and evil, benefit and harm, and
then He commands them to regulate the affairs of the kingdom of visibles and
dominion of invisibles with the help of what He has given them of knowledge,
reason and wisdom, by no means would their manipulation, given their co­
operation and combination, add, even in the least, to the Allah's manipulation

i

387
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
of the affairs of the world and the hereafter, nor reduce anything from, nor
raise nor lower an atom thereof, nor bring a benefit nor avert harm, defect,
ailment, poverty, or shortage from him whom Allah has doomed to receive any
of those.
On the contrary, they would find neither a flaw nor a shortage of proportion
in all of what Allah has created , of the heavens and the earth, if they turn their
vision again and again to them; and the same applies to all that is doomed by
Allah to His servant concerning sustenance, term appointed, happiness and grief,
failure and power, belief and disbelief, obedience and disobedience, etc: all are
made with justice and truth in which there is neither injustice nor wrongness. On
the contrary: It is made according to the required order and in proportion to
what should be, in such a way as there is nothing possible to be better, more
perfect, and more complete than what is available. Had there been anything
better which He has the power to do but He did not do out of His bounty, it
would have been niggardliness that contradicts generosity, and injustice which
opposes justice; and had he had no power to do it, it would have been failure that
contradicts lordship. That is because every kind of poverty and harm in this
world is but a shortage in this world which would be compensated in the
hereafter, and every kind of shortage one has in the hereafter is a kind of blessing
for another, for had it not been for the night, the value of the day would not have
been learnt, and had it not been for the ailment, the healthy would not have
enjoyed of their health, and had it not been for the fire (of Hell), the inhabitants
of Paradise would not have learnt the value of the favor conferred upon them.
As well as redeeming the souls of mankind with the souls of animals and
giving them the authority to slay and slaughter them is not injustice, for it is out
of perfect justice to give priority to the complete over the incomplete, similarly, it
is out of perfect justice to make much the favor on the inhabitants of the
Gardens through the severe punishment of the denizens of the fire of Hell and
redeem these of belief with those of disbelief. Had the incomplete not been
created, surely, the value of the complete would not have been leamt. Had the
animals not been created, of a surety, the honor of mankind would not have
appeared. Both completeness and incompleteness appear when compared with
each other. Wisdom and generosity require to create both the complete and
incomplete. As well as cutting off the hand when eroded to save the soul in the
remaining body is out of justice, for it is to redeem a complete with an
incomplete, the same applies to the disparity between the people concerning what
is doomed to them in this world and the hereafter: All of this is justice in which
there is no wrongness, and truth in which there is no sport.
In sum, both good and evil are decreed, and what is decreed should inevitably
come after having been preordained by the will. So, there is none to cancel out
His judgement, and there is none to change His decision and command. On the
contrary, everything, be it significant or insignificant is doomed to happen, and
what affected you was not to miss you, and what missed you was not to affect
you.
Let us then satisfy ourselves with those hints from the sciences of revelation,

The quarter of the saviors
388
which form the foundations of the station of reliance (on Allah), and rather
return to the science of practical religion, Allah willing: sufficient for us is Allah
as the best disposer of affairs.

part Two; States and deeds of reliance on allah
It contains the following chapters:
Exposition of state of reliance
Exposition of statements of sheikhs about definition of reliance
Exposition of reliance as to earning for the single and the responsible for
his family
Exposition of reliance as to the amount to be saved and the reasons for
saving
Exposition of reliance as to averting harm
Exposition of reliance as to removing harm by medical treatment and other
things
Allah helps us with His mercy

CHAPTER ONE
EXPOSmON OF STATE OF RELIANCE
We have previously mentioned that the station of reliance consists of
knowledge, state and work, and talked about knowledge.
The state is that which describes reliance, whose foundation is knowledge,
and fruit is work. The people talked so much in definition of reliance, and their
phrases and expressions are different, each according to his own state and
experience, as is the custom of the Sufis. So, there is no benefit to make a
mention of them here. Let's uncover it directly saying:
Reliance is that the heart deputizes, and depends upon him whom he
considers reliable. Suppose a false suitcase is raised against you in the court, you
would, of course, deputize one (the lawyer) to uncover the truth and show the
falsehood of the claim before the judge. Of a surety, you would not deputize that
person and rely on him to undertake the task unless he meets four conditions: the
furthest degree of guidance, the furthest degree of power, the furthest degree of
eloquence, and the furthest degree of sympathy.
By guidance, he would know the points of falsehood and dissembling, in
order that the abstruse tricks would not be hidden from him. By power, he could
dare to declare the truth with no hesitation nor flattery nor adulation. It may be
that although he knows the points of dissembling in the claim of the foe, his fear
or weakness prevents him from declaring it. As for eloquence, it is the verbal
power that enables one to express in words all which the heart likes to declare.
To be sure, it is not that all who know the points of dissembling are fluendy
expressive enough to show them in the court. By the furthest degree of
sympathy, he would do his best to uncover the truth, for the power alone does
not avail without his having care for the mandator.
If he has doubt in all or one of those four, or has the feeling that his foe is
more perfect in them, then, he would not be completely reassured to his legal
representative. His state of reassurance and reliance then differs according to the

389
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
power of his conviction and belief in those four conditions. As the beliefs and
convictions differ in power and weakness whose degrees are infinite, similarly,
the states of the reliant differ in the power of reassurance and confidence whose
degrees are infinite, until he attains the certainty (of faith) in which there is
neither weakness nor suspicion. It is like the case in which the legal representative
is the father of the mandator who seeks to gather both the lawful and the
unlawful to defend his son: in this case, he has certainty only in one condition, i.e.
the furthest degree of sympathy and care, and not in all the conditions. The same
then applies to any of those four, in which one might attain the certainty of
confidence and this is known by long experience and practice, which tell, for
example, that so and so is famous for his great eloquence, so and so for his great
power and bravery in saying the truth, so and so for his great skill in uncovering
the tricks and points of dissembling, etc.
Having known the significance of reliance in this example, you then might
measure on it the reliance on Allah Almighty. If it is proven to you, through
revelation or decisive belief, that there is no doer or maker but Allah Almighty, as
you have previously had complete faith in His knowledge and power to sustain all
of His servants, His perfect care, mercy and sympathy for all of His servants, and
that there is no further power, nor further knowledge, nor further care, nor
further mercy beyond His, then, your heart would rely on Him alone, and would
not turn to anyone or anything else, for indeed, there is neither might nor power
but with Allah Almighty as has previously been shown in monotheism.
But if you do not have this state in yourself, it might be due to one of two
reasons: Either the lack of certainty in one of those four conditions, or the
weakness and disease of the heart because of being possessed by illusions and
false impressions. However, the heart might be disturbed by illusions without
even being short of certainty. If one, for example, is to eat honey, which is
likened in front of him to dung, he would surely have aversion for it, and if a
rational person is required to spend the night beside a dead in the grave or on
the bed, he would disdain the idea, even though he is certain of his being dead
and motionless. This is due to the weakness of the heart, from which any man
could hardly be free. But it might become strong until it turns into a disease
causing one to panic to spend the night alone in the house, given that the door
might be tightly closed.
Thus, reliance is suspended on the strength of heart and certainty for by
both, the heart becomes calm and reassured. However, there is difference
between tranquility and reliance. How many a reliance is, but with no
reassurance. Allah Almighty addressed Abraham "peace be upon him" saying:
"Do you not then believe?" He said: "Yea! but to reassure my own heart." (AlBaqarah 260)
u

He sought to see with his eyes how life is given to the dead, in order to
establish it in his imagination, for the soul always follows and is reassured by
imagination, but not by certainty in the beginning until it ultimately attains the
degree of the reassured soul. How many a reassured person who has no certainty,

!

The quarter of the saviors
390
like those of all religions and doctrines other than Islam. The Jew, for instance, is
reassured by his Judaism, and the same is true of the Christian, given that both
have no certainty, but they follow their assumption and what they souls desire.
Although they received the guidance, which is the cause of certainty, from their
Lord, they turn away from it.
Cowardice and boldness are among the instincts, with which the certainty
alone is of no benefit. They are among the causes which oppose reliance, just as
the weakness of certainty of one of all four conditions is another cause. But if
there is strong certainty along with control over the instincts, the confidence of
Allah Almighty would be attained. It is said that in the Torah, the following
phrase is written: "Curse is he whose confidence is in another man like him (more
than in Allah)." The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "Whoever seeks honor and power through servants, Allah Almighty
puts him to humiliation." (Al-Aqili and Abu Na'im on the authority of Umar).
Once the significance of reliance is revealed to you, and you come to learn the
state which is called reliance, then, you should learn that this state is of three
degrees in terms of power and weakness:
The first is what we have previously mentioned, i.e. to be confident of Allah
Almighty, and of His care and concern over him as he is his legal representative
and disposer of affairs.
The second, which is stronger, is that his state with Allah should be like the
child's state with his mother: the child knows none other than his mother, and
takes refuge to none other than her when anything terrorizes him, and depends
upon none other than her. Once he sees her, he gets attached to the tail of her
garment, and if anything disturbs or befalls him, the first word he cries with is:
"O mother!" that is because he is fully confident of her mercy, sympathy, care
and sufficiency for him. Whoever then devotes himself as such to Allah
Almighty, depends as such on Allah Almighty, is confident as such of Allah
Almighty, and gets attached as such to Allah Almighty, he then is reliant on Allah
Almighty, just as the child is reliant on his mother.
The difference between this and the former is that this is entirely reliant to the
extent that he consumes himself in reliance from even the perception of the real
nature of his reliance. There is no place in his heart for anything other than Him
on Whom he is reliant But the former relies ostentatiously, without consuming
himself from reliance for he turns to it, and perceives it well, with which he is
diverted from observation of Him upon Whom he is reliant. To this Sahl referred
when he was asked about reliance: "What is its minimum?" he said: "To abandon
wishes." It was said to him: "Then, what is its middle?" he said: "To leave the
choice", in reference to the second degree. But when he was asked about its
maximum, he gave no answer and rather said: "None knows it but he who attains
at least its middle."
The third, which is the highest, is to be in the Hands of Allah Almighty in all
of his movements and stillness like a dead in the hands of the washer of his body,
with no difference except that he sees himself dead moved only by the eternal
power in the same way as the dead body is moved by the hand of the washer. It is

391
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
he whose certainty is strong of the fact that it is Allah Who causes movement,
power, will, knowledge, and all things and attributes, and of the fact that all
happen by necessity and force (of Allah), which means that he does not wait what
to occur to him. Unlike the child, in the previous degree, who takes refuge to his
mother, cries and gets attached to the tail of her garment, he, in this third degree,
is like a child who knows, for certain, that even if he does not cry for his mother,
she always demands him, even if he does not get attached to the tail of his
mother's garment, she always carries him, and even if he does not ask her for
milk, she hastens to provide for him. The fruit of this station is to leave
supplication and demand out of confidence of Allah's generosity and care, and of
the fact that even if he does not ask, he would be given better than what he asks
for. But the second station does not require him to leave supplication and
demand from him, but it requires him to leave demand from anyone else.
You may argue: "Are those states imaginable?" In reply, let me say that they
are not impossible, but they exist in very rare cases. The first station is closer to
possibility, whereas both the second and third are more rare and exceptional; and
even in case either the second or the third exists, it is unlikely to remain or
become regular. We could say that the third station does not come but like the
flash which vanishes very soon. But the period of time for which the second
station could last is somewhat longer.
you may further ask: "With those states, could the servant have the power to
regulate his affairs or get attached to the means and causes?" In reply, it should
be known to you that the third state nullifies manipulation entirely as long as it
remains. The second station also nullifies manipulation except when one takes
refuge to Allah Almighty with supplication and invocation, like the child's
manipulation when he gets attached to his mother. The first station does not
nullify the origin of manipulation and choice. But it nullifies some manipulations,
like one's reliance on his agent or legal representative: he leaves manipulation on
the part of anyone else other than the agent, but not that recommended by his
agent, or known from the practice and custom to be so. An agent might advise
his mandator to be present in the court, since he would not speak but in his
presence. In this case, he regulates his affairs to attend, which, anyway, does not
contradict his reliance on him, for it is out of his perfect reliance on him to do
just what he has planned for him to do, and had he not relied on him and
depended on his advice, surely, he would not have attended in response to his
counsel.
An example of what is known by practice and custom, is that one knows that
he could not argue the foe except from the record. Then, it is out of his perfect
reliance is to take the record with him when he goes to argue his foe in the court
In this way, he could not dispense with manipulation either in attendance or in
bringing the record with him. Were he to leave any of those, it would be shortage
and deficiency in his reliance.
Then, after he attends in response to the advice of his agent, and brings the
record with him in compliance with what is known from custom and practice, he
sits in the court watching his agent's defense and advocacy, with which he might

The quarter of the saviors
392
rise up to the second and even the third stadon. He indeed has done everything
required from him by his agent, and there remains only his self-reassurance and
confidence of the agent, and expectation for what is to come.
Having understood that, all problems and difficulties concerning reliance (on
Allah) would be averted from you, and you come to know that it is not requisite
for reliance to abandon all manipulations as long as it is not in opposition to
reliance as will be shown later in the deeds. If die reliant takes refuge to his
strength and power in attendance and bringing the records with him (in the
court), it would not contradict reliance, for he knows that had it not been for the
presence of the agent, neither his attendance nor his bringing the records in the
court would have been useful. He then does not depend on his strength or power
because they are his strength or power, in so much as because it is the agent who
shows to him that it is of great benefit to depend on them to be able to argue his
foe. In this way, there is neither strength nor power but with the agent.
But this last statement is not fitting for the agent (as a human being), for he is
not the creator of his strength and power. But he just functions them for the
benefit of his mandator. This statement is perfectly true to the real disposer of
affairs, i.e. Allah Almighty, for He is the Creator of the strength and power as we
have previously clarified in monotheism, and made them effective as being
requisite for what He is going to create after them. Then, there is neither strength
nor power but with Allah Almighty, in truth and verification. Whoever testifies to
this would receive the great reward referred to in the many narrations and
traditions, which assure much reward to him who says "There is neither strength
nor power but with Allah Almighty." But one may wonder: "How should one be
given that much reward only for this statement which is easy on the tongue, and
easy on the heart to believe in its concept?"
There is, to be sure, much reward for this statement, even though
incomparable to the testimony of monotheism "There is none worthy of worship
except for Allah." That is because the testimony of monotheism affirms all things
to Allah Almighty, whereas this affirms to Him only two things. On the other
hand, we have already mentioned that everything has two husks and two cores,
and this applies also to that statement. Most people restricted themselves to the
two husks and abandoned the two cores. To this the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" referred in his saying: "Whoever says "There is
none worthy of worship except for Allah" out of truth and faith in them from the
depth of his heart, Paradise is assured to him." (At-Tabarani on the authority of
Zaid Ibn Arqam; and Abu Ya'li on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
In sum, whoever does not say either of both statements out of sincerity and
faith in them, which is based on contemplation and certainty, then, no state of
reliance is expected from him.
You may argue: "You have said that whoever says that "There is neither
strength nor power but with Allah Almighty" attributes only two things to Allah
Almighty. Then, if one says that both the heavens and the earth are created by
Allah Almighty, would he receive the same reward he receives when he says
"There is neither strength nor power but with Allah Almighty"?.

393
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
In reply, let me answer in the negative, for the reward is determined by the
amount and value of that for which it is given. There is no equality between both
phrases. There is no comparison between the hugeness and immensity of the
heavens and the earth on the one hand, and the amount of the strength and
power on the other hand. That is because it is not only by hugeness or immensity
that things are estimated. Anyone among the laymen knows, for certain, that the
heavens and the earth are not created by a human being, but by Allah Almighty.
But the matter of the strength and power has been abstruse and problemadc on
Mu'tazilah, philosophers and many sects of those who claim they reflect opinions
and doctrines minutely until they turned into hair-splitters. So, it is a great danger
in which the heedless have fallen, affirming to themselves things out of
polytheism.
Whoever goes beyond that obstacle by help and aid of Allah Almighty will
have a high and great degree. We have previously mentioned that in monotheism,
there are only two obstacles: The first is to look at the heavens and the earth, the
sun and the moon and stars, clouds and rain, and all non-living beings; and the
other is to look at the choice of animals, and this obstacle is greater and more
dangerous than the former. But in general, to go beyond those obstacles is to
attain the perfect mystery of monotheism. This is why there is much reward for
this statement, i.e. for the contemplation of which this statement is a translation.
The state of reliance then is to abandon one's strength and power, and rather
rely on the One and Real. This point would be clarified in more detail when we
talk about the deeds of reliance, Allah willing.

CHAPTER TWO
EXPOSITION OF THE STATEMENTS OF MANY SHEIKHS ABOUT THE
DIFFERENT STATES OF RELIANT
It would be clear to you, from those statements, that nothing thereof is
beyond what we have mentioned. But each has indeed expressed his own
experience and state.
Abu Musa Ad-Daili said: I asked Abu Yazid about his understanding of
reliance, thereupon he asked me: "And what do you say about it?" I said: "Our
companions say that even if wild animals exist on your right and left sides, your
internal thought would not change even a bit (out of fear of them)." On that he
said: "Yes, that is close to its meaning. But if the inhabitants of Paradise are
enjoying in their pleasures and the denizens of Hell are punished and burnt in the
fire, and you make a distinction between them, then, you would come out of the
sphere of the reliant."
What Abu Musa said is a report of one of the most glorious states of reliance,
i.e. the third station; whereas what Abu Yazid mentioned is a report of the
dearest knowledge of reliance, which is among the foundations of reliance: it is
the knowledge of the wisdom of Allah Almighty in the sense that whatever He
does should necessarily be done, with no distinction between the inhabitants of
Paradise and the denizens of the fire of Hell in relation to the origin of injustice
and wisdom. That is indeed the most abstruse kind of knowledge, and beyond it
lies directly the mystery of Fate and Divine Decree. Abu Yazid rarely talks but

The quarter of the saviors
394 ----- ---------------------------------------------------about the highest stations and the furthest degrees.
Furthermore, it is not requisite in the first stadon of reliance to take
precautions of the female snakes, for Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him"
himself took precautions in the cave (of Thawr) when he was along with the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" by closing all its
holes for fear of their danger. But it might be said that he did so only with his
foot, but his internal thought did not change because of them; or that he did so
out of sympathy and pity for the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" and not himself. But the reliance removes once his internal
thought changes for the sake of himself. But it would be shown later that the
like of this and even more does not contradict reliance. What stimulates the
internal thought to move in flight from the female snakes is fear, and the reliant
has the right to fear from the mover and creator of the female snakes, for the
female snakes have neither strength nor power but with Allah Almighty. So, if
he takes precautions, he should not rely on himself or on his power and
manipulation, but on the Creator of the strength, power and planning.
In another context, Dhun-Nun Al-Misri was asked about the concept of
reliance thereupon he said: "It is to abandon all lords (other than Allah Almighty),
and eliminate all means." The first phrase refers to monotheism, and the last to
the works and deeds in this world, but not to the state explicitly in so much as
implicitly. It was said to him once again: "Then, give us more." He said: "It is to
devote the soul to worship and set it free from lordship" in reference to
dissociation only from the strength and power.
Hamdun Al-Qassar was asked about reliance thereupon he said: "If you
have ten thousand Dirhams and at the same time you owe a Daniq, you do
not feel safe to die and your debt remains due on you; and if you owe ten
thousand Dirhams and you do not have what fulfills it, you do not despair
that Allah Almighty would fulfill it on your behalf." That is a reference to the
great power of Allah Almighty.
Abdullah Al-Qurashi was asked about reliance and he said: "It is to get
attached to Allah Almighty in whichever state you are." The asker said to him:
"Give me more." He said: "It is to leave each means that leads to another until
you reach the Real Who is the guardian of all things." The first is general to all
three stations, and the other is particular to the third station only. It is like the
reliance of Abraham "peace be upon him" when Gabriel "peace be upon him"
asked him: "Do you have a need?" He said: "As for you, it is not." His question
was a means leading to another, i.e. Gabriel's guarding him, which Abraham
"peace be upon him" left out of confidence of the fact that if Allah likes, He
would subjugate Gabriel to do so. That is a state of one who is absent from
himself with the presence of Allah Almighty. It occurs very rarely, and even if it
exists, it is more unlikely to remain for a long time.
According to Abu Sa'id Al-Kharraz: "Reliance is a quake without tranquility,
and a tranquility without quake." Perhaps he refers to the second station. His
tranquility without quake refers to the heart's tranquility and reassurance of the
disposer of affairs; and his quake without tranquility refers to one's panic to Allah

395
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
and supplication and imploring to Him in which he quakes like the child when he
quakes in the hands of his mother, with his heart calm and reassured of her
complete and perfect pity for him.
According to Abu Ali Ad-Daqqaq: "Reliance is of three degrees: dependence,
submission and then authorization. The reliant gets reassured of His promise,
and the one who submits satisfies himself with His knowledge, and the one who
gives authorization accepts His judgement." This refers to the disparity of degrees
of his sight in relation with the one whom he views. Knowledge is the
foundation, followed by promise and then by judgement. It is not unlikely that
the reliant observes something of that.
Many Sheikhs have a lot of statements other than those we have mentioned
concerning reliance. But let us not be lengthy by mentioning all of them, for to
uncover the truth of it is more beneficial than to relate the different statements
about it. That is due to the state of reliance; and Allah Almighty helps us, with
His mercy and kindness, achieve success.

CHAPTER THREE
EXPOSITION OF DEEDS OF RELIANT
It should be known that knowledge develops the state, and the deed is the
fruit of the state. It might be thought that reliance is to leave earning with the
body, and manipulation with the mind, and rather to lie on the ground like a
thrown cloth, or a piece of flesh on bone. But this is, to be sure, the belief of the
ignorant among the people, since it is unlawful under Sharia, which praises the
reliance. Then, how should a religious station be attained through something
forbidden in religion? Let's uncover the truth and say that the effect of reliance
appears in the servant's movement and seeking with his knowledge to achieve his
purposes. The servant seeks voluntarily either to get something beneficial which
he lacks, such as earning, or to save something beneficial which he has, like
saving, or to avert harm from him before it afflicts him, like defending himself
against a thief, an attacker or a wild animal, or to remove harm that afflicted him,
like remedy from diseases and their like. The purposes of the servant's movement
do not go beyond those main four: to get a benefit, keep a benefit, avert harm, or
prevent harm. Now, let us in the following pages make a mention of the
conditions and degrees of reliance in each of those, with evidences from Sharia.

THE FIRST PURPOSE: TO GET A BENEFIT
The means by which a benefit is sought is of three degrees: what is fully
certain, what is almost certain, and what is illusive.
The first set of means: what is fully certain, like the association between the
cause and effect according to the Divine Decree, in which there is no difference
or dispute. Suppose, for instance, that food is served before you and you are very
hungry, but you do not stretch your hand to it under pretext that you are reliant,
and it is requisite for reliance not to seek, and to stretch the hand is a kind of
seeking, and the same applies also to chewing and swallowing the food: this is, to
be sure, a mere madness, and does not belong to reliance. If you expect that
Allah Almighty would create in you a state of satiation, or create in the food a

The quarter of the saviors
396
power of movement to enable it to come and enter your mouth, or subjugate an
angel to chew and swallow it and convey it to your stomach on your behalf, you
then are ignorant of the established norm of Allah on earth. Similarly, if you do
not cultivate die land, in covet of a plant to be created by Allah without sowing
the seed of it, or do not have sexual relation with your wife in covet of her giving
birth without it such as Mary gave birth to Jesus "peace be upon him", it is
madness, quite far from reliance. Those states and their likes are beyond
calculation. In diis station, reliance is not only by deed, but by both state and
deed.
As far as knowledge is concerned, it is to know, for certain, that it is Allah
Almighty Who created for you the food, the hand, the teeth and the power of
movement, and that it is He Who feeds and waters you. As for the state, it is that
your heart's tranquility and reassurance go back to your depending on Allah
Almighty, and not on your hand or food. How should you depend on the health
and soundness of your hand which might soon stop from function and be
afflicted with paralysis? How should you depend on your power and you might
soon lose your consciousness and mind leaving you motionless? How should you
depend only on the presence of food, and perhaps Allah might direct somebody
to overpower you on it, or cause a female snake to come and disturb you and
divert you from it? Since all of those are possible, and there is no way to get rid
of them but by virtue of Allah Almighty, you then should rejoice of Him, depend
on Him, and put your trust in Him.
The second degree is the means which are almost certain, but the effects
more likely result from them, as well as it is unlikely that they would not result
from them. A typical case is of him who leaves the homeland and town of
residence, and sets out on journey alone having no provision with him, not in the
company of the caravans or groups of riders, and follows the lonely deserts and
ways which people very rarely walk through. This is not requisite for reliance, for
taking provision on journey in the desert is the right way of the early people and
righteous successors, and it does not nullify reliance particularly when it comes
after depending on the virtue of Allah Almighty. But it is possible, as being one
of the highest stations of reliance, and this is why Al-Khawas used to do it.
But you may argue: "This is to seek to put oneself to destruction, which is
forbidden under Sharia." In reply, let me say that it does not become unlawful
with two conditions: the first is that a man should have disciplined, mortified and
habituated his own self to keep patient on hunger for a week or two, without
causing breast disturbance or mind distraction, or difficulty to celebrate the
praises of Allah Almighty. The other is that he should have the power to sustain
himself with such things as grass and its like. After those conditions, it is not
unlikely that it would not become unlawful, for he might probably meet, by
chance, every week or every two weeks, somebody to provide for him, or come
upon a village or a town to get sustenance for himself, and so on. Mortification is
the foundation of reliance.
This was the conduct of Al-Khawas and his fellows from among the reliant.
Al-Khawas did not leave the needle, rope, file and jug, saying: "This does not

Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah

397

oppose reliance." The reason is that he learnt that in the desert, there is no water
on the surface of the earth, and it is not out of the established norm of Allah that
water rises up automatically from the bottom to the top without a jug or a rope,
and it is unlikely that one could find a rope or a jug in the desert, and one needs
water to perform ablution many times thereof everyday, and to quench his thirst
at least once every two days, for the traveler could not, with movement in the
scorching heat, keep patient on the loss of water in the same way as he could on
the loss of food. Similarly, he might have only one garment which is apt to be
torn leaving his private parts exposed, and in the desert, he could unlikely find a
needle or a file, and this is why he takes them with him. Thus, anything like those
four join the second degree, for it is thought but not with full certainty, that his
garment might probably be torn, and that one might probably give him another
garment, or that he could probably find on die top of the will a man to give him
water, and so on.
For this reason, we say that if one inclines to a mountain pass in which there
is neither water, nor grass, nor anyone to come to it at all, and sits there reliant
(on Allah), he would be sinful, seeking to destroy himself, it is narrated that an
ascedc left his residence and betook himself to the bottom of a mountain and
stayed there seven days saying: "I would never ask anyone about anything until
my Lord brings me my sustenance." He spent seven days there until he was about
to die, and no sustenance was brought to him. On that he said: "O my Lord! If
you have decreed that I should live, then, bring me my sustenance You have
doomed to me, otherwise, take my soul unto You." Allah Almighty revealed to
him: "By My Honor, I would not sustain you until you enter your residence and
live among the people." He entered his residence and sat thereupon much food
and drink was brought to him by the people. He ate and drank, and had doubt
within himself about that. On that Allah Almighty revealed to him: "You liked to
remove My wisdom with your abstinence from this world. Do you not learn that
to sustain My servant at the hands of My other servants is dearer to Me than to
sustain him with the hand of My power?"
Then, to leave all means whatsoever is an opposition to the wisdom of
Allah, and an ignorance of the established way of Allah Almighty. But to act
upon the established way of Allah Almighty, and depend on Him Alone and
not on the means does not contradict reliance in the least. But means are
divided into apparent and hidden; and the significance of reliance is to be
satisfied with the hidden on the exclusion of the apparent means, with the
soul's tranquility and reassurance of the causer of the cause, and not of the
cause itself.
You may ask: "What is your opinion about sitting in residence without
earning? Is it forbidden, permissible or recommended?" in reply, it should be
known to you that it is not forbidden for it is like the act of him who tours in the
desert which does not lead to his destruction. The resident does not destroy
himself whatsoever in order for his act to be regarded unlawful. It is not unlikely
that sustenance might come to him from sources he expects not, but, at the same
time, it might delay, and patience here is possible. But if he closes the gate of his

The quarter of the saviors
398
door on himself and there is no way for anyone to reach him, then, his act would
be unlawful. If he opens the door of his home, and he is not engaged in worship
or celebration of Allah, then, work to get his earnings would be better for him.
But anyway his act is not unlawful unless he is about to die, at which time it
becomes incumbent upon him to come out and earn his living or beg the people
for sustenance. But if his heart is entirely devoted to Allah Almighty, and not
ambitious for anyone to enter from the door and bring sustenance to him, in so
much as it is ambitious for the bounty of Allah Almighty, then, this would be
much better and preferable, as being one of the stations of reliance. It is to
engage in Allah Almighty and give no care to his sustenance. That is because
sustenance should inevitably come to him.
At that point, it is of great significance the statement of a religious scholar: "If
a servant even flees away from his sustenance, it would run after him in pursuit
of him, just as if he flees away from death, it would run after him in pursuit of
him; and if he asks Allah Almighty not to sustain him, He would not respond to
him, and by such asking, he would be regarded sinful, and Allah would say to him
in reply to his demand: "O ignorant! How should I create you and not sustain
you?" for this reason, Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them" said: "The people
dispute about all things except for sustenance and death, for they assume the
consensus that there is neither sustainer nor causer of death but Allah Almighty."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "If you
rely on Allah Almighty as it should be, surely, He would sustain you in the same
way as He sustains the birds: they come out hungry early in the morning, and
return satiated in the evening, and rather the mountains would disappear with
your supplication."
Jesus "peace be upon him" said: "Look at birds which neither cultivate, nor
harvest, nor save anything, but at the same time, Allah Almighty sustains them
day by day. But if you say that your bellies are bigger, then, look at the cattle and
sheep, and how Allah Almighty assigned to them those meadows for sustenance."
According to Abu Ya'qub As-Susi: "The reliant have their sustenance at the
hands of the servants with no effort nor suffering, and those other than them are
engaged in work and toiling." Another one said: "All servants are sustained by
Allah Almighty. But some of them eat with humiliation like the beggars, some
with trouble and expectation like the traders, some with their profession like the
craftsmen, and some with honor like the Sufis, who witness the One Exalted in
honor and get their sustenance from His Hand, and see no intermediary.
The third degree pertains to the illusive means, falsely thought to lead to the
effects, but with no apparent confidence or certainty. A typical case is of him
who surveys the minute and detailed manipulations as regards the matter of
earning, by which he turns entirely from the sphere of reliance. That is the case of
almost all the people, i.e. those who use the minute tricks to earn permissible
property. But to earn what is suspicious, or to use suspicious tricks in earning is
to be concerned over this world, and rely on the causes. It is not hidden that this
nullifies reliance entirely. It is like the causes to be attributed to bringing about
what is beneficial, and removing what is harmful. The Messenger of Allah

399
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" described the reliant as those who do
not depend on those causes, and did not describe them as those who do neither
earn, nor live in the cides and towns, nor take anything from anyone. Sahl said
about reliance: "It is to leave manipulation at all." In justification of that he said:
"Indeed, Allah Almighty created the creatures and did not veil them from
Himself, but their veil is their own planning." Perhaps he meant the extraction of
the far reasons through the thought, which need manipulation, other than the
near reasons.
In sum, it has become clear that the reasons are divided into those the
attachment to which turns one from the sphere of reliance entirely, and those
which do not do; and those the attachment to which turns one from the sphere
of reliance are divided into what is decisively certain and what is only assumed;
and those decisively certain do not turn one from the sphere of reliance when the
state and knowledge of reliance are available, i.e. to rely on the causer of all
causes, in which case, reliance is by state and knowledge, and not by deed, unlike
the assumed causes, in which reliance is by state, knowledge and deed.
Furthermore, the reliant are of three stations: The first is that of Al-Khawas
and his fellows: it applies to him who tours in the desert with no provision out of
confidence of the bounty and favor of Allah Almighty, to help him keep patient
for one or two weeks, to facilitate grass or sustenance to him whatsoever, or to
keep him firm on satisfaction with death on that state if nothing of those is
available. Whoever carries provision could lose it, and whoever has a camel, his
camel might be lost, leaving him die out of hunger.
The second station is about him who sits in his house or in the mosque, but
within the borders of villages and populous cities. Although it is weaker than the
first, one is also reliant, for he leaves earning and all apparent means, and rather
relies on the bounty of Allah Almighty in manipulation of his affairs concerning
the hidden means. But at the same time, by his residence in the cities and villages,
he is exposed to the means of sustenance. But anyway, this does not nullify his
reliance if he keeps his eye on Him Who subjugates to him the inhabitants of the
town to give him sustenance, and not on the inhabitants of the town themselves,
who are imagined to be heedless of him and waste him, and forget him had it not
been for the bounty of Allah Almighty.
The third station is about him who comes out and seeks to get his earnings in
the same way we have previously mentioned in the third and fourth chapters of
the Book of the Etiquettes of earning. This seeking does not turn him from the
sphere of reliance so long as his self-reassurance is not of his sufficiency, power,
majesty and goods which might be removed by Allah Almighty in a moment: on
the contrary, he is reassured only of the sole guarantor and surety to guard all of
this for him, and facilitate its reasons and causes to him. On the other hand, if he
seeks to earn to spend on his dependents or on the needy and indigent, then, he
seeks with his body, while devoting his heart wholeheartedly to Allah Almighty.
In this case, his state is more noble than the state of him who sits at home or in
the mosque.
The evidence for the fact that seeking to get earnings does not turn one from

I

The quarter of the saviors
400
die sphere of reliance if its conditions and requirements are fulfilled, and both its
state and knowledge are put in consideration, is taken from the conduct of Abu
Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" diat in the morning next to his being given the
pledge of allegiance as the caliph, he took garments and entered the market and
started to practice traffic. The Muslims did not like that and said to him: "How
do you do so given diat you have been made as the successor of the Prophet?"
on that he said: "Engage me not from my dependents, for were I to waste them, I
would waste those other than them." They then assigned to him the sustenance
of a Muslim family from the Muslim treasury. When they were pleased with that,
he saw it better to engage in looking after their affairs, helping them, disposing of
their interests and serving their benefits and purposes.
It is impossible to say that Abu Bakr " Allah be pleased with him", in this
state, was not in the station of reliance, for which of people is more worthy of
that station than him? He indeed was reliant not from the perspective of leaving
earning and seeking in so much as from the perspective of giving no care to his
power and sufficiency, and the knowledge that Allah Almighty is the facilitator
of earning and the disposer of affairs, and observation of many conditions in
earning, i.e. to earn only what he needed, without saving or being pompous, or
giving preference to his own Dirham over the Dirham of the others, and so on,
for whoever enters the market with his Dirham dearer to him than the Dirham
of others, he would be concerned over this world and not abstinent from it; and
reliance is not valid in the absence of abstinence from this world, given that
asceticism alone is valid, for the station of reliance is beyond that of asceticism.
According to Abu Ja'far Al-Haddad, the mister of Al-Junaid: "I have hidden
reliance for twenty years, during which I used to enter the market, and everyday I
earned a Dinar, from which I did not save or let a single Daniq until the night
with me, for before the night, I would have given it out entirely." Al-Junaid used
not to talk about reliance in his presence, saying: "I feel shy of talking about his
station while he is attendant with me."
You may ask: "Which is better: to sit at home or come out to get his
earnings?" in reply, it should be known to you that if one sits at home in order to
devote himself entirely to worship, celebration of Allah Almighty, and meditation
of the signs and creation of Allah Almighty, etc, and his coming out to work
would distract his devotion and divert him from his celebration, then, it would be
better for him to sit at home, provided that he should not look forward to the
people in expectation for him who might enter into him bringing to him
sustenance: on the contrary, he should be of strong heart, reliant on Allah Alone.
But if he is of troubled heart, and desires for the people, then, coming out to get
earnings would be better for him, because desire for the people is begging with
the heart, and to leave it is more important and more significant than to leave
earning.
It was the habit of the reliant among the people not to take what their souls
desired for. In this context, it is narrated that Ahmad Ibn Hanbal told Abu Bakr
Al-Marwazi to give a poor something extra than his charge for which he had
hired him, but he rejected to accept it. When he turned away, Ahmad told Abu

401
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
Bakr to catch him and give him, for at that time he would accept it He caught
him and gave it to him, and he took it. When Abu Bakr asked Ahmad about that
he said: "His soul desired for it at first, and when he turned away, he despaired
and had no covet, thereupon he accepted it."
It was the habit of Al-Khawas that whenever he looked at a gift to be given to
him, or feared he might get accustomed to the like of that, he would not accept it
When he was asked about the most wonderful thing he saw in his journeys, AlKhawas said: "I saw Al-Khadir and he accepted my company, and, fearing my
soul would be accustomed to and get comforted with that, which might be a
shortage of my reliance, I left him."
Overall, if the seeker to earn his living observes the conditions and
edquettes of earning as we have previously clarified them, i.e. not to intend to
gather much money, nor depend on his commodities and sufficiency, he
would be reliant.
You may ask: "What is the sign indicative of his non-reliance on his
commodities and sufficiency?" in reply, let me say that if his goods are stolen or
lost, or if he is exposed to any obstacle in his traffic, he would be well-pleased
with it, for the reliance of his heart would remain the same before and after that
event.
You may argue: "Then, how should it be imagined that one has commodities
on which he does not rely, given that he knows for certain that there is no
earning without commodities?" in reply, let me say that he should know that
those whom Allah Almighty provides with sustenance are numerous, and those
whose goods and commodities were lost or stolen are also numerous, and further
habituate himself to the fact that Allah Almighty does with him only what serves
his benefit and interest. If He ruined his commodities, it would be rendered good
for him, for perhaps were He to leave him, it might have led to the corruption of
his religion. And even if the result is that he would die out of hunger, he should
know, for certain, that to die out of hunger is better for him in the hereafter, so
long as it is the fate and decree of Allah Almighty, with no shortage nor
indulgence on his part.
If he believes in the truthfulness of all of that, the presence or absence of
the commodities would be the same to him. According to a certain narration:
"A servant might intend by night to do a thing concerning his traffic, and
were he to do it, it would lead him to destruction, but Allah Almighty looks at
him from above His Throne (of Majesty), and diverts him from it, leaving him
in a state of grief and sorrow, although it is not but a mercy with which Allah
Almighty delivers him."
It is within this context that Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: "I do not
mind whether I become rich or poor, for I do not know which is better for me."
Whoever is not fully certain of those things, no reliance is expected from him.
Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani said to Ahmad Ibn Abu Al-Hawari: "I have a share
from every station except that of blessed reliance, whose smell I have never
smelt." This was his speech given his high esteem and piety. He did not reject
that it is among the possible stations, but he reported that he did not attain it.

The quarter of the saviors
Furthermore, unless one has a full belief in the fact that there is no doer, no
maker, no sustainer and no creator other than Allah Almighty, and that
everything doomed by Him to the servant, in terms of poverty and richness,
health and sickness, death and life, etc, is, to be sure, for the benefit of that
servant than it is hoped by him, then, his state of reliance would not be complete;
and the same applies to all stations of religion, all of which are built on the basis
of the origin of faith.
In sum, reliance is an understandable station, but it summons the power of
the heart and the power of faith and certainty. For this reason, Sahl said:
"Whoever criticizes the seeking to get earnings has indeed criticized the sunnah;
and whoever criticizes leaving it has indeed criticized monotheism."
You may ask: "Is there any beneficial medicine to treat the heart's being
diverted from reliance on the apparent means, in order to have a good
assumption of Allah Almighty to facilitate the hidden means?" In reply, let me
answer in the affirmative. It is to know, for certain, that the bad assumption is
inspired from Satan, and the good assumption is inspired from Allah
Almighty. In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty said: " Satan threatens you
with poverty and bids you to conduct unseemly. Allah promises you His
forgiveness and bounties. And Allah cares for all and He knows all things."
(Al-Baqarah 268)

402

4.

3j AjS o'jix*

-Uj

f

jaCj JiiljT ^^

Man, by nature, is concerned with the Satan's threats. If you add to that the
weakness of the heart and cowardice, and seeing the reliant dependent on the
apparent means, the evil assumption is intensified, which nullifies reliance.
However, seeing sustenance among the hidden means also nullifies reliance. It
is related that a worshipper stayed in the mosque in seclusion, and he had no
earnings. The imam said to him: "If you seek to get your earnings, it would be
better for you." He gave no answer and the imam repeated the same thrice, and
in the fourth time, he answered: "A Jew living near the mosque promises to give
me two loafs everyday." He said: "If he is true to his promise, then, your stay in
seclusion in the mosque would be better for you." He said: "O man! How are you
an imam standing in front of Allah given that shortage of monotheism? How do
you give preference to the promise of a Jew over Allah's guarantee of
sustenance?" A mosque imam asked one of the praying persons: "From where do
you eat?" he said: "O sheikh! Wait until I repeat the prayer I have offered behind
you and then I would give you the answer."
It is beneficial for the good assumption of Allah's providing with sustenance
out of His bounty through the hidden means to listen to the narrations which
imply the wonders of Allah's making in having the sustenance reach him to
whom it is doomed. They also contain Allah's power of destroying the wealth of
the traders and rich and killing them out of hunger.
It is narrated on the authority of Hudhaifah Al-Mar'ashi, who served Ibrahim
Ibn Adham for a long time, thereupon he was asked: "What is the most amazing
thing you have seen from him?" he said: "We spent many days on the way to
Mecca, with no food we had. Then, we entered Kufah and came into a waste

403
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
mosque, thereupon Ibrahim looked at me and said: "O Hudhaifah! I feel you are
hungry." I said: "It is as the sheikh feels." He asked me to bring to him an ink and
a parchment, and I brought them to him and he wrote the following: "In the
Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful. You are the One aimed at in any
state, and referred to with all meanings." He also wrote many poedc verses. Then
he gave me the parchment and said: "Come out and let not your heart attached to
anyone other than Allah Almighty, and give the parchment to the first of people
you meet." I came out and gave the parchment to the first man I met, and he was
a man riding a mule, and when he took and read it, he wept and said: "What is
the matter with the writer of this parchment?" I said to him: "He is in such and
such mosque." He gave me a parcel containing six hundred Dinars. Then, I met
another one whom I asked about the rider of the mule, thereupon he told me
that he was a Christian. I then returned to Ibrahim and related to him the story,
thereupon he said to me: "Do not touch the money, for the man would come an
hour later." When an hour elapsed, the Christian came in and turned over the
head of Ibrahim and went on kissing it and then embraced Islam."
In another context, Abu Ya'qub Al-Aqta Al-Basri said: "I spent ten days in
the sanctuary, and I felt weakness out of hunger, thereupon I talked to myself to
come out. I came out to the valley perchance I could find anything to pacify my
hunger. I saw a taro thrown on the ground and when I took it, I felt I disgusted
it, as if somebody saying to me: "You have kept hungry for ten days after which
you would break your hunger with that putrefied taro?" I then threw it away, and
entered the mosque and sat there. Behold! A non-Arab man came and sat in front
of me and put before me a huge container of food and said to me: "This is for
you." I asked him: "Then, how have you specified it to me?" He said: "It should
be known to you that ten days ago we were aboard the sea and the ship was
about to drown, thereupon I vowed that if Allah delivered me from this
affliction, I would give this in charity to the first man my eye would fall upon
from among those living near the mosque; and you are the first one I have met."
I asked him to open it and he did accordingly, and behold! It had semolina,
almond and sugar. I took a handful of each, and then said to him: "Give the
remaining to your companions as a gift from me to you, and I have accepted it."
Then, I said to myself: "Your sustenance is proceeding to you ten days ago and
you came out to pursue it from the valley!"
Mimshad Ad-Dainuri said: "I was owing some money, because of which my
heart was engaged. Then, I saw in my dream as if somebody saying to me: "O
niggard! You blamed Us for that little amount of debt. Take what you like. It is
your duty to take, and Our duty to give." After that, I have never accounted a
grocer, a butcher, or anyone else."
It is related from Bannan Al-Hammal that he said: "I was on the way to
Mecca, coming from Egypt, and I had my provision when a woman came to me
and said: "O Bannan! You are carrying provision on your back, and having the
false impression that you are not given sustenance." On that I threw away my
provision and three days came upon me without eating anything. Then, I found a
bangle on the road, and I said to myself: "Let me keep it for perhaps its owner

The quarter of the saviors
404
might come to ask about it, and give me something for returning it to him."
Then, die same woman came to me and said: "You are a trader, saying: 'Perhaps
its owner might come and I take something from him for returning it to him.'"
Then, she threw some Dirhams to me and told me to spend it, and I was satisfied
with it along the way to Mecca."
It is related also from him that he needed a slave-girl to serve him. He
complained to his companions who collected her price from themselves and sat
in expectation for the caravan to buy her. When the caravan came, they chose
one to buy and said: "She befits him." They asked its owner about her price and
he said: "She is not for sale." When they insisted he said: "She is for Bannan AlHammal, presented to him by a woman from Samarqand." She then was brought
to Bannan, and the story was related to him.
It is narrated from a man in the early age that he was on journey having a loaf
with him. He said to himself: "If I eat it, I would die." On that Allah Almighty
entrusted him to an angel who said: "O Lord! if he eats it, then, provide him with
sustenance, and if he does not eat it, do not provide him with sustenance." The
loaf remained with him until he died, and nothing was given to him other than it.
Abu Sa'id Al-Kharraz said: "I entered the desert without provision and I was
exposed to a severe starvation. When I saw the coming town from afar, 1 rejoiced
thinking I had arrived. But later, I thought that I relied on something other than
Allah Almighty, thereupon I insisted not to enter the village but as carried to it. I
made a hole for myself in the sand and interred my body to the breast, and by
night I heard a loud voice saying: "O people of the village! There is an ally of
Allah Almighty, detaining himself in a hole in the sand. So, deliver him." A group
of people came and took me out, and carried me to the village."
It is further narrated that a man stuck to the gate of the house of Umar
"Allah be pleased with him" and behold, he heard somebody saying to him:
"O man! Have you emigrated to Umar or to Allah Almighty? Go and learn the
Qur'an, for it would make you independent from the gate of the house of
Umar." The man went and remained absent until Umar "Allah be pleased with
him" missed him. Behold! He got isolated and devoted himself to worship.
Umar went to him and asked him: "I have longing for you. What has engaged
you from me?" the man said: "I indeed recited and learnt the Qur'an, which
made me independent from Umar and the family of Umar." On that Umar
"Allah be pleased with him" said: "May Allah bestow mercy upon you! What
have you found in it?" He said: "I have found in it the statement of Allah
Almighty: " And in heaven is your Sustenance, as (also) that which you are
promised." (Adh-Dhariyat 22)

I then said to myself: "How should my sustenance be in the heaven and I
seek for it on earth?" Umar "Allah be pleased with him" wept and said to him:
"You have told the truth." After that, Umar "Allah be pleased with him" used to
come and sit with him.
Abu Hamzah Al-Khurasani said: "I performed Hajj one year, and while I was
on the way, I fell down into a well. My self disputed me to seek relief of the

Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah

405

people, but I said to myself: "No, by Allah, I would never seek the people's
relief." No sooner had I finished from that idea than two men came upon the
head of the well. One of them said to the other: "Come to close the head of that
well, in order for none to fall in it." They then closed it and 1 intended to cry, but
I said to myself: "But to whom should I cry? He is nearer to me than them." I
then relied on Him. An hour later, somebody came and uncovered the head of
the well, and dangled his foot as if he was murmuring: "Hang yourself to me." I
then hung to his foot and he took me out. Behold! It was a wild animal. It then
left, and later on, I heard a voice saying to me: "O Abu Hamzah! Is it better? We
have delivered you from damage with damage. mi
Such stories are very numerous. If there is a strong faith in it, in addition to
the power to keep patient on hunger for a week, with belief that if one's
sustenance is not brought to him for a week, then, death would be better to him
in the sight of Allah Almighty, and this is why He detained it from him, the
reliance would be attained, otherwise, there would be no reliance.
Exposition Of Reliance As To Earning For The Single And The
Responsible For His Family
It should be known to you that the responsible for a family differs in the
ruling of reliance from him who is single. That is because the reliance of the latter
is valid only with two conditions: the first is to have power to keep patient on
hunger for a week, without being disturbed or covetous; and the other is some
items of faith we have previously mentioned in their suitable places, including his
being pleased with death if he receives no sustenance, putting in mind that his
sustenance that is doomed to him is death and hunger, on the basis of the belief
that if it is shortage in the world, it would be recompensed in the form of
increase in the hereafter. In this way, he sees that the best of both kinds of
sustenance is driven to him, i.e. the sustenance of the hereafter. Thus, the reliance
of a single could be attained.
Furthermore, it is impermissible to oblige the children or dependents in
general to keep patient on or endure hunger. They could not be convinced to
have faith in monotheism on the basis of the fact that death out of hunger is their
sustenance that is doomed to them, with which they should be pleased; and the
same applies to the remaining items of faith. For this reason, the responsible for a
family could not adhere but to the reliance of the earning, i.e. the third station,
which is similar to the reliance of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased with
him" when he came out to get his earnings. But to go to desert and leave the
children with no sustenance out of reliance, or to sit at home and fail to take care
of their affairs out of reliance, is unlawful, which might lead to their destruction,
for which he would be reckoned.
In verification, there is no difference between himself and his dependents. If
his dependents help them keep patient on hunger for some time, and regard
death out of hunger a kind of sustenance and gain in the hereafter, he then has
the right to rely concerning them, with good pleasure and satisfaction. But he has
no right to waste them by reliance unless they help him keep on hunger for some
time. If he could not endure it, and his heart would be troubled, and'his worship

The quarter of the saviors
406
distracted, then, it would be impermissible to do it.
In this context, it is narrated from Abu Turab An-Nakhshi that once he
saw a Sufi stretching his hand towards a watermelon's husk to eat after three
days (of patience), thereupon he said to him: "Sufism is unfitting for you.
Stick to the market." He means that there is no Sufism in the absence of
reliance; and reliance is valid only for him who could patient on the loss of
food for more than three days.
According to Abu Ali Ar-Ruthbari: "If a poor says after five days (of patience
on hunger) that he is hungry, then, make him stick to the market, and enjoin
upon him to work and get his earnings."
One's body then is like his dependents, and his reliance concerning it and
what might harm it is like his reliance concerning them and what might befall
them. But he differs from them in one thing, i.e. he has the right to oblige his
own self to keep patient on hunger, a right which he does not have
concerning his children.
It then has become clear to you that reliance is not to cut off all means in so
much as to depend on keeping patient on hunger, and good pleasure with death
if sustenance delays to come. Besides, it is to stick to cities and villages, or deserts
which contain grass. All of those form the means of survival, but with a kind of
harm, for it could not be tolerable without patience. Moreover, reliance in cities
and villages is closer to means than in the desert. Although all of those are means,
the people incline to means more apparent, due to their weak faith, severe
adherence to this world, lacking patience on the harm in this world for the sake
of the hereafter, and cowardice that is based on their bad assumption and long
hope.
Whoever catches a glimpse of the dominion of the heavens and the earth, it
would be revealed to him, in verification, that Allah Almighty has regulated the
kingdom of visibles and dominion of invisibles, in such a way that by no means
would a servant's sustenance escape him, even if he leaves movement. The one
failing to move, his sustenance would never skip him. Do you not see how the
fetus in his mother's womb, being failing to move, has his umbilicus connected
to his mother's belly in order for nourishment to reach him without his
movement to it? Then, when it is disconnected, He invests love and sympathy
with authority over the heart of the mother in order to take care of him, and
look after his affairs, willingly or unwillingly, as she is compelled by Allah
Almighty to do so, by virtue of the fire of love and pity He kindles in her heart.
Then, as he has no teeth to chew food, his sustenance is made of milk which
needs not to be chewed. Do all of this occur by the effort of the children or of
the mother? When he grows up and becomes mature, means of learning and
education are made easy for him, in order for him to follow the path to the
hereafter.
His cowardice then after maturity is evident ignorance, for his means of living
do not decrease by his maturity: On the contrary, they increase. When he was a
child, he was unable to earn; and now, he is able to work and get his earnings.
Furthermore, when he was a child, only one, his mother, or two, his parents, had

407
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
sympathy and pity for him, and their sympathy was excessive as they used to feed
him twice or more a day, by virtue of the love and pity placed in their hearts by
Allah Almighty; and now when he is mature, pity, mercy and sympathy for him is
placed by Allah Almighty in the hearts of all Muslims to the extent that if anyone
of them feels somebody is in need, he would sympathize for him, and be
stimulated to remove his need. Those who had pity for him in the beginning were
one or two, and now they increase up to one thousand or more. They did not
sympathize for him at first for they saw him in the care of his parents or
guardians, and had they seen him as an orphan, surely, they would have
sympathized for him and taken him in their care.
In sum, Allah Almighty is the caretaker of him, as well as of all the people,
by means of the pity and mercy He creates in the hearts of His servants. So,
why should he engage his heart in the sources of his sustenance after maturity,
given that he did not do before it? Paradoxically, during childhood, those who
showed mercy to him were only one or two at maximum, and now after
attaining maturity, he came to have many. Although the mother's pity is
strong, the pity of one thousand or more could serve the purpose. How many
an orphan whose state Allah Almighty made better than numerous who have
fathers and mothers!
But even, you may argue: "But the people take care of the orphan because
they see him unable and incapable because of his orphanhood, whereas they do
not turn to the normal person for they see he is able to work and get his earnings,
saying: 'He is one like us, so, let him work and endeavor by himself.'" in reply, let
me say that if such a capable mature person is an idle, then, they have told the
truth, for earning is due on him, and there is no significance for reliance on his
part, for reliance is one of the religious stations whose aid one seeks to devote
himself to the worship and celebration of Allah Almighty, and what is the matter
of the idle with reliance? But if he is devoted to Allah Almighty, sticking to a
mosque or a place of worship, in the course of acquiring knowledge and
worship, by no means would the people blame him for leaving work for the
sake of getting earnings, nor oblige him to do so. On the contrary, his devotion
to Allah Almighty instills his love in their hearts and moves them to give him
even what is beyond his sufficiency. All he has to do is not to close his door in
their face, nor to flee away from them to a mountain pass or desert. Until now,
neither a worshipper nor a religious scholar living in a town or a village who
devoted himself entirely to Allah Almighty was reported to have died out of
hunger. That is because whoever devotes himself to Allah Almighty, Allah
never leaves him; and whoever engages in the celebration of Allah Almighty,
Allah instills his love in the people's hearts, and subjugates hearts to serve him
in the same way as He subjugates the mother's heart to her child.
Indeed, Allah Almighty has regulated the kingdom of visibles and dominion
of invisibles in such a way as is sufficient and fitting for their inhabitants. If
anyone witnesses His manipulation, surely, he would have full confidence of,
engage and believe in the regulator, and further consider the regulator of means
and not the means themselves. He has made the means in such a way as everyone

:il

The quarter of the saviors
408
should receive not only as much as is equal to his needs, but also as much as what
is beyond his needs. So, there is no point for leaving reliance except the people's
desire for permanent pleasure and constant delight. But this is not the path to the
hereafter. That is not available for anyone either without or with movement more
often. It occurs very rarely. So, none should be reassured of his movement in so
much as of the regulator of the kingdom of visibles and dominion of invisibles, in
such a way as no sustenance doomed to a servant should escape him even in the
least.
If this reality is revealed with certainty to you, along widi a strength in the
heart and bravery in the soul, then, the fruit would be the same as stated by AlHassan Al-Basri: "Would that the inhabitants of Basra endrely are among my
dependents, and that a single fruit is as much as a Dinar." According to Wuhaib
Ibn Al-Wurd: "Were the heavens to be of copper, and the earth of lead, and were
I to be concerned over my sustenance, surely, I would think I have ascribed
partners to Allah Almighty."
Having understood all those things, you would learn that reliance is an
understandable and attainable station, but only to him who oppresses himself,
and that whoever rejects the origin of reliance has done so out of ignorance. So,
beware of combining both kinds of bankruptcy: Denial of reliance in taste and
sense, and rejection of reliance in faith and belief. You also have to be satisfied
with the little provision and pleased with the sustenance whatsoever for it would
inevitably come to you, even if you run away from it. At that point, it is
incumbent upon Allah Almighty to send your sustenance to you at the hands of
him whom you expect not. If you engage in piety and righteousness, you would
necessarily witness with experience the confirmation of His statement: " And for
those who fear Allah, He (ever) prepares a way out, And He provides for him
from (sources) he never could imagine. And if anyone puts his trust in Allah,
sufficient is (Allah) for him. For Allah will surely accomplish His purpose: verily,
for all things has Allah appointed a due proportion." (At-Talaq 2-3)
Cr4J

40
' ;
I:

I
. :;li:
!

I rj* •’
h ;i

tjs*

^ Sy

(Mr-?

oj ->4™^ j-63 ^ y ifiy-i

But He does not ensure to sustain him with the flesh of birds and all delicious
kinds of food all the time: Fie does not ensure to provide him but with the
sustenance that is sufficient for his survival. This ensured sustenance is given to
him who engages in the ensurer and is reassured to His guarantee. The hidden
means with which the manipulation of Allah Almighty encompassed sustenance
are much greater than what seems to the people. Moreover, the sustenance's
gateways and channels are beyond calculation and measure. That is because it
emerges on earth, while its means are in the heaven. In confirmation of that,
Allah Almighty said: " And in heaven is your Sustenance, as (also) that which you
are promised." (Adh-Dhariyat 22)
To be sure, the mysteries of the heavens are beyond the reach of anyone.

Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah

409

For this reason, a group of people entered upon Ai-Junaid and he asked them:
"What do you want?" they said: "We want sustenance." On that he said: "Then, if
you know where it lies, then demand it from wherever it is." They said: "Then,
let's ask Allah Almighty." He said: "If you know that He forgets you, then,
remind Him of you." They said: "Then, let's enter the house and rely on Him and
wait what it would come to be." He said: "But reliance on the basis of experiment
(and not on the basis of certainty) is suspicion." They said: "Then, what should
we do?" he said: "Do nothing."
Ahmad Ibn Isa Al-Kharraz said: "I was in the desert when severe hunger
afflicted me and my self overpowered me to ask Allah Almighty for food, but I
said to myself: "But this is not one of the acts of the reliant." Then, it required me
to ask Allah Almighty for the power of endurance, but I heard somebody
inspiring to me not to do.
You then have come to understand that he, of submissive soul, strong heart,
and powerful faith in the manipulation of Allah Almighty, would be always self­
reassured of Allah Almighty, fully confident of Him. The worst of his states is to
die out of hunger, and of a surety, death should inevitably approach him as it
approaches him who is not self-reassured. The perfect reliance then is achieved
by full satisfaction on the part of one side, and fulfillment of the ensured
sustenance on the part of the other side. The One Who ensures the sustenance of
the servants who are satisfied with the means He manipulated is true to His
promise. So, all you have to do is to be satisfied and put yourself to experiment,
perchance you would witness with certainty and verification the truthfulness of
the promise in the form of the wonderful and amazing sustenance you would
receive from sources you expect not. Furthermore, expect not, in your reliance,
the means but rather the causer and bringer of those means. That is the necessary
condition of reliance of him who tours the desert with no provision, or sits at
home as idle.
As for him who is famous for his celebration and worship of Allah Almighty,
if he is satisfied with food and drink once per day and night, and a coarse
garment which befits the men of religion, this would come to him not only from
sources he does or does not expect, but also he would receive many times the like
of it. This is why his leaving reliance and rather engagement in sustenance
indicate to the utmost degree of weakness and shortage. The concern with
sustenance is ugly, and it is more ugly on the part of the religious scholars, for it
is requisite for a religious scholar to be satisfied and well pleased. To be sure, the
satisfied scholar receives his sustenance and the sustenance of his group, unless
he dislikes to take from the hands of people and prefers to eat of his own labour:
that is fitting for the working scholar, who acts upon work and knowledge
outwardly and not inwardly, for work and earning prevent one from inward
meditation and contemplation. But the one who engages in worship and
knowledge, outwardly and inwardly, and takes from the hand of him who comes
close to Allah Almighty with what he gives him is preferable, for by so doing, he
devotes himself to Allah on the one hand, and helps another to receive reward
for what he gives on the other hand.

1

The quarter of the saviors
Furthermore, whoever contemplates the established norms of Allah
Almighty, would know that sustenance is not in proportion to the means. For
this reason, one of the Khosraus asked a wise man about the foolish who is given
sustenance, and die rational who is deprived of it, thereupon he said: "The Maker
likes to indicate to Himself: were He to provide with sustenance every rational,
and deprive of sustenance every foolish, it would be thought that it is the mind
which provides with sustenance its owner. But when they saw the opposite of
that, they believed, with certainty, that the sole sustainer is someone else, and
thus lost confidence of the apparent means."

410

1

Exposition Of States Of Reliant In Attachment To Sustenance
Through A Similitude
It should be known to you that the similitude of the people in relation with
Allah Almighty is like the similitude of a group of beggars standing in a field at
the gate of the king's palace, in need of food. He brought out to them some of
His servants with loafs of bread, and told them to give some two each, and some
one each, and so on, and do their best not to forget anyone of them. He ordered
a caller to announce to them: "Be quiet, and attach not to anyone of my servants
once they come out to you. But anyone of you should be reassured while being
firm in his place, for the servants are subjugated and commanded to convey
sustenance to all of you. Whoever of you attaches to anyone of my servants and
harms him and takes two loafs by force, then, when the gate of the field is
opened and he comes out, I would send one of my servants to whom I would
entrust him until I punish him in a term appointed by Me, unknown to anyone of
you; and whoever does not harm the servants, and is satisfied with only one loaf
he receives from the hand of the servant while being quiet and calm, then, I
would favor him with a valuable gift in the appointed term at which I would
punish the former; and whoever keeps firm in his place and receives two loafs,
then, he would receive neither a punishment nor a gift; and whomever my
servants miss and give him nothing with the result that he spends the night
hungry, without being displeased with the servants, then, in the morrow, I would
make him a minister and authorize the affairs of my kingdom to him."
Thus, the beggars were divided into four divisions: a group were overpowered
by their appetite, thereupon they gave no care to the promised punishment, and
said: "From today to tomorrow, there would be a release from that difficulty, and
now we are very hungry." So, they rushed towards the servants and harmed them
and took the two loafs each. In this way, the promised punishment went before
to them in the appointed term, thereupon they regretted, but it was of no profit
to them to regret The second group did not attach to the servants for fear of
punishment. But at the same time, they took two loafs each for they were
possessed by severe hunger. In this way, they became safe from the punishment,
but won not the valuable gift. The third group said: "Let's sit at the sight of the
servants in order not to miss us. But if they give us, let's take only one loaf with
which we would be satisfied, perchance we would win the valuable gift." Actually,
they won the valuable gift.
The fourth group hid themselves in the comers of the field and kept away

411
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
from the sight of the servants, and said: "If they follow us and give us we would
be satisfied with one loaf for each, and if they miss us, then, let's undergo the
severity of hunger tonight, perchance we would have the power to abandon
displeasure, and thus attain the rank of ministry and closeness to the presence of
the king." But this was of no profit to them for the servants pursued them in
every corner and gave each a loaf. That state remained for many days until, by
chance, three hid in one corner and the sights of the servants did not fall on
them, who were engaged by something from long inspection. The result is that
those three spent the night in severe hunger. Two of them said: "Would that we
faced the servants and took our food, for we could not endure patience on
hunger." But the third kept silent until morning, thereupon he alone attained the
rank of ministry and closeness to the king.
That is the similitude of the people. The field symbolizes life of this world;
the gate of the field death; the unknown appointed term the Day of Judgement;
the promise of ministry the guarantee of martyrdom for the reliant if he dies as
hungry, pleased and satisfied, without delaying his reward to the Day of
Judgement, for martyrs are living in the presence of their Lord, and given their
sustenance regularly; the one who attaches to the servants the aggressor who
depends on means only; the subjugated servants the means; the one sitting in the
apparent places of the field at the sight of the servants the dwellers of cities and
villages, in the mosques and places of worship in the state of quietness; and those
hidden in the corners the wanderers in the desert in the state of reliant, and
means follow them, and sustenance comes to them except in vary rare cases: and
if one of them dies as hungry, well pleased and satisfied, he would have the rank
of martyrdom and closeness to Allah Almighty.
The people really are divided into those four divisions: from each hundred,
about ninety attach themselves to the means, seven sit at cities and villages, in
mosques and places of worship, exposing themselves to the means once they
come to them, and the remaining three wander in tours in desert and mountain
passes, two of whom were displeased, while it is the remaining one only who won
the rank of closeness. That was the state during the previous times. But now,
these who abandon the means are no more than one per ten thousand.

THE SECOND PURPOSE: TO KEEP A BENEFIT
EXPOSITION OF RELIANCE AS REGARDS THE CAUSES OF SAVING AND
THE AMOUNT TO BE SAVED
Whoever has property, whether by means of inheritance, earning or any
other means, has three states, and no more:
The first is to take only what satisfies his need at the time. That is, to eat if
he is hungry, put on clothes if he is naked, and purchase a humble dwelling
place if he needs residence, and distribute what is beyond his need
immediately, without saving anything of it except for what he knows he would
distribute in such a way. By so doing, he would fulfill the requirements of
reliance; and that is the highest degree of reliance.
The second state is on the opposite side of that, therewith one turns out
from the sphere of reliance. That is to save as much as is sufficient for a

f

• >

;

il

i!
:

i!i

!'•
! I

; HI

j!i

The quarter of the saviors
412
whole year and more. This one does not belong to the reliant in principle. It is
said that from among animals, only three save foodstuff: the mouse, the ant
and the son of Adam.
The third case is to save as much as is sufficient only for forty days and
less. However, by so doing, would he be deprived of the station of praise
promised for the reliant in the hereafter? The matter is debatable. According
to Sahl, by so doing, one turns out from the limit of reliance. But Al-Khawas
is of the opinion that saving for forty days is not sufficient to turn one out
from the limit of reliance, but to save more turns him out from the limit of
reliance. Abu Talib Al-Makki says that even by saving as much as is sufficient
for over forty days does not turn him out from the limit of reliance. Anyway,
this dispute is meaningless since saving in principle is permissible.
It might be thought that saving in principle contradicts reliance. Hence,
the difference of estimation is pointless. Every kind of reward promised for a
special rank is given in proportion to its degrees; and each rank has a
beginning and an end. Those of end are called the precedents, and those of
the beginning the companions of the right side. Moreover, the companions of
the right side also are of different degrees, and the same is true of the
precedents. The highest degree of the companions of the right side is adjacent
to the lowest degree of the precedents. For this reason, the difference of
estimation is meaningless.
In verification, reliance by abandonment of saving is not achieved except
by shortening the hope. People are different as to the length and shortness of
their hope. The shortest hope is for a day and a night and less, whereas the
longest takes up the man’s entire lifetime; and in between both extremes,
there are countless degrees. Whoever, for example, has hope as short as a
month is closer to the purpose than him whose hopes is as long as a whole
year, and so on. To bind it by forty days according to the appointment of
Moses "peace be upon him" with Allah Almighty is unlikely, for this incident
was not intended to show the duration of concession given to hope, but
Moses "peace be upon him" was not to deserve what he was promised except
after the passage of forty days, for a Divine mystery which none knows but
Allah Almighty, like the statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him": "Allah Almighty covered with His Hand the clay
from which Adam was created for forty mornings." (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami
on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud and Salman Al-Farisi, and it is false).
Therefore, whoever saves as much as is sufficient for more than a year is of
weak heart and faith, and relies only on the apparent means, therewith he turns
out from the station of reliance (on Allah Almighty), since he is uncertain of the
power of the Real Disposer of affairs to manipulate the hidden means. In sum,
the degree of everyone is determined by the shortness or length of his hope. It is
only the shortness of hope that prevents one from saving. So, it is preferable for
one not to save at all, even though his heart is weak, for the less he saves, the
more excellent reward he would receive.
It is narrated that a poor one died, thereupon the Messenger of Allah

413
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" commanded ALi or Usamah Ibn
Zaid "Allah be pleased with them" to wash his dead body and they washed
and shrouded him in his garment. When he was buried, the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to his companions: "He
would be raised on the Day of Judgement with his face as bright as is the
moon on the night when it is full; and had it not been for a characteristic he
had, surely, he would have been raised with his face as shining as is the sun."
We asked: "What is that O Messenger of Allah?" He "peace be upon him"
said: "He used to observe much fasts, stand (at night for supererogatory
prayers), and remember Allah Almighty more often. But, at the same time,
whenever winter came upon him, he would save the summer suite for his next
summer, and whenever summer came upon him, he would save the winter
suite for his next winter." Then, He, "peace be upon him" said: "Indeed, you
have been given the least portion of certainty and determination of patience."
However, the mug, the blade (or razor), the pot, and the like of those
which man needs regularly do not belong to things like money and clothes.
Indeed, saving those does not decrease the degree of reliance. But one does
not need the garment of winter in summer, and the same is true of the
garment of summer, which one does not need in winter. But this applies only
to him who is not disturbed by abstention from saving, nor does his soul
covet of what is in the hand of the people, nor does his heart turn but to the
Real Disposer of affairs. If his abstention from saving causes trouble to him
and distracts him from worship, celebration of Allah Almighty and meditation
of His signs, to be sure, saving becomes preferable for him. Moreover, if he
keeps an estate whose income satisfies his need therewith he would not be
diverted from worship, it would be preferable for him, for the purpose is to
mend the heart to be devoted entirely to the celebration and remembrance of
Allah Almighty.
How many a person who is engaged by the presence of money, and how
many a person who is engaged by the loss of money. What is forbidden is that
which distracts and diverts from Allah Almighty, otherwise, the world itself is
not forbidden, neither in its presence nor in its absence. For this reason, the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was sent as a
Messenger to all kinds of people, including traders, craftsmen, farmers,
businessmen, etc. He neither ordered the traders to leave their trade, nor the
craftsmen to leave their crafts, nor those who did not work in them to engage
in them: He "peace be upon him" invited all the people to Allah Almighty,
and guided them to the fact that their felicity and salvation lie in turning their
hearts from this world, and devoting them entirely to Allah Almighty. The
fundament of engagement in Allah Almighty is the heart. The remedy of the
weak-hearted is to save only what satisfies his needs, as well as the remedy of
the strong is to abstain from saving.
That ruling is specific to the single. But as for the one responsible for a
family, to save for his dependents as much as is sufficient to sustain them for
a whole year does not turn him out of the sphere of reliance. But to save more

The quarter of the saviors
414
invalidates reliance, for the means reoccur by the reoccurrence of years. So, to
save what is sufficient for more than a year goes back to the weakness of his
heart, which contradicts the power of reliance. The reliant is a monotheist
who has a strong heart, and is reassured and certain of the bounty and favor
of Allah Almighty, confident of His manipulation, giving no care to the
apparent means.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" saved
for his dependents as much as is sufficient to sustain them for a whole year.
At the same time, he forbade Umm Ayman and others to save anything even
for the morrow. He also forbade Bilal "Allah be pleased with him" to save
even a fragment of bread to break fast on it, and said to him: "Spend, O Bilal,
and fear not that (Allah) the Lord of the Throne (of Majesty) would withhold
from you." He "peace be upon him" said: "If you are asked to give anything,
do not withhold it, and if you give, do not save anything." (At-Tabarani and
Al-Hakim on the authority of Abu Sa'id). He "peace be upon him" shortened
his hope to the extent that whenever he urinated, he would practice
Tayammum, even though water was close to him. In justification, he said:
"What does make me know? Perhaps I may (die and) not be able to reach it."
(Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
Were the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" to
save, this would have decreased nothing from his reliance, for he was not to
be confident of his saving. But he left saving in order to instruct the strong
among his nation, who were weak in comparison with him. He "peace be
upon him" saved as much as is sufficient to sustain his dependents for a
whole year, not because of his weakness or the weakness of his dependents.
He "peace be upon him" said: "Indeed, Allah loves that His concessions
should be acted upon in the same way as He loves for his determinations."
(Ahmad and At-Tabarani on the authority of Ibn Umar). This means that he
did so to please the hearts of the weak among his nation, lest their weakness
would lead them to despair and hopelessness, and cause them to leave the
good that is available to them because of their failure to attain the highest
degree. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was
not sent but as a mercy for all the worlds, with their different kinds and
degrees.
Having understood this, you come to know that saving might cause harm
to some people, and no harm to others. In this respect, it is narrated on the
authority of Abu Umamah Al-Bahili "Allah be pleased with him" that one of
the companions of Suffah, i.e. the poor persons among the Emigrants, died,
and they found no shroud to shroud his dead body in it, thereupon he "peace
be upon him" said: "Inspect his garment." They did and found two Dinars.
On that He "peace be upon him" said: "Those are two (causes of)
cauterization (he would receive in the fire of Hell)." (Ahmad on the authority
of Shahr Ibn Hawshab from Abu Umamah). Many other Muslims died and
left a lot of money, but even, he did not say the same about them.
His saying is open to two interpretations: one is that he intended the real

!

415
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
cauterization of the fire of Hell, as shown in the statement of Allah Almighty:
" On the Day when heat will be produced out of that (wealth) in the fire of Hell,
and with it will be branded their foreheads, their flanks, and their backs, "This is
the (treasure) which you buried for yourselves: taste you, then, the (treasures) you
buried!" (At-Tawbah 35)
(© ^ • J

C* Ij3j JL5

<~~=>

' J-lA ^

This state applies to one who intends to show to the people his ascedcism
and poverty, although he is lacking it, as a kind of dissembling. The second
interpretation is that he saved those not by way of dissembling, but saving them
decreased his degree of perfection, in the same way as the traces of two
cauterizations reduce the beauty of face. However, everything one saves
decreases his degree in the hereafter accordingly. None is given anything in this
world but that it would decrease his degree in the hereafter.
That saving with the heart being disengaged from what is saved does not
necessarily invalidate reliance is confirmed by the following narration from
Bishr on the authority of Al-Hussain Al-Maghazili, one of his companions: I
was in the house of Bishr one day at forenoon when an old man of lean
cheeks came to visit him and Bishr stood in respect for him, and it was his
habit not to stand for anyone. He gave me a handful of Dirhams and said to
me: "Buy for us of the most delicious kinds of food as much as you could."
He never said to me the like of that before. I brought the food and served it,
and he shared food with him, given that I have never seen him sharing food
with anyone else. We ate until we satisfied our need and a great quantity of
food remained. The man took it and carried it within his garment and went
away. I wondered at that and disliked it from him. Bishr said to me: "Perhaps
you have disapproved his behavior." I said: "Yes. He took the remaining food
without permission." He said: "This is our brother Fath Al-Mawsili. He came
from Mawsil to visit us. He intended to instruct us that if reliance is valid,
there is no harm in saving."

THE THIRD PURPOSE: TO AVERT HARM EXPOSITION OF SEEKING
MEANS THAT AVERT HARM WHICH LEADS TO FEAR
It should be known to you that harm might expose one to fear on himself
or on his property; and it is not requisite for reliance to leave the means of
averting it. An example of the harm that leads to fear on oneself is to sleep in
a land densely inhabited with wild animals, or under an inclining wall, about to
collapse, etc: This is forbidden, and the one who does so exposes himself to
destruction without benefit. But the means here are divided into those which
are certain, those which are probable, and those which are thought to be. To
leave the third category, i.e. those thought to be is requisite for reliance. They
are like the charm and cauterization in relation to averting harm. The
Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" described the
reliant as those who do not practice charm nor get themselves cauterized. But
he did not described them as those who, whenever came out to a cold place,
would not put on a cloak to protect themselves from the expected cold.

The quarter of the saviors
But it is possible to leave the means that are certain to avert harm. If one
receives harm from another, and he has the power to avert his harm and exact
retribution, or to endure and keep patient, then, it is requisite for reliance to
choose to endure and keep patient. In confirmation of that, Allah said: "(He
is) Lord of the East and the West: there is no god but He: take Him therefore for
(your) Disposer of Affairs. And have patience with what they say, and leave them
with noble (dignity)." (Al-Muzzammil 9-10)

416

& ® v

VO f

He further said: " We shall certainly bear with patience all the hurt you may
cause us. For those who put their trust should put their trust on Allah." (Ibrahim
12)
And: "and heed not their annoyances, but put your trust in Allah. For enough
is Allah as a Disposer of affairs." (Al-Ahzab 48)
And: "Therefore patiently persevere, as did (all) Messengers of inflexible
purpose." (Al-Ahqaf 35)
And: "an excellent reward for those who do (good)! Those who persevere in
patience, and put their trust in their Lord and Cherisher." (Al-Ankabut 58-59)
4 © bj&y-i mp Jpj b/*« {jiAlt{cgj

j>-1

^

That is specific to the harm of the people. But to keep patient on the harm
of wild animals, scorpions and female-snakes, not to avert them is not
requisite for reliance, since it has no benefit at all. Similarly, the work is not
intended for itself in so much as to help one do the religious affairs.
The same is true of the harm that leads to fear on one's property. By no
means would reliance be defective by closing the door of the house when one
comes out of the house, or by fastening the camel, and the like of that, for
those means have been learnt to be among the established ways of Allah
Almighty. For this reason, when the Bedouin indulged in fastening the camel
under the pretext that he had relied on Allah Almighty, the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to him: "Tie it and then
put your trust in Allah."
In a similar context, Allah Almighty said: " take your precautions." (An-Nisa
71)

4fJ^=>j^r b*^ }
In description of the fear prayer, He Almighty said: " taking their arms with
them." (An-Nisa 102)

4}*j
He Almighty further said: "Against them make ready your strength to the

417
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
utmost of your power, including steeds of war, to strike terror into (the hearts of)
the enemies, of Allah and your enemies." (Al-Anfal 60)
>•*

ill
He Almighty said to Moses "peace be upon him": "March forth with My
servants by night: for you are sure to be pursued." (Ad-Dukhan 23)
i

Jpbj

o?

“«

To be sure, by night one gets fortified from the eyes of the enemies. When
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" hid in the cave
(of Thawr) from the eyes of the enemy, it was to avert harm.
You may argue: "It is related from many people that the lion placed its
hand on the shoulder of some of them, and they kept motionless." In reply to
that, let me say that some people used to ride the lion, and subjugate it under
their control. So, let not this station deceive you. Although it might be true in
itself, it is not fitting for the people to imitate and follow. That is a high
station of miracles, and it is not requisite for reliance, and it has some
mysteries which none knows but a very few.
You may further ask: "Is there any sign therewith to know that I have reached
that station?" in reply, let me say that the one who reaches does not need any
sign. But anyway, among the signs is that something like a dog inside yourself is
subjugated to you, called the anger, which continues to bite you as well as others
than you. If such is subjugated to you in such a way that if it is irritated and
provoked, it would not move but with your hint, you might then raise up to a
degree in which a lion, which is the king of wild animals, is subjugated under your
control. The dog of your house is more entitled to be subjugated to you than the
dog of the desert, and the internal dog within you more entitled than that of your
house, and so on. If the internal dog is not subjugated to you, covet not of
getting the external dog subjugated to you.
You may argue: "Then, if the reliant takes his arms for fear of the enemy,
closes his door for fear of the thief, and ties his camel for fear of losing it, by
which consideration should he be regarded a reliant?" in reply to that, let me
say that in this case, he is reliant by knowledge and state. As for knowledge, it
is that the thief, for example, would not rush by himself towards opening the
door unless he is doomed by Allah to do so. How many a door is close but in
vain, and how many a camel is tied, but it dies or runs away, and how many a
person takes his arms and is killed or overpowered. So, rely not on those
means in so much as on the causer of those causes and means, as we have
previously set forth the example for the legal representative in the dispute. If
the mandatory even attends and brings the record with him, he does not rely
on himself and his record in so much as on the sufficiency and power of his
legal representative.
As for the state, it is to be satisfied with the fate of Allah Almighty in his
house and in himself, saying: “O Allah! If You invest with authority such as
takes what is in the house in Your Cause and I am well pleased with Your
decree. I do not know what You have given me in order to take it back, or

'!

The quarter of the saviors
418
deposited with and lent me in order to take it back once again; and I do not
know whether what You have given me was preordained to be the sustenance
of another one than me. Anyway, however You decree, I am satisfied with it. I
have not closed the door for I dislike or fear of Your decree. But I did so
according to Your established way of organizing means. I have no confidence
but of You, O Causer of causes and means.”
Such being his state and knowledge, he would not turn out of the limit of
reliance by fastening the camel, taking up arms and closing the door. If he
returns and finds his luggage in the house being stolen, let him consider his
heart: if he finds himself happy and pleased with that, putting in mind that
Allah Almighty has taken that from him only to increase his sustenance in the
hereafter, then, his station of reliance is valid, and he has proved true to it,
otherwise, he then is not true to his claim of reliance, for the station of
reliance is beyond that of asceticism, and asceticism is valid only from him
who does not feel regret for what he has missed in this world.
You may argue: “Then, how should the reliant have property in order to
be taken?” in reply, let me say that the house of the reliant could hardly be
empty from any kind of property, like a bowl to eat therein, a mug to drink
therein, a pot to perform ablution therein, a container to keep his provision
therein, a stick to avert evil from himself therewith, to the end of those
necessities of living. Furthermore, he might have money in his hand in
expectation of a needy or indigent to give it to him. His saving with that
intention does not invalidate his reliance. It is not requisite for reliance to get
rid of the mug in which he drinks, the container in which he preserves his
provision, etc. this is true only of what is beyond the need and necessity, for
the established way of Allah Almighty requires that good should reach the
reliant poor, and this does not apply to mugs, food containers, and the like of
them. To behave in opposition to the established way of Allah Almighty is not
requisite for reliance. For this reason, Al-Khawas used to take in journey the
rope, the pot, the file, the needle, but not provision.
You may argue: “Then, how should one imagine he could not feel sorry
for losing the luggage of which he is in need? Had he not desired it, surely, he
would not have kept it and closed the door of the house on it; and since he
kept it for he was in need of it, then, how should he not be afflicted for losing
it?” in reply, let me say that he kept it in order to seek its aid to do the
obligations of his religion, thinking that it was better for him to have this
luggage, and had it not been for his benefit, surely, Allah Almighty would not
have given it to him. But it may be that his benefit lies in being put to trial of
losing it, in order to toil more in achieving his purpose, and get much reward
in that toiling and fatigue.
But when it was taken from him, his assumption changed, for in all states,
he has full confidence of Allah Almighty. In justification, he says to himself:
“Had it not been for the fact that Allah Almighty knows that my benefit lies
in having this thing with me up till now, and that my benefit lies in losing it
immediately, He would not have taken it from me.” It is only by this

419
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
assumption that sadness is imagined to leave him. That is because he does not
rejoice of the means as being means, but of being facilitated to him by the
Causer of causes and means, out of His bounty and care. In this he is like a
patient in front of a merciful physician who accepts all what he does with him:
if he gives food to him, he would rejoice saying: “Had it not been for the fact
that he knows that food benefits me, he would not have given it to me.” If he,
after that, takes food away from him, he also would rejoice saying: “Had it not
been for the fact that he knows that food harms me, he would not have taken
it away from me.”
Whoever does not think about the favor and bounty of Allah in the same
way as a patient thinks about his merciful physician, who is well-experienced
in the science of medicine, no reliance is valid from him. Whoever knows
Allah Almighty, and gets acquainted with His deeds and acts, and His
established way of mending His servants, he would not rejoice of means at all
for he does not know which of means is good for him, as Umar “Allah be
pleased with him” said: “I do not care whether I have become rich or poor,
for I do not know which of both is better for me.”
As such, the reliant should not care whether or not his luggage has been
stolen from him, for he does not know which of both is better for him in the
world and the hereafter. How many a luggage in this world which is a cause of
man’s destrucdon in the hereafter! How many a rich who is tried by an
incident because of his richness, for the sake of which he says: “Would that I
am a poor!”
Exposition Of Etiquettes Of Reliant When Their Luggage Is Stolen

!
-

The reliant should have many etiquettes as for the luggage of his house
once he leaves it: The first is to close the door, without exceeding the due
limits of keeping it, such as putting more than a lock on the door. Indeed,
Malik Ibn Dinar used not to put a lock on the door: but he rather used to
straighten it with a rope saying: “Had it not been for dogs, I would not have
even straightened it.”
The second is not to leave in the house such luggage as instigates the
thieves to come to steal it. Thus, leaving such an expensive luggage could lead
thieves to commit disobedience, as well as exceeding the due limits of
preserving it could provoke in them the motive for committing theft. For this
reason, when Al-Mughirah presented a pot (of water) to Malik Ibn Dinar, he
said to him: “Take it back, for I have no need of it.” He asked him: “Why?”
he said: “My enemy (Satan) whispers to me that a thief might steal it.” He
seemed to have avoided causing the thief to commit disobedience on the one
hand, and engagement with the Satan’s whisper that it might be stolen on the
other hand. In description of that, Abu Sulaiman said: “That portends the
weakness of the hearts of Sufis. He abstained in this world: Then, what harm
should he receive from leaving it?”
The third: as for what he is forced to leave in the house, he should, when
coming out and leaving it, be pleased with the decree of Allah Almighty
concerning it, saying to himself: “Whatever a thief takes, he is free of

The quarter of the saviors
420
obligation from it, or it is in the Cause of Allah; and if he is a poor, then, that
is an object of charity to him; and even if he is not poor, at least he is more
eligible to get it.” In this way, he should have two intentions applicable to the
poor and the rich: The first is that his property is to hold back disobedience,
for one might become free of need because of it, and dispense with theft, and
as he has made him free of obligation after taking it, then, his sin of devouring
the unlawful would be removed from him. Het other is not to wrong another
Muslim by stealing his property, making his property a ransom for his
property.
When he intends to maintain the property of somebody other than him by
making his own property a ransom for it, or to avert or at least alleviate the sin
from the thief, he proves sincere to Muslims, and complies with the statement
of the Prophet “Peace be upon him”: “Help your brother, no matter wrongful
or wronged he might be.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Anas).
To help the wrongful is to prevent him from committing injustice; and to
forgive him is to cancel out and hold back injustice. He should put in mind that
such intendon never harms him even in the least, for it neither gives the thief
an authority over anyone, nor does it change the Divine decree. But by
asceticism, this intention is achieved. If his property is taken, he would have, by
each Dirham, seven hundred and more good deeds, depending on that
intention; and even if it is not taken, he would receive a reward too. In
confirmation of that, it is narrated from the Prophet “Peace be upon him” that
he told about him who left coitus interruptus that he would receive the reward
of a babe to be potentially born for him from that sexual relation and live until
he fights in the Cause of Allah, even if he is not actually born at all. That is
because one’s portion from begetting children is only the sexual intercourse,
but the matter of creation, life, sustenance and survival, is not up to him. If he
is created, he would get a reward for his act; and the same is true of theft.
The fourth is that if he finds his property being stolen, he should not
grieve, but rather rejoice if he could, and say to himself: “Had there been no
good for that, surely, it would not have been taken from me by Allah
Almighty.” Furthermore, if he does not have the intention to make it in the
Cause of Allah, at least he should not be excessive in pursuing it and having
bad assumptions of Muslims. But if he has the intention to make it in the
Cause of Allah, he should not pursue it, for he has sent it forward as
ammunition for him to the hereafter. If it is returned back to him, he should
not accept it particularly when he has made it in the Cause of Allah. But
should he accept it, it is his own, for ownership does not lapse only by that
intention, even this is unfavorable in the sight of the reliant.
It is narrated from Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with him" that his shecamel was stolen, and he went in pursuit of it until he was troubled. Then he
said: “Let it in the Cause of Allah Almighty.” Then, he entered the mosque
and offered a two-rak’ah prayer. Then a man came to him and said: “O Abu
Abd-Ar-Rahman! Your she-camel is in such and such a place.” He put on his
sandals and stood up to go with him, but later he said: “I pray for forgiveness

421
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
of Allah.” He sat down. It was said to him: “Would you not go to bring it?”
he said: “But I have made it in the Cause of Allah.”
One of the sheikhs said: “I saw in a dream one of my brothers and asked
him: “What has Allah Almighty done with you?” He said: “He has forgiven
for me and admitted me to Paradise, and showed to me my abodes in it, and I
saw them with my own eyes.” But at the same time, he seemed sad and
gloomy. I asked him: “How has He forgiven for you and admitted you to
Paradise and at the same time you seem sad and gloomy?” he took breath and
said: “Yes. I would remain sad to the Day of Judgement.” 1 asked him about
the reason and he said: “When I saw my abodes in Paradise, some stations in
the highest part of Paradise were shown to me the like of which I have never
seen, of which I rejoiced. But when I intended to enter them, a caller from
above called: “Turn him away from them, for they are not his, but they are for
him who decided the way.” I asked: “Then, what is to decide the way?” it was
said: “You used to say about a thing that it is in the Cause of Allah, and later
retract from that. Had you decided your way, we would have decided those
for you.”
It is related from one of the worshippers that he was sleeping in Mecca
besides a man who had a treasure with him, when the latter got up and made
sense that he had lost his treasure, and accused the worshipper of stealing it.
He asked him: “How much was it?” he told him and he went to the house and
weighed for him the like of it from his own property and gave it to him. Later
on his companions told him that it was they who had taken the treasure out of
joking. He went in their company to the worshipper and apologized to him,
and returned to him the gold, but he rejected and said: “Take it as good and
lawful. I am not to take back a thing I have given out in the Cause of Allah.”
He did not accept it. But in the face of their insistence, he invited his son and
went on dividing it in parcels and distributing them among the poor, until
nothing thereof remained.
Those were the etiquettes of the righteous predecessors. Whoever took a
loaf to give it to a poor, by way of charity, and he did not find him, he disliked
to take it back after giving it out of his property, and rather favored to give it
to another poor; and he did the same with Dirhams, Dinars, and all items of
charity.
The fifth, which is the least in degree, is not to invoke evil upon the thief.
If the reliant does, his reliance would become invalid, for his doing so
indicates his aversion and grief for what he has lost, and his asceticism would
become unsound too. Moreover, if he is excessive in his invocation of evil
upon him, his reward for losing his things would vanish too. According to a
particular narration: “Whoever invokes evil upon his wrongdoer has indeed
taken back his right.”
It is related that a horse belonging to Ar-Rabie Ibn Khuthaim, as much as
twenty thousand Dirhams, was stolen while he was standing in prayer. But he
neither interrupted his prayer, nor was he moved to pursue it. Some people
came to console him and he said to them: “Indeed, I have seen the thief

i

The quarter of the saviors
422
untying it.” They said to him: “Then, what has prevented you from deterring
him?” he said: “I was occupied by something dearer to me than that.” He
meant prayer. They went on invoking evil upon him, thereupon he said to
them: “Do not invoke evil upon him, but rather speak good, for I have made
it an object of charity for him.”
In a similar context, it was said to somebody about something that had
been stolen from him: “Do you not invoke evil upon your wrongdoer?” he
said: “I do not like to be helpful of Satan against him.” It was said to him:
“Then, what do you see if he returned it to you?” He said: “I neither take nor
look at it for I have made it lawful for him.”
It was said to another one: “Invoke evil upon your wrongdoer.” He said:
“None has wronged me.” He further said: “He indeed has wronged himself
and not me. Is it not sufficient for this poor that he has wronged himself in
order for me to add evil to his evil?”
A person insulted Al-Hajjaj so much for his wrongness and injustice in the
presence of a righteous predecessor, thereupon he said: “Do not insult him so
much, for Allah Almighty takes back the right of Al-Hajjaj from him who
violates his honor, in the same way as He takes back the right from Al-Hajjaj
when he devours the property or takes the life of anyone else.”
It is narrated in a particular Hadith: “A servant might be wronged
thereupon he continues to insult and abuse his wrongdoer until it becomes as
much as is equal to and even more than the injustice committed against him,
with the result that the wrongdoer turns to have right to demand from him
with what he insulted him more than his injustice, thereupon retribution
would be exacted from him (on the Day of Judgement).”
The sixth is to grieve for the sake of the thief and his disobedience and the
sin he has committed which exposes himself to the punishment of Allah
Almighty, and give thanks to Allah Almighty for He made him wronged and
not wrongful, and made it shortage in his world and not in his religion. In this
context, one made a complaint to a religious scholar that a robber cut the way
on him and stole his property, thereupon he said to him: “If you do not grieve
for the fact that among the Muslims there is such as makes lawful that property
for himself more than you grieve for the loss of your own property, then, you
are not sincere (in advice and counsel) to Muslims.” On another occasion, some
Dinars were stolen from Ali Ibn Al-Fudail while he was performing Tawaf
round the House, and his father saw him later weeping in sigh, he asked him:
“Do you weep for the loss of those Dinars?” he said: “No, by Allah, but I
grieve for that poor man lest he would be questioned on the Day of Judgement,
without argument to have to defend himself.”
Those were the etiquettes of the righteous predecessors, may Allah have
mercy upon them all.

THE FOURTH PURPOSE: TO PREVENT HARM
EXPOSITION OF SEEKING TO PREVENT HARM LIKE TREATING
AILMENT AND THE LIKE OF IT
It should be known to you that the means by which an ailment is removed

423
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
are divided into what is fully certain, like water that removes the harm of
thirst, and bread that removes the harm of hunger; And almost certain, like
cupping and bloodletting and medicine; and what is thought to be like
cauterization and charming.
As for the fully certain means, it is not out of reliance to leave it, and even
it is unlawful to leave it, if there is fear of death. As for the illusive, it is
requisite for reliance to leave it, for the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" described the reliant as those who leave such illusive
means. The strongest of them is cauterization followed by charming, and the
weakest is the evil or bad omen.
As for the middle degree pertaining to the almost certain means, such as
medication with the apparent causes offered by physicians, doing them does
not contradict reliance, unlike the illusive ones, whereas leaving them is not
forbidden unlike the fully certain means. Sometimes, avoiding might be better
than doing them, whereas in other times and in relation to particular persons,
doing might be better than avoiding them. It is in the middle way between
both extremes.
That medication does not contradict reliance is attested by the deeds, acts
and words of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him". As for his words, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: “There is no disease but that it has a medicine, that is known
by such as knows it, and unknown by such as is ignorant of it, except for
death.” (Ahmad and At-Tabarani on the authority of Ibn Mas’ud; Al-Bukhari
abridged on the authority of Abu Hurairah; and Muslim abridged on the
authority of Jabir).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “Treat yourselves with medicine, O servants of Allah, for Allah has
created ailment and medicine (for it).” (Ibn Majah and At-Tirmidhi on the
authority of Usamah Ibn Sharik).
Once, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
was asked about medicine and charming whether they aught repel the Divine
decree of Allah, thereupon he said: “Those are doomed by Allah Almighty.”
(At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah on the authority of Abu Khizamah from his
father).
It is further narrated in a particular Hadith that he "peace be upon him" said:
<fI have never passed by a company of angels but that they said to me: “Tell your
Ummah to use cupping.” (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Ibn Mas’ud; and Ibn
Majah on the authority of Anas).
It is narrated in another Hadith that he "peace be upon him" commanded
people to treat themselves with cupping saying: “Get yourselves cupped
pardcularly on the seventeenth, nineteenth, or twenty first night, lest blood
would erupt in your bodies and cause you to die.” (Al-Bazzar on the authority
of Ibn Abbas, with whom it is stopped).
Here he "peace be upon him" mentioned that the eruption of the blood
causes death by permission of Allah Almighty, and that taking out blood (by

l

424
The quarter of the saviors
cupping) is salvation form it. There is no difference between taking out the
destructive blood from underneath the skin, and taking out the scorpion from
underneath the garment or the serpent from the house. It is not requisite for
reliance to leave that. It is like the pouring of water on the fire to extinguish it
and avert its harm once it flames in the house.
It is narrated in a particular Hadith of broken chain of transmission:
“Whoever gets cupped on Tuesday that coincides with the seventeenth day of
the month, it would be a medicine for him for the ailments along a year to
come.” (At-Tabarani on the authority of Ma’qil Ibn Yasar; and Ibn Hayyan on
the authority of Anas).
As for his command "peace be upon him" he commanded more than one of
his companions to get cupped, and he "peace be upon him" cut off a vein of Sa’d
Ibn Mu’adh "Allah be pleased with him" by bloodletting. (This is narrated by
Muslim on the authority of Jabir). He also cauterized (the injury of) As’ad Ibn
Zurarah "Allah be pleased with him". (At-Tabarani on the authority of Sahl Ibn
Hunaif). He "peace be upon him" said to Ali "Allah be pleased with him" who
had an eye trouble: “Do not eat of that kind of food (i.e. fresh dates), and rather
eat of that kind (i.e. vegetables cooked with powdered parley) since it is more
fitting for you.” (Abu Dawud, Ibn Majah and At-Tirmidhi on the authority of
Umm Al-Mundhir). Once, he "peace be upon him" said to Suhaib "Allah be
pleased with him" and he saw him eating dates while he had an eye trouble: “Do
you eat dates while you have an eye trouble?” he said: “I eat in the other side (of
the mouth).” On that he "peace be upon him" smiled.
As for his act "peace be upon him" it is narrated in a Hadith on the
authority of one of the members of the Prophet's household that he "peace be
upon him" used to apply kohl every night, get cupped once every month, and
drink medicine every year; and more than once he got medicine from the
scorpion and others like it.
It is narrated that whenever revelation was sent down on him "peace be
upon him" he would have a headache, and to get rid of it, he would cover his
head with henna. According to another narration, whenever he had a sore, he
would treat it with henna, and sometimes with dust. The narrations about his
medical treatment and command that the people should do so are beyond
calculation. A book has been composed about that called the Prophetic
Medicine.
It is narrated in an Israeli tale that Moses "peace be upon him" fell ill and
the children of Israel came to visit him and recognized his ailment and asked
him to get medicine for it, but he rejected and said: “I shall never get
medicine until He cures me without medicine.” But his ailment got aggravated
and lasted for a long time. They said to him: “The medicine of that ailment is
famous and experimented, and we always treat ourselves with it.” But he
insisted on his rejection. Allah Almighty revealed to him: “By My Honor and
Glory, I would never cure you until you treat yourself with what they
mentioned to you.” He said to them: “Then, treat me with the medicine you
have mentioned to me.” They did and he recovered. But he had doubt about

425
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
that, thereupon Allah revealed to him: “You like to invalidate My wisdom
with your reliance on Me: Who made medicine for the benefit of people other
than Me?”
According to another tradition, one of the Prophets "peace be upon them"
suffered from an ailment, thereupon Allah Almighty revealed to him to eat
eggs. Another Prophet complained of weakness, thereupon Allah Almighty
revealed to him to eat meat and milk, for it has the water of power. It is said
that the weakness intended is the sexual impotence.
It is further narrated that a people made a complaint to their Prophet
about the ugliness of their children, thereupon Allah Almighty revealed to him
to tell them to feed their pregnant women with quince, for it beautifies the
babe in the womb, and it is better to be eaten in the third and fourth months
of pregnancy, during which Allah Almighty gives form to the fetus. They used
to serve the pregnant woman with quince, and the confined because of post­
partum bleeding with fresh dates.
Thus, it seems clear that the causer of causes has made His established
way to associate causes with effects out of wisdom. No doubt, medicines are
causes subjugated by the ruling of Allah Almighty, like the other causes. As
well as the bread is the treatment of hunger, and the water the treatment of
thirst, all medicines are made to treat the different ailments and diseases with
only two differences: one is that to treat hunger and thirst with food and
water is evidently clear, and well-known by all the people, while to treat any
disease with its related medicine is known only by some private people. The
other is that in order for the medicine to be effecdve, there should be many
conditions and circumstances the absence of all or some of which might cause
the medicine to fail in treatment, whereas to treat hunger or thirst does not
require but food and water, not counting such condidons and circumstances.
All of this goes back to the manipulation of the Causer of causes, out of His
perfect power and wisdom. So, there is no harm on the reliant to use them
while keeping his eye on the Causer of causes apart from the physician and
medicine.
It is narrated from Moses "peace be upon him" that he said: “O Lord!
From Whom do ailment and medicine come?” He said: “From Me.” He
asked: “Then, what is the benefit of physicians?” He said: “They only earn
their sustenance and please My servants, until My cure or death comes.” Thus,
reliance with medical treatment is to rely with knowledge and state as has
previously been shown in the different works that avert harm and bring about
benefit. But to leave medicine at all is not requisite for reliance.
You may argue: “Cauterization also is among the means whose benefit is
apparent.” In reply, let me answer in the negadve. It is one of the illusive
means, like charming, with the difference that it is to burn the affected place
at once, given that it is dispensable. There is no ailment to be treated with
cauterization but that it has a medicine instead of it. To burn with fire is
destrucdve, although it is and dispensable at the same dme, unlike cupping
and bloodletdng, which are not replaceable. That is why the Messenger of

The quarter of the saviors
426
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" forbade cauterization and not
charming (Al-Bukhari on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
In this respect, it is narrated that Imran Ibn Al-Hussain "Allah be pleased
with him" fell ill and they suggested to him to get cauterized, but he rejected. In
the face of their persistence, he accepted and got cauterized. After that he used to
say: “I used to see light and heard voice, and angels used to greet me, and when I
got cauterized, all of this disappeared from me.” He further said: “We got
cauterized, and by Allah, there was no success nor prosperity.” Then, he repented
from that, and turned to Allah Almighty, thereupon Allah restored to him what
he used to find concerning the angels. In his comment on that he said to Mutarrif
Ibn Abdullah: “Do you not see the angels therewith Allah Almighty honored me,
and how He restored them to me?” earlier, he told him that he had lost them
(after he got cauterized).

Exposition of the fact that leaving medicine might be praiseworthy
in some cases, and that it indicates to the power of reliance, and
that it does not contradict the act of the messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him"
It should be known to you that the number of the righteous predecessors
who got medical treatment from ailments are beyond calculation. But at the
same time, some among the elite left it. Being so, it might be thought to be
shortage of reliance. But had leaving it been out of perfection of reliance,
surely, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
would have left it, for none else could be expected to be more reliant on Allah
than him "peace be upon him".
It is narrated from Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" that when he fell ill
it was said to him: “Would that we invite a physician to see you.” He said: “The
(Real) physician caught a glimpse of me and said: “I do what I like to do.”” In
another context, it was said to Abu Ad-Darda’ "Allah be pleased with him”
during his fatal illness: “What do you complain?” He said: “My sins.” It was
further said to him: “Then, what do you desire?” He said: “The forgiveness of my
Lord.” They asked him: “Should we not invite a physician to see you?” he said:
“No doubt, the physician has made me ill.” It was said to Abu Dharr "Allah be
pleased with him" when he got eye trouble: tfWould that you treat them!” he said:
“Indeed, I am engaged from them.” It was said to him: “Then, would that you
ask Allah Almighty to cure them.” He said: “I ask Him only for what is more
significant in my sight than them.”
It is further narrated that Ar-Rabie Ibn Khuthaim was paralyzed,
thereupon it was said to him: trWould that you get medicine!” he said: “I
intended to do so, but I soon remembered Aad and Thamud people, and the
others like them: although they had so many physicians among them, both the
physician and the ill were destroyed, and the medicine availed them naught.”
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal used to say: “It is better for such as follows the way of
reliance on Allah Almighty to leave medicine, and if he has ailments, he
should not tell the physician about them whenever he asks him.”

Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah

427

It was said to Sahl: “When would the servant’s reliance become valid?” he
said: “When harm befalls him in his body, shortage afflicts him in his
property, and he gives no care for that, and rather cares for being maintained
and sustained by Allah Almighty.”
Some of them then discarded medicine at all, and others disliked it. How
to accommodate the act of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" with theirs could be evident only with enumerating the
impediments of medicine. Let us say that there are many reasons for leaving
medicine, and they go as follows:
The first reason is that the patient is among these to whom some of the
unseen is revealed to whom it is revealed that it is time for his death, and this
means that the medicine avails him naught. That is known to him once by a true
vision, once by anticipation, once by certain revelation, etc. Abu Bakr As-Siddiq
"Allah be pleased with him" seemed to have left medicine for that reason, for he
was among these to whom some unseen matters were revealed. It is narrated that
he said to A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her" concerning the inheritance: “You
have two sisters.” At that time, she had only one sister, but his wife was pregnant,
and gave birth to a female child. Thus, it was learnt that it was revealed to him
that his wife was pregnant and that she would give birth to a female child. So it is
not unlikely that the extermination of his time was revealed to him, otherwise, he
was not to reject medicine, given that he saw the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" having got medicine, and ordered the Muslims
to do so.
The second reason is that the patient is occupied by his own state and
destination in the hereafter, which causes him to forget the pain of disease.
The result is that his heart is engaged from thinking about medicine. To this
fact the speech of Abu Dharr "Allah be pleased with him" refers when he
said: “I am occupied from them” and the statement of Abu Ad-Darda’ "Allah
be pleased with him": “I complain of my sins.” The pain of his heart for fear
of his sins was more grievous than the pain of his body because of his
physical ailment.
As such Sahl was occupied: it was said to him: “What is sustenance?” He
said: “To remember Allah, the Ever-Living, the Self-subsisting, Eternal.” It was
said to him: <cWe asked you about what sustains life.” He said: “What sustains life
is knowledge.” It was said: “We asked you about food.” He said: “Food is the
remembrance (of Allah).” It was said: <rWe asked you about the nourishment of
the body.” He said: “What do you have to do with the body? Let Him Who took
care of it in the first take care of it in the last. Whenever an ailment befalls it,
return it to its maker. Do you not see that if there is a defect in anything, you
return it to its maker to repair it?”
The third reason is that the ailment is chronic and the medicine prescribed
for it is of no benefit, like cauterization and charming, and that is why the
reliant leaves it. To this fact the statement of Ar-Rabie Ibn Khuthaim refers:
“I intended to do so, but I soon remembered Aad and Thamud people, and
the others like them: although they had so many physicians among them, both

The quarter of the saviors
428
the physician and the ill were destroyed, and the medicine availed them
naught.” This might be so in reality, or only in the sight of the patient in view
of his little practice and experience of medicine. This is why it is close to his
certainty that it is of no profit to take it. No doubt, the experienced physician
has belief in the benefit of medicine more than anyone else. That is because
confidence and assumption are based on belief, and belief depends on
experience and practice.
That is the argument of almost all the worshippers and ascetics who left
medicine, for medicine in their sight remains groundless and illusive. That is
true of some medicines in the sight of those who are well acquainted with the
science of therapy, and not true of others. But the non-physician might see all
kinds of medicine with one eye, thinking that all are in the same position of
cauterization and charming, which causes him to leave medical treatment.
The fourth reason is that the servant intends, by leaving medical
treatment, to have the disease continue to exist in order to get reward for his
patience on the trial of Allah Almighty, or to put himself to experiment of his
power to keep patient. There are many narrations concerning the reward for
ailment and disease.
In this respect, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: trWe, the company of Prophets, are the most tolerable of trials among
the people, followed by those who are next (to us in degree), and those who are
next (to them). The servant is put to trial in proportion to the strength of his
faith. The more his faith is strong, the more his trial is severe, and the weaker his
faith is, the less his trial is.” (Ahmad, Abu Ya’li and Al-Hakim on the authority of
Sa’d Ibn Abu Waqqas).
According to another narration: “Indeed, Allah Almighty tries His servant
with ordeals in the same way as anyone of you tries his gold with fire: some
come out as pure gold with no blemish, others less than that and others as
black and burnt.” (At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu Umamah).
It is narrated on the authority of one from the household of the Prophet
"peace be upon him": “Verily, if Allah Almighty loves a servant, He would try
him; and if he keeps patient, He would select him; and if he is contented, He
would choose him.” (Sahib Al-Firdaws on the authority of Ali).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “Do you like to be like the straying red camels, neither fall ill nor
become weak?” (Ibn Abu Asim, Abu Na’im and Ibn Abd-Al-Barr on the
authority of Abu Fatimah).
Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased with him" said: “You find that the believer
has the healthiest heart and the most diseased body, unlike the hypocrite who
has the healthiest body and the most diseased heart.”
When ailment and trial were praised in such a great way, some people liked
ailment and seized the opportunity of being ill to get the reward for patience
on it. Some of them had an ailment which he hid and did not mention to the
physician who came to treat him. He favored to tolerate the suffering of the
ailment and accept the judgement of Allah Almighty, knowing that the truth

Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah

429

that prevails over his heart is greater than the ailment which possesses his
organs could occupy him from it. They also learnt that their prayer while
sitting and keeping patient on the fate of Allah Almighty is better than their
prayer while standing with health and power.
In confirmation of that, it is narrated that Allah Almighty says to His
angels: “Write for My servant the best of what he used to do (when he was
healthy), for he is in My fetters, and if I release him, 1 would substitute him
with flesh better than his, and blood better than his; and if I send him to
death, I would send him to My mercy.” (At-Tabarani on the authority of
Abdullah Ibn Umar).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “The best deed (in reward) is that which people force themselves to do.”
In interpretation of it, it said that it refers to the diseases and disasters that
afflict people, to which the following statement of Allah refers: “But it is
possible that you dislike a thing which is good for you, and that you love a thing
which is bad for you.” (Al-Baqarah 216)
4
3-^3
^ ypj-* o i
^
3-^3
oi
^
Sahl used to say: “To leave medicine even if it leads to weakness of acts of
worship and shortage of obligatory duties is better than to get medicine for
the sake of acts of worship.” He was suffering from a chronic disease from
which he never got medicine, although he medicated the people from it.
Whenever he saw a servant offering prayer while sitting and could not do
righteous deeds because of ailment from which he got medicine in order to be
able to offer prayer while standing and do the righteous deeds, he would be
astonished and say: “No doubt, his prayer while sitting, along with satisfaction
and pleasure with his state is better for him than getting medicine to become
too powerful to pray while standing.” He, like these of Basrah, used to
weaken the soul with hunger and break desires, for their knowledge that as
little as an atom of deeds of hearts like good pleasure, patience and reliance is
much better than as much as mountains of the deeds of organs, and by no
means could sickness hinder from the deed of hearts, unless its pain is
intolerable. Sahl said once again: “The ailment of body is a mercy from Allah
Almighty, whereas ailment of hearts is a punishment from Him.”
The fifth reason is that a servant has previously committed sins of which
he feels afraid, and for which he is too powerless to make expiation. He then
sees that if his ailment lasts long, it might be an expiation for those sins,
thereupon he abstains from getting medicine for it, for fear the traces of
ailment would go soon.
In confirmation of that, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: “Fever still befalls a servant (so long) until he comes
to walk on earth as pure of sins and mistakes.” (Abu Ya’li and Ibn Adi on the
authority of Abu Hurairah; and At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu AdDarda’).
According to another narration: “The fever of a single day is expiation for
the sins to be committed along a whole year.” (Al-Quda’i on the authority of

t

i

The quarter of the saviors
430
Ibn Mas’ud). In interpretation of it, it is said that it does so because it ruins
the power of a whole year. It is also said that man has three hundred and sixty
joints, and fever afflicts and pains all of them, and thus the pain of each is
expiation for one day.
When the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
mentioned that the fever of one day is expiation for a sins to be committed in
a whole year, Zaid Ibn Thabit "Allah be pleased with him" asked his Lord to
remain fevered, thereupon fever did not leave him at all until he died. The
same was asked by a group of Ansari people whom fever did not leave until
their death. (Ahmad and Abu Ya’li on the authority of Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri).
Furthermore, when the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: “He, whom Allah Almighty takes away the sight of his eyes,
He accepts for him no reward less than Paradise”, a lot of Ansari people
hoped to be blind.
Jesus "peace be upon him" said: “He is not a learned who does not rejoice
of being stricken with ailments in his body and calamities in his property, for
the expiation for sins expected from that.”
It is narrated that Moses "peace be upon him" saw a servant suffering
from great ordeals and trials, thereupon he said: “O Lord! Bestow mercy upon
him!” on that Allah said to him: “How should I bestow mercy upon him in
that with which I have mercy upon him, i.e. therewith I expiate his sins, and
increase him in degrees?”
The sixth reason is that a servant feels the commencements of arrogance
and haughtiness because of the long period of being healthy, thereupon
whenever he is afflicted with a disease, he leaves medicine for fear that when
he recovers, he would soon return to his arrogance and tyranny. However,
health is the power of attributes therewith the desires and inclinations are
stimulated, and summon one to sins and mistakes, the least of which is to call
for enjoyment of what is permissible, which means to waste time and neglect
the great profit of opposition of the soul and adherence to the acts of
worship. If Allah Almighty intends good for a man, He always alerts him with
diseases and calamities. For this reason, it is said: “No believer is free from a
disease, a destitution or a slip.”
It is narrated that Allah Almighty says: “Poverty is My prison, and disease
is My bond therewith I detain whomever I like of My creatures.” if it is a
disease, it would detain from tyranny and committing sins; and which good is
better than it? But even, the good health is to abstain from sins and mistakes.
A Gnostic said to a man: “How have you been?” he said: “I have been in
good health.” He said: “If you have not disobeyed Allah Almighty, you then
are in good health; and if you have disobeyed Him, then, which disease is
more destructive than disobedience? Not healthy is he who disobeys Allah
Almighty.”
Ali "Allah be pleased with him" said when he saw the adornment made by
those of Nabath in Iraq on the day of Id: “What is that which they did?” they
said to him: “O Commander of Believers! That is a day of Id belonging to

431
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
them.” On that he said: “Everyday on which we do not disobey Allah
Almighty is an Id for us.”
Allah Almighty said: “and disobeyed it after He brought you in sight (of the
Booty) which you covet.” (A1 Imran 152)
4

uijr

It is said that it refers to the health and wellbeing. He further said: “Nay, but
man does transgress all bounds, In that he looks upon himself as self-sufficient.”
(Al-‘Alaq 6-7)

4©

o* ©

oi ^ ^

I.e. if he is self-sufficient with health.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“Remember more often (death which is) the destroyer of pleasures.” (AtTirmidhi, An-Nasa’i and Ibn Majah on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
Allah Almighty said: “See they not that they are tried every year once or twice?
Yet they turn not in repentance, and they take no heed.” (At-Tawbah 126)
4 © -CL>3j^=a'Xj- f-* Yj

yp

J1 v

4

b/ji Yjl

It is said that they are tried with ailments and diseases,
It is said that if a man falls ill twice and does not turn to Allah in repentance,
the angel of death says to him: “O heedless man! A messenger after a messenger
from me has come to you, and you gave no response.”
For this reason, the righteous predecessors disliked that a year should
elapse without their suffering from ailment in their body or shortage in their
property. They said that a believer could hardly be free from being befallen by
a terror or a disaster at least every forty days. In this respect, it is narrated that
Ammar Ibn Yasir "Allah be pleased with him" married a woman who never
fell ill, thereupon he divorced her. It is further narrated that a woman was
offered to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
and he intended to marry her because of her good qualities described to him,
and when it was said to him: “And she has never fallen ill”, he "peace be upon
him" said: “Then, I have no need for her.” (This is reported by Adimad on the
authority of Anas).
Once, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
made a mention of ailments and pains like headache, etc, thereupon a man
asked: “What is the headache? Indeed, I have never experienced it.” On that
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “Keep
away from me! Whoever likes to have a glance of one from among the
denizens of the fire, let him look at so and so.” (Abu Dawud). That is because
it is narrated that “Fever is the portion of every believer from the fire (of
Hell).” (Al-Bazzar and Ahmad on the authority of A’ishah; Ahmad on the
authority of Abu Umamah; At-Tabarani on the authority of Anas; and Abu
Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of Ibn Mas’ud).
It is narrated on the authority of Anas and A’ishah "Allah be pleased with
them" that it was said to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace

f

I

The quarter of the saviors
432
be upon him": “O Messenger of Allah! Would there be anyone else in the
same position of martyrs?” he said: “Yes, whoever remembers death twenty
times a day” or according to another version: “He who remembers his sins
and grieves for them.” No doubt, the patient remembers death more often
than the ordinary man. Thus, when the benefits of ailment are numerous, a set
of people saw it better not to seek to remove it. They saw abstention from
medicine a means of superiority, whereas taking medicine a shortage. But how
should it be regarded shortage given that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" did it?
Refutation Of The Claim That Leaving Medicine Is Better In All
States
It might be argued that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" did it only in order to be enacted for others than him,
otherwise, it is the state of the weak, and the degree of the powerful requires
them to be reliant by leaving medicine at all. In reply to that, let me say that
this means that it is requisite for a reliant to abstain from cupping and
bloodletting when blood erupts and boils in the body, as well as to leave the
scorpion and female-snake bite the body without even attacking or averting it
from him. But this should apply to hunger, thirst and cold/heat, for which the
reliant should not take food, drink or clothes to sadsfy it. Therefore, none
adopts that argument. There is no difference between those, for all of those
causes are organized and manipulated by Allah Almighty, the Causer of
causes.
What confirms the fact that this is not requisite for reliance is the
narradon from Umar and companions "Allah be pleased with them"
concerning the story of the plague. When they aimed at Sham and arrived at
Jabiyah, the news of the plague reached them. The people were divided into
two divisions: Some said: “We never enter upon the plague and contribute in
the destrucdon of ourselves.” Others said: “No, let’s enter and rely on Allah
Almighty, and do not flee away from the fate of Allah Almighty, nor escape
from death, thereby we become like those in connecdon with whom Allah
Almighty said: “Did you not turn your vision to those who abandoned their
homes, though they were thousands (in number), for fear of death?” (AlBaqarah 243)
i dp

jV-Aj

Cr?

0^ j] J fJ* ♦ ^

They returned to Umar "Allah be pleased with him" and asked him about
his opinion, thereupon he said: “Let’s return and enter not upon the plague.”
Those who had a different opinion said: “Should we flee away from the fate
of Allah Almighty?” Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: “Yes, we should
flee away from the fate of Allah to the fate of Allah.” Then, he set forth an
example for them: “Tell me: if anyone of you has catde and sheep and
descends a valley of two sides: one fertile and the other infertile. Tell me: if he
pastures them in the ferule one, would he not do so by the fate of Allah
Almighty? If he pastures them in the infertile one, would he not do so by the

433
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
fate of Allah Almighty?” they answered in the affirmative. Then, he asked for
Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf "Allah be pleased with him" to seek his verdict, and
he was absent at that time. In the morning Abd-Ar-Rahman "Allah be pleased
with him" came to him and he asked him about his opinion, thereupon he
said: “O Commander of Believers! I have something I heard from the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him".” Umar "Allah
be pleased with him" said: “Allah is Greater.” Abd-Ar-Rahman "Allah be
pleased with him" resumed: “I heard the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" saying: “If you hear about the plague in a land, do
not enter it; and if it emerges in a land in which you are, do not come out in
flight from it.” Umar "Allah be pleased with him" rejoiced and praised Allah
that this agreed with his opinion. Thus, he returned with the people from
Jabiyah. (Al-Bukhari)
Then, if that is requisite for reliance, how did all the companions "Allah be
pleased with them" leave reliance unanimously, given that it is one of the
highest stations in religion?
You may argue: “Then, why was it forbidden to leave the land in which
the plague emerges in flight from it, given that the medical cause of infection
is the air, and the best way to get medicine is to leave the unclean air? Here, it
is permissible to leave reliance.” In reply to that, let me say, and Allah
Almighty knows best, that the harm does not lie in the air’s direct touching
the body in so much as in inhaling it regularly for a long time. The putrefied
air enters into the lungs and starts to damage them, and the apparent trace of
the plague does not emerge unless the inside is damaged. So, leaving the land
in which the plague emerges does not save the body from its traces, which
would appear some time later. Salvation here is illusive, like cauterization and
charming.
Nevertheless, if this is abstracted, it might seem to contradict reliance. But
it is not forbidden in itself in so much as for the fact that if all the healthy are
given permission to come out, there remains in the land none but the patient,
who are afflicted with the plague: Who then should take care of them and
look after their affairs? However, if the healthy remain in the land, their stay
does not mean decisive death; and if they come out, their departure does not
mean decisive salvation from death, given that their departure accelerates the
death and destruction of the infected ones, in opposition to the principle that
Muslims are like the building whose parts straighten each other; And the
believers are like one body: If a member of it falls ill, all the remaining
members call each other to share it.
That is the reason given to the forbiddance. It applies to him who has not
entered the town in which the plague emerged, whom the air has not yet
affected, nor are the inhabitants of the town in need of him. But even, if
remains only the plagued in the town, who come to be in need of such as
takes care of them, in this case, it might be favorable for those outside to
enter upon them, simply for the sake of care and aid. It should not be
forbidden for it is an exposure to a harm in the hope of averting a further

%

The quarter of the saviors
434
harm from the Muslims. For this reason, the flight from plague is likened to
the flight from the battlefield in many narradons, for it breaks the hearts of
Muslims and hastens on to destroy them. (Ahmad on the authority of A’ishah
and Jabir).
Those are subde matters, and whoever observes them not and rather takes
heed of the apparent side of the narradons and tradidons, what seems
contradictory to him would be more than what he hears. The mistakes of
worshippers and ascetics in this issue are numerous. But it is for the sake of
this that the honor and excellence of knowledge are.
You may argue: “Since there is excellence in leaving medicine, then, why
did the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" not
leave medicine for the sake of its excellence on the one hand, and to get the
reward for that on the other hand?” in reply to that, let me say that it really is
excellent but for him who has so many sins and he needs expiation for them;
or him who fears on himself the tyranny of health and prevalence of desires;
or him who needs what always reminds him of death as he is possessed by
heedlessness; or him who needs to get the reward of the patient for his
shortage of attaining the stations of the contented and reliant; or him who
falls short of perceiving the benefits and advantages placed by Allah in the
medicine, so that it becomes illusive in his sight like charming and bad omen;
or him whose engagement in his own state prevents him from getting
medicine, since medicine occupies him from his state in view of his inability
to combine both, to the end of that series.
Those are the causes that impede from getting medicine. Those might be a
source of perfection for many, and of shortage for others in the degree of the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him", whose station
is higher than all of those stations. His state required him to be on the same
mode concerning the presence or absence of means. That is because in all of
his states, he regarded only the Causer of causes and not the causes and means
themselves; and whoever is in such a state is not harmed by the means and
causes. The desire is shortage, and turning away from wealth is to have
aversion for it; and even if it is perfection, it is shortage in the sight of him to
whom it is the same to have or lose wealth. To regard both stone and gold
with the same eye is more perfect than to flee away from gold. The state of
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was like him
to whom both gold and stone are equal. He did not keep gold just to instruct
the people the station of asceticism, not for fear on himself of keeping it, for
he is too high for the world to harm him, given that the entire world with its
treasures was offered to him, and he did not accept it.
But at the same time, he did not leave medicine in order to follow the
established way of Allah in this respect on the one hand, and to make it
permissible for his Ummah to use it when they are in dire need of it on the
other hand, given that it is harmless in the end, unlike wealth, which is
extremely harmful. It is true that getting medicine does not cause harm except
in terms of seeing medicine alone beneficial apart from its creator, and from

435
Book five: Monotheism and reliance on Allah
this point of view, it is forbidden; and in terms of intending health thereby to
seek its aid in committing sins, and this is also forbidden. But fortunately, no
believer intends that. None of the believers sees medicine beneficial in itself in
so much as being made by Allah Almighty a means of advantage and benefit,
just in the same way as he does not see food or drink to quench hunger and
thirst in themselves in so much as being made a means to do so by their
Creator.
Getting medicine is subject to the same ruling of earning. If one earns to
seek its aid to do good or evil, it has its pardcular ruling; and if he earns to be
blessed in what is permissible, it has its particular ruling; and so on.
From what we have mentioned, it has become clear that leaving medicine
might be better in some cases, and getdng medicine might be better in some
cases; and this differs by the difference of persons, states and intendons; and
neither doing nor leaving it is requisite for reliance, except for leaving such
illusive things as cauterizadon, charming, omen, etc, which is unfitdng for the
reliant.
Exposition Of States Of Reliant In Disclosing And Concealing Illness
It should be known to you that concealing illness, and hiding poverty and
all kinds of distress and trials are among the treasures of righteousness, and
among the highest stations, for the contentment with the judgement and
decree of Allah Almighty, and patience on His trials are included in the good
treatment with Allah Almighty. To conceal that is safer from evils.
Nevertheless, to disclose that brings about no harm if the intention and
purpose therein are true and good. There are three purposes of disclosure:
The first is to want to get medicine, thereupon one needs to make a mention
of his ailment to the physician. In this case, he mentions it not by way of making
a complaint but by way of describing the power of Allah Almighty on him that is
shown in this ailment. Bishr used to describe his pains to Abd-Ar-Rahman the
physician. Ahmad Ibn Hanbal used to tell about the ailments he experienced,
saying: “I indeed describe the power of Allah on me.”
The second is to describe to anyone other than the physician, provided
that he is of those followed by others and well-versed in knowledge. By
description, he likes that he would learn from him not only the good patience
on disease, but also the good gratitude, by disclosing that the ailment is a
favor that deserves gratitude, telling about it in the same way as he tells about
a favor. According to Al-Hassan Al-Basri: “If the patient praises Allah
Almighty and gives thanks to him and then makes a mention of his pains, it
would not be a complaint.”
The third is to disclose his powerlessness and neediness for Allah
Almighty; and that is good from him who is brave and powerful (in relation to
the people) and helplessness is unlikely to be expected from him. In this issue,
it is narrated that when Ali "Allah be pleased with him" fell ill, he was asked
about his state, thereupon he said: “Evil.” The attendants looked at each other
as if they felt it and thought it to be a complaint, thereupon he said: “I just
announce my neediness for Allah Almighty.” In this way, he liked to disclose

!

!

The quarter of the saviors
436
his powerlessness and neediness for Allah Almighty with the etiquettes with
which he was disciplined by the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" when he heard him saying while being ill: “O Allah! Make
me padent on the trial!” on that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said to him: “You have asked Allah for trial, then, ask
Him for health.”
With thqse intendons, it is permissible to make a mendon of disease. But
in the absence of that, it turns to be a complaint, and to make a complaint
against Allah Almighty is unlawful as I have already mendoned in the
prohibidon of begging for the poor unless there is a dire necessity. The
disclosure turns into a complaint by the presumpdon of displeasure and
showing aversion for the deed of Allah Almighty. If it is void of displeasure,
and the intentions we have already mendoned, it would not be unlawful,
although it is preferable to leave it, for it might give the false impression of
complaint, or ostentatious description of the illness. Anyway, whoever leaves
medicine out of reliance, has no right to disclose his disease, for to take rest
with medicine is better than to take rest with disclosure.
In interpretation of the statement of Allah Almighty: “So patience is most
fitting (for me)” (Yusuf 83)
A*

>

3 ;

It is said that it is a patience in which there is no complaint. It was said to
Jacob "peace be upon him": “What has taken away your sight?” He said: “The
bitterness of time and long sadness.” On that Allah Almighty revealed to him:
“He has devoted himself to complain of Me to My servants.” He said: “O Lord! I
turn to You in repentance.”
It is narrated on the authority of Tawus and Mujahid that they said: “Even
the moaning of the patient in his illness is written against him.” They disliked
moaning during illness, for it gives the impression of complaint. It was said in
this context: “Iblis, may Allah curse him, got nothing from Job "peace be
upon him" except for his moaning during his illness.” In this way, the
moaning was Iblis’s portion from him.
It is narrated: “If a servant falls ill, Allah Almighty reveals to both angels
the following: “Consider what he says to his visitors.” If he praises Allah and
talks with good, they would invoke good upon him; and if he makes a
complaint and talks with evil, they would say: “Let it be against you.”
For this reason, some worshippers disliked to be visited when they fell ill
for fear of complaint. Whenever anyone of them fell ill, he would close his
door against the people, and none would come to visit him until he would
recover and come out to them. Among those who used to do so, a mention
may be made of Fudail, Wuhaib and Bishr.
Fudail used to say: “I desire to remain ill without visitors to come to
inquire about my health.” He further said: “I dislike ailment only for the sake
of visitors.” "Allah be pleased with them".
End of Book of Monotheism and Reliance, by aid and good help of Allah
Almighty, followed, Allah willing by the Book of Love, Longing, Intimacy and
Contentment.

Q23>

:>roTirjir^nrTir.

i; ongm 3. trrrflTp^^ij

It is the sixth book of the quarter of saviors of the revival of religion sciences
In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Ail perfect praise to Allah Almighty Who diverted the hearts of His allies
from devotion to the adornment and splendor of this world, and purified their
sights form observing none but His presence. Then, He Almighty appeared with
Glory to them, with His Names and Attributes until their minds rose with the
lights of His gnosis, and revealed to them the lights of His Countenance until
their hearts burnt with the fire of love for Him, and then He veiled Himself from
them with His Glory until minds wandered in the vast land of His Supremacy and
Grandeur.
All blessing and peace of Allah be upon Muhammad, the seal of all the
Prophets, and upon his family and companions, the chiefs of all the people, and
imams and leaders and guides to the truth.
Coming to the point: the love for Allah Almighty is the farthest degree and
the highest station after which there is no stadon but that it is a fruit and product
of it, like longing, indmacy and contentment; as well as there is no stadon before
it but that it is an introductory to it, like repentance, patience, asceticism, etc.
Although there is, concerning all stations other than the love for Allah Almighty,
in case of their absence, a belief in their availability. But as for the love for Allah
Almighty, belief in it is very rare, to the extent that many religious scholars go as
far as to deny it, saying: "It has no significance other than the regular obedience
of and compliance with the command of Allah Almighty. This is what caused us
to reveal the real nature of this matter.
This book will be divided into two parts

Part one: Love/ longing and intimacy
In this part, we are going to discuss the following:
The Sharia-based quotations in support of love
Exposition of its real nature and causes
Exposition of the fact that none deserves love other than Allah Almighty
Exposition of the fact that the greatest pleasure is to catch glimpse of His
Bounteous Countenance
Exposition of the further pleasure achieved by the vision in the hereafter
than the gnosis in this world
Exposition of the causes that strengthen the love for Allah Almighty
Exposition of the people's disparity of their love
Exposition of the cause why understanding falls short of gnosis of Allah
Almighty as it should be
Exposition of the significance and meaning of longing
437

The quarter of the saviors

438

I

Exposition of the love of Allah for His servant
Exposition of signs of the servant's love for Allah Almighty
Exposition of significance of contentment with Allah Almighty
Exposition of elation produced from contentment with AJlah Almighty

CHAPTER ONE
EXPOSITION OF THE SHARIA-BASED QUOTATIONS IN LOVE OF THE
SERVANT FOR ALLAH ALMIGHTY
It should be known to you that there is a consensus among the Ummah
that the love for Allah Almighty and His Messenger "peace be upon him" is
an obligatory duty. But even, how should what exists be imposed an
obligation? How should love be construed as obedience given that obedience
is a product and fruit of love? The love should be the first and after that the
lover would give obedience. That love is affirmed to Allah Almighty is
attested from His statement: “whom He will love as they will love Him.” (AlMa’idah 54)

i

4 (Jjs

£

And: “ but those of Faith are more overflowing in their love for Allah.”
(Al-Baqarah 165)

; -

iil
!

i

i!

I
Iil I I
i

I

That is an indication to affirm love on the one hand, and prove disparity in it
on the other hand.
There are many narrations in which the Messenger of AJlah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" made the love for Allah Almighty requisite
for faith. It is narrated that Abu Razin Al-Uqaili asked him "peace be upon
him" saying: “O Messenger of Allah! What is faith?” He "peace be upon him"
said: “It is that Allah and His Messenger become dearer to you than anyone
else.” (Ahmad).
He "peace be upon him" said in another Hadith: “None of you shall have
faith (complete) until Allah and His Messenger become dearer to him than
anyone else.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Anas).
He "peace be upon him" said in another Hadith: “No servant shall have
faith (perfect) until I become dearer to him than his family, property and
children.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Anas).
why not since Allah AJmighty said in His Holy Book: “Say: If it be that
your fathers, your sons, your brothers, your mates, or your kindred; the wealth
that you have gained; the commerce in which you fear a decline; or the dwellings
in which you delight - are dearer to you than Allah, Or His Messenger, or the
striving in His cause - then wait until Allah brings about His decision: and Allah
guides not the rebellious.” (At-Tawbah 24)

: i

^b'y >3 J^=*3^513
i&T

IL<4

*-4>*"33 ^ bbLs?

b^oj

}

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment

439

^ CE?)
a^
^ -OJlj
The Messenger of Allah ’’Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" ordered
people to love Allah saying: “Love Allah for His favors He provides you with,
and love me for the love of Allah for me.” (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of
Ibn Abbas).
It is narrated that a man said to the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him": “O Messenger of Allah! I love you.” He "peace be
upon him" said: “Then, get ready for poverty.” He further said: “I love Allah
Almighty.” On that he "peace be upon him" said: “Then, get ready for trial.”
(At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Mughaffal).
It is narrated on the authority of Umar "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" looked
at Mus’ab Ibn Umair coming and he had a hide of ram with which he
wrapped his waist, thereupon he "peace be upon him" said: “Look at that man
whose heart Allah has illuminated. I saw him with his parents seducing him
with the most pleasant food, but the love for Allah and His Messenger "peace
be upon him" invited him to such (a state) as you see.” (Abu Na’im in his
Hilyah).
It is narrated in a famous Hadith that Abraham "peace be upon him", said
to the angel of death when he came to take his soul: “Have you seen a bosom
friend sending his bosom friend to death?” Allah Almighty revealed to him:
“Have you seen a lover disliking to meet his beloved?” on that Abraham
"peace be upon him" said: “O angel of death! Now then take my soul.” None
but a servant who loves Allah from the depth of his heart could do so. If he
learns that death is the cause of his meeting with his beloved, he would hasten
to it. In confirmation of that our Prophet "peace be upon him" said in his
supplication: “O Allah! Endow me with Your Love, and the Love for such as
brings me close to You, and make Your love dearer to me than the cold
water.”
It is further narrated that a Bedouin came to the Messenger of Allah
"Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" and said: “O Messenger of Allah!
When will the Hour (of Judgement) be?” The Prophet "peace be upon him"
said: “What have you prepared for it?” he said: “Indeed, I have not prepared
for it much prayers or fasts, except that I love Allah and His Messenger.” On
that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to
him: “The man would be in the company of whomever he loves.” Anas "Allah
be pleased with him" said: “I have never seen the Muslims happy with
anything after embracing Islam more than they were with that (statement of
the Prophet).” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Anas).
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased with him" said: “Whoever tastes the
love of Allah Almighty, it occupies him from the pursuit of this world, and
lets him keep aloof from all the people.” According to Al-Hassan “may Allah
have mercy upon him”: “Whoever knows his Lord loves him, and whoever
knows this world abstains from it; and the faithful believer is not amused until
he becomes heedless, and once he meditates, he grieves.” According to Abu

The quarter of the saviors
440
Sulaiman Ad-Darani “may Allah have mercy upon him”: “From among the
creation of Allah Almighty, there are such as whom even Paradise with the
pleasures and delights it contains never diverts from Him: then, how should
they be occupied from Him by this world?”
It is narrated that Jesus "peace be upon him" came upon three persons
whose bodies grew lean and the color of their faces turned pale, thereupon he
asked them: “What has caused you to reach such a state as I see?” They said:
“The fear of the fire (of Hell).” He said: “It is incumbent upon Allah to
secure the fearful.” Then, he left them and came upon other three whose
body were more lean and the color of their faces more pale, whom he asked:
“What has caused you to reach such a state as I see?” they said: “The longing
for Paradise.” He said: “It is incumbent upon Allah to give you what you hope
for.” Then he left them and came upon other three whose bodies were more
lean and the color of their faces changed as if they were mirrors because of
light, thereupon he asked them: “What has caused you to reach such a state as
I see?” they said: “We love Allah Almighty.” On that he said to them: “You
are these brought close to Allah! You are these brought close to Allah! You
are these brought close to Allah!”
Abd-Al-Wahid Ibn Zaid said: I came upon a man standing in the ice
thereupon I asked him: “Do you not sense cold?” He said: “Whomever the
love of Allah occupies never senses cold.” It is narrated that Sari As-Saqati
said: “On the Day of Judgement, the different nations would be called by
their Prophets "peace be upon them" saying: “O nation of Moses! O nation of
Jesus! O nation of Muhammad”, except for the lovers of Allah Almighty, who
would be called as “O allies of Allah! Come to Allah Almighty.” At that time,
their hearts would almost burst out of joy.” According to Haram Ibn Hayyan:
“If the faithful believer knows his Lord Almighty, he loves Him; and once he
loves Him, he turns to Him wholeheartedly; and once he tastes the sweetness
of turning to Him, he would not look at the world with the eye of desire, nor
to the hereafter with the eye of regret.”
According to Yahya Ibn Mu’adh: “His (Allah’s) forgiveness absorbs sins,
what do you think about His good pleasure? And His good pleasure absorbs
all hopes, what do you think about His love? And His love astonishes minds,
then, what do you think about His affection? And His affection causes one to
forget anything else, then, what do you think about His kindness?” According
to a Scripture: “O My servant! By your right, I love you. So, by My right on
you, love Me.” According to Yahya Ibn Mu’adh once again: “As little as a
mustard seed of love is dearer to me than worship for as long as seventy years
without love.” he further said: “O my God! I am standing at your courtyard,
engaged in Your praise. You have taken me to Your presence since I was still
young, dressed me in the dress of Your gnosis, made me well-established in
Your kindness, and moved and turned me between different deeds: Screening
and repentance, asceticism and longing, love and contentment, letting me
drink from the springs of Your fountains, and graze in Your gardens, and I
am adherent to Your command and concerned with Your statement.”

441
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
However, the narrations about the love for Allah Almighty are beyond
calculation, and this is apparent. What is abstruse in this issue is to clarify its
meaning. So, let’s engage in it.

CHAPTER TWO
EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE AND CAUSES OF LOVE FOR ALLAH; AND
VERIFICATION OF THE SERVANT’S LOVE FOR ALLAH ALMIGHTY
It should be known to you that the purpose of that chapter is achieved
only by exposition of the real nature of love in itself, and then of its
conditions and causes, and then consideration of its significance as regards
Allah Almighty.
The first principle: the point to clarify here is that no love is imagined
before knowledge and perception. Man could love only what he knows. For
this reason, love is characteristic of the living perceptive organism, apart from
the non-living being. On the other hand, the perceptibles are divided into
what agrees with, befits and pleases the perceiver, what disagrees with,
opposes and pains the perceiver, and what is neutral in effect on him. The
perceiver loves all that is pleasing and comfortable in perception, and hates all
that is painful in perception, and what is neutral is neither loved nor hated.
This means that what is pleasant is lovable in the sight of him who is
delighted and pleased with it. That it is lovable means that there is inclination
to it by disposition, whereas that it is hateful means that there is disinclination
from it by disposition. Love is an inclination by disposition to a pleasant
thing, and if that inclination is confirmed and strengthened, it is called
attachment. On the other extreme, dislike is a disinclination by disposition
from a troublesome painful thing, and if it is strengthened it is called
abomination. That is the first principle of the meaning of love.
The second principle: as love follows perception and knowledge, it is
divided in accordance with the division of the perceptibles and senses
themselves. Each sense perceives a kind of perceptibles, and each has its
certain pleasure, because of which the nature inclines to, and henceforth loves
it. The pleasure of the eye lies in seeing and perceiving the beautiful things
and good pleasant and nice-to-see pictures and images; the pleasure of the ear
lies in the good harmonious tunes; the pleasure of smelling lies in the good
pleasant smells; the pleasure of taste lies in the delicious flavors; and the
pleasure of touching lies in smoothness and softness.
Since those perceptibles are pleasant, they are loved. That is, the sound
nature inclines to them. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" said: “Three things of your world have been made lovable to
me: Perfume and women, and the comfort of my eye has been made in
prayer.” (An-Nasa’i on the authority of Anas). Perfume was included among
the lovable things, although neither the eye nor the ear has a portion in it.
Similarly, women were enlisted among the lovable things although only the
eye and touching, apart from smelling, hearing and tasting, have a portion in
them. The prayer was called the comfort of the eye and made the best among
the lovable things, although none of the five senses has a portion in it. But
there is a sixth sense whose source is the heart, and none perceives it but him

The quarter of the saviors
442 -----------------------who has a sound heart.
Animals share man in the five senses. But if love is restricted to the five
senses, to the extent that it is said that since Allah Almighty is not perceived
by anyone of the five senses, nor is He imaged in imagination, He then is not
loved, then, the characteristic of man and the sixth sense that distinguishes
him from all living beings would become invalid. That sixth sense is expressed
by mind, heart, light, or by any such thing. To be sure, the internal insight is
stronger than the apparent sight, and the heart is more perceptive than the
eye, and the beauty of the meaning perceived by the mind is greater than the
beauty of the apparent images visible to the sights. Thus, the pleasure of the
heart it receives from perception of the Divine noble matters which the five
senses fail to perceive, is more perfect and impressive, and it causes the sound
nature and mind to incline to them more. There is no significance for love but
to incline to that whose perception brings about pleasure, as will be shown
later. None then denies the love for Allah Almighty except him whose
shortage keeps him in the rank of animals, and does not go beyond the
perception of the five senses.
The third principle: It is not hidden that man loves himself, and it is not
hidden too that he might love others for his own sake. It is not imagined that
he could love anyone else for his sake apart from the lover’s own sake. That is
abstruse on the weak persons who think that it is not imagined that man could
love anyone else for his sake unless there is a certain benefit to return to the
lover himself more than his self-perception. In fact, this is possible. So, let’s
explicate the reasons and divisions of love.
The first beloved in the sight of every living being is his own self. That he
loves himself means that he inclines, by disposition, to his survival, and
disinclines from his annihilation and destruction. That is because the beloved
is that which befits the lover, and which thing is more fitting than his own self
and his own survival? And which thing is more unfitting and disgusting than
his annihilation and destruction? For this reason, man loves to survive, and
dislikes to die or be killed, not for fear of what he might receive after death,
nor for fear of death agonies, for were he to be snatched by death without
pain nor punishment nor reward, he would not accept it. None loves death,
nonexistence and annihilation but for the suffering and pain he receives in his
life. If he is put to trial, what he loves is to remove that trial. So, he loves
death, he indeed does not love it because it is nonexistence in so much as
because it removes the trial from him. Thus, destruction and nonexistence are
hateful, whereas survival and existence are lovable. That is instinctive in
human nature, according to the established way of Allah Almighty, and “no
change will you find in the established way (approved) of Allah.” (Al-Ahzab 62)
A*

4 (0)

}

Thus, the first thing man loves is his own self, then the soundness of his
organs and parts of his body, then his children, property, relatives, kith and
kin, clan, friends, etc. the organs and parts of body are lovable, and their
soundness is required, for the perfection of survival and permanent existence

443
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
depend on them. Property is lovable for it is an instrument of the permanent
and perfect existence, and the same is true of all causes and means. Man then
loves those things not for their sake in so much as for the fact that his perfect
and permanent existence is suspended on them.
He loves his child, even if no portion from him returns to him, and
tolerates the difficulties for him, simply because he is to succeed him in
existence after his destruction and turning into nonexistence. His offspring
are a continuation of his existence. Because he loves to survive, he loves the
survival of him who would exist on his behalf as if he were a part of him
when he fails to survive any longer. It is true that if he is given the freedom to
choose the killing of him or the killing of his child, he would give preference
to his own survival over the survival of his child, for the survival of his child
resembles his own survival in one point, but it is not really his own survival.
The same is true of his love for his clan and kith and kin, which goes back to
his love for the perfection of himself. He sees himself powerful and perfect
with their great number. To be sure, the clan, kith and kin, property, and all
the other external causes are like the wing that completes man, and the
perfection and permanence of existence are inevitably and necessarily lovable.
Thus, the first beloved to any living being is his own self, the perfection
and permanent existence of his own self; and what he dislikes is the opposite
of all that. That is the first cause.
The second cause: Doing good. Man is a servant of the doing of good,
and the hearts have been predisposed to love these who do good to them and
dislike these who do evil to them. In confirmadon of that, the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “O Allah! Cause not me
to be under obligadon to a wicked or a disbeliever lest my heart would love
him.” (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of Mu’adh). He indeed refers
to the fact that one loves the person who does favor to him, and he loves him
by force in such a way as he could not but do so. It is an inclinadon by
predisposidon which one has no power to change. By that cause, man might
love him who is foreign to him, although there is no reladonship between
them.
However, this goes back to the first cause, since the doer of good is he
who provides another with wealth, aid and all means that help in the survival,
permanence and perfecdon of existence. But there is a difference here: The
organs and parts of body are loved because with them his existence and
survival are realized, whereas the doer of good is but one of the means to that
perfect existence, just like the physician which might be a means to the health
and soundness of the organs and parts of body. There is difference between
the love for the health and the love for the physician who is the cause of that
health, for the health is required for itself, whereas the physician is loved for
he is the means to that health. The same is true of knowledge and teacher:
Knowledge is loved for itself, whereas the teacher is loved for he is the means
to that loved knowledge. Food and drink are loved, and Dinars also are loved.
But food and drink are loved for themselves, whereas Dinars are loved for

The quarter of the saviors
444 --------------------------they are a means to them.
The third cause: To love a thing for itself and not for a portion or a fortune
to get from it. That is the real and extensive love whose permanence is reliable. It
is like the love for beauty and prettiness. Every beautiful and pretty is loved for
itself by die perceiver of beauty and prettiness, for pleasure lies in the perception
of beauty and prettiness, and the pleasure is loved for itself and not for anything
else. Think not that the love for the beautiful pictures is imagined only to fulfill
the desire, for fulfilling the desire is another pleasure for which the beautiful
pictures might be loved, and the perception of the beauty itself is pleasant and
thus it might be loved for that.
Why not since greenery and current water are loved not to eat the greenery
nor to drink the water? No portion but vision one has in them. The
Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" used to admire
greenery and current water. It is characteristic of the sound natures and
healthy dispositions to get pleasure in looking at lights, flowers, and birds of
good colours and harmonious forms. In so many cases, one finds release from
his distresses by looking at such sceneries and landscapes.
Those causes are pleasant, and every pleasure is loved. Furthermore, the
perception of every beauty and prettiness brings about pleasure. No one
denies that the beauty is loved by disposition. Since it is proved that Allah
Almighty is beautiful, He should be loved by him to whom His beauty and
Glory are revealed. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: “Allah is beautiful and He loves beauty.” (Muslim on the
authority of Ibn Mas’ud).
The fourth principle: Exposition of the meaning of beauty and
prettiness. It should be known to you that the one who is detained in the
limited sphere of fancies and sensible things might think that the beauty has
no significance other than the harmony of character and form, and the good
and pleasant colour. The beauty, for the most part, is judged by sight, and
people more often care for the form of the man. They think that what is not
visible or imagined is not beautiful. Since its beauty is not imagined, then,
there is no pleasure in perceiving it, which means that it is not loved.
But even, that is a clear mistake. Beauty is not restricted to the visibles,
nor to the harmony of forms and colours. We say, for instance, that is a good
handwriting, that is a good voice, and that is a good horse. We also say, that is
a good dress, and that is a good utensil. Which meaning then lies in the beauty
of the handwriting, voice, and all the other things, if we limit beauty only to
the picture and form? It is a well-known fact that the eye gets pleasure in
looking at the handwriting, the ear in listening to the good and sweet tones.
All the perceptibles are divided into what is good and what is ugly. What is the
meaning of beauty in which all those things share?
We should look for it. But it would take too long to do that search which
is, anyway, unfitting for the science of practical religion. So, let us say, with
frankness, that the beauty of everything lies in its being fittingly and possibly
perfect. If it is entirely perfect, it would be in the highest degree of beauty. If

445
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
only some of its parts are perfect, its portion of beauty is determined by the
extent of the perfect parts in it. The good horse is that which combines all
that is fitting for a horse in terms of good appearance, stature, colour, good
running, ease of attacking and escaping on it; and the good handwriting is that
which combines all that is fitting for the handwriting, in terms of the
harmony, arrangement and good order of letters; and so on. Everything has its
perfection that is fitting for it. Thus, the beauty of anything lies in its
perfection that is fitting for it. Of course, the elements of beauty and
prettiness of the man differ from those of the beauty and prettiness of the
horse; and the elements of beauty and prettiness of the handwriting differ
from those of the beauty and prettiness of the voice; and the elements of the
beauty and prettiness of the utensil differ from those of the beauty and
prettiness of the clothes; and so on.
But even, you may argue: “It is true that those things are not perceived by
the sight, they, therefore, could not be perceived but by anyone of the five
senses. They, by that consideration, are among the sensibles, and the beauty
of sensibles is not deniable, nor is the pleasure by perceiving their beauty and
prettiness, for this is denied only in the insensible things.”
In reply, it should be known to you that beauty and prettiness lie also in
the insensible. It is said, for example, that is a good moral character, that is a
good knowledge, that is a good conduct, those are good and beaudful
manners, etc. The good and beaudful manners are intended to combine
knowledge, mind, piety, chasdty, bravery, generosity, to the end of those good
attributes. None of those attributes is perceived by the five senses, in so much
as by the light of the internal insight. Therefore, all those good attributes are
loved, and the one who has them is also loved accordingly by him who knows
well his characterisdcs and qualities.
The sign of that is that natures are predisposed to love the Prophets "peace
be upon them", the Companions "Allah be pleased with them", although they did
not see them. Furthermore, they are inclined to love the men of four juristic
schools like Ash-Shafi’i, Malik, Abu Hanifah and Ahmad “may Allah have mercy
upon them” to the extent that one might go in his love as far as to spend his
entire wealth in support of the school of jurisprudence whose leader he loves,
and exposes himself to danger in fighting such as criticizes or tries to find fault
with that leader or imam whom he follows.
Anyone of those who love Ash-Shafi’i “may Allah have mercy upon him”,
for example, did not see him, and even if they saw him, he might not seem
good-looking to them. However, what causes them to love him is his internal
and not external image, for his external image turned into dust in the earth.
They love him then for his internal attributes of religiousness, piety,
abundance of knowledge, chastity, and his eagerness and endeavor to benefit
the science of Sharia and jurisprudence, and publicize those good things in the
world. Those are beautiful matters whose beauty and prettiness could be
perceived only by the light of the internal insight, of which the five senses are
short.

446

The quarter of the saviors
The same is true of him who loves Abu Bakr As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased
with him" and gives him preference over anyone else among the people; or of
him who loves Ali "Allah be pleased with him" and gives him preference, and
shows fanaticism for him: he loves them only for he regards as good their
internal images of knowledge, religiousness, piety, chastity, bravery,
generosity, to the end of this series of the good attributes and qualities. It is
well known that whoever loves As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased with him" does
not love his flesh, bones, skin, limbs and form in general, since all of this
perished by his death. But he loves him for the very thing that remained
therewith As-Siddiq gained the quality of being truthful, i.e. the praiseworthy
attributes which are the sources of the good conduct. Thus, love survives with
the survival of those attributes, although all external forms and images
disappear.
All those attributes go back to both knowledge and power. That is, one
knows the real nature of things and then has power to force himself to them by
oppressing his desires. All good characteristics depend on those two attributes,
which are beyond the perception of senses, although they are inseparable part of
the body, and it is that part which is the real beloved. That inseparable part has
no form, nor features, nor a colour to seem to the sight in order to be loved for
that. Beauty lies in the conduct, and in the absence of knowledge and insight, that
good conduct would not be loved. What is really loved is the source of that good
conduct, i.e. the praiseworthy good manners and noble virtues, which go back, in
total, to the perfect knowledge and power, which are loved by nature, although
they are not perceived by senses.
If we like to endear an absent or a dead to a child, for example, our sole
way to do so is to exaggerate in praising him and ascribing all good qualities
and attributes to him, and once the child believes that, he could not help love
him. The Companions "Allah be pleased with them" were loved whereas
people like Abu Jahl were hated only by means of exaggeration in describing
the good and bad attributes, which are not perceived by senses. When the
people described Hatim At-Ta’i with generosity, and Khalid Ibn Al-Walid
"Allah be pleased with him" with bravery, the people loved them because of
those good attributes, although they did not see them with their own eyes, nor
did they covet of any fortune to get from them. If it is related from a
particular king anywhere in the land that he is just and kind to his subjects, the
people would love him, although they do not covet of getting any portion of
his good or kindness.

This means that man does not love only him who does good or favor to
him. The doer of good in himself is loved although his good might not reach
the lover. That is because every beauty and prettiness is loved in itself. Beauty
and prettiness combine both the external and internal images. The external
images are perceived by the external sight, whereas the internal images by the
internal insight. Whoever is deprived of the internal insight could not perceive
by it, nor get pleasure in it, nor love nor incline to it. Whoever is possessed by
the internal insight more than the external sight, he inclines more to love the

447
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
internal meanings than the external meanings. How great the difference is
between him who loves a picture inscribed on the wall, whose beauty lies in
its external form, and him who loves one of the Prophets "peace be upon
them" for the beauty of his internal image.
The fifth cause: the hidden relevance between the beloved and the lover.
It may be that two persons love each other not because of beauty or
prettiness, nor because of any fortune or the like of it, but just because there
is a kind of harmony between their souls. In confirmadon of that, the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “Souls are
mobilized soldiers: Those from amongst them who are familiar to each other (in
the heaven) would have affinity with one another (in the world) and those from
amongst them who opposed each other (in the Heaven) would also be at odds (in
the world).” [Muslim] we have previously explained that in the Book of the
Etiquettes of Companionship.
In sum, there are five causes of love: the man’s love for his perfect and
permanent existence; His love for him who does good or favor to him, that
helps him survive and avert harm from himself; His love for him who does
good in general, even though his good does not reach him; his love for what is
beautiful and pretty in itself, whether its beauty lies in its external or internal
image; and his love for the one due to a hidden relevance between them. If all
those causes gather in a man, the love for him increases in degree and strength,
like a son who combines beautiful features, good moral character, perfect
knowledge, good manipulation, who always does good to others, and is kind to
his parents: He would be extremely loved. No doubt, the strength and degree of
love are determined by the strength, perfection and presence of all or some of
those attributes.
On the other hand, it is not imagined that all those causes gather in
perfection but in Allah Almighty. For this reason, none deserves the real love
but Allah Almighty.

CHAPTER THREE
EXPOSITION OF THE FACT THAT NONE DESERVES LOVE OTHER THAN
ALLAH ALMIGHTY ALONE
It should be known to you that Whoever loves anyone else other than Allah
Almighty not for the sake of Allah does so because of his ignorance or shortage;
and that the love for the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" is praiseworthy for it is a part of the love for Allah Almighty; and the same
is true of the religious scholars and pious for the beloved of the beloved should
be loved, the messenger of the beloved should be loved, and the lover of the
beloved should be loved. All of this goes back to the love for the primal One and
does not go beyond Him. There is no beloved, in the sight of those endued with
deep insights, other than Allah Almighty, and none deserves love other than
Him.
To clarify this, we should go back to the five causes we have previously
mentioned, and show that they never gather together with perfection in anyone
other than Him Almighty, and anyone else has only one or two of them.

The quarter of the saviors
448
Furthermore, they are real for Allah Almighty, and allegorically imagined for
anyone else, for which there is no reality. Once that is revealed, what would seem
evident is the opposite of what is imagined by the weak-minded, that it is
impossible to love Allah Almighty in reality, and that verification requires to love
in reality none other than Allah Almighty.
As for the first cause, i.e. the man's love for himself, his perfect and
permanent survival and existence, and aversion for what destroys or threatens
to exterminate his existence and perfection, that is the predisposition of every
living being, and none is imagined to do the opposite of that. But even, that
requires the utmost degree of love for Allah Almighty. Whoever knows
himself well, and knows Allah Almighty becomes certain that he could never
bring himself into existence by himself: but his existence, i.e. permanent and
perfect survival is dependent upon, from, to and by Allah Almighty. He is the
Inventor of him, Who brings him into existence, and causes him to survive,
and his existence to be perfect, by creating for him the attributes of
perfection, and the means to attain them.
In total, nothing in the existence could survive by itself other than Allah,
the Self-Subsisting, the Eternal, Who survives by Himself, and anything else
survives by Him. If one loves himself, and his existence is caused by another
than him, of a surety, he necessarily loves the causer of his existence. If he
does not love Him, that is due to his ignorance of himself and of his Lord.
Love is the fruit of knowledge: it exists by its existence, disappears by its
disappearance, becomes strong and weak by its strength and weakness. That is
the significance of the statement of Al-Hassan Al-Basri “may Allah have
mercy upon him”: “Whoever knows his Lord should necessarily love Him;
and whoever knows this world should necessarily abstain in it.”
How should it be imaginable that a man would love himself and not his
Lord, upon Whom his own survival depends? It is well-known that the one
tried with the scorching heat of sun loves the shade, and along with it loves
the trees with which it is made. All that is in existence, in comparison with the
power of Allah Almighty, is like the shade in comparison with the trees, and
the light in comparison with the sun. All things result from His power, and
their existence follows His existence, in the same way as the existence of the
light follows the existence of the sun, and the existence of the shade follows
the existence of the trees.
If one should necessarily love himself, he should, more inevitably, love Him
Who sustains his existence and perfect survival. Whoever lacks that love does so
because he engages in himself and his own desires from his Lord and Creator,
and does not know Him as He should be known, and rather restricts his vision to
his desires and sensibles, i.e. the world of the visibles in which animals share him,
apart from the dominion of invisibles, which none tramples but he who is closer
to the angels: He sees from it as much as he is close in his attributes and qualities
to the angels, and falls short of it as much as he is far from them, and rather close
to the world of the animals.
As for the second cause, i.e. that one loves such as does good to him, is

449
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
kind to him, consoles him with his wealth and good words, provides for his
aid, hastens to support and help him, averts evil and harm from him, gives
him a means to attain of fortunes what is beneficial and advantageous to him,
his children and reladves, he should inevitably be loved. This very fact
requires that one should love none but Allah Almighty. If he knows Him as
He should be known, he would learn that the real doer of good to him is only
Allah Almighty. His favors He does to all of His servants are too numerous to
measure or calculate, as confirmed by Allah Almighty in His statement: “And
He gives you of all that you ask for. But if you count the favours of Allah, never
will you be able to number them.” (Ibrahim 34)
((^)ijJUu o!3

L

^

We have already referred to something of that in the Book of Gradtude. But
now, let’s limit ourselves to explicate that the doing of good on the part of the
people is unimaginable except with allegory, for the real and sole doer of good is
Allah Almighty.
Suppose that somebody confers a favor upon you by making available to
you all of his treasures and putting them under your disposal: Of a surety, you
think that this doing of good is from his own. That is wrong. The good he has
done to you has been achieved by His (Allah’s) power, with the help of His
wealth and property, and as a result of the motive He created in him to give
you that wealth. Who has given the favor of creating him, creating his
property and wealth for him, and creating his power and will to do so? Who
has endeared you to him, caused him to turn in love to you, and made him
believe that the rectitude of his religion and world lies in his doing good to
you? Had it not been for all of that, surely, he would have given you nothing
of his wealth.
But when Allah Almighty causes him to give you, and makes him believe that
the rectitude of his religion and world lies in giving you out of his wealth, he then
is forced to surrender to the will of Allah Almighty, and not to oppose it even in
the least. The real doer of good then is He Who forces him and subjugates him to
you, and causes him to give you. His hand is but a medium through which the
good of Allah Almighty reaches you. The man of the hand is forced to do so in
the same way as the watercourse is forced to be ready for the water to run in it. If
you think he is a doer of good, or give thanks to him for his doing good to you in
terms of his being a real doer of good and not merely a medium, you then are
ignorant of the truth of the matter.
Doing good on the part of the man is unimaginable but to himself. But to do
good to another is impossible from a creature to a creature like him, for one does
not give his wealth but for a certain purpose that is to serve his own benefit. That
benefit might be later like the reward in the hereafter, or sooner like to make
reminder of generosity, subjugate others in his service, gain praise and gratitude
from others, get fame for generosity and spending, or attract the hearts of people
to obey and have love for him. As well as man does not throw his wealth into the
ocean, since he has no benefit to get from that, he also does not throw it into the
hand of another unless there is a certain benefit to get from that. That benefit is

The quarter of the saviors
450 ------- --------------------------------his purpose he seeks for and pursues.
As for you, you are not his purpose and your hand is no more than an
instrument of receiving until he gets his purpose of praise, gradtude, or
reward because of your receiving the money. Thus, he subjugates you to
receive the money in order for him to achieve his purpose. He then is a doer
of good to himself, and is recompensed for what he gives of wealth, and that
recompense, in his sight, overweighs the money he gives, and had it not been
preponderant, he would not have given up his wealth to you.
Thus, he deserves neither gratitude nor love from two points of view:
One is that he is forced, by Allah’s investing motives with authority over
him to do so, and has no power to oppose that will. He is in the position of
the king’s treasurer: He does not render himself a doer of good by giving the
king’s gift to him to whom it is assigned, for he is forced to obey and comply
with the commands of the king, and has no power to oppose his order.
However, if the king lets him be to himself, he would not give anything of
that to anyone. Similarly, the same is true of every doer of good: if Allah
Almighty lets him be to himself, he would give nothing of his property to
anyone, until Allah invests motives with authority over him, and causes him to
believe that his good fortune from religion and world lies in giving his wealth,
and it is only for this that he gives.
The other is that the recompense he gets in substitution for what he gives is
better and dearer in his sight than what he really gives. As well as the seller is not
regarded a doer of good because of what he gives for a compensation which is
dearer to him than what he gives, similarly, the grantor is recompensed with the
reward, praise or gratitude, or any such compensation. It is not requisite for the
compensation to be in the form of money or priced thing. No doubt, all fortunes
are regarded as compensations, in comparison with which all items of wealth and
commodities are insignificant.
Doing good lies in generosity, and generosity is to give wealth with no
compensation nor fortune to return to the giver; and that is impossible except
in relation to Allah Almighty. It is He Who confers favors upon the worlds
out of doing good to them, and for their sake, with no fortune nor
compensation to return to Him. In this way, the pleasure of generosity and
doing good in relation to anyone else other than Him is false, or at least
allegoric. It is, in relation to anyone else other than Him, as impossible as to
combine both whiteness and blackness. Generosity and doing good are unique
to Him Alone. If one should, by nature, love the doer of good, then, the
Gnostic should not love but Allah Almighty, since doing of good from
anyone else other than Him is impossible. It is He Alone Who deserves that
love. Anyone else deserves love for doing of good provided that one is
ignorant of the meaning and real nature of doing good.
As for the third cause, i.e. to love the doer of good in himself even if his
good does not reach you, that is natural. If the news of a just worshipping
good king who is kind to his subjects reaches you, and his kingdom is far
from you, and the news of another wrongful wicked, arrogant and harsh king

451
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
reaches you, whose kingdom is far from you, of a surety, you would, by
disposition, incline to the former in love, and disincline from the latter in
aversion, given that you have no hope of the good of the former, and are safe
from the evil of the latter. That is the love for the doer of good in himself as
being a doer of good in general, and not as being a doer of good to you in
particular.
This requires, therefore, to love none but Allah Almighty. That is because
it is Allah Alone Who does good to all the worlds, and confers upon them out
of His bounty and favor, first, by bringing them into existence, second, by
perfecting them with the organs and means necessary for their survival, third,
by getting them blessed in the means and things He has created to fulfill their
unnecessary needs, and fourth by beautifying them with the additional traits
and accessories to serve their adornment, although they are not necessary for
them, nor are they in dire need of them.
The necessary organs are like the head, the heart, and the liver. These
which one needs are like the eye, the hand and the leg. Those that serve the
adornment are like the bowedness of the eyebrows, the redness of the lips,
and the colorfulness of the eyes, to the end of those things missing which
does not affect the life.
The necessary favors outside the parts of the body are like water and food.
Those which man needs are like medicine, flesh and fruits. The additional
traits and accessories are like greenery, the good forms of lights and flowers,
and the pleasant delicious kinds of food and fruits, missing which does not
affect the life.
Those three divisions are available not only to man, but also to animals,
plants and all living beings. This means that it is He Alone Who is the doer of
good. How should anyone else be a doer of good? Anyone doing good is but
a single good of His power. He is the Creator of the good, of the doer of
good, of the doing of good, and of the causes of doing good. To love anyone
else because of that is also out of ignorance. Whoever knows this fact would
not love but Allah Almighty.
As for the fourth cause, i.e. to love everything that is beautiful just for
the sake of beauty and not for a certain fortune or benefit to return to the
lover, this is natural to all dispositions. Beauty is divided into the beauty of the
apparent form that is visible to the eye, and the beauty of the internal form
perceived by the eye of the heart and the light of the insight. The first is
shared by people and animals, whereas the latter is unique to the masters of
hearts and none shares them in it, I mean of those who do not know but the
apparent side of this life of world.
Every beauty is loved by him who perceives beauty. If it is perceived by
the heart, then, it is loved by the heart. Its example in reality is the love for
the Prophets "peace be upon them" and the religious scholars and learned and
those of high manners and noble qualities among men. Their love is
imaginable given the distortion in the mind or even the absence of the
features and appearance. That is what is intended by the beauty of the internal

The quarter of the saviors
452
image, which is beyond the reach of the five senses. But it might be perceived
by the apparent traces indicative of it until when the heart is guided to it, it
inclines to and loves it. Whoever loves the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" or Abu Bakr As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased
with him" or Ash-Shafi’i “may Allah have mercy upon him” loves them only
because of their good traces and effects they left after them, and not because
of their good image or even their apparent acts. However, their good acts
signify their good qualities and high manners which are the source of those
acts.
However, the internal qualities of acts go back, with verification, to both
the knowledge and power. The more the learnt is noble and perfect, the more
the knowledge of it is noble and beautiful; and similarly the more the thing
under power is more noble and high, the more the power over it is noble and
high. To be sure, the noblest of all things to be learnt is Allah Almighty. No
doubt, the best and the noblest of knowledge is the gnosis of Allah Almighty;
and the more the thing to be learnt is close and attached to Him, the more it
is noble and high.
Thus, the beauty of the qualities of the sincere lovers of truth whom the
hearts love by nature goes back to three things: The first is their knowledge of
Allah Almighty, His angels, Books, Prophets, and the laws and religions of His
Prophets. The second is their power to amend their own selves and the servants
of Allah by guiding and leading them to the straight path. The third is their
abstention from vices, abominable things and prevailing desires, which divert
from the established ways of good and rather draw to the ways of evil.
It is with the like of those things that the Prophets "peace be upon them",
religious scholars, caliphs, just and generous rulers and kings are loved by hearts.
Compare then those qualities with the attributes of Allah Almighty.
As for knowledge, where is the knowledge of the earlier and later generations
from the knowledge of Allah Almighty that encompasses all things, to the extent
that even no atom’s weight escapes from Him in the heavens and on earth. He
Almighty addressed all the people saying: “of knowledge it is only a little that is
communicated to you, (O men!)" (Al-Isra’ 85)

i©

^

Moreover, if all the inhabitants of the heavens and the earth gather together
to comprehend His knowledge and wisdom about the details of creating such a
little thing as an ant or a mosquito, by no means would they be able to learn even
one-hundredth of it: “Nor shall they compass aught of His knowledge except as
He wills. His Throne does extend over the heavens and the earth.” (Al-Baqarah
255)
As for that little amount of knowledge which the people learn, it is by virtue
of His instructing them that they learnt it. He Almighty said: “He has created
man: He has taught him speech (and Intelligence).” (Ar-Rahman 3-4)

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment

453

Thus, if the beauty and nobility of the knowledgeable should be loved, and
at the same time, the one endued with knowledge is perfect, by that
consideration, none deserves to be loved other than Allah Almighty. The
sciences of all the scholars and learnt among men are ignorance in comparison
with His knowledge. Whoever knows the most knowledgeable and the most
ignorant of his time, in no way would he love but the most knowledgeable,
given that the most ignorant learns of knowledge what is required for him in
his living.
On the other hand, the disparity between the knowledge of Allah and the
knowledge of the creatures is greater than the disparity between the
knowledge of the most knowledgeable and the knowledge of the most
ignorant among the people. That is because the most knowledgeable excels
the most ignorant only with a limited number of sciences, which the ignorant
is possibly imaginable to attain by acquisition and effort. But the excellence of
the knowledge of Allah Almighty over the sciences of all the people is infinite,
and beyond measure. His knowledge is infinite unlike the knowledge of the
people which is limited.
As for the attribute of power, it is perfecdon, whereas powerlessness is
imperfection. Every kind of perfection, grandeur, glory and Excellency should
be necessarily loved by the hearts, since their perception is pleasant. One
might hear in the stories about the bravery of All and Khalid "Allah be
pleased with them" and the other courageous men, and their power with
which they excelled their fellows, thereupon his heart is moved, rejoices and
gets comforted only by the pleasure of hearing, let alone the vision, which
develops love in the hearts. Compare then the power of all the people with
that of Allah Almighty.
The most powerful who has the greatest and the most extensive kingdom, the
ablest to overpower his desires and curb the vices of the self, and the most
capable of leading himself and the people: What is the limit of his power? He
might excel many among the people in many things. But at the same time, he has
no power to give himself life or death or resurrection, nor to cause harm or
benefit to himself whenever and however he likes. He even has no power to keep
his eye from blindness, his tongue from muteness, his ear from deafness, and his
body from ailment. The things over which he has no power in himself and in the
people are beyond reckoning, let alone what is beyond the reach of his power,
like the dominion of the heavens with its horizons and celestial bodies, and the
earth with its mountains, oceans, rivers, plants, animals, etc, over which he has no
power.
And even his power of that which is under his power does not come from
his own self. It is Allah Who created him and created his power, and created
the means to attain that power. If a mosquito is invested with authority over
the strongest who has the greatest and the most extensive kingdom among the
people, surely, it would destroy him. The servant has no power unless he is
established in power by his Master and Lord. In confirmation of that, He

:

'

The quarter of the saviors
454
Almighty said about the greatest king on the earth, i.e. Dhul-quatrain: “Verily
We established his power on earth, and We gave him the ways and the means to
all ends.” (Al-Kahf 84)
i©
cr?
<4 ^
bj ^
He did not gain all of his kingdom and ruling without being established in
power by Allah Almighty in a part of the land. However, the whole earth is but a
gnat in comparison with the celestial bodies of the galaxy; and all parts which the
people govern on it are but a few molecules of that earth. That few molecules are
out of the favor and bounty of Allah Almighty.
Thus, it is impossible to love anyone of the servants of Allah Almighty for his
power, and does not love Allah Almighty for the same reason, given that there is
neither strength nor power but with Allah Almighty. He is the Irresistible, the
Powerful, the Exalted in wise and knowledge, in Whose Right Hand the heavens
are rolled up, and in Whose grasp the earth with all of its kings and what it
contains is, and under Whose power the forelocks of all the people are: Were He
to destroy all of them, this would decrease nothing of his sovereignty, and were
He to create thousands times the like of them, no fatigue nor trouble would befall
Him. In this way, there is no power nor a powerful but that they are a trace of the
traces of His power. Whose is the beauty, brightness, brilliance, power, grandeur,
and supremacy. If it is imaginable to love a powerful for his perfect power, then,
none other than Him Almighty deserves such love by that consideration.
As for the attribute of being deemed far above all shortcomings and
defects, and exalted from vices and wickedness, it is one of the things that
makes love binding and is required for beauty in the internal images. It is true
that the Prophets "peace be upon them" and sincere lovers of truth, are
deemed far above vices and wickedness, but the absolute perfection is not
imagined except for Allah, the One and Only, the Real, the Sovereign and the
Holy One, the Lord of Glory and Honor. But every creature should have a
kind of defect. His being created and subjugated is the utmost degree of
deficiency and helplessness. The absolute perfection belongs to Allah Alone,
and none other than Him has that absolute perfection except in proportion to
what is given to him by Allah Almighty. It is beyond one’s capacity to have
the utmost perfection, for the utmost perfection, in its least degree, is not to
be a servant subjugated to and sustained by another. That imperfection is
impossible to the other (i.e. Allah), it is He Alone Who has the absolute
perfection, is deemed far above imperfection, and exalted from shortcomings
and defects.
By that consideration, the real nature of beauty and perfection to be loved
is not attained but by Him Alone. The perfection of anyone else is not
absolute, but it is so in comparison with what is inferior to it in perfection. It
is like the horse which has perfection in comparison with the donkey, the man
in comparison with the horse, and so on. Imperfection includes all creatures,
but they vary in the degree of imperfection.
The beautiful is loved, and the absolute beautiful is the One and Only, to
Whom there is no equal, the Unique Whom none disputes, the Independent

455
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
Who is free of want, the Omnipotent Who does what He wills and decrees
what He likes, and none could cancel out His decree, or change His fate, from
Whose knowledge even an atom’s weight in the heavens and on earth never
escapes, the Irresistible in Whose grasp are the forelocks and necks of all the
tyrants, the Eternal Whose existence has no beginning, the Never-Ending,
Whose survival has no end, the Self-Subsisting, who is sustainable by Himself,
and every existing is sustained by Him, the Compeller of the heavens and the
earth, the Creator of the non-living and living beings, Who Alone is the
Exalted in honor and supremacy, kingdom (of the visibles) and dominion (of
the invisibles), the Lord of bounty, beauty, glory, brilliance, power and
perfection. In the knowledge of His glory the minds are put to confusion, and
His description is beyond the capacity of the tongues. The perfection of the
gnosis of the Gnostics is to acknowledge their inability to fathom Him, and
the utmost degree of the Prophethood of the Prophets "peace be upon them"
is to admit their shortage of describing Him, as stated by the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": “I could not calculate praises
on You, You are as You praised Yourself.”
Love by that consideration is stronger and more confirmed than the love for
doing good, for doing good increases and decreases. For this reason, Allah
Almighty revealed to David "peace be upon him": “The closest in love to Me is a
servant who loves Me without expecting any gift to receive from Me, but rather
gives the Lord His due estimate.” According to the Psalms: “And Who is more
wrongful than a servant who worships Me for Paradise or Hell? Had I not
created Paradise or Hell, would I not have been worthy of worship?”
Once, Jesus "peace be upon him" came upon a set of worshippers whose
bodies were lean, and when he asked them about the reason they said: “We
fear the fire (of Hell) and expect for Paradise.” On that he said to them: “Do
you fear a creature and expect for a creature?” He then came upon another
group of worshippers whose bodies were lean, and they said to him: <cWe
worship Allah out of love for Him and Honoring His Glory.” He said to
them: “You are really the allies of Allah Almighty, and with you I have been
commanded to stay.”
According to Abu Hazim: “I feel shy of worshipping Allah Almighty just
because of reward and punishment, thereupon I would be like the evil servant,
who would not work unless he feels afraid of his master, or like the wicked
hireling who would not work unless he is given.” It is reported in a certain
narration: “None of you should be like the evil hireling: If he is not given a
charge, he would not work; nor like the evil servant: If he does not feel afraid
of his master, he would not work.”
As for the fifth cause of love, it is the relevance and resemblance, for the
match of a thing is attracted to it. For this reason, the boy gets affable with
the boy like him, the old man with the old man, the bird with a bird of its
kind, and drives away from that which is different from it. Similarly, the
scholar gets affable with a scholar like him more than he does with a
craftsman, and the carpenter gets affable with a carpenter like him more than

I
.

=

i

The quarter of the saviors
456
he does with a farmer, and so on. This is confirmed by experience and
different narrations and traditions, as we have previously clarified in the
chapter of Brotherhood in (the religion of) Allah Almighty in the Book of the
Etiquettes of Companionship.
If relevance is a cause of love, it might be apparent like the boy’s
resemblance to the boy in the boyhood, or hidden in such a way as none
knows, like the accord between two persons without observing beauty, or
covet of wealth. To this the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" referred in his statement: “Souls are mobilized soldiers: those from
amongst them who are familiar to each other (in the heaven) would have affinity
with one another (in the world) and those from amongst them who opposed each
other (in the Heaven) would also be at odds (in the world).” [Muslim] recognition
here stands for resemblance, whereas opposition for disagreement.
This cause also requires to love Allah Almighty, for an internal relevance
which does not go to the resemblance in the form and image in so much as to
internal meanings, a part of which might possibly be mentioned, and the other
part is impossible to be mentioned in the books, but rather left under the
cover of molecules until the sojourners find it once they fulfills the condition
of following the path.
What might be possibly mentioned here is the servant’s closeness to his
Lord in the attributes in accordance with which he is commanded to behave.
It is said: “Let your morals similar to the morals of Allah Almighty.” It is to
acquire the praiseworthy qualities which are the attributes of the Lord, like
knowledge, dutifulness, doing of good, kindness, overflowing with good and
mercy upon the people, sincerity in advice to them, guiding them to the truth
and preventing them from the falsehood, to the end of the noble manners and
good conduct approved by Sharia. All of this brings one close to Allah
Almighty, not in the place in so much as with the attributes and qualities.
What is impossible to be written in books is that which is referred to by
Allah Almighty in His statement: “They ask you concerning the Spirit (of
inspiration). Say: "The Spirit (cometh) by command of my Lord: of knowledge it
is only a little that is communicated to you, (O men!)"” (Al-Isra’ 85)

■

He showed here that it is a Divine matter beyond the reach of the human
mind. More evident is His statement: "When I have fashioned him (in due
proportion) and breathed into him of My spirit, fall you down in obeisance unto
him." (Sad 72)
4 (0)

jA^ !ij-jj qa 4-3

;4Ejl ^

This is why He caused His angels to fall in prostration to him. To this the
statement of Allah Almighty refers: "I will create a vicegerent on earth." (AlBaqarah 30)

Jj>
Adam "peace be upon him" did not deserve the vicegerency of Allah

457
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
Almighty on earth but for this relevance, to which refers the statement of the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": “Allah Almighty
created Adam on His Image.” But the short-minded think that there is no image
but the external one that is perceived by senses, for which they went on making
manifestations and embodiments, Exalted be Allah, the Lord of the worlds from
all the ignorant ascribe to Him. To this He Almighty refers in His saying to
Moses "peace be upon him": “I fell ill and you did not visit me.” He asked: “O
Lord! How could I visit You?” He Aimighty said: “My servant so and so fell ill
and you did not visit him; and had you visited him, you would have found Me
with him.”
This relevance does not appear evident unless one is regular on the
supererogatory deeds after compledng the obligatory duties. In confirmation
of that, Allah Almighty says as told by the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him": “My servant continues to come close to Me
with the supererogatory deeds undl I love him, and once I love him I become
his ear therewith he hears, his eye therewith he sees, and hi tongue therewith
he speaks.” (Al-Bukhari on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
Here, we should withhold the rein of the pen, for the people have divided
into parties: the short-minded inclined to making manifestadons and
embodiments, and extremists went beyond the limits of relevance to
immanentism and pantheism, to the extent that one of them said: “I am the
real.” The Christians went astray concerning Jesus "peace be upon him"
saying: “He is the god.” Little are those to whom it has been revealed the
impossibility of manifestations and embodiments, as well as the impossibility
of immanendsm and pantheism. But at the same dme, the real nature of the
mystery have become clear to them.
That is the greatest and the strongest cause of love.
In sum, those are the five causes of love, and they are perfect and
complete, really and not allegorically, in their highest and not in their lowest
degree, in Allah Almighty, and not in anyone else. For this, it is reasonable
and acceptable to those endued with deep insights to love none but Allah
Almighty, as well as it is reasonable and acceptable to the blind to love anyone
other than Allah Almighty. On the other hand, whoever loves anyone for one
or two of those causes, is imagined to love another for he shares him in that
one or two causes, and partnership in itself is shortage in love. None from
among the creatures is loved but that he has a partner in one or two causes
for which he is loved, unlike Allah Almighty Who has no partner at all. Thus,
there is no partnership in His love, which means that no shortage lies in His
love, just as no partnership lies in His attributes. He Alone deserves the
principal and perfect love, in which none shares Him.

CHAPTER FOUR
EXPOSITION OF THE FACT THAT THE NOBLEST AND HIGHEST
PLEASURE LIES IN THE GNOSIS OF ALLAH ALMIGHTY AND LOOKING
AT HIS BOUNTEOUS FACE; AND NO PLEASURE HAS THE SAME EFFECT
UNLESS ONE IS DEPRIVED OF IT
It should be known to you that the pleasures follow perceptions, and the

:

The quarter of the saviors
458
man has many powers and instincts, each of which has its unique pleasure,
which is to get what agrees with its nature for which it is created. Those
instincts and powers have not been placed in man jestingly, but each serves a
certain purpose that befits its very nature. The instinct of anger, for example,
was created for retribution and revenge, and thus, its pleasure lies in the
retribution and revenge that agree with its very nature. The instinct of the
appetite for food was created to obtain nutrition that sustains the body, and
its pleasure lies in obtaining that nutrition which agrees with its very nature.
The same is true of the instincts of hearing, seeing and smelling. Overall,
there is no instinct but that it should have pain and pleasure in relation to its
perceptibles.
Similarly, in the heart, there is an instinct called the Divine light, as elicited
from the statement of Allah Almighty: “Is one whose heart Allah has opened to
Islam, so that he has received enlightenment from Allah, (no better than one
hard-hearted)?” (Az-Zumar 22)
i © (*£.4.^-fl.lj Jjy

)

jy 'Js* 'y$3

yj

4i)T

{j^*\

This instinct might also be called the mind, the internal insight, the light of
faith and certainty. Regardless of its different names and terms, the meaning is
the same. The heart differs from all parts of the body with a quality therewith it
perceives the meanings that are beyond imagination and sense, like the
perception of the creation of the world, and its lack of an eternal powerful
omnipotent wise creator, who has Divine qualities and attributes.
You may call that instinct the mind provided that it should not be construed
as the means to the different ways of debate and disputation. It is the quality
therewith man excels the animals, and perceives the gnosis of Allah Almighty,
which makes it the noblest of all qualities. This instinct was created in order for
man to know, with it, the realities of all things. Its nature agrees with knowledge
and science, in which its pleasure lies. It is not hidden that there is a pleasure in
the knowledge and science, to the extent that one rejoices when he is attributed
to knowledge even of a little thing, and grieves whenever he is attributed to
ignorance even of a little thing. Man always persists in acquiring knowledge and
science in the particular field in which he is specialized. All of this goes back to
the pleasure of knowledge, for knowledge is one of the attributes most unique to
the Lord, which is the utmost degree of perfection.
On the other hand, the pleasure of knowledge of sowing and sewing is not
like the pleasure of knowledge of ruling and politics, nor is the knowledge of
grammar and poetry like the knowledge of Allah Almighty, His attributes, angels
and the dominion of the heavens and the earth. However, the pleasure of
knowledge is determined by the nobility of the knowledge, and the nobility of
knowledge is determined by the nobility of that which is to be known, to the
extent that whoever learns the innermost selves of the people finds a pleasure
within himself because of that, and if he fails to know it, his disposition requires
him to do his best to learn it. Of a surety, his knowledge of the internal self and
states of the president or ruler, for example, is more pleasant in his sight than his

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment ------------------------ 459
knowledge of the internal self of the farmer or a sewer, and the higher the one
whose internal self he learns, the more pleasant and delightful it becomes to him.
It seems clear then that the most pleasant of sciences is the noblest among
them, and its nobility is determined by the nobility of that to be known. If that to
be known is the most perfect, the noblest, the most glorious and the greatest, of a
surety, the knowledge of it should be the most pleasant, the most delightful and
the noblest of all sciences. By my life, is there anything in the existence, more
noble, more grand, more glorious and more perfect than the Creator of all things,
Who gives them their perfection and adornment, Who begins the creation and
would repeat it once again (in the hereafter), and Who manipulates and organizes
all things? Is it imaginable that the presence of any king, no matter how excellent,
bright, brilliant and graceful it might be, greater than the presence of the Lord
whose glory and excellence are beyond the description of describers?
If you have no doubt about that, then, you should not have doubt as to the
fact that the knowledge of the mysteries of the Lord is the highest, the most
pleasant, the most delightful, and the noblest kind of knowledge, and it is more
fitting for souls to feel perfection, beauty, glory, excellence, and souls are more
entitled to rejoice, grow happy and get comforted with that. In this way, it seems
evident that knowledge is pleasant, and that the most pleasant knowledge is the
knowledge of Allah Almighty, His attributes, acts, angels, manipulation of His
dominion, from the utmost height of His Throne (of Majesty) to the lowest
bottom of the earth.
Thus, it should be learnt that the pleasure of knowledge is stronger than all
other pleasures, i.e. the pleasures of desires and anger, and the pleasures of all
five senses. Pleasures differ from each other, first in kind, like the difference
of the pleasure of sexual intercourse from that of hearing, the pleasure of
knowledge from that of authority; and second in weakness and strength, like
the difference of the pleasure of orgasm of him whose sexual desire is strong
from that of him who has only a weak sexual desire, and the pleasure of
looking at a beautiful and pretty face from the pleasure of looking at a face of
inferior beauty.
The strongest of pleasures is known by its effect and influence on the other
pleasures. If one is given the freedom to choose to look at a beautiful picture, or
smell good odors, and he chooses the former, it would be learnt that the pleasure
of looking is stronger in his sight than that of smelling good odors, and so on.
That is a true standard therewith it is known how a certain pleasure is
preponderant over another.
Let’s say that the pleasures are divided into the apparent like the pleasures of
the five senses, and the internal like the pleasures of authority, supremacy,
dignity, knowledge, and the like of that, which are beyond the five senses. The
internal meanings prevail more than the apparent pleasures over the hearts of
those endued with perfection. If a man is given the freedom to choose the
pleasure of the fat chicken or the pleasure of authority and supremacy, the man
of despicable ambitions would choose the flesh and sweet; and the man of high
ambitions and perfect mind would choose authority and supremacy on the

'

.
i1’

The quarter of the saviors
460
exclusion of hunger.
As well as the pleasures of dignity and knowledge prevail over the hearts of
those who transcend the age of boyhood and the state of madness, the pleasure
of the gnosis of Allah Almighty, the beauty of the presence of the Lord, and
looking at the mysteries of Divine things prevails more than the pleasure of
supremacy, which is the highest of pleasure that prevail over the hearts of most
people. The best expression of that is the statement of Allah Almighty: “Now no
person knows what delights of the eye are kept hidden (in reserve) for them, as a
reward for their (good) Deeds.” (As-Sajdah 17)
4

Ojl^

2A Cr?

fa

^

He Almighty prepared for them that which no eye has ever seen, no ear has
ever heard about, and which has never occurred to the mind of anyone.
But none knows that except him who tastes both pleasures together. Of a
surety, he comes to know that the pleasure of authority and supremacy is
perishable and limited for it is practiced over creatures who are perishable, unlike
the other pleasure which is permanent, never-ending and eternal even after death
which does not interrupt it in so much as disengages the self from anything that
diverts one from it. Such pleasure is void of competition, contest and impurity,
and extends to include all the creatures to come to it, for its width is like the
breadth of both the heavens and the earth. The fruits of this Garden is eternal
and heavenly, and death never exterminates them, since death never destroys the
place of the gnosis of Allah Almighty, which is the spirit, and the spirit is a
Divine heavenly matter: “Think not of those who are slain in Allah's Way as
dead. Nay, they live, finding their sustenance in the Presence of their Lord; They
rejoice in the Bounty provided by Allah:, And with regard to those left behind,
who have not yet joined them (in their bliss), the (Martyrs) glory in the fact that
on them is no fear, nor have they (cause to) grieve.” (A1 Imran 169-170)

Think not that this is particular to the one who is killed in the battlefield, for
the Gnostic has, for each breath he takes, as much reward as is equal to that
given to one thousand martyrs. According to a certain narration: “The martyr
hopes in the hereafter to be returned to the world in order to be slain once again
due to the great reward and honor he receives for martyrdom; and the martyrs
hope they were Gnostics, due to the high degree of the Gnostics they see.” (the
first half of both Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Anas).
Thus, all sides of the dominion of the heavens and the earth form the field of
the gnosis of the Gnostic from which he gets what he likes, with no need to
move to it with his body and person. He sees the beauty of the dominion in a
Garden whose width is equal to the breadth of the heavens and the earth. Each
Gnostic has the same without reducing the portion of each other. But they vary
in the width of their fields in proportion to their variation in the width of their
vision and extension of their gnosis. They are of different degrees in the Sight of

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment

461

Allah Almighty; and their degrees are beyond calculation.
It seems clear then that the pleasure of authority and supremacy, which is an
internal pleasure, is, in the sight of those endued with perfection, stronger than
the pleasures of all five senses. That internal pleasure is not the portion of a boy,
a mad, or an animal. At the same time, those endued with perfection combine
both the pleasures of the five senses along with the internal pleasure of authority,
but they give priority to the pleasure of authority and supremacy.
That the pleasure of the gnosis of Allah Almighty, His attributes, acts, and
mysteries of His dominion of the heavens and the earth, is stronger than the
pleasure of authority and supremacy is unique only to him who attains the rank
of knowledge, and tastes its pleasure. It is impossible to prove that fact to him
who has no heart, for the heart is the fountainhead of that power, just as it is
impossible to prove that the pleasure of the sexual intercourse is more
preponderant than the pleasure of play to the boys or that it is more
preponderant than the pleasure of smelling good odors to him who is sexually
impotent, for he lacks the attribute therewith such pleasure is attained. But
whoever is free from the sexual impotence, and his sense of smelling is good
would know, for certain, the disparity between both pleasures. At that point, it
might be said: “Whoever tastes should inevitably know (the pleasure of what he
tasted).”
As for him who meditates in the gnosis of Allah Almighty, and even a little of
the mysteries of the dominion of Allah Almighty has been revealed to him, his
heart, at the moment of revelation, would rejoice so much, and wonder at
himself, how he is firm and able to tolerate his strong joy and cheerfulness of
what has been revealed to him. This is attained only by taste, and any speech in it
longer than that is of no use.
This amount is sufficient to bring to your mind that the gnosis of Allah
Almighty is the most pleasant thing, over which there is no pleasure.
For this reason, Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani “may Allah have mercy upon
him” said: “Allah Almighty has servants whom neither the fear of the fire nor
the hope for Paradise occupies from Him, then, how should the world occupy
them from Allah Almighty?” One of the brothers of Ma’ruf Al-Karkhi said to
him: “O Abu Mahfudh! Tell us: which thing has caused you to devote yourself
to worship and get isolated from the people?” He kept silent, thereupon he
asked him: “Is it the mention of death?” He said: “Which thing is death?” He
said: “Is it the mention of the grave and the hereafter life?” He said: “Which
thing is the grave or the hereafter life?” he further asked: “Is it the fear of the
fire and the hope for Paradise?” he said: “Which thing is all of that? No doubt,
a king in Whose Hand all of this is, should cause you to forget all things once
you love Him; and if there is knowledge between you and Him, this would be
sufficient for you.”
According to Jesus "peace be upon him": “If you see the man devoted to seek
the Lord Almighty, you should know that this has diverted him from anything
else.” An old man saw Bishr Ibn Al-Harith in a dream and asked him: “What is
the news of Abu Nasr At-Tamar and Abd-Al-Wahhab Al-Warraq?” he said: “I

The quarter of the saviors
462
have left them at that moment in front of Allah Almighty, eating and drinking.”
He further asked him: “Then, what about you?” he said: “Allah Almighty learnt
my little desire for eating and drinking, thereupon he gave me the pleasure of
looking at His Glory.”
It is narrated on the authority of Ali Ibn Al-Muwaffaq that he said: I saw in a
dream as if I were made to enter the Garden and behold! There was a man sitting
on a repast with an angel on his right side and an angel on his left side giving him
from all the delicious kinds of food, and he was eating. I also saw a man standing
at the gate of the Garden looking at the faces of people, allowing some to enter
and returning others with failure. Then, I left them to the garden of Holiness and
1 saw a man nearby the Throne (of Majesty), having stretched his sight to look at
the Countenance of Allah Almighty. I asked Ridwan (the keeper of the Garden):
“Who is that?” He said: “Ma’ruf Al-Karkhi, who worshipped Allah Almighty, not
for fear of His fire, nor in longing for His Garden, but just in love for Him,
thereupon He allowed for him to look at His Countenance on the Day of
Judgement.” He mentioned that the other two are Bishr Ibn Al-Harith and
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal.
That is the significance of the statement of Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani “may
Allah have mercy upon him”: “Whoever today is engaged in himself, would
remain engaged in himself in the morrow; and whoever today is engaged in his
Lord would be engaged in his Lord in the morrow.”
Ath-Thawri asked Rabi’ah: “What is the real nature of your faith?” she said: “I
have never worshipped Him for fear of His fire, nor in the hope of His Paradise,
thereby I would be like the evil hireling. But I have worshipped Him out of love
and longing for Him.” In that meaning, she composed the following poetic
verses: “I love You two loves: I love You out of passion, and I love You for You
are fitting for love. As for the love out of passion, it is my engagement in Your
celebration and remembrance from anything else. As for the love for which You
are fitting, it is Your revealing to me the veils so that I would be able to see Your
Glory. In both I am not praised, for all perfect praise be to You in both.”
She intended by the love out of passion that she loved Allah for His kindness
and favors upon her, through the transitory fortunes; and by the love for which
He is fitting, she intended that she loved Him for His Beauty, Glory and
Excellence, that was revealed to her, and that is the higher and stronger of both
kinds of love. It is the pleasure of seeing the beauty of the Lord which the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" referred to in his
statement relating from his Lord: “I have prepared for My good righteous
servants that which no eye has ever seen, no ear has ever heard about, and which
has never occurred to the mind of anyone.” (Al-Bukhari on the authority of Abu
Hurairah).
Some of those pleasures are hastened on in this world but for those whose
hearts attain the utmost degree of purity; and this is the significance of the
statement of one of them: “I say ‘O Lord, O Allah’, thereupon I find that on my
heart heavier than the mountains, for the call is from behind a veil. Have you
seen a sitter calling his sitter?” The purpose of all the Gnostics is to be in touch

463
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
with and meet Him Almighty. That is the comfort and pleasure of the eye, which
no soul knows what is kept thereof for it. Once it is attained, all anxieties and
desires vanish, and the heart is engrossed in its pleasure, to the extent that were
he to be thrown in the fire, he would not sense its pain, and were the pleasures
and delights of Paradise to be offered to him, he would pay no attention to it, due
to the perfection of his pleasure, and attaining the utmost finale beyond which
there is no further finale.
By my life, how one who does not understand but the love for the scnsibles
taste the pleasure of looking at the Countenance of Allah Almighty? What is the
significance of Allah’s promise of that to His servants in the hereafter, as it is the
greatest of all pleasures at all? Furthermore, whoever knows Allah Almighty
would come to learn that all desires and pleasures, whatever they might be, are
included under that great pleasure. The pleasure of the gnosis of Allah Almighty
prevails over all pleasures of eadng, drinking, and even sexual intercourse.
Paradise is to please the senses, whereas the pleasure of the heart is only to meet
Allah Almighty.
Following is an example for the development of the pleasure among the
people: the boy, with the commencements of his movement and discernment, an
instinct appears in him, therewith he gets pleasure in play and amusement and it
is in his sight the most pleasant of all things. After that, he experiences the
instinct of adornment and putting on the smart clothes, and riding mounts, with
which he regards with slightness the pleasure of play and amusement After that,
the pleasure of sexual intercourse and desire for women appears in him, with
which he leaves all the other pleasures and does his best to attain it. Then, the
pleasure of loftiness, authority, supremacy and multiplying (in rivalry) appears in
him, and this is the last and the highest and the strongest of all the worldly
pleasures, as confirmed by Allah Almighty in His statement: “Know you (all), that
the life of this world is but play and amusement, pomp and mutual boasting and
multiplying, (in rivalry) among yourselves, riches and children. Here is a
similitude; how rain and the growth which it brings forth, delight (the hearts of)
the tillers; soon it withers; you wilt see it grow yellow; then it becomes dry and
crumbles away. But in the Hereafter is a Penalty severe (for the devotees of
wrong). And Forgiveness from Allah and (His) Good Pleasure (for the devotees
of Allah). And what is the life of this world, but goods and chattels of
deception?” (Al-Hadid 20)
JilS' oJj'ifTj

Aijjj

JuJut.

jj \.LU>-

4.

llil

^

j-oLS j\j)SrS\

yj y -Jt e>yJ>S\ Cj

After that another instinct appears in him, therewith he attains the pleasure of
the gnosis of Allah Almighty and His acts and attributes, with which he regards
with slightness all the previous pleasures. Thus, the more a pleasure appears later,
the stronger it is than what is prior to it.
That is the natural gradation of pleasures: The love for play appears in the age

The quarter of the saviors
464
of childhood, the love for women and adornment in the age of adulthood, the
love for authority and supremacy over twenty, and the love for knowledge
towards the age of forty; and that is the supreme finale. As well as the boy laughs
at him who leaves play and engages in adoration of women and pursuit of
authority, the rulers laugh at those who leave authority and ruling and rather
engage in the gnosis of Allah Almighty.

CHAPTER FIVE
EXPOSITION OF WHY THE PLEASURE OF LOOKING IN THE HEREAFTER
EXCELS THE PLEASURE OF THE GNOSIS IN THE WORLD
It should be known to you that the perceptibles are divided into what is
subject to imagination like the imagery and colourful and manifested forms of
animals, persons and plants; and what is not subject to imagination like the
Essence of Allah Almighty and all that is not a body such as knowledge, power,
will, and the like of them. Whoever sees a man and then lowers his sight, he
would find his picture present in his imagination as if he is looking at him. But
once he opens his eye and looks at his person, he would detect differences
between both (the imaged and the real pictures). Of a surety, the differences do
not go back to the difference between both pictures, for the seen picture agrees
with the imaged one. But those differences go back to the increasing clarity and
brightness. The seen picture is clearer and more bright. Its example is like a
person who sees a thing a short time before the daybreak, and then sees it once
again when it is clear daylight. The difference between both pertains only to the
increasing clarity and brightness.
Thus, imagination is the first commencement of perception, and vision
completes that perception. It is the utmost degree of exposure. It is called vision
for it is the utmost degree of exposure and not because it pertains to the eye.
Were Allah Almighty to create the perfect perception in the forehead or in the
breast, it would also deserve to have the name of vision.
Having understood this in the imaged things, it should be known to you that
there are two degrees to perceive the information that are not formed in
imagination: the first is essential and the second is complementary; and between
both degrees, there are nuances of difference concerning clarity and exposure just
like what is between the imaged and the real. The second is called, in comparison
with the first, vision, contemplation, and meeting. It is called vision for it
represents the utmost degree of exposure. As well as it is the established way of
Allah Almighty that closing the eyelids prevents from perfect exposure through
vision, as being a veil between the sight and what is seen, which should be
removed in order for the vision to occur, it is also the established way of Allah
Almighty that so long as the soul is veiled by the incidents of body and
requirements of desires and prevailing human characteristics, it fails to achieve
contemplation and meeting as regards the information outside the imagination.
This life veils it as the eyelids veils the eye from vision. Why it is a veil takes too
long to explain here, and it is not fitting for the knowledge of practical religion.
That is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty to Moses "peace
be upon him" when he asked to see Him: "By no means can you see Me (direct).”
(Al-A’raf 143)

465

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment

He further said: “No vision can grasp Him. But His grasp is over all
vision: He is above all comprehension, yet is acquainted with all things.” (AlAn’am 103)
4

Vf ^j

jaj j-^3. Vi <£=*j

^

Of course He refers here to this world. It is true that the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" did not see Allah Almighty on the
Night Journey to the Heaven. If the veil is removed by death, the soul remains
contaminated with the impurities of this world, in which they are different: some
of them have impurities and rust accumulated on them, thereupon they
corrupted, and those are veiled from the vision of their Lord. Others do not
reach the degree of rust, and are susceptible to be polished, and those would be
offered to the fire for some time, until the impurities would be removed from
them. The duration of that ranges from a short while to seven thousand years,
according to the different narrations in this respect. No soul would leave this
world without being stained with something of impurities of this world, no
matter how little it might be. That is confirmed by the statement of Allah
Almighty: “Not one of you but will pass over it: this is, with your Lord, a Decree
which must be accomplished. But We shall save those who guarded against evil,
and We shall leave the wrong-doers therein, (humbled) to their knees.” (Maryam
71-72)
r

■—

^

oyN

{*-* ’T'

i^jij *5]

o!3 ?

Each souls is certain to pass over the fire, and uncertain of leaving it. If Allah
Almighty purifies and justifies it to the best, and the decree is accomplished, and
the reckoning promised by Sharia is finished, and the Garden becomes due,
whose time is unspecific which none knows, at that time, every soul is engaged in
its purity and cleanness, where neither dust nor dirt troubles the face, for in it the
Real rises with His Glory, thereupon He rises to him in such a way that His
emergence to him in comparison with what he learnt is like the emergence of the
real in comparison with what he imagined. That contemplation and emergence
are called vision.
Vision then is a fact, provided that it should not be construed as reference to
an imagined thing in a particular place: Exalted be Allah from all of this. On the
contrary, as you know Him perfectly in this world, with no imagination of a
particular image or definite form, you would se Him as such in the hereafter. Let
me say, therefore, that the same gnosis that is attained in the world would be
completed and perfected in the hereafter by contemplation and vision, with no
difference between what is known in the world and what would be seen in the
hereafter other than the increasing clarity and brightness, just as the imagination
is perfected and completed by vision.
If the gnosis in this world does not imply any definite form of His
Countenance, when this gnosis is completed and perfected in the hereafter, it also
would not imply any definite form of His Countenance, for the difference, as we

The quarter of the saviors
466
have already mentioned, does not go beyond the increasing clarity and brightness.
To this He Almighty refers in His statement: “Their Light will run forward before
them and by their right hands, while they say, "Our Lord! Perfect our Light for
us, and grant us Forgiveness: for You have power over all things."” (At-Tahrim
8)
u

4 ©5^

- *

To be sure, the perfection of light does not effect but in the increase of clarity.
That is why it is only the Gnosdcs in this world who would attain the degree
of vision in the hereafter, for the gnosis in this world is the seed which turns into
a tree of vision in the hereafter, just as the kernel turns into a date-palm; and
whoever has no kernels in his land, how should he get date-palms in the end?
Whoever does not sow the seeds in the land, how should he harvest the
cultivation? Similarly, whoever does not know Allah Almighty in this world, how
should he see Him in the hereafter? As well as the gnosis is of different degrees
in this world, the vision in the hereafter accordingly would be of different
degrees. The difference of vision according to the difference of gnosis is like the
difference of plants according to the difference of seeds. From this perspective,
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “Allah
Almighty would rise (with His Glory) to the people in general, and to Abu Bakr
from among them in particular.” (Ibn Adi on the authority of Jabir).
Think not that those who are less in rank than Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased
with him" would taste the same pleasure of vision and contemplation as he would
taste. If one’s gnosis in this world is one-tenth that of Abu Bakr "Allah be
pleased with him" he should taste only one-tenth Abu Bakr’s pleasure of vision,
and so on. As well as you see in this world such as gives priority to the pleasure
of authority and supremacy over food and marriage, and such as gives preference
to the pleasure of knowledge and exposure of the mysteries of the dominion of
the heavens and the earth, and all Divine matters over the pleasure of authority
and supremacy, food, marriage, and all corporal pleasures, similarly, in the
hereafter, there would be such as give priority to the pleasure of looking at the
Countenance of Allah Almighty over the bliss of Paradise, whose pleasure goes
back only to food and marriage. It is those who give preference in this world to
the pleasure of knowledge, gnosis and acquaintance with the mysteries of the
Lord Almighty over the pleasure of marriage, food and drink, with which almost
all the people are concerned.
For this reason, when Rabi’ah was asked about her opinion in the Garden,
she said: “The neighbour should be first and then the abode.” She showed that
she had no concern with the Garden but with the Lord of the Garden. Whoever
does not know Allah in this world would not see Him in the hereafter, and
whoever does not taste the pleasure of gnosis in this world would not detect the
pleasure of vision in the hereafter, for none harvests but the produce of what he
cultivates, nor would he be mustered in the hereafter but on the very thing on
which he dies in this world, nor does he die but on the very state in which he

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment

467

lives. It is the gnosis that accompanies him in this world which would be the
provision with which he would be blessed in the hereafter, with the difference
that it turns into vision and contemplation, by removing the lid, thereupon the
pleasure is multiplied in the same way as the pleasure of the lover is multiplied if
the imagined picture of his beloved is replaced with seeing his/her person; and
this is the utmost degree of pleasure.
On the other hand, the Garden is good and has for each one what he desires
for. Whoever desires only for the meeting of Allah Almighty would taste no
pleasure other than that, and even any other pleasure might harm him. Thus, the
bliss of the Garden is in proportion to the love for Allah Almighty. The principle
of happiness is the gnosis which Sharia describes as the faith.
You may argue: “If the pleasure of vision is to be measured on the pleasure
of gnosis, it should be weak, for the latter is weak, and even if it is multiplied, it
would not become too strong to cause one to regard with slightness all other
pleasures of Paradise.” In reply to that, it should be known to you that this
slightness with which the pleasure of gnosis is regarded goes back to the
absence of gnosis: whoever lacks gnosis, how should he be able to taste its
pleasure? Even, if he has only weak gnosis and his heart is attached to the
things and benefits of this world, how should he be able to perceive its
pleasure? The Gnostics in their gnosis, meditation, and private talk with Allah
Almighty, have of indescribable pleasures that if the Garden with all its
pleasures is offered to them in this world, by no means would they replace them
with it. On the other hand, the pleasure of meedng and contempladon is
incomparable to this pleasure of gnosis, given its perfecdon and completion,
just as the pleasure of seeing the real person of the beloved is incomparable to
the pleasure of the picture imagined of him/her, and the pleasure of smelling
the good smell of delicious food is incomparable to the pleasure of tasting it,
and the pleasure of touching with the hand is incomparable to the pleasure of
sexual intercourse.
In order to show how great the difference between both is, let’s give an
example: The pleasure of looking at the face of the beloved in this world varies
due to many causes: First is the perfection and imperfection of the beauty of the
beloved: The more the beloved is perfect in beauty, the more looking at his/her
face is pleasant. The second is the perfection of the power of love, desire and
attachment: the more one is attached to and desirous for the beloved, the more
his looking at his/her face is pleasant, the third is the perfection and imperfection
of perception: the more one sees his/her beloved direct and close, and not from
behind a partition or a screen, the more his looking at his/her face is pleasant;
and of a surety, the pleasure of sleeping with one’s beloved as naked with no
garment between both is incomparable to the pleasure of sleeping with him/her
with a garment to separate between their bodies. The fourth is to eliminate the
distracting impediments and pains that divert the heart: no doubt, the pleasure of
the sound healthy one who is devoted to looking at his/her beloved is different
from the pleasure of the unhealthy or scared one, or him whose heart is engaged
in something else.

The quarter of the saviors
On that basis, you should compare looking in the hereafter with gnosis in this
world: the screen represents the body, scorpions and bees represent the desires
and lusts, the weakness of desire and love represents the self-shortage in this
world and lack of love for die highest company (of angels), and rather devotion
to the lowest of the low things, just like the boy’s shortage of observing the
pleasure of authority and supremacy and rather devotion to the pleasure of the
play with the bird.
No matter how strong the gnosis of the Gnostic in this world, it could
hardly be free form distracting impediments, which might be weak in some
cases. No doubt, what seems from the beauty of gnosis might astound the
mind, and bring about pleasure so much that the heart is about to rent asunder
because of its enormity, but it is only like the flash of lightning which lasts only
for a very short time. This is characteristic of this perishable life, unlike the
permanent good life after death, in which there would be no trouble, nor
suffering, nor fatigue, as confirmed by the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him": “The real life is that of the hereafter.” Allah Almighty
also said: “What is the life of this world but amusement and play? But verily the
Home in the Hereafter, that is life indeed, if they but knew.” (Al-Ankabut 64)

468

4 (SS

)

yj cl^

j\j]\

iS-vlT

oIla

f

Whoever attains that rank loves, indeed, to meet Allah Almighty, and loves
death accordingly, which he does not dislike except as much as he expects to
increase his gnosis in life before death. The gnosis is like a deep vast ocean which
has no limit. It is impossible to fathom the glory and majesty of Allah Almighty.
The more the gnosis of Allah Almighty, His attributes, acts, and mysteries of His
dominion of the heavens and the earth, increases and is intensified, the bliss and
pleasure in the hereafter increase and become strong, just in the same way as the
more one’s sowing is good, the more the cultivation and harvest increase and
become good. That sowing is possible only in this world, and it could not be
cultivated in a place other than the heart, and the harvest would be gathered only
in the hereafter.
For this reason, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “The best happiness is the long lifetime to be spent in obedience of
Allah Almighty.” That is because the gnosis of Allah Almighty becomes more
complete, perfect and vast the more one’s lifetime is long. Whoever loves death
then loves it because he thinks he has reached the utmost and farthest extreme of
gnosis after which there is no gnosis available to him; and whoever dislikes death
does so because he hopes for more gnosis to attain through his long lifetime.
That is why death is liked and disliked in the sight of Gnostics.
But all the other people are limited in their vision of death to their worldly
desires and lusts: If they are extensive, they would like to survive in this world,
and if they are limited, they would hope to die and leave this world. All of this is
out of deprivation and loss whose source is ignorance and heedlessness. Both
ignorance and heedlessness are the fountainhead of every kind of misery and
wretchedness, whereas gnosis and science are the cause of every kind of
happiness and pleasure.

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment

469

With what we have previously mentioned, you have known the significance of
love and attachment, the significance of the pleasure of gnosis, the significance of
vision, the pleasure of vision, and why it is the most pleasant of all the other
pleasures in the sight of those endued with minds and perfection, and not so in
the sight of those of shortage, just as the pleasure of authority and supremacy is
not the most pleasant in the sight of children.
You may ask: “What is the place of this vision in the hereafter: the heart or
the eye?” In reply, it should be known to you that the people are different in this
issue. But these endued with deep insights do not care about that difference.
However, the mindful eats the herbage without asking about the ground in which
it is planted, and whoever desires to see his/her beloved, his attachment engages
him from asking whether his vision would be with his/her heart or eye. That is
because his/her intention is the vision and its pleasure, whether with the eye or
with anything else.
As for what would be in the hereafter, we could not give any judgement but
depending on what is heard from traditions and narrations. According to the
people of established way and community, it seems to them depending upon the
quotations and evidences of Sharia and traditions, that this vision would be
attained with the eye, taking the verbs of vision and looking on their apparent
meaning, which should not be removed unless there is a compelling necessity for
it; and Allah Almighty knows best.

CHAPTER SIX
EXPOSITION OF CAUSES THAT STRENGTHEN LOVE
FOR ALLAH ALMIGHTY
It should be known to you that the happiest of people in the hereafter are
those who have the strongest love for Allah Almighty in this world. That is
because the hereafter is that one comes to Allah Almighty and attains the
happiness of meeting Him; and how great the bliss of the lover is when he comes
to his beloved after an extensive longing, and is able to see him with his own eyes
forever, with neither embitterment nor disturbance, neither watcher nor
competitor, neither fear nor worry of interruption. But this bliss is always
estimated in proportion to the strength of love: The more one's love increases,
the more the pleasure increases accordingly.
The servant obtains that love for Allah Almighty in this world, and almost all
the faithful believers experience the fundament of that love, for they have the
fundament of knowledge and gnosis. What most of them have not is the strong
and high degree of love that possesses the self and reaches up to the level of
attachment.
However, there are two causes why that love for Allah Almighty increases in
this world and becomes strong as such:
One is to cut off all relations with this world, and disengage the heart from
love for anyone else other than Allah Almighty. The heart is like a utensil which
could not contain vinegar unless water comes out of it first. In confirmation of
that, Allah Almighty said: " Allah has not made for any man two hearts in his
(one) body." (Al-Ahzab 4)

The quarter of the saviors

470

4O

Cr? ykOl

^^

The perfection of love is to love Allah Almighty wholeheartedly. As long
as he turns to anyone else, then, a corner of his heart is engaged in another
than Allah. As much as one is engaged in another than Allah Almighty, his
love for Allah Almighty decreases, just in the same way as in proportion to
what remains of water in the utensil, the quantity of poured the vinegar
decreases. To this fact Allah Almighty referred in His statement: " Say: "Allah
(sent it down)": then leave them to plunge in vain discourse and trifling." (AlAn'am 91)
And: "In the case of those who say, "Our Lord is Allah," and, further, stand
straight and steadfast, the angels descend on them (from time to time): "Fear you
not!" (they suggest), "Nor grieve! but receive the Glad Tidings of the Garden (of
Bliss), that which you were promised!" (Fussilat 30)

Ijiji % ijili

U=yUT

p 3W12^ iijJii <>.iT oj >

40
Nay! It is the significance of your testification: "There is no god but Allah",
i.e. there is none worthy of worship and love except for Allah Almighty. One
worship only whomever he loves. That is the significance of the statement of
Allah Almighty: "Then see you such a one as takes as his god his own vain
desire?" (Al-Jathiyah 23)
iyb
For this reason, he "peace be upon him" said: "The most hateful god to be
worshipped on earth is one's inclination and desire." He "peace be upon him"
further said: "Whoever said with sincere faith 'There is none worthy of worship
except for Allah' shall enter Paradise." Sincere faith here is to devote oneself to
Allah Almighty in such a way as there remains in his heart no partner with Allah
Almighty. In this way, Allah Almighty becomes his sole beloved, purpose and
desired goal and objective. Whoever is in such a state, then, the world is his
prison, for it impedes him from seeing his beloved, whereas death is his salvation
from that prison, and coming to his beloved.
No doubt, one of the causes of the weakness of love for Allah Almighty is the
strength of love for this world, including the love for property, family, offspring,
kith and kin, estates, riding mounts, gardens, etc, to the extent that he who
rejoices at the sweet voice of birds and the soft touch of dawn breezes is devoted
to the bliss of this world, which exposes him to the reduction of the love for
Allah from his heart. As much as he is affable with this world, his intimacy with
Allah Almighty decreases. None is given anything in this world but that he would
be deprived of the like of it in the hereafter, just as much as one comes close to
the East, he moves away from the West, and as much as he pleases the heart of
one of his wives, he disturbs the heart of her fellow-wife. Both the world and the
hereafter are fellow-wives, and they are like the East and the West. This fact has

471

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment

been revealed to the masters of hearts and insights clearer and more evident than
the vision with the eyes.
The way to remove the love for this world from the heart is to abstain in it,
stick to patience and perseverance, and be led to Allah Almighty by the rein of
fear and hope. What we have already mentioned of the stations of asceticism,
patience, gratitude, repentance, fear and hope, are commencements towards one
of both corners of love, i.e. to disengage the heart from anything other than Allah
Almighty. The first step in it is to have faith in Allah Almighty, the Day of
Judgement, the Paradise and fire, therefrom spring fear and hope, therefrom
spring repentance and patience on them. All of this leads to abstinence from this
world, property, majesty, and all worldly fortunes, until the heart gets purified
from all things other than Allah Almighty, and expanded to the gnosis and love
for Allah Almighty. All of this is but commencements of purifying the heart. That
is one of both corners of love, to which refers the statement of the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "Purity constitutes half the
faith." (Muslim on the authority of Abu Malik Al-Ash'ari).
The second cause of the strength of love for Allah Almighty is the strength
and extension of the gnosis of Allah Almighty, and the extent to which it
possesses the heart After purifying the heart from all worldly benefits and
engagements, it becomes ready for the seed of love to be sowed in it, like the
good soil after being cleaned from grass and its like. There springs from that
sowing the tree of love and gnosis. It is the goodly word which Allah Almighty
set forth as an example when He said: " See you not how Allah sets forth a
parable? A goodly Word like a goodly tree, whose root is firmly fixed, and its
branches (reach) to the heavens, It brings forth its fruit at all times, by the leave
of its Lord. So Allah sets forth parables for men, in order that they may receive
admonition." (Ibrahim 24-25)
i

i

(^) j lLU i
^

1^5*5

i LT5

JL4LJ ^hiJ

4iii
Lfo 0*U

y

^

^

He also said: " To Him mount up (all) words of Purity: It is He Who exalts
each Deed of Righteousness." (Fatir 10)
^ (ijj)

^T.l'.yajT J-ajJTj v4JaJ 1

^Jj ^

Those words of purity stand for gnosis, and the good and righteous deed is
like the riding mounts that raise this gnosis, or like the servant. The purpose of
the righteous deed is to purify the heart from all the worldly benefits. It is
intended only for that gnosis. As for the knowledge of how to work, it is
intended only for work. Knowledge, in this sense, is the first and the last. But the
first is the science of practical religion (Mu'amalah), whose purpose is work, and
the purpose of practical religion is to purify the heart in order for the real to seem
evident in it, and it get adorned for the science of gnosis, which is the science of
revelation (Mukashafah).
Once this gnosis occurs, love necessarily follows it. It is like the case in which
if the one of good temper perceives and sees the beautiful thing with his eyes, he

The quarter of the saviors
would soon incline to and love it, and once he loves it, he receives pleasure from
that love, for pleasure necessarily follows love, and love necessarily follows
gnosis. This gnosis is attained after disengaging the heart from all worldly
relations and benefits only through permanent celebration (of the Praises of
Allah), pure meditation, earnest seriousness in pursuit of it, and continuous
reflection of Allah Almighty, His attributes, acts, the dominion of His heavens
and earth, and all of His creatures.
The obtainers of this rank are divided into: The strong, who know Allah
Almighty first, with Whom they come to know anything else; and the weak, who
know the acts first, from which they promote to know the actor. To the former
refers the statement of Allah Almighty: "Is it not enough that your Lord does
witness all things?" (Fussilat 53)
472

i0 VAnd: "There is no god but He: that is the witness of Allah, His angels, and
those endued with knowledge, standing firm on justice. There is no god but He
the Exalted in Power, the Wise." (A1 Imran 18)

\> ,3i iJi H 'y.siL il/ii ^LjT iJj\j iSJLXj >

ijj S

ST i*i >

From this perspective, somebody was asked: "With which thing have you
known your Lord?" he said: "I have known my Lord first, and had it not been for
my Lord, I would not have known my Lord at all." To the latter refers the
statement of Allah Almighty: "Soon will We show them Our Signs in the
(furthest) regions (of the earth), and in their own souls, until it becomes manifest
to them that this is the Truth." (Fussilat 53)

4

^^

i9^

<4

^

And: "Do they see nothing in the government of the heavens and the earth
and all that Allah has created?" (Al-A'raf 185)

i @)&

3^

^

And: " Say: "Behold all that is in the heavens and on earth"; but neither Signs
nor Warners profit those who believe not." (Yunus 101)
4@

^

jujTj0*4S/I

Lj

Mj O'yi-ijT ^ I

IjjJajT Ji ^

And: "He Who created the seven heavens one above another: No want of
proportion will you see in the Creation of (Allah) Most Gracious. So turn your
vision again: see you any flaw? Again turn your vision a second time: (your)
vision will come back to you dull and discomfited, in a state worn out." (AlMulk 3-4)
jjk* & c'Sy

<4 tey L
^

J-*J I-*-*

_yV3-J I dLJ j Cd-Lxj

^

_/va-J I

This way is easier on the majority, and larger for the sojourners. To it the
Qur'an invites people most when it calls them to consideration, meditation and
reflection on the signs of Allah Almighty.

473
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
You may argue: "But even, both ways are difficult. So, clarify to us with which
of them could aid be sought to acquire gnosis and attain love therewith." In reply
to that, it should be known to you that the higher way is to attest, with the Real
Almighty, the existence of all the creatures. But it is abstruse, and to talk about it
is beyond the reach of understanding of most people. So, there is no benefit to
talk about it in the books whatever they might be. As for the easier and lower
way, the greatest part of it lies within the limits of the understanding of most
people. But minds fall short of understanding it for they turn away from
meditation and reflection, and rather engage in the worldly benefits and desires.
But the signs with which the gnosis of Allah is attained are beyond calculation,
for there is no atom in the heavens or on earth or in what is between them but
that it signifies to the perfect power, wisdom, glory and beauty of the Real
Almighty. In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty said: " Say: "If the ocean were
ink (wherewith to write out) the words of my Lord. Sooner would the ocean be
exhausted than would the words of my Lord, even if we added another ocean like
it, for its aid."" (AJ-Kahf 109)
4

3b
o'
(jjo^31 J3 ^
To delve into that is to plunge into the sciences of revelation. Moreover, by
no means could we make it intrude the sciences of practical religion.
It is by the easier and lower of both ways that the gnosis of Allah Almighty
increases, and by the increase of the gnosis of Allah Almighty, the love for Him
increases.
So, if you pursue the happiness of meeting Allah Almighty (in the hereafter),
you should leave the world with all that it contains behind your back, and
dedicate your entire lifetime to the permanent remembrance of Allah Almighty
and continuous meditation and reflection of His signs, perchance you would get a
little amount of this gnosis, but with that little amount, you would attain a great
endless dominion.

CHAPTER SEVEN
EXPOSITION OF WHY PEOPLE VARY IN LOVE
It should be known to you that the faithful believers are equal in the principle
of love, for they are equal in love itself. But, at the same time, they vary according
to their variance in their portion of gnosis and love for this world. However,
things differ in accordance with the disparity of their means and causes, and most
people do not know from Atilah Almighty other than His names and attributes
which they heard and which hit their ears, thereupon they jept an memorize
and perhaps imagined for them meanings from whic
&
^
*
of all lords, is exalted and hallowed; and perhaps ey i no> un ers
real nature, nor imagined any meanings for them, an ra e*
Those are the
way of submission and trust, and engagcd in ww ^anof imagmarionSj who
safe among the companions of the nght ha •
^ the Gno£cS who are
belong to the straying ones. The thina
are the nearest to Allah
knowledgeable of the realities and facts,
_ rlasses in His statement: "And you
Allah Almighty mentioned those tnr
wy] he) the Companions of the
shall be sorted out into three classes. Then (

The quarter of the saviors
474
Right Hand; what wall be the Companions of the Right Hand? And the
Companions of the Left Hand; what will be the Companions of the Left Hand?
And those Foremost (in Faith) will be foremost (in the Hereafter). These will be
those Nearest to Allah." (Al-Waqi'ah 7-11)
* r

2?

, _

f***

*t

I

i 0 bj^^y o

^A^A O

He Almighty mentioned their states in detail, and then said: " Thus, then, if
he be of those Nearest to Allah, (There is for him) Rest and Satisfaction, and a
Garden of Delights. And if he be of the Companions of the Right Hand, (For
him is the salutation), "Peace be unto you," from the Companions of the Right
Hand. And if he be of those who treat (Truth) as Falsehood, who go wrong,
For him is Entertainment with Boiling Water, And burning in Hell-Fire." (AlWaqi'ah91:94)

oJUjT

o^oj

o*'dj&iy

' *

Both the layman and the insightful share in the love for Allah Almighty, as
being the Creator and Lord of all the worlds. But the insightful contemplates the
wonders of the making of Allah Almighty, which astounds his mind and puts him
to astonishment, and increases the greatness, glory, majesty and perfection of
attributes of Allah Almighty in his heart, thereupon he increases in love for Him.
The more one knows and perceives of the wonders and marvels of the making of
Allah Almighty, the more he attests the glory, majesty and perfection of Allah
Almighty, and the more he increases in gnosis and love for Him. To be sure, the
ocean of this kind of gnosis, i.e. the knowledge of the wonders of the making of
Allah Almighty, is endless, which means that the disparity of Gnostics in their
love also is endless.
The disparity of love also might go back to the difference of the five causes
we have mentioned for love: whoever loves Allah, for example, for He does good
to, and confers favors upon him, and not for the sake of Him only, his love is
weak for it changes by the change of the good that he receives. Of a surety, his
love in the state of trial and distress differs from his love in the state of pleasure
and satisfaction. But whoever loves Him for the sake of Him only, as He
deserves love because of His perfection, glory, beauty and grandeur, his love
remains unchangeable, for it is not subject to the different states of good he
receives. This is why people are different in their love. Of a surety, the disparity
in love leads to disparity in happiness of the hereafter. That is the significance of
the statement of Allah Almighty: " but verily the Hereafter is more in rank and
gradation and more in excellence." (Al-Isra' 21)
^@

fl">y^==*'

^

/

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment

475

CHAPTER EIGHT
EXPOSmON OF WHY PEOPLE S MINDS FALL SHORT
OF GNOSIS OF ALLAH ALMIGHTY
It should be known to you that the most evident and the most apparent in
existence is Allah Almighty, and this requires that gnosis of Him should be the
first to occur to minds, and be easier upon understanding. But it is the opposite
of that which is observable. So, it is necessary to explicate the cause that lies
behind it.
To be sure, the existence of Allah Almighty, His power, knowledge,
perfection, glory, majesty, and all of His attributes are attested by all that is
visible and perceptible by the external and internal senses, like the heavens,
the earth, the trees, the mountains, the plants, the stones, the oceans, the
planets, the stars, etc. Moreover, the first testimony to it comes from our own
selves and bodies with their attributes and characteristics, our changing states
and turning hearts, and our movement from stage to another, and so on. The
most evident things to our knowledge is our selves, and then the external
perceptibles that under our five senses, and those under our mind and insight.
Each of those perceptibles have only one sense, one indication and one
testimony. But all that is in the universe are indications and testimonies to the
existence of their Creator, Manipulator, Mover, and Disposer, and to His
power, knowledge, perfection and wisdom. The perceptible existents are
beyond calculation and measure. Each atom in existence confirms that it does
not exist nor move by itself, but it needs to such as brings it to existence and
then moves it.
That is attested first by the composition of our bodies from bone, flesh,
blood and nerves, in a marvelous and miraculous way that is beyond the reach
of the power of any human being to imitate or even understand entirely. Of a
surety, we know, for certain, that this is not composed by itself, in so much as it
needs to a composer. Since there is nothing in universe, be it abstract or
concrete, present or absent, but that it is a testimony and evidence for Allah's
grandeur and perfection, minds have been dazzled and confounded from
perceiving that.
What our minds fall short of perceiving goes back to two causes: the first is
its being extremely hidden and abstruse, and this matter is self-evident. The other
is its being extremely clear and apparent. Its example is like the pat which sees at
night and fails to see during the day, due to the extreme clarity and appearance of
the daylight, for the pat's sight is very weak and thus is affected and dazzled by
the sunlight when sunrises, for the strength of clarity with the weakness of its
sight causes it to fail to see. We do not see a thing unless light is mixed with
darkness in a way that makes weak its emergence. Similarly, our minds are weak,
and the beauty and glory of Divine presence are in the utmost degree of
brightness and clarity, illumination and rising, comprehension and perfection, to
the extent that no atom in the dominion of the heavens and the earth escapes
from His emergence. In this way, His emergence is a cause of His concealment.
Glorified be Allah Who has been veiled by the rising of His light, and been
hidden from sights by the emergence of His glory and majesty.
One should not wonder at anything's being hidden because of its being

The quarter of the saviors
476
apparent, for things seem clear on the light of their opposites. Such as whose
existence is too comprehensive and perfect to have an opposite, its perception
is very difficult. If things are different, their difference would indicate to each
other, unlike the case of similarity, in which percepdon becomes difficult. The
example of that is the light of the sun that rises on earth. We know that it is an
accident that occurs in the earth and then vanishes when sun disappears. Were
sun to rise forever and never sets, we would have thought that bodies have no
definite forms other than their colours, i.e. whiteness and blackness, and what is
between them. We do not see in the black but the blackness, and in the white
but the whiteness. But as for light itself, we do not perceive it alone. But when
sun disappears and it becomes dark, we come to know the difference between
both states. We learn that bodies are illuminated by the sunlight, which gives
them a characterisdc different from that they acquire when sun sets. Thus, we
know the existence of light from its absence, and but for its absence, it would
have been very difficult for us to know that. That is because we see things
similar to and not different from each other during darkness and light, given
that light makes visible all perceptibles since with it all things are perceived.
Sun then is self-evident, and it makes visible all things. Consider then how it
becomes abstruse because of its emergence, unless its opposite occurs upon it.
Allah Almighty, therefore, is the most evident and the most apparent, and with
Him all things are made apparent and visible. Were He to become absent or
disappear or change (for a moment like such creatures as sun), Exalted be Allah
from that, the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and all things in existence
would have ceased to function, and people then would have come to know the
difference between both cases. Similarly, were some things to exist by Him and
some by another one else, you also would have come to know the difference
between both things. But since all things exist by Him Alone, and thus indicate to
the existence of Him alone, and His existence is eternally permanent and it is
impossible to otherwise imagine, such utmost degree of emergence led to
concealment. That is why minds fall short of understanding.
But whoever has his insight strong does not see, in case he is in his normal
state, nothing in existence but Allah Almighty. His acts are but traces of His
power and will. They do not exist in reality, for the real existence is for the One
and Only, with Whom all acts exist. Whoever is in such a state does not look at
an act but that he sees the Actor and Maker, and do not regard the act itself as
being the heavens, earth, animals and trees, in so much as being the making of
the One and Real. In this way, his sight does not go beyond Him. All the world is
but the composition of Allah Almighty. Whoever regards it from this perspective,
i.e. as being the making and composition of Allah Almighty, and knows that it is
the act of Allah Almighty, and loves it simply because it is the act of Allah
Almighty, he indeed does neither see nor know nor love but Allah Almighty.
That is the real monotheist who does not see but Allah Almighty. He does not
look at himself but as being one of the servants of Allah Almighty. It is that who
consumes himself in monotheism.
Those matters are known to those endued with deep and strong insights. But

477
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
they are abstruse only for minds fall short of understanding and perceiving them,
and the religious scholars fail to clarify and explicate to be understandable enough
to the people, or because they engage in themselves and think that it does not
matter them to explicate those issues. This is why minds fall short of having
gnosis of Allah Almighty.
Additionally, all the percepdbles that attest the existence of Allah Almighty
are perceived by man from the early childhood, i.e. before the age of
discernment. Then, the instinct of reasoning grows in him step by step, while he
is involved in his desires and lusts, and affable with his perceptibles, whose
impact thus vanishes from his heart. For this reason, if he sees, all of a sudden, a
strange animal, plant or a supernatural act of Allah Almighty, his tongue would
soon speak with gnosis saying: "Exalted be Allah!" but even, although he sees,
during night and day, the parts of his body, animals, plants, and all things familiar
to him, which all attest the existence of Allah Almighty, he does not sense their
testimony due to his long intimacy with them.
Suppose that there is a blind mature rational man, and suddenly the covering
of darkness is removed from his sight, and his sight stretches towards the sky, the
earth, the trees and the animals and their like, all at once, his mind might likely be
confounded by his great astonishment of the numerous testimonies of these
wonders of the existence of their Creator.
This, and its like of causes, in addition to man's involvement in desires and
lusts have impeded people from seeking light with the light of gnosis. People, in
their pursuit of the gnosis of Allah Almighty, are like the astounded man who
searches for his donkey, though he is riding it. If a very evident thing is pursued,
it would turn abstruse. That is the mystery which lies behind this matter. So, it
should be investigated with verification.

CHAPTER NINE
EXPOSITION OF MEANING OF LONGING FOR ALLAH ALMIGHTY
It should be known to you that whoever denies the reality of love for Allah
Almighty, should, necessarily, deny the reality of longing for Him, since longing
could not be imagined but for a beloved, and we affirm the existence of longing
for Allah Almighty, to which the Gnostic is forced, by way of consideration and
vision through the lights of insights, and by way of transmission through the
narrations and traditions about it.
As for the way of consideration and vision, what has previously been
mentioned to affirm love is sufficient to affirm longing here. Of a surety, every
lover has longing for his beloved in his absence. If he is present, no doubt, he
would have no longing for him. Longing is only for that which is absent. To
explicate it, longing is imagined to be for a thing that is perceived in part and not
perceived in another part. But as for what is not perceived at all, there is no
longing for it. If one does neither see nor hear about somebody, he would not
have longing for him at all. Similarly, there is no longing for a thing that is
perceived entirely, given that the perfect perception is achieved by vision.
Whoever sees his beloved regularly is not imagined to have longing for him. That
is because, as we have mentioned, longing pertains to that which is perceived in

i

The quarter of the saviors
478
part and not perceived in part. This could not be made clear, from two
perspectives, but through an example from the reality:
Let's say that if one has his beloved absent from him, and only his image
remains in his mind, he needs to perfect this image with vision. If his image,
remembrance and knowledge are removed from his mind, to the extent that he
comes to forget him, he is imagined to have no longing for him at all. Were he to
see him regularly, he is not imagined to have longing for him at the moment of
vision. Longing then means that he desires to perfect and complete his image
with vision. Similarly, he might seen him in darkness in a way that does not allow
him to seem clear to him, thereupon he needs to complete that defective vision in
the rising light.
The second is that he might see only the face of his beloved, and does not see
his hair or any aspect of his beauty, and thus he has longing for seeing them, even
if he has not already seen them at all, nor formed a true image within himself
resulting from his vision. But he knows that his beloved has beautiful parts of his
body, and since he does not perceive the details of their beauty with vision, he
has longing for uncovering what he has not seen.
Both perspectives are imaginable for Allah Almighty, and necessarily inherent
in the sight of the Gnostics. What appears to the Gnostics from the Divine
matters, regardless of being extremely clear and evident, seems as if it were from
behind a thin screen. This means that it does not seem extremely clear in their
sight in so much as stained with the effects of their imaginations, for
imaginations in this world never weary to imitate and represent the data given to
them. They indeed, by so doing, embitter and contaminate gnosis. Add to that
the engagements of this world. To be sure, the perfect clarity is achieved by
contemplation and complete rising emergence, which would be possible only in
the hereafter. This requires necessary longing, for it is the highest beloved of the
Gnostics. This is one of two kinds of longing, i.e. to perfect clarity in what seems
clear to some extent.
The other is that the Divine matters are infinite, and what is revealed to every
servant is only some of them, and there remains abstruse infinite matters which
the Gnostics know that they exist and are known to Allah Almighty, as well as
the Gnostic knows, for certain, that what is absent from his mind of information
is much more than what is available to him. Thus, he remains in longing for
getting knowledge of what he has not acquired of the remaining information that
he has never known, whether in abstruseness or in clarity.
The first longing ends in the hereafter with what is called meeting, vision and
contemplation. It is not imagined to be appeased in this world. In this issue, it is
reported that Ibrahim Ibn Adham was one of those who had longing. He related:
One day, I said: "O Lord! Should you give one of Your lovers what appeases his
heart before meeting You, then, give it to me, for worry has harmed me so
much." He resumed: I saw in a dream as if He made me stand in front of Him
and He said to me: "O Ibrahim! Have you not felt shy of asking Me to give you
what appeases your heart before you meet Me? Should the longing of the lover
be appeased before meeting his beloved?" I said: "O Lord! I have wandered in

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment

479

Your love and have not known what to say. So, please, forgive for me, and teach
me what to say." He said: "Say: 'O Allah! Make me satisfied with Your fate,
persevere on Your trial, and give thanks for Your favor’, for this longing would
be appeased only in the hereafter."
As for the second longing, it seems to be endless either in the world or in
the hereafter. That is because its end is to be revealed to the servant in the
hereafter of Allah's glory, majesty, wisdom, acts and attributes what is known to
Allah Almighty; and this is impossible, for it is infinite and endless. The servant
continues to know that there remains of glory, beauty and majesty what has not
been made clear to him. This means that his longing is never appeased,
particularly if he is of those who sees many degrees over his own. But it is a
longing for the perfection of connection, given that the connection itself is
present, for which he has pleasant longing in which he experiences neither pain
nor trouble. It is not unlikely that the subdedes of reveladon are endlessly
consecudve, and this means that bliss and pleasure condnue to increase forever.
The pleasure of the new subdedes of bliss engages one from the sense of
longing for what he has not got, provided that reveladon of what he has not got
in this world is possible, otherwise, the bliss would continue forever, but with
no increase.
To this refers the statement of Allah Almighty: " Their Light will run forward
before them and by their right hands, while they say, "Our Lord! Perfect our
Light for us, and grant us Forgiveness: for You have power over all things."" (AtTahrim 8)
UJ

bjji UJ 'p-+5\ ll5j Ojl}

It means that one would have his light perfected so long as he gets the light
itself from this world. In confirmation of that, He Almighty said: " One Day will
the Hypocrites - men and women - say to the Believers: "Wait for us! let us
borrow (a light) from your Light!" it will be said: "Turn you back to your rear!
then seek a light (where you can)!"" (Al-Hadid 13)

However, any judgement in this matter is based on probabilities and
assumptions, and no reliable judgement is possible. So, we ask Allah Almighty to
increase us in knowledge and guidance, and show us the truth as truth, and help
us follow it. This amount of the lights of insights is sufficient for disclosing the
realities and meanings of longing.
As for the quotations from Prophetic narrations and traditions, they are
beyond calculation. The following famous supplication is reported from The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "O Allah! I ask
You to endow me with contentment after fate, abundance of living after death,
pleasure of looking at Your Bounteous Countenance, and longing for Your
meeting." (Ahmad and Al-Hakim).
It is also reported that Abu Ad-Darda' said to Ka'b "Allah be pleased with
I

The quarter of the saviors
480
them",: "Tell me about the most unique Verse" i.e. in the Torah. He said: Allah
Almighty says: 'The longing of the dutiful for meeting Me has increased so much,
and My longing for meeting them is stronger.' Besides it, the following is written:
Whoever demands Me would find Me, and whoever demands anyone else would
not find Me.'" On that Abu Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased with him", said; "I
testify that I heard the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" saying so."

i

It is narrated that Allah Almighty revealed to David "peace be upon him": "O
David! Tell the inhabitants of the earth that I am a lover of him who loves Me, a
sitter of him who sits with Me, a remover of loneliness of him who is affable with
My remembrance, a companion of him who seeks my company, a chooser of him
who chooses Me, and an obedient of him who obeys Me. No servant loves Me,
with certainty from the depth of his heart but that I choose him for Myself, and
love him more than anyone of My creatures. Whoever demands Me in truth finds
Me, and whoever demands anyone else other than Me finds Me not. So, O
inhabitants of the earth! Give up the arrogance and deception of the world you
live in, and rather stick to My company and sitting with Me, and become affable
with Me, so that I would hasten to remove your loneliness, and love you. I
created My lovers from the same clay from which I created Abraham, My bosom
friend, Moses to whom I spoke direct, and Muhammad, My chosen and selected.
I also created the hearts of those who have longing for Me from My light, and
blessed them in My glory."
It is reported from one of the righteous predecessors that Allah Almighty
revealed to a sincere master and affirmer of truth the following: "I have servants
who love Me as well as I love them, have longing for Me as well as I have longing
for them, remember me as well as I remember them, and look at Me as well as I
look at them. If you imitate them, I would love you; and if you deviate from
them, I would hate you." He asked: "O Lord! What is their distinctive sign?" He
said: "They care about shades during the day in the same way as the merciful
shepherd takes care of his sheep, and incline to sunset in the same way as a bird
inclines to its nest when sun sets. When night falls, darkness prevails, beds are
prepared, and each lover becomes in private with his beloved, they would soon
hold their feet in standing before Me, and spread their faces (on the ground in
prayer) for Me, talk with Me in private with My speech, and praise Me for My
favors on them, with some of them weeping, some crying, some complaining,
some moaning, some standing, some sitting, some bowing and some prostrating.
I see with My eyes what they suffer for My Sake, and hear what they complain of
My love. My first gift I would give them would be three things: I would cast of
My light into their hearts, thereupon they would tell about Me as well as I would
tell about them; second, if the heavens and the earth, with what they contain, are
to be placed in their balances of deeds, I would regard them not sufficient for
them; the third, I would turn to them with My Face, and none would know what
I like to give anyone of them to whom I turn with My Face."
It is reported from David "peace be upon him" that Allah Almighty revealed
to him: "O David! To which time would you remember Paradise and do not ask

i

481
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
longing for Me?" He said: "O Lord! Who are those who have longing for You?"
He said: "Those who have longing for Me are those whom I have purified from
every kind of impurity, alerted with caution, and made their hearts exposed
direcdy to Me, through which they look at Me. I carry their hearts and place them
on My heaven, and then call the intelligent among My angels and when they
assemble, they fall in prostration to Me, thereupon I say to them: "I have not
called you to fall in prostration to Me, but rather I have called you to show you
the hearts of those who have longing for Me, and commend you to these who
have longing for Me. Their hearts indeed illuminate in My heaven to My angels,
just as sun rises to the inhabitants of the earth. O David! I created the hearts of
those who have longing for Me from My good pleasure, blessed them in the light
of My Countenance, and took them for Myself to talk to, made their bodies the
places where to look at the earth, and carved from their hearts a way to look
through it at My Face, and thus their longing for Me increases everyday."
David "peace be upon him" said: "O Lord! Show me your lovers." He said:
"O David! Come to the mount of Lebanon where you would find fourteen
persons from different ages. When you come to them, greet them on My behalf
and say to them: "Your Lord salutes you, and says to you: 'Do you have any need
from Me? You are My lovers, chosen and allies. I rejoice for your joy and hasten
to love you.' Then, David "peace be upon him" went to them and found them
sitdng on a spring, in meditadon and reflection of the greatness and grandeur of
Allah Almighty. When they saw David "peace be upon him" they got up to
disperse from him, thereupon he said to them: "I am the Messenger of Allah to
you. I have come to you to convey to you a message from your Lord." When
they heard that, they came to him, paid attention to his speech, and lowered their
sights down to the ground. David "peace be upon him" said to them: "I am the
Messenger of Allah to you. I have come to convey His greeting to you and
inform you that He says to you: 'Do you not have any need from Me? Do you
not call Me so that I answer your call? You indeed are My lovers, chosen and
allies. I rejoice for your joy and hasten to love you, and look at your faces every
moment in the same way as a merciful mother looks at her babes."' Then, tears
flowed over their faces, and they started to speak one after the other:
Their old man said: "Exalted be You (O Allah)! Exalted be You (O Allah)!
We are Your servants, and the sons of Your servants. Please, forgive for us our
not celebrating You in the past."
Another one said: "Exalted be You (O Allah)! Exalted be You (O Allah)! We
are Your servants, and the sons of Your servants. Confer upon us with the good
vision in what is between You and us."
The third said: "Exalted be You (O Allah)! Exalted be You (O Allah)! We are
Your servants, and the sons of Your servants. Could we dare to invoke You
given that we have no need for the sake of ourselves. So please, make us
permanently stick to the way to You, and perfect for us Your favor on us."
The fourth said: "We fall short of seeking Your good pleasure. So, please,
help us on ourselves with Your generosity and bounty."
The fifth said: "You created us from a dropped sperm and conferred upon us

The quarter of the saviors
482
the favor of meditation in Your greatness and grandeur. So, could anyone
engaged in meditation of Your greatness and glory dare to speak in anything else?
We just ask to bring us close to Your light."
The sixth said: "Our tongues have wearied to invoke You due to Your
grandeur and majesty, Your closeness to Your allies, and Your great favors on
those who love You."
The seventh said: "You guided our hearts to celebrate Your praises, and
devoted us to engage in You. So please, forgive for us our indulgence in giving
thanks to You for all of this."
The eighth said: "You have known our need. It is just to look at Your
Bounteous Countenance."
The ninth said: "How could a servant dare to exceed his limits before his
Master? You commanded us to supplicate You with Your generosity and bounty.
So please, grant us light to be guided in the darkness from the firmaments of the
heavens."
The tenth said: "We invoke You to turn with Your face to us, and be with us
forever."
The eleventh said: "We ask You to perfect Your favor upon us in what You
granted to us out of Your bounty."
The twelfth said: "We have no need for anyone of Your creatures. So please,
grant us with the favor of looking at the beauty of Your Countenance."
The thirteenth said: "I, from among them, ask You to make me blind from
seeing the world with its inhabitants, and my heart from engagement in the
hereafter."
The fourteenth said: "I have known that You, Exalted and Blessed be
You, love Your allies. So please, grant us with the favor of engagement in You
from all things."
Allah Almighty revealed to David "peace be upon him": "Tell them that ’I
heard your speech and responded to what you like. So, leave each other, and let
each one of you take for himself a tunnel: I am going to remove the veil that is
between Me and you until you would be able to look at My light and glory.’"
David "peace be upon him" said: "O Lord! By which thing have they attained
that honor from You?" He said: "By their good assumption, abstention from this
world with its people, wholehearted devotion to Me and talking to me in private.
To be sure, this rank is attained only by him who rejects this world and its people,
devotes his heart to me Alone, and gives me preference over all of My creatures.
At this point, I sympathize for him, purify himself, and remove the veil that is
between Me and him, until he is able to look at Me in the same way as a beholder
looks at a visible thing. I also show him My honor every moment, and bring him
close to the light of My Countenance. If he falls ill, I nurse him in the same way
as a merciful mother nurses her babe; and if he is thirsty, I would water him and
make him taste the flavor of My remembrance. Once I do this with him, O
David, I make his soul blind from this world with its people, and his heart from
loving it, so that he never wearies to engage in remembering Me. He asks me to
hasten his death to come to Me, whereas I dislike to send him to death for he is,

483
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
from among My creatures, the place of my vision: I see none but him, and he
sees none but Me. Would that you see him, O David, while his soul has been
melted, his body lean, his organs crashed, and his heart removed once he hears
about Me. I commend him to My angels and the inhabitants of My heavens,
while he increases in fear and worship. By My Honor and Glory, I would make
him abide in the highest part of Paradise, and quench his thirst of looking at My
Countenance until he is satisfied."
It is also reported from David "peace be upon him" that Allah Almighty
revealed to him: "Tell My servants who devote themselves wholeheartedly to Me
in love the following message: 'What harm would you receive if I veil Myself
from My creatures, and remove the veil that is between Me and you, until you see
Me with the eyes of your hearts? What harm would you receive from such of
world as I keep away from you so long as I spread My religion for you? What
harm would you receive from the displeasure of the people with you if you seek
My good pleasure with you?'
It is further reported from David "peace be upon him" that Allah Almighty
revealed to him: "You claim you love Me. So, if you really love Me, then, take the
love for this world out of your heart, for the love for Me and for it never gather
together in one heart. O David! Be sincere in love for Me, and mix with the
inhabitants of this world. Stick to what seems to you to agree with My love. I
would give you before you ask Me, and aid you against the difficulties. I have
taken oath on Myself not to reward but a servant whom I know to love and have
longing for Me, and that nothing avails him from Me. If you are so, I would
remove humiliation and loneliness from You and place satisfaction in your heart.
The gnosis of Me is infinite and endless, and once you ask Me for increase, I
soon increase you with no limit.
It should be known to you, O child of Israel, that there is no relationship
between Me and anyone of My servants. So, let them strengthen their desire and
wish for Me, I soon give them that which no eye has ever seen, no ear has ever
heard about, and which has never occurred to the mind of any human being. Put
Me in front of you and see Me with the sight of your heart and not with your eye
that is in your head. I have taken oath on Myself not to give My reward to a
servant who entered into My obedience just by way of experiment and
procrastination. Behave humbly towards those whom you know, and do not be
arrogant over the beginners on the path to Me. If those who love Me know the
position of the beginners on the path to Me in My sight, they would make
themselves the ground on which they walk.
O David! It is better for you to deliver a beginner on the path to Me from a
difficulty, so that I would write you a Mujahid, and whomever I enlist as a
Mujahid, he suffers no loneliness nor want of anyone of the creatures. O David!
Stick to My speech, and take from yourself to yourself, and do not make it a
point for others to come to you through it, lest I would veil from you My love.
Do not make My servants despair of My mercy. Devote your desire to Me
Aione. I indeed made desires permissible just for the weakness of mankind.
What is the matter with the strong that they get their desires in this world, given

;

;

!

The quarter of the saviors
that it decreases the sweetness of their private talk with Me? The least
punishment I have prepared for the strong for their worldly desires is that I veil
their minds from Me. 1 do not approve the world for My beloved, whom I
deem far beyond it. O David! Make not between Me and you a world to veil
you from My love. Those cut the way on My servants who seek Me. Seek the
aid of permanent fasting on giving up desires. O David! Be lovable to Me by
being enemy to yourself. Withhold desires from it perchance I would look at
you (with the eye of mercy and love), and the veils between Me and you would
be removed."
It is also narrated that the following was revealed to David "peace be upon
him": "O David! Were these who turn back from me to know how I am waiting
in expectation for them, kind and merciful to them, and have longing for them to
leave sins and misdeeds, they would die out of longing for Me, and their joints
would be cut off out of love for Me.
O David! This is my will concerning those who turn back from Me. What
do you think My will to be concerning those who devote themselves to Me? O
David! The servant is in the direst need for Me when he dispenses with Me;
and I am the most merciful to My servant when he turns back from Me; and
he is the most glorious and the most dignified in My sight when he turns to
Me (in repentance)."
Those traditions and their like, which are beyond calculation, affirm love,
longing for, and intimacy with Allah Almighty. But the verification of its meaning
is uncovered only by what has already been mentioned.

484

CHAPTER TEN
EXPOSITION OF ALLAH’S LOVE FOR SERVANT, AND ITS MEANING
It should be known to you that the evidences from the Holy Qur'an confirm
Allah's love for His servants. So, it is necessary for us to explain its meaning. But
let's first present the quotations from the Holy Quran. Allah Almighty said: " O
you who believe! if any from among you turn back from his Faith, soon will Allah
produce a people whom He will love as they will love Him." (Al-Ma'idah 54)
And: "Truly Allah loves those who fight in His Cause in battle array, as if they
were a solid cemented structure." (As-Saff 4)

4

cr1^

^

Hb-** <4

o] ^

And: "Allah loves those who turn to Him constantly and He loves those who
keep themselves pure and clean." (Al-Baqarah 222)

i ©1

Oj >

When Both the Jews and the Christians say: "We are sons of Allah, and His
beloved." He Almighty said in reply to them: "Why then does He punish you for
your sins?" (Al-Ma'idah 18)

4 (jfj

fp IP

l^1

}

It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" from the

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
485
Prophet "peace be upon him" that he said: "Indeed, if Allah Almighty loves a
servant, no sin he commits shall harm him; and the one who repents from a sin is
like him who has never committed a sin." Then, he recited the following
statement of Allah: " Allah loves those who turn to Him constantly and He loves
those who keep themselves pure and clean." (Al-Baqarah 222)

4

jT*4^3

auT o! \

(Sahib Al-Firdaws and Ibn Majah on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud). it means that
if Allah Almighty loves a servant, he accepts his repentance before death and this
requires that the sins he has committed in the past shall not harm him, no matter
how much they might be, just as the past disbelief never harms one when he
reverts to Islam. Allah Almighty made it requisite for love to forgive sins as
confirmed by His statement: " Say: "If you do love Allah, follow me: Allah will love
you and forgive you your sins; for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful." (A1
Imran 31)

It is further reported that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" said: "Indeed, Allah Almighty gives this world to whomever He
loves and whomever He loves not, but He never gives faith except to whomever
He loves." (Al-Hakim and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud.(
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "Whoever humbles himself before Allah Almighty, Allah raises him (in
degree); and whoever is arrogant to Allah Almighty, Allah lowers him (in
rank); and whoever celebrates and remembers Allah more often, Allah loves
him." (Ibn Majah on the authority of Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri).
It is also narrated that The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said: “Allah says: 'My servant keeps on coming closer to Me through
supererogatory deeds till I love him, so I become his sense of hearing with which
he hears, his sense of sight with which he sees, his hand with which he grips, and
his leg with which he walks; and if he asks Me, I will give him, and if he asks My
protection (Refuge), I will protect him; (i.e. give him My Refuge) and I do not
hesitate to do anything as I hesitate to take the soul of the believer, for he hates
death, and I hate to disappoint him."' (Al-Bukhari on the authority of Abu
Hurairah).
It is reported on the authority of Zaid Ibn Aslam that he said: "Allah
Almighty loves the servant to the extent that He says to him: 'Do what you like,
for I have forgiven for you.'"
The narrations and traditions about the love of Allah for His servants are
beyond calculation.
We have already mentioned that the servant's love for Allah Almighty is real
and not allegoric. Love, in language, is that a soul inclines to such of things as
agrees with its disposition and nature, unlike attachment which is the excessive
overwhelming inclination to a thing. We have also showed that doing good agrees
with the nature and disposition, and so is beauty; and both beauty and doing of
good might sometimes be perceived by the sight and sometimes by the insight,

The quarter of the saviors
486
and love follows each, for it is not unique to the sight on the exclusion of the
insight.
But Allah's love for the servant is not like this in principle. More even, if all
names are attributed to Allah Almighty as well as to the creatures, they would
not give the same meaning. Take, for example, the term 'existence', which is the
most common name: it does not give the same meaning when it is attributed to
the Creator and the creature. The existence of all things other than Allah
Almighty is taken from the existence of Allah Almighty, and by no means could
the resulting existence be equal to the followed existence. It is unlike the case in
which both the tree and the horse share in the term 'body'. Their being bodies
is common to both without the body of any of them being taken from the
other. This quite difference in names appears more evident in such names as
power, will, and knowledge, in which the Creator is not similar to the creature
at all.
Love, in language, as we have mentioned, is that a soul inclines to what
agrees with its nature and disposition. This notion is imagined to apply to an
imperfect soul, which inclines to what agrees with it, therewith it perfects
itself and gets pleasure in attaining it. This is impossible in relation with Allah
Almighty, for all perfection, beauty, glory, excellence, majesty, brilliance, etc,
is imagined to be permanent and everlasting only for the Lord Almighty, in
the sense that it is not imagined to be renewed or removed. For this reason,
He has no care about anything or anyone else as being another than Him, in
so much as about His essence and acts only. There is nothing in existence
other than His essence and acts.
For this reason, when it was recited: "Whom He will love as they will love
Him" (Al-Ma'idah 54)

i

To Abu Sa'id Al-Maihani "may Allah have mercy upon him", he said: "Do He
really love them? He does not love but Himself." He refers to the fact that He is
the whole, and there is nothing in existence other than Himself. Whoever loves
himself, his acts, essence and composition, his love never goes beyond himself
and its appurtenances.
He Almighty then loves none but Himself, and all narrations about His love
for His servants should be construed as allegoric and not literal. Its meaning is to
remove the veil from his heart in order for him to be able to see Him well with
his heart, and bring him close to His presence, and this is decreed for whomever
He likes in eternity. Thus, His love for whomever He loves is eternal if it is
attributed to the eternal will which enables that servant to follow the right way to
come close to Him. But if it is attributed to the act therewith He removes the veil
from the heart of His servant, it is then occurrent, in the sense that it occurs by
the occurrence of the cause that requires it, as confirmed by Allah in His
statement as related by the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him": "My servant keeps on coming closer to Me through supererogatory
deeds till I love him." Thus, his closeness with the help of supererogatory deeds
is a cause of the purity of his inside, the removal of the veil from his heart, and

487
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
coming close to the presence of his Lord Almighty. All of this is out of Allah's
act and kindness for His servant; and this is the significance of His love for him.
If Allah Almighty loves a servant, He does not love him for he agrees with
His disposition, Exalted and Hallowed be Allah from all of that, nor to get
benefit from him. But He loves him for he has of pleasing manners and
praiseworthy qualities what makes him entided to come close to the presence of
Allah Almighty. The beloved of Allah Almighty then is he who is close to Him.
The closer a servant is to the presence of Allah Almighty, the farther he is from
the beasdy, devilish and brutal qualities, as much as he is I close to the Divine
manners and qualities. In this way, it is closeness by attributes and not by place.
Whoever was not close and then came to be close, has changed. By the
occurrence of closeness, it might be thought that this change applies to the
servant and the Lord equally; and of course, it is impossible in relation with the
Lord Almighty. This change is possible only for the servant and not for the Lord,
Who remains in perfection and glory as He is in eternity.
For example, if two persons like to be close to each other, there are two
ways to do so: Either both of them move to each other, or one of them moves
towards the other who, in turn, remains stationary. This means that closeness
has occurred by a change in the one who moved, and not in the other. The
same applies also to the closeness in attributes. The pupil seeks to be close to
his mister in degree of perfection and beauty of knowledge, while the mister
remains in his degree of perfection and beauty of his knowledge, and does not
move down to the degree of his pupil, while the pupil remains in movement
and promotion from the bottom of ignorance to the summit of knowledge until
he becomes close to his mister in the degree of knowledge. In this way the
promotion of the servant in the degrees of closeness should be understood.
The more one becomes perfect in attributes, encompassing of the knowledge of
the truth of matters, stronger in oppressing Satan and curbing desires, and
abstaining from vices, the closer he becomes to the degree of perfection; and
the utmost degree of perfection is unique to Allah Alone, and each one
becomes close to Allah Almighty in proportion to the degree of perfection he
attains.
It is true that the pupil might be very close to his mister, equal to and even
excel him in many cases, but this is quite impossible in relation with Allah
Almighty. That is because the perfection of Allah Almighty is infinite, whereas
the degrees of perfection available to the servant are limited. For this reason, he
should have no hope of attaining equality in it. Moreover, the degrees of
closeness vary endlessly , for the perfection is infinite and endless.
In sum, Allah's love for His servant is to bring him close to His presence, by
averting all worldly engagements and sins from him, and purifying his soul from
the impurities and stains of this world, and removing the veil from his heart until
he contemplates Him as if he sees Him with his heart,.
The servant's love for Allah Almighty is to incline to attain that degree of
perfection of which he has short and lacking. This means that he has longing
for getting what he lacks, and if he attains anything thereof, he takes pleasure

The quarter of the saviors
488
in it. Both love and longing, in this meaning, are impossible in relation with
Allah Almighty.
You may argue: "But in this meaning, Allah's love for the servant is
puzzling. Then, how should a servant know that he is the beloved of Allah
Almighty?" in reply to this, let me say that he should know this by the signs
that indicate to it. Here, I quote the statement of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "If Allah Almighty loves a servant,
He puts him to trial, and if He loves him with the utmost degree of love, He
chooses him (for Himself)." It was said: "What is to choose him (for
Himself)?" He "peace be upon him" said: "He leaves for him neither family
nor property." (Sahib Al-Firdaws on the authority of Ali Ibn Abu Talib).
The sign of Allah's love for His servant then is to make him in solitude, and
impede him from anything else other than Him Almighty.
It was said to Jesus "peace be upon him": "Why do you not buy a donkey
to ride?" he said: "I am too dear to Allah Almighty to make me engage from
Him with a donkey."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "If
Allah Almighty loves a servant, He puts him to trial, and if he perseveres, He
chooses him, and if he is pleased, He selects him (for Himself)."
According to a religious scholar: "If you love Him, and He puts you to trial,
you should know then that He purifies you to select you (for Himself)." One of
the beginners on the path to Allah said to his mister: "I have experienced a
portion of love (from Allah Almighty)." He asked him: "O my son! Have He
tried you with a beloved over which you gave Him Almighty preference?" He
answered in the negative, thereupon he said: "Then, have no hope of love, for He
never gives it to anyone until He puts him to trial."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "If
Allah Almighty loves a servant, he assigns to him a preacher and deterrent from
himself to enjoin good upon him, and forbid him to do evil." (This is reported by
Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of Umm Salamah).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "If Allah Almighty intends good for a servant, He lets him know his own
defects and shortcomings." (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of Anas).
One of the most characteristic signs is one's love for Allah Almighty, which
indicates to the love of Allah for him.
As for the act indicative of his being loved, it is that Allah Almighty
undertakes all of his affairs, outwardly and inwardly, secretly and openly, in such
a way as He becomes his counselor, disposer, improver of his morals, mover of
his organs and parts of body, grantor of success to him externally and internally,
gatherer of all his concerns into only one concern, causer of this world and its
things to be hateful in his sight, and of anyone else to be unfamiliar to him,
eliminator of his loneliness by virtue of the pleasure of the private talk with Him
in his solitudes, and remover of veils that are between him and the gnosis of
Allah Almighty.
These and their like are the signs of Allah's love for the servant. Let's us now

!|

489
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
mention the signs of the servant's love for Allah Almighty, since they are a part of
Allah's love for him.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
EXPOSITION OF SIGNS OF SERVANT S LOVE FOR ALLAH ALMIGHTY
It should be known to you that love is claimed by anyone, and how easy it is
to claim, and how difficult it is to realize. So, man should not be deceived by
Satan's dissembling and self trickery when it claims love for Allah Almighty,
unless it is tried with signs and demanded to affirm that love with proofs and
evidences. Love is a good tree whose root is well-established in the ground,
branches are in the sky, and fruits appear in both the heart, tongue and organs.
Its overflowing traces on the heart, tongue and organs indicate to love in the
same way as smoke to fire and fruits to trees. They are numerous.
Among them is the love to meet the beloved by way of revelation and vision
in the abode of peace. It is not imagined that heart loves a beloved and does not
like to see and meet him. If he knows that there is no access to him unless he
leaves this world by death, he should like death and not flee from it. It is not
heavy nor difficult on the lover to leave his homeland for wherever his beloved
resides in order to be blessed in seeing him. Death is the key to meet one's
beloved and the doorway to enter into the world of vision.
The Messenger of Allah "AJlah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Whoever likes to meet Allah Almighty, Allah likes to meet him." (both AlBukhari and Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah and A'ishah).
When death approached Hudhaifah "Allah be pleased with him" he said: "(An
appointment with) a beloved has come at a time one is in dire need for him: not
prosperous is he who shows regrets (for death)."
One of the righteous predecessors said: "There is no characteristic Allah
Almighty likes to be in a servant, after the love for meeting Allah, more than to
fall in prostration (to Allah in prayer) more often." Thus, the love for meeting
Allah Almighty has been given priority over prostration.
Allah Almighty made it requisite for the truthfulness and sincerity in love for
Him to fight and be killed in the Way of Allah. People claimed that they love
Allah, thereupon He Almighty made fighting and being killed in His Way and
pursue of martyrdom a sign for His love. In confirmation of that, He Almighty
said: " Truly Allah loves those who fight in His Cause in battle array, as if they
were a solid cemented structure." (As-Saff 4)
He further said: " they fight in His Cause, and slay and are slain." (At-Tawbah
111)
& Jir* j
►
In his bequest to Umar "Allah be pleased with him" Abu Bakr As-Siddiq
"Allah be pleased with him" said: "Although truth is heavy, it is, regardless of its
heaviness, blissful; and although falsehood is light, it is, regardless of its lightness,
detrimental. If you observe my bequest, then, nothing will become dearer to you
than death which would inevitably approach you; and if you waste my bequest,

The quarter of the saviors
490
nothing will become more hateful to you than death, which you would never
overpower."
It is narrated on the authority of Ishaq Ibn Sa'd Ibn Abu Waqqas that his
father Sa'd "Allah be pleased with him" told him from Abdullah Ibn Jahsh "Allah
be pleased with him" that on the day of the holy battle of Uhud, he said to him:
"Should we not invoke Allah?" they moved aside and Abdullah Ibn Jahsh
invoked Allah saying: "O Lord! I swear that if I meet the enemy tomorrow You
should make me face a strong and hardy man, whom I fight in Your Cause, and
he fights me, and then kills me and cuts off my nose and ear, and splits open my
belly, until when I meet You, You would ask me: "O Abdullah! Who has cut off
your nose and ear?" I then would say: "They were cut off in Your Cause, O Allah,
and for the sake of Your Messenger "peace be upon him"." You then would say:
"You have told the truth." Sa'd commented: "I saw him towards the end of the
day, with his nose and ear hung in a thread." Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab said: "I hope
that Allah should fulfill the last portion of his oath as He fulfilled the first portion
of it." (At-Tabarani and Abu Na'im in his Hilyah).
Ath-Thawri and Bishr Al-FIafi used to say: "None but a doubtful (in faith)
dislikes death, for the lover does not like to meet his beloved in whichever state
he is."
Al-Buwaiti said to an ascetic: "Do you like death?" He seemed as if he
stopped for a while, thereupon he said to him: "Had you been truthful, surely,
you should have liked it." Then, he recited the statement of Allah Almighty: "then
seek you for death, if you are sincere." (Al-Baqarah 94)
The man said: "But the Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "None of you
should hope for death."" (both Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Anas).
He said: "He said that none should hope for death because of harm that has
befallen him, for to be pleased with the fate of Allah Almighty is better than to
seek to flee from it"
You may argue: "Then, whoever does not like death: Is he imagined to be a
lover of Allah Almighty?" In reply, let me say that the aversion for death might
go back to the love for this world, and grief for leaving the family, property and
offspring; And this contradicts the perfect love for Allah Almighty, for the
perfect love is that which possesses the heart entirely. But it is not unlikely that
one has, along with his love for his family, property and children, a little portion
of love for Allah Almighty, for people indeed vary in love.
This disparity is attested from the narration in which Abu Hudhaifah Ibn
Utbah Ibn Rabie'ah Ibn Abd-Shams "Allah be pleased with him" gave his sister
Fatimah "Allah be pleased with her" in marriage to Salim "Allah be pleased with
him" , his freed slave, thereupon the Quraish people blamed him for that and
said: ,rYou gave one of the noble ladies of Quraish to your freed slave!" on that
he said: "By Allah, I gave her to him in marriage although I know well that he is
better than her." His statement was more difficult on them than his behaviour.
They asked him: "How given that she is your sister and he is your freed slave?"
on that he said: "No doubt, I heard the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing

491
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
and peace be upon him" saying: "Whoever likes to see a man who loves Allah
from the depth of his heart (i.e. wholeheartedly), let him look at Salim."" (A
similar narration is reported by Abu Na'im on the authority of Umar). This
Hadith indicates to the fact that from among the people, there is such as loves
Allah Almighty, but not from the depth of his heart, as he loves other things
along with Him Almighty. However, his bliss with meeting Him on coming to
Him (by death) is as much as is equal to his love for Him, and his pain by
departure from this world by death is as much as is equal to his love for it.
The second cause of aversion for death is that the servant is still in the first
commencements of the station of love and he does not dislike death itself in so
much as he dislikes its being hastened on for him before he gets ready for
meedng Allah Almighty. This does not attest the weak love. His example is like
him whom the news of the arrival of his beloved has reached, thereupon he likes
for his arrival to delay for some time in order to be able to prepare the house for
him, and get himself ready for meeting him as he likes, wholeheartedly devoted to
him. Aversion by that consideration does not contradict the perfection of love.
Its sign is to work for that relendessly and engage in getting ready for it.
Another sign is to give preference to what Allah loves over what he himself likes,
outwardly and inwardly, thereupon he works hard and avoids following his
inclinations, and continues to obey Allah Almighty regularly, come close to Him
through the supererogatory deeds, and seek to attain with Him the highest
degrees, just as the lover seeks more closeness to the heart of his beloved. Allah
Almighty described the lovers as those who give others preference over
themselves in His statement: " But those who, before them, had homes (in
Medina) and had adopted the Faith, show their affection to such as came to them
for refuge, and entertain no desire in their hearts for things given to the (latter),
but give them preference over themselves, even though poverty was their (own
lot). And those saved from the covetousness of their own souls; they are the ones
that achieve prosperity." (Al-Hashr 9)
i_j3jl li* <?-

p-AjJ4 Oj J-€r ^J
+ it p-A viijlJjli

Z3 O?
(3>J

Lolva_>- ^

' '

!
! i

I

^
’’'

When love possesses the soul, it curbs inclination so much that the lover is
not blessed with anything other than his beloved. His example is like that of
Zulaikhah, the previous wife of Al-Aziz of Egypt: When she believed in Islam
and got married to Yusuf "peace be upon him", she left him and devoted
herself to the worship of Allah Almighty. Whenever he invited her to his bed by
day, she would postpone him to the night, and whenever he invited her at night,
she would postpone him to the day, and so on. She said to him: "O Yusuf! I
loved you before I knew Him, and since I knew Him, my love for Him has left
no place for anyone else in my heart to love, and I do not like to have a
substitute for Him." He said to her: "Allah Almighty ordered me to have sexual
relation with you, and told me that He would cause me to beget two children
from you and make them Prophets." She said: "As Allah Almighty ordered you
to do so, and made me a means to it, then, let it be in obedience of the

.

The quarter of the saviors
492
command of Allah Almighty." At that time, she found tranquility with him.
Whoever loves Allah does not disobey Him in the least. According to Sahl:
"The sign of love for Allah is to give Him preference over yourself, and it is not
that everyone acting upon the obedience of Allah becomes a beloved, but the real
beloved is he who avoids what is forbidden." It is so as he said, for one's love for
Allah Almighty is a cause of Allah's love for him, as He Almighty said: “whom
He will love as they will love Him.” (Al-Ma’idah 54)

When Allah loves a servant, He undertakes all of his affairs, and supports and
helps him emerge victorious over his enemies, and his principal enemy is his own
self and desires: Allah then never disappoints him, nor entrusts him to his desires
and inclinations. This is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty: " But
Allah has full knowledge of your enemies: Allah is enough for a Protector, and
Allah is enough for a Helper." (An-Nisa' 45)

4©

\

^'5 ^

You may argue: "Does disobedience contradict love in principle?" in reply, let
me say that it contradicts its perfection, and not it in principle. How many a man
who loves himself and he is sick, and likes to be healthy, even though he eats
what harms him, although he knows that it is harmful to him. This does not
mean that he does not like himself. But gnosis might weaken, and desire, in
return, prevail, with which he fails to do what is due to his love.
This is attested from the narration in which An-Nu'aiman used to be brought
to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" for sins he
committed and required corporal punishment to be executed on him, until when
he was brought to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" one day, and the corporal punishment prescribed for crimes was
implemented on him, a man cursed him. On that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said to him: "Curse him not for he loves Allah
and His Messenger." (Al-Bukhari). Thus, his sins did not remove from him love
in principle in as much as they removed the perfection of that love. According to
a Gnostic: "If faith does not go beyond the surface of the heart, one loves Allah
moderately, and when it goes beyond it and reaches the core of the heart, one
loves Allah extremely, with which he leaves all sins."
In sum, the claim of love is very dangerous. For this reason, Al-Fudail said:
"If you were asked whether you love Allah Almighty, keep silent, for if you
answered in the negative, you would disbelieve, and if you answered in the
affirmative, of a surety, you are not like the real lovers. So, beware of
displeasure." According to a religious scholar: "There is in Paradise no bliss
higher than the bliss of the real Gnostics and lovers; and there is in Hell no
punishment more painful than that of the claimants of gnosis and love, which
they have never realized."
Another sign is to persist in the celebration and remembrance of Allah
Almighty, from which one's tongue never weakens nor his heart is void. Whoever
loves a thing remembers it and remembers anything in connection with it more

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment

493

often. The sign of love for Allah is to love to remember Him, love the Qur'an
which is His speech, love His Messenger "peace be upon him" and love all that is
attributed to Him Almighty, for whoever loves a man loves all that is related to
him. If love becomes strong, its trace goes beyond the beloved himself to all that
is surrounding him and related to him. This is not to join anything in love with
him. Whoever loves the messenger of the beloved just for he is his messenger,
and his speech just for it is his speech, his love for him does not exceed him to
those things in so much as it signifies to the perfection of his love for him.
Whoever, over whose heart the love for Allah prevails, loves all the creatures of
Allah Almighty, just for they are His creation. How should he not love the
Qur'an, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and the
righteous servants of Allah Almighty?
For this reason, Allah Almighty said: " Say: "If you do love Allah, follow me:
Allah will love you and forgive you your sins; for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful."" (A1 Imran 31)

The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Love
Allah for His favors He confers upon you, and love me for the love of Allah
Almighty for me." (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
According to Sufyan: "He who loves whomever Allah loves has indeed
loved Allah; and he who honors whomever Allah honors has indeed honored
Allah Almighty."
It is related from one of the beginners on the path to Allah that he said: "I
detected in myself the sweetness of private talk with Allah, thereupon I was
addicted to recitation of the Qur'an by day and night. Then, I intermitted for a
while during which I stopped from recitadon. Then, during my sleep I heard a
caller calling me: "If you claim to love Me, then, why have you abandoned My
Book? Have you considered my kind blame in it?" I then awoke with the love
for the Qur'an being inculcated in my heart, thereupon I returned to my first
state."
According to Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased with him": "None of you should
ask about himself but the Holy Qur'an: If he likes the Holy Qur'an, then, he likes
Allah Almighty, and if he does not like the Holy Qur'an, he then does not like
Allah Almighty."
According to Sahl: "The sign of love for Allah Almighty is to love the Holy
Qur'an, and the sign of love for the Qur'an is to love the Prophet "peace be upon
him", and the sign of love for the Prophet "peace be upon him" is to love the
sunnah, and the sign of love for sunnah is to love the hereafter, and the sign of
love for the hereafter is to hate this world, and the sign of aversion for this world
is not to take from it but a provision and a riding mount to convey him to the
hereafter."
Another sign is to be affable with solitude, private talk with Allah Almighty,
and recitadon of His Holy Book. Thus, he performs Tahajjud prayer regularly,
and seize the opportunity of quietness and pureness of night to be alone with
Allah Almighty. Love at its least degree is to take pleasure in being with the
beloved alone, and blessed in talking to him privately. Whoever has sleep and

;

j

!

The quarter of the saviors
494
engagement in talk with the people more pleasant to him than the private talk
with Allah Almighty, then, how should his love for Allah be held valid?
It was said to Ibrahim Ibn Adham and he had descended from the mountain:
"From where have you come?" he said: "From where I was in the company of
Allah Almighty."
It is related that it was revealed to David "peace be upon him": "Do not be
sociable with anyone of My creatures (on the exclusion of Me), for I cut two
men from Me: A man who regarded My reward to have delayed to come to
him, thereupon he abandoned Me; and a man who forgot Me and was satisfied
with his state. The sign of that is that I entrust him to himself, and leave him
confused in this world." As much as one is affable with anything else other than
Allah Almighty, he feels estrangement from Allah Almighty, and far from His
love.
It is related in the story of Barkh, the black slave with whom Moses "peace be
upon him" invoked Allah for water, Allah Almighty said to Moses: "How
excellent slave Barkh is in My sight, except that it has a defect." Moses "peace be
upon him" said: "O Lord! What is his defect?" he said: "The breeze of dawn
appeals to Barkh, with which he finds tranquility; and whoever loves Me should
not find tranquility with anything other than Me."
It is narrated that a worshipper kept worshipping Allah Almighty in a garden
for a long time. One day, he looked at a bird singing in a nest he took in a tree,
thereupon he said: "Would that I turn my place of worship to that tree, in order
to get sociable with the voice of that bird!" He did accordingly, thereupon Allah
Almighty revealed to the Prophet of his time: "Tell so and so, the worshipper, the
following: You have become affable with a creature. I would degrade you in rank
which you would never attain with your deed.'"
The sign of love then is to be perfecdy affable with talking privately to the
beloved, to be perfecdy blessed with becoming in seclusion with him, and to be
perfecdy estranged from such as hinders that seclusion and interrupts the
pleasure of private talk with him. The sign of intimacy is to have the mind
engaged in the pleasure of private talk with one's beloved. Such pleasure led one
of those, while being in prayer, not to sense the burning of his house. The leg of
another one was cut off, as a medical treatment because of ailment that afflicted
it, during his prayer, and he felt not. When love and intimacy with the beloved
prevail over the soul, seclusion and private talk then become the comfort of the
eye, therewith he averts all concerns and anxieties. Moreover, the love and
intimacy engage his heart entirely to the extent to which he could not understand
the affairs of this world unless they are repeated to his hearing again and again.
That is because the lover rests assured only with his beloved.
In his comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: "Those
who believe, and whose hearts find satisfaction in the remembrance of Allah:
For without doubt in the remembrance of Allah do hearts find satisfaction"
(Ar-Ra'd 28)

Qatadah said: "I.e. rejoice to Him and become affable with Him."
As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased with him" said: "Whoever tastes the pleasure of

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
495
the pure love of Allah Almighty, it engages him from the pursuit of this world,
and makes him feel estrangement from all its inhabitants."
According to Mutarrif Ibn Abu Bakr: "The lover never wearies from the talk
of his beloved."
Allah Almighty revealed to David "peace be upon him": "False is he who
claims he loves me if night comes upon him and he sleeps from Me. Does any
lover like to meet his beloved? Here I am for such as wants Me."
According to Yahya Ibn Mu'adh: "Whoever loves Allah Almighty should
necessarily hate himself." He said once again: "Whoever has not the following
three characteristics, he then does not love Allah Almighty: to give preference to
the speech of Allah Almighty over the speech of the people, the meeting with
Allah Almighty over the meeting with the people, and the worship of Allah
Almighty over the service of the people."
Another sign is not to grieve for what he misses other than Allah Almighty,
and to grieve so much for any moment to elapse in which he does not remember
and obey Allah Almighty. This requires him to pray for forgiveness, repent and
ask for mercy of Allah so much once he finds himself heedless.
A Gnosdc said: "Allah has many servants who loved Him so much and found
reassurance and satisfaction with Him till they no longer grieved for anything that
escaped them. They did not engage in their own fortunes, for their dominion was
perfect: What was doomed to them reached them, and what escaped them did
not aggrieve them, in reliance on His good manipulation of their affairs."
It is due upon the lover, once he returns from his heedlessness, to devote
himself wholeheartedly to the beloved, and engage in blame, asking: "O Lord!
By which sin have You cut off Your kindness from me, and deprived me of
Your presence, and occupied me by myself and struggle of Satan?" , of a surety,
this brings about purity and kindness in his heart, which expiates for his
previous heedlessness and his slip becomes a means to renew his remembrance
of Allah Almighty, and the purity of his heart. Once the lover sees none other
than the beloved, and sees nothing coming but from him, he neither grieves nor
complains, but rather receives all things with good pleasure and contentment,
knowing that the beloved decrees for him only what is good for him,
remembering His statement: " But it is possible that you dislike a thing which is
good for you, and that you love a thing which is bad for you." (Al-Baqarah 216)

Another sign is to be blessed with obedience and acts of worship, of which
one never wearies. In confirmation of that, one of them said: "I underwent with
difficulty standing at night (for supererogatory prayer) for twenty years, and then
enjoyed of it for further twenty years."
According to Al-Junaid: "The sign of a lover is to be regularly active and
enthusiastically devote himself to worship with which his body might weary, but
his heart never wearies."
According to another one: "The work in love for Allah Almighty never
intermits." According to a religious scholar: "By Allah, no lover of Allah
Almighty has ever quenched his thirst by His obedience even through the

The quarter of the saviors
496 ---------------------------------greatest means possible to him."
All of this is observable in reality. The lover never gets tired of seeking to
please his beloved, and take pleasure in his service with his heart, no matter how
troublesome it might be on his body. Whenever his body becomes powerless, the
dearest hope to him is to restore his health and power in order to be able to
engage in sendee of his beloved. As such the love for Allah Almighty should be.
If love prevails over the soul, it overpowers what is inferior to it. If one's beloved
is dearer to him than laziness, of a surety, he leaves laziness and becomes active
in his sendee; and if he is dearer to him than property, he leaves property in love
for him; and so on.
It was said to a lover and he had consumed his own self and property (in love
of Allah): "What has caused you to reach such a state of love?" he said: "One day,
1 heard a lover while being in seclusion with his beloved, saying to him: "I, by
Allah, love you from the depth of my heart, whereas you turn back your face
from me." The beloved said to him: "If you really love me, which thing are you
ready to spend on me?" he said: "O master! I give you all that is in my possession,
and then strive with my soul for you until I die." I said (to myself): "This is from
a creature to a creature, and from a servant to a servant: then, how should it be if
it is from servants to the worshipped?"
Another sign is to have pity and mercy for all the worshippers of Allah
Almighty, and be strong and strict on the enemies of Allah Almighty, as well as
on such as commits what is forbidden by Allah Almighty, as confirmed by Him
in His statement: " and those who are with him are strong against Unbelievers,
(but) compassionate amongst each other." (Al-Fath 29)
c.

jlaSjT, Jp

j<xa tiMlU ^

It is also he who does not care about the blamer's blame, and nothing
diverts him from being angry for the Sake of Allah Almighty. As such Allah
Almighty described His allies when He said: "Such as are attached to Me in
love in the same way as a child is attached to a particular thing in love of it,
take shelter to celebration and remembrance of Me in the same way as an
eagle takes shelter to its resting place, and grow angry for (violating) My
sanctities in the same way as a tiger grows angry when it is provoked, careless
whether people are more or less." Those are the signs of love. Whoever has
these in perfection, his love for Allah then is perfect and sincere, and in the
hereafter his drink would be pure, fresh and sweet. But he, whose love for
Allah Almighty is mixed with the love for anything else, he would be blessed
in the hereafter as much as is equal to his love for Allah, for his drink would
be mixed with that of these nearest to Allah, as confirmed by the statement of
Allah: " Truly the Righteous will be in Bliss... Their thirst will be slaked with
Pure Wine sealed: The seal thereof will be musk: And for this let those aspire,
who have aspirations: With it will be (given) a mixture of Tasnim: A spring,
from (the waters) whereof drink those Nearest to Allah." (Al-Mutaffiffm 22,
25-28)

497

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
Cr?

(0)

vlAJ'3 ^3

4 (0

.» *

^ 0fjz***

Cr?

^-r VL/^ Lip 0)

What then makes the drink of the righteous pure is its being mixed with
the drink of those nearest to Allah. Drink here symbolizes the whole bliss of
the Garden, just as the record indicates to all deeds, as confirmed by His
statement: "Nay, verily the Record of the Righteous is (preserved) in Iliiyyin.
And what will explain to you what Iliiyyin is? (There is) a Register (fully)
inscribed, To which bear witness those Nearest (to Allah)." (Al-Mutaffiffin
18-21)
40
(Q)
<1^ 0) o_4if ^ vibj Ji "Uj 0
jS jVjfis
o! ^ ^
What then makes high the record of the righteous is that these nearest to
Allah bear witness to it. As well as the righteous find more and more in their
state and gnosis by their closeness to and seeing those nearest to Allah Almighty,
as such their state would be in the hereafter as confirmed by His statement: "And
your creation or your resurrection is in no wise but as an individual soul: For
Allah is He Who hears and sees (all things)." (Luqman 28)

4

^ o!

3

X!

^3

l^

And: "even as We produced the first Creation, so shall We produce a new
one: a promise We have undertaken: truly shall We fulfill it." (Al-Anbiya 104)
^ ((0)

\j£ bl blip I JPj jojl~ju

<Jjl 131JU L*5" ^

And: "A fitting recompense (for them)." (An-Naba 26)
I.e. a reward to fit their deed: Pure drink for pure love, and mixed drink for
mixed love, and so on. He Almighty said: " Then shall anyone who has done an
atom's weight of good, see it! And anyone who has done an atom's weight of evil,
shall see it." (Az-Zalzalah 7-8)
4 0 *j>.
cr*J © *JD-4-*^ cr^ ^
And: " Verily never will Allah change the condition of a people until they
change it themselves (with their own souls)." (Ar-Ra'd 11)

40

^^

And: "Allah is never unjust in the least degree: if there is any good (done) He
doubles it, and gives from His own presence a great reward." (An-Nisa1 40)

i0

ly-l i3oJ

bb oj3

y ^ Oj }

And: "We shall set up scales of justice for the Day of Judgment, so that not a
soul will be dealt with unjustly in the least. And if there be (no more than) the
weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it (to account): and enough are We to
take account." (Al-Anbiya 47)

The quarter of the saviors

498
lit J5y>- {j*

0!3 L~L

^ Al'rfl)T>>^J .la^aJl Oij'3^^£^a-,j ^

Whoever has his love in this world in the hope of Paradise and what it
contains of bliss, houris, and palaces, he would be made to abide in Paradise, and
enjoy thereof whatever he likes, play with children and bless himself with women;
and this is the utmost degree of his pleasure in the hereafter, for every one is
given in love only what he desires for. Whoever has his purpose is the Lord of
the abode and the Sovereign of the dominion and the King of the kingdom,
Whose love prevails over his heart with sincerity and truthfulness, of a surety he
would be " In an Assembly of Truth, in the Presence of a Sovereign
Omnipotent." (AI-Qamar 55)
p,

*

The righteous would enjoy themselves in the gardens and bless themselves
with the houris and children, while these nearest to Allah Almighty would abide
by the Presence of Allah to which they restrict their vision, and regard with
slightness all pleasures of Paradise in comparison with the Presence of Allah
Almighty. The former party would be engaged in fulfilling the desires of their
abdomen and genitals, and the latter party would be engaged in sitting in the
presence of Allah.
Another sign is to be in his love fearful and frightened by veneration and
exaltation, thinking fear to contradict love, although it is not so. Perception of
greatness and grandeur enjoins veneration and exaltation, whereas perception of
beauty enjoins love. But lovers in particular have fears in the stations of love
which are unique to them, some of which are more severe than others. The first
is to feel afraid of turning away, and more severe is to feel afraid of veiling, and
more severe is to feel afraid of remoteness. It is that significance which
frightened the master of all lovers "peace be upon him" when he heard the
statement of Allah Almighty in the Surah of Hud: " Ah! Behold! removed (from
sight) were Ad, the People of Hud!" (Hud 60)

And: "ah! behold! removed (from sight) were the Thamud!" (Hud 68)

And: " Ah! Behold! How the Madyan were removed (from sight) as were
removed the Thamud!" (Hud 95)

The veneration and fear of remoteness is aggravated in the heart of such as
tasted the pleasure of closeness. The degrees of closeness are unlimited, and it
is due upon the servant to strive his utmost in order to increase in closeness as
much as he could. That is the significance of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" when eh said: "He who has two days equal (in
deed and reward) is a loser, and he who has his day worse than his yesterday is
cursed." (This is narrated by Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Abd Al-Aziz Ibn

499
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
Abu Rawad, who said that he saw the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" in a dream and asked him and he gave him this answer).
It is further reported that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" said: "(Sometimes) shades heap up on my heart every day and
night to the extent that I ask Allah for forgiveness seventy times." (Al-Bukhari
and Muslim on the authority of Al-Agharr).
It is reported that Allah Almighty says: "The minimum punishment I inflict
upon the religious scholar, if he gives preference to the worldly desires over the
acts of worship, is to deprive him of the pleasure of private talk with Me." The
laymen are deprived of more as a punishment because of desires, whereas the
private are deprived of more because of only their claim, conceit and reliance on
the apparent commencements of kindness. That is the hidden plan which none is
able to avoid but him who is well-established in knowledge.
Furthermore, there is the fear of missing what has become unattainable after
missing it. There is also the fear of abandonment. The lover persists in love and
longing, and pursuit of more and more, and he does not abandon his beloved
except with a new kindness, which might be a cause of his pause or even
retraction. Abandonment afflicts him from wherever he feels not just as love
strikes him from where he feels not. Those turning states have concealed
heavenly causes which it is beyond the capacity of mankind to know. If Allah
Almighty likes to do a plan against him, He conceals from him the would-be
abandonment, thereupon he remains in his hope and is deceived by the good
vision, prevailing heedlessness, inclination, or forgetfulness. All of those are
among the soldiers of Satan that counteract oppose the soldiers of angels such as
knowledge, mind, and remembrance of Allah. As well as there are, of Allah's
attributes what stimulates love in the heart, such as kindness, mercy, and wisdom,
there are other attributes which arouse abandonment such as compelling,
exaltation in might and power, and freedom of want. Those are the
commencements of plan, wretchedness and deprivation.
There is also a fear of replacement, i.e. that the heart should move from his
love to the love of another. That is the aversion, whose commencements is
abandonment; and turning away and veiling are commencements of
abandonment; and breast constriction to do good and withdrawal of persistence
in remembrance of Allah Almighty, and tiresomeness of the daily devotional
recitals are causes and commencements of all of those.
The appearance of those causes indicates to the turning of the station of love
into the station of aversion, we seek refuge with Allah from that. Persistence in
fear of those matters and caution of them by permanent vigilance indicate to the
truthfulness of love. Whoever loves a thing should necessarily feel afraid he
might lose it; and this is why the lover remains in fear particularly if the beloved
could be lost.
According to a Gnostic: "Whoever worships Allah Almighty by way of love
without fear, he would be destroyed because of indulgence and pampering; and
whoever worships Him by way of fear without love, he would be cut off from
Him because of remoteness and estrangement; and whoever worships Him by

The quarter of the saviors
500
way of both love and fear, Allah Almighty loves him, brings him close to His
presence, and enables and instructs him." The lover then should necessarily
entertain fear, and the fearful should necessarily entertain love. But whoever has
love possess his heart with only a little portion remaining thereof for fear, he is
said to be in the station of love, and regarded among die lovers. If love alone is
to prevail entirely, it would be beyond the power of humankind to tolerate. Fear
counterbalances it and alleviates its trace on the heart.
It is related diat one of the Abdal asked a sincere affirmer and lover of truth
to ask Allah Almighty to bestow upon him only an atom of His gnosis. He did
accordingly and Allah Almighty responded to him, thereupon the man wandered
in mountains and his mind was confounded, and he remained for seven days
unable to benefit from anything or be of any avail to anything at all. The sincere
affirmer of truth asked Allah Almighty to reduce the atom of gnosis He had
given to him, thereupon Allah Almighty revealed to him: "We have given him
only a part of one hundred thousand of an atom of gnosis. Indeed, one hundred
thousand servants asked Me to bestow upon them a portion of love at the same
time this man has asked Me, and I postponed their answer until you interceded
for this, and when I responded to your question, I also gave them the same as I
gave him. Thus, I divided an atom of gnosis into one hundred thousand portions
between them. What he is suffering is the trace of that." He said: "Exalted be
You, the Wisest of all wise! Reduce from what You have given him." Allah then
took away from him most of that portion, and there remained with him only a
portion of ten thousand portions of an atom of gnosis. Thus, his love, fear and
hope were counterbalanced, and he became quiet like the other Gnostics.
It is impossible for the people to share in such kinds of gnosis, and it is
forbidden for anyone to disclose what is revealed to him thereof. Were all the
people to share in it, the whole world would be destroyed. Wisdom of Allah
requires that most of them should be heedless of it in order for the world to be
well constructed. Were all the people to eat only the unlawful for forty days,
surely, the whole world would be ruined, for they all would abstain in it, all
markets would become idle. Moreover, if all the religious scholars and learned
among the people to eat only the unlawful, they would engage in themselves, and
tongues and pens would stop from writing knowledge. But there are mysteries
and wisdoms in evil as well as there are mysteries and wisdoms in good; and His
wisdom is infinite as well as His power is unlimited.
Another sign is to conceal love and avoid claim of it, and beware of
disclosing affection and longing in exaltation and veneration of the beloved,
and jealousy on his secret. Love indeed is one of the secrets of the beloved.
Moreover, in the claim, one might exceed the due limits of the meaning to the
point of defamation, for which there is a severe punishment, and disaster
because of which might be hastened on in this world. It is true that the lover
might come under intoxication of love, which befogs his mind and causes
trouble to him, with the result that his love might appear on him. If this occurs
to him unintentionally, he should be excused, for he is oppressed by the
influence of love. In other cases, the fire of love might kindle so much that one

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment

501

would not be able to tolerate its authority, and the heart might overflow with it
ceaselessly.
One of the Gnostics said: "The more one refers to Allah Almighty, the
farther he is from Him." Of a surety, he means such of people as remembers
Him ostentatiously every moment and in the presence of anyone: this is hateful in
the sight of lovers and Gnostics.
One day, Dhun-Nun Al-Misri visited one of his brothers who claimed love
(for Allah Almighty), and found him suffering from a distress, thereupon he said
to him: "He loves Him not who senses the pain of His harm." The man said:
"But as for me, I say that he loves him not who is not blessed with the pain of
His harm." Dhun-Nun said: "But I say that he loves him not who makes himself
famous for His love." On that the man said: "I ask for forgiveness of Allah, and
turn to him in repentance."
You may argue: "Since love is the highest station, to disclose it is to disclose
good, then, why should it be disapproved?" In reply to that, it should be known
to you that love is praiseworthy, and disclosing it also is praiseworthy. But what is
blameworthy is to pretend it ostentatiously, for this develops claim and
arrogance; and it is due upon the lover to have his states and deeds not his
statements and words reveal his love. Were his love or act indicative of love to
appear necessarily, he should do it without intendon, for the lover's intention is
to reveal his love only to the beloved. But to disclose the love to anyone else is to
join him in that love, and this affects love. To disclose the love through deed and
word then is blameworthy unless one is under the intoxication of love, with
which the tongue speaks freely and organs and parts of body are shaken with
trouble, in which case, one should not be held responsible.
What is hateful here is to pretend to love, for when the Gnostic knows about
the states of the angels in their permanent love and inherent longing with which
they glorify and exalt Allah Almighty relentlessly day and night, and that they
neither weary nor disobey any command given to them by Allah Almighty, and
always do what they are commanded to do, he despises his state, and disdains to
disclose his love, for he comes to know that from among the lovers for Allah in
the dominion of the Lord Almighty, he is the most despicable, and his love the
shortest of all who love Allah.
In this respect, it is related from one who was revealed that he said: "I kept
worshipping Allah Almighty for thirty years with the works of hearts and organs
and parts of body, striving my utmost power, until I thought I have done a thing
of significance to Allah Almighty." Then, he made a mention of things and signs
of the heavens and the earth that were revealed to him by Allah Almighty in a
long story at the end of which he said: "Then, I saw a row of angels as much as is
equal to the number of all what Allah has created. I asked them: "Who are you?"
they said: "We are the lovers for Allah Almighty, Whom we have been
worshipping for three hundred thousand years, during which nothing else has
ever occurred to our minds, nor have we remembered any other than Him." I
then felt shy of (the insignificance of) my deeds (in comparison with theirs), and
granted them to such of people as on whom punishment is due perchance his

i

r

i

The quarter of the saviors
502
torment would be alleviated in the Hell."
Then, whoever knows himself would necessarily know his Lord Almighty,
of Whom he would feel shy, and disdain to claim any love ostentatiously. It is
true that his movements and silence, daring and abstention, hesitation and
reluctance, might bear witness to his love. In this respect, it is related by AlJunaid that he said: "Our mister As-Sari fell ill and we knew no reason for his
ailment. An experienced physician was described for us and we brought him.
He took hold of a bottle full of his urine and checked it and then said: "This is
the urine of a lover (for Allah)." I swooned and fell unconscious and the
bottle of urine fell from my hand. When I recovered and returned to As-Sari
and told him, he smiled and said: "May Allah fight him! How insightful he is!"
I asked: "O mister! Is (the trace of) love shown in urine?" he answered in the
affirmative."
As-Sari said once again: "If I like to say, nothing made my skin stick to my
bone, and made lean my body other than my love for Him." Then, he felt
unconscious. Those are some of the signs and fruits of love.
Among those signs is the intimacy and contentment as will be shown later.
In sum, all good things of religion and noble manners are among the fruits of
love. What love does not produce is the following of inclinations and fancies, and
it is among the evil manners. It is true that one might love Allah Almighty for His
doing good to him, and one might love Him for His glory and beauty, even
though He does not do good to him. All lovers are but one of both divisions. For
this reason, Al-Junaid said: "People in their love for Allah Almighty are divided
into laymen and private. The laymen acquired that love by their knowledge of
Him in His continuous doing of good and bestowal of favors, thereupon they
could not help please him, but their love varies in littleness and muchness in
accordance with the favors and doing of good. As for the private, they acquired
love by their perception of the grandeur of His will, power, knowledge, wisdom,
and uniqueness of dominion and kingdom. When they knew His perfect
attributes and complete beautiful names, they could not help love Him, for He
deserved love in their sight for He is worthy of it, even though were He to take
away from them all the favors."
It is true that from among the people, there is such as loves his own
inclinations and Iblis, the enemy of Allah Almighty. But even, he is dissembled by
means of arrogance and ignorance, thinking that he is a lover of Allah Almighty,
and this is he who lacks those signs; or by way of showing off, in order to be seen
and heard of men, and his purpose is only the transitory things of this world,
although what seems from his outwardly contradicts what he conceals inwardly,
and those are the evil religious scholars and reciters: Those are hateful to Allah
Almighty on earth.

CHAPTER TWELVE
EXPOSmON OF MEANING OF INTIMACY WITH ALLAH
We have already mentioned that intimacy, fear and longing are among the
fruits and traces of love. But those traces differ in relation with the lover
according to his vision and what prevails over him in a particular time or state. If

1

503
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment ---------------------it prevails over himself to look forward from behind the partition of the unseen
to the utmost degree of beauty, feeling he is too short to fathom glory, the heart
would be immediately moved and provoked to pursue that. This state is called
longing, and it pertains to what is absent If it prevails over him to rejoice of his
closeness and vision of what is presendy revealed to him, and his vision is
restricted only to see the present revealed beauty, giving no care to what he has
not attained yet, the heart then would cheer up with what it perceives, and this
state of cheerfulness is called intimacy. If he is interested with the attribute of
exaltation in might and power and freedom of want, carelessness and risk of
removal and remoteness, the heart would feel pain, and this state of pain is called
fear.
Those states follow observations, and observations are required by unlimited
reasons and means. Intimacy, for example, is that the heart rejoices of the vision
of beauty, to the extent that if it prevails in it over the observation of what is
absent from it, and the risk of vanishing and disappearance, its pleasure and bliss
would grow strong. This is the significance of the reply of one when he was
asked: "Do you have longing?" he said: "No, because longing should be for what
is absent." If the absent is present, then for which would he have longing? He,
over whom the state of intimacy prevails, finds his pleasure only in seclusion and
solitude.
It was said to Ibrahim Ibn Adham when he had descended from the
mountain: "From where have you come?" He said: "From where I was in the
company of Allah Almighty." That is because intimacy with Allah requires one to
feel estranged from anything else other than Allah Almighty. Moreover, all that
hinders that seclusion becomes the heaviest on the heart. In this respect, it is
narrated that whenever Moses "peace be upon him" was communicated directly
by his Lord, he would spend a long time during which he never heard the speech
of anyone of the people but that he would be afflicted with nausea. That is
because love requires the sweetness of the speech and remembrance of the
beloved, which drives away from the heart any other sweetness.
For this reason, a wise man said in his supplication: "O Lord, Who made me
affable with His remembrance, and estranged from His creatures." Allah
Almighty said to David "peace be upon him": "Have longing for Me and be
affable with Me, and estranged from anything else."
It was said to Rabi'ah: "By which thing have you attained that rank?" she said:
"By leaving what concerns me not, and engagement and intimacy with Him Who
is never-ending."
Abd-Al-Wahid said: "I came upon a monk to whom I said: "O monk! Has
solitude appealed to you?" he said: "O man! Were you to taste the sweetness of
solitude, you would feel estranged from everything else. Solitude is the leading act
of worship." I asked him once again: "O monk! What is the least thing you find
in solitude?" He said: "To be relieved of adulating the people and safety from
their evil." I further asked: "O monk! When would the servant taste the sweetness
of intimacy with Allah Almighty?" he said: "When affection becomes pure, and
treatment sincere (to Him Alone)." I said: "Then, when would affection become

The quarter of the saviors
504
pure?" he said: "When all concerns turn into one concern in obedience (to Allah

Almighty).

IMI

According to a wise man: "Wonder at the creatures, how they seek a
substitute for You! Wonder at the hearts, how they get affable with anything else
other than You!"
You may argue: "Then, what is the sign of intimacy with Allah Almighty?" in
reply to that, it should be known to you that its distinctive sign is to have one's
breast constricted by mixing with the people, and annoyed by them, and, in
return, enjoy of the sweetness of remembrance of Allah. Were he to be in a
gathering, he is in solitude while being in assembly, and in assembly (with Allah
Almighty) while being in solitude, a sojourner in residence, and a resident in
journey, an attendant in absence and an absent in attendance, mixing the people
only with his body, while he is in solitude with his heart, wholeheartedly involved
in the sweetness of remembrance. That is the meaning of intimacy with Allah,
and those are its indications and signs.
Some scholastic theologians went as far as to deny longing, intimacy and love
for Allah Almighty, thinking that this gives false impression of likening (Allah to
His creatures), and of course, this is not so, since it indicates to their ignorance of
the fact that the beauty of perceiving what is invisible with insights excels in
perfection the beauty of perceiving visibles with sights, and the gnosis of the
invisibles is more pleasant to the masters of hearts. Among those scholastic
theologians, a mention may be made of Ahmad Ibn Ghalib who denied the talk
of love, longing and intimacy of Al-Junaid and his companions, and denied also
the station of contentment, saying: "Nothing is possible but patience. As for
contentment, it is unimaginable." But even, this speech is defective and
imperfect, of a narrow-minded man who did not know of stations of religion but
its external husks. All of what is visible in religion belongs to the external husks,
whereas what is invisible to the internal core of religion. Whoever does not know
from the nut but its external crust thinks, though falsely, that it has no oil at all;
and he is excusable, although by no means would his excuse be accepted.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
EXPOSITION OF MEANING OF ELATION AND PAMPERING PRODUCED
BY OVERWHELMING INTIMACY
It should be known to you that if intimacy is permanent, strong and
prevailing, and neither the pain of longing nor the fear of change embitters it, it
indeed produces a kind of elation in deeds and words, and private talk with
Allah Almighty. It might seem disapproving due to what it has of audacity and
lack of veneration, but at the same time, it might be tolerable from him who is
in the station of intimacy, and whoever is not in that station, and rather imitates
them in word and deed, would be destroyed by it, and become on the threshold
of disbelief.
The typical example of it is the private talk of Barkh the Black with whom
Allah Almighty commanded Moses "peace be upon him" to invoke Him for
rain after the children of Israel had suffered from famine for seven years,
thereupon Moses "peace be upon him" set out in the company of seventy

505
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
thousand of his people to invoke Allah Almighty for rain. Allah Almighty
revealed to him: “How should I respond to their invocation and their sins had
overwhelmed them, and their innermost secrets were malicious? They invoke
Me with no certainty nor fear of My plan. Return to one of My servants called
Barkh and tell him to set out with you perchance I would respond to his
invocation.” Moses "peace be upon him" inquired about him, and failed to find
him. One day, while Moses "peace be upon him" was on the way, a black slave
received him, and there was dust in between his eyes because of the trace of
prostration, and he had wrapped himself in a wrapper whose ends he had tied
on his neck. Moses "peace be upon him" was led by his gnosis by virtue of the
light of Allah Almighty, to salute him. He asked him about his name and the
slave said: “Barkh.” Moses said: “You have been sought by us. Come out to
invoke Allah for rain for us.”
He came out and invoked for rain and said during his invocation: “This is not
fitting for Your deeds, nor for Your forbearance, nor for what seems to You. Do
you suffer from shortage of springs or the winds proves disobedient of Your
command or what you have was consumed, or you grew angry with the sinners?
Had you not been forgiver of sins before You created the doers of mistakes? You
created mercy and enjoined sympathy and kindness. Do You like to show us that
You withhold from us? Or do you fear not to hasten on punishment?” He did
not leave before the children of Israel were provided with rainfall in abundance,
and Allah Almighty caused greenery to grow in half a day. When Barkh returned
and Moses "peace be upon him" received him, he said: “Have you not seen that
when I pleaded Him He immediately was just and fair to me?” When Moses
"peace be upon him" intended to attack him, Allah Almighty revealed to him:
“Barkh indeed makes Me laugh thrice a day.”
It is further narrated on the authority of Al-Hassan that he said: “Many huts
were burnt in Basrah, and one in the middle was not burnt; and at that time Abu
Musa "Allah be pleased with him" was the governor of Basrah. When he was
informed about that, he sent for the owner of the hut and he was brought to him.
He was an old man, to whom he said: “O old man! What is the matter with you
that your hut was not burnt?” He said: “I took oath that my Lord Almighty
should not burn it.” On that Abu Musa "Allah be pleased with him" said: I heard
the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" having said: “There would be in my
people men of disheveled hair and untidy clothes, and if they take oath that Allah
should do a thing, He Almighty would fulfill their oath.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
It is further narrated that a burning broke up in Basrah and Abu Ubaidah AlKhawas came and started to step over the fire, and the Basrah governor said to
him: “Beware lest fire would burn you.” He said: “I took oath that my Lord
Almighty should not burn me with the fire.” He said to him: “Then, swear that
fire should be extinguished (by permission of Allah Almighty).” He swore that
fire should be put out (by permission of Allah Almighty) , and it was put out.
It is related that one day Abu Hafs was walking when a confounded rural man
received him and he asked him: “What is wrong with you?” he said: “I have lost
my donkey and I have none other than it.” Abu Hafs stopped and said: tcBy Your
Honor, I would not take a step unless You restore to him his donkey.” Then, the

The quarter of the saviors
506 --------------------------------------------------------donkey appeared immediately, and Abu Hafs left.
Those and others like them occur to those of indmacy with Allah Almighty,
and it is not fitting for anyone else to imitate them in that.
According to Al-Junaid: “The men of intimacy say during their speech and
private talks in their solitude and seclusion things that seem disbelief in the sight
of the laymen...and were the laymen to hear them, surely, they would render
them disbelievers.” This is tolerable from and fitting for them but not for others.
It is not unlikely that He Almighty is pleased with such a servant because of a
thing for which He grows angry with another, so long as their stations are
different. In the Qur’an there are alerts to those concepts if you make sense to
them. All Qur’anic stories are but alerts to those endued with insights and
understanding perchance they would consider them with reflection and
meditation.
The first narration pertains to the story of Adam "peace be upon him" and
Iblis: Do you not see how both shared in sin and transgression, and then differed
in selection and infallibility? As for Iblis, he was removed far from His mercy. As
for Adam "peace be upon him" He Almighty said about him: " Thus did Adam
disobey his Lord, and allow himself to be seduced. But his Lord chose him (for
His Grace): He turned to him (in repentance), and gave him guidance." (Ta Ha
121-122)
Furthermore, in another narration, Allah Almighty blamed His Prophet
"peace be upon him" for his turning away from a servant, and turning his face to
another servant, given that both were equal in servitude and different in state. He
Almighty said making a comparison between both: "As to one who regards
himself as self-sufficient, To him do you attend; Though it is no blame on you if
he grow not (in spiritual understanding). But as to him who came to you striving
earnestly, And with fear (in his heart), Of him was you unmindful." (Abasa 5-10)
Cr4

On another occasion, Allah Almighty commanded him "peace be upon him"
to sit with a group of people saying: "When those come to you who believe in
Our Signs, say: "Peace be on you; your Lord has inscribed for Himself (the rule
of) Mercy: verily, if any of you did evil in ignorance, and thereafter repented, and
amended (his conduct), lo! He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful." (Al-An'am 54)
^ ><i\ <*->-ji\
^

jjLL- 'tS*3 LxijIli
lj <-ouL ^ja CJC

i

^

Ia

Then, He ordered him not to sit with another group of disbelievers saying: "
When you see men engaged in vain discourse about Our Signs, turn away from
them unless they turn to a different theme. If Satan ever makes you forget, then
after recollection, sit not you in the company of those who do wrong." (Al-An'am
68)

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment

--------------

507
Oolj 1313 ^

4. CjS

^yzM

t£j^=> -df Uju wL*ij

^yioljjT

In confirmation of that, He said to him once again: 11 And keep your soul
content with those who call on their Lord morning and evening, seeking His
Face; and let not your eyes pass beyond them, seeking the pomp and glitter of
this Life; nor obey any whose heart We have permitted to neglect the
remembrance of Us, one who follows his own desires, whose case has gone
beyond all bounds." (Al-Kahf 28)

4. ^3 iby jOja \

Aj^A

b-»Ll3 lilipl ^

3jl>jT

Similarly, elation and pampering are tolerable from some servants and not
form others. For example, Moses "peace be upon him" said out of elation of his
intimacy: " This is no more than Your trial: By it You cause whom You will to
stray, and You lead whom You will into the right path. You are our Protector: So
forgive us and give us Your mercy; for You are the Best of those who forgive."
(Al-A'raf 155)
LJjc-jl t iLo qa—Up J-^aj liiiili ^|J ^a o! ^

i©

^ *5

A mention also may be made of his statement in reply to the Lord when He
said to him: "Go you to Pharaoh, for he has indeed transgressed all bounds" (Ta
Ha 24)

i (0)

j<°J

Jj

^

"O my Lord! I do fear that they will charge me with falsehood: My breast will
be straitened. And my speech may not go (smoothly): so send unto Aaron. And
(further), they have a charge of crime against me; and I fear they may slay me."
(Ash-Shu'ara 12-14)

40oj4ZJ£&
He further said: "Our Lord! we fear lest he hasten with insolence against us,
or lest he transgress all bounds." (Ta Ha 45)

i0 'JSh o‘jfui

uljUS Sili »

If this is from anyone other than Moses "peace be upon him" it would be
impolite, for the one who is made to stand in the station of intimacy, should be
dealt with gently and the like of this might be tolerable from him. What is less
than this was not tolerable from Jonah "peace be upon him" when he was made
to stand in the station of fear and veneration. He was put to punishment of
prison in the belly of the fish for three days, in three darknesses, and " Had not
Grace from His Lord reached him, he would indeed have been cast off on the

l

The quarter of the saviors

508 ------------------------------------------------------naked shore, in disgrace." (Al-Qalam 49)

4 (£§5

3A3 5 ^ 'xf^

o' 5/jJ £

Our Prophet "peace be upon him" was forbidden to imitate him and Allah
Almighty said to him: " So wait with patience for the Command of your Lord,
and be not like the Companion of the Fish, when he cried out in agony." (AlQalam 48)
4 (@)
>3
ijjSo
^
Those differences go back in part to the difference of states and stations, and
in part to the preordained superiority given by Allah to some over others. In
confirmation of that, Allah Almighty said: " We did bestow on some Prophets
more (and other) gifts than on others." (Al-Isra* 55)

4

cr^lr***

3-Llj ^

And: "Those Messengers We endowed with gifts, some above others: to one
of them Allah spoke; others He raised to degrees (of honour)." (Al-Baqarah 253)
>•
£*33 ^Cr4
'Jp f
hljai
^
Jesus "peace be upon him" was among those given superiority, and due to his
being pampered, he greeted himself saying: "So Peace is on me the day I was
born, the day that I die, and the day that I shall be raised up to life (again)!"
(Maryam 33)

4©^

f3o

fyj^Aj fy

}

This from him was out of elation for what he contemplated while being in the
station of intimacy.
As for John, son of Zechariah "peace be upon him", he was made to stand in
the position of fear and shyness, and thus he did not speak until his Lord
Almighty praised him saying: " So Peace on him the day he was born, the day that
he dies, and the day that he will be raised up to life (again)!" (Maryam 15)

}yi

}yi Aj

aIIp jLiLj }

Consider also how He Almighty tolerated from the brothers of Yusuf "peace
be upon him". According to a religious scholar: I have counted about forty two
sins committed by them, some more severe and mortal than others, beginning
from their statement as related by Allah Almighty: "Truly Joseph and his brother
are loved more by our father than we: but we are a goodly body! really our father
is obviously wandering (in his mind)! (Yusuf 8)

4 ©oj

l?

(3J<4-^

yA iyii A ^

But He Almighty excused them, and forgave for them, unlike the case of
Uzair in which He did not tolerate from him only one question he asked about
the Divine decree, and he was said to have been omitted from the register of
Prophets. Similarly, Bal’am Ibn Ba'ura' was from among the leading learned
religious scholars and when he devoured this world for the religion, this was not
tolerable from him.

509
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
Asif was among the transgressors against himself, and his sins were corporal,
and Allah Almighty forgave him. In this respect, it is reported that Allah
Almighty revealed to Solomon "peace be upon him": "O chief of worshippers,
and the son of the main ascetic! To which time would your maternal cousin Asif
continue to disobey Me and I forbear him? By My Honor, if I seize him, I would
make him a lesson to be considered by those to come after him." When Asif
entered upon Solomon "peace be upon him" he told him of what had been
revealed to him by Allah Almighty. He came out until he ascended a sandhill and
raised his head and hands towards the sky and said: "O my God and Master! You
are what You are, and I am what I am. How should I repent unless You accept
my repentance, and how should I become infallible? Unless you protect me,
surely, I would return to sin." Allah Almighty then revealed to him: "You have
told the truth O Asif] You are only what you are, and I am what I am. I accept
repentance, and I have turned to you in repentance; and I am Oft-Turning, Most
Merciful."
That is the established way of Allah Almighty in His creatures: He gives some
superiority and priority over others. Those stories are mentioned in the Qur'an in
order to know the eternal established way of Allah in His servants who passed
away. The Qur'an has nothing but that it is a light and guidance, in which Allah
Almighty shows Himself to His creatures: sometimes by exaltation like His
statement: " Say: He is Allah, the One and Only; Allah, the Eternal, Absolute; He
begets not, nor is He begotten; And there is none like unto Him." (Al-Ikhlas 1-4)

4 Ofj_>' *

^@

^O

^O

^

And sometimes by the attributes of His Glory like His statement: " Allah is
He, than Whom there is no other god; the Sovereign, the Holy One, the Source
of Peace (and Perfection), the Guardian of Faith, the Preserver of Safety, the
Exalted in Might, the Irresistible, the Supreme: Glory to Allah! (High is He)
above the partners they attribute to Him. He is Allah, the Creator, the Evolver,
the Bestower of Forms (or Colours). To Him belong the Most Beautiful Names:
whatever is in the heavens and on earth, does declare His Praises and Glory; and
He is the Exalted in Might, the Wise." (Al-Hashr 23-24)

ji&jriydr
(jj C /*J

,p»jT

•$) sj)
ii

i$jCiTjpjT *lii 3> ^

>
^

And sometimes by showing to them His threatening and hopeful acts and
reciting to them His established way in His enemies and allies like His statement:
IMI
See you not how your Lord dealt with the 'Ad (people) Of the (city of) Iram,
with lofty pillars, The like of which were not produced in (all) the land?" (Al-Fajr
6-8)
And: " See you not how your Lord dealt with the Companions of the
Elephant? Did He not make their treacherous plan go astray? And He sent

The quarter of the saviors
510
against them flights of Birds, Striking them with stones of baked clay. Then did
He make them like an empty field of stalks and straw, (of which the corn) has
been eaten up." (Al-Fil 1-5)

part two: contentment
Explication of contentment with the fate of Allah Almighty: Its meaning and
real nature, and what is narrated about its excellence
It should be known to you that contentment is among the fruits of love, and
one of the highest stations of the nearest to Allah Almighty. But at the same time,
its meaning and real nature are abstruse on the majority of people, and none
perceives it but those endued with the talent of interpretation and religious
understanding. Indeed, some denied contentment
with
what opposes
inclination, under pretext that were one to be contented with all things as being
acts of Allah Almighty, this requires that he should necessarily be contented with
disbelief and sins. By this illusion, some were deceived, and claimed that
contentment with disobedience and wickedness, and leaving objection and
disapproval is to admit the fate of Allah Almighty. Were those mysteries to be
disclosed to such as restricts his vision only to the hearsay of the apparent
matters of Sharia, surely, the Prophet "peace be upon him" would not have
invoked for Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them" saying: "O Allah! Endow
him with the faculty of religious comprehension and teach him the (talent of)
interpretation." (Al-Bukhari).
Let us then begin with discussing the following:
Explication of excellence of contentment
Relating the tales of the contented
Explication of real nature of notion of contentment with what opposes
inclination, and what is thought to belong to contentment and it is not of it, like
leaving invocation and silence from sins and disobedience.

CHAPTER ONE
EXPLICATION OF VIRTUE OF CONTENTMENT
From the Holy Quran, a mention may be made of the statement of Allah
Almighty: " Allah well-pleased with them, and they with Allah: that is the great
salvation, (The fulfillment of all desires)." (Al-Ma'idah 119)

40

l**03

^

In confirmation of that, He Almighty said: "Is there any Reward for Good
other than Good?" (Ar-Rahman 60)

40

>

The utmost degree of good is the Allah's good pleasure with His servant,

511
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment ----------------which is the fruit of the servant's contentment with his Lord Almighty.
He Almighty further said: "Allah has promised to Believers - men and women
- Gardens under which rivers flow, to dwell therein, and beautiful mansions in
Gardens of everlasting bliss. But the greatest bliss is the Good Pleasure of Allah:
that is the supreme felicity." (At-Tawbah 72)

4

y* dll’5

l 4AjT T jA O 'yiojj OJJZ

Here, Allah Almighty made the good pleasure superior to the Gardens of
Eden, just as He raised His remembrance over prayer in His statement: "
establish regular Prayer: for Prayer restrains from shameful and unjust deeds; and
remembrance of Allah is the greatest (thing in life) without doubt. And Allah
knows the (deeds) that you do." (Al-Ankabut 45)
j* jjj

lj t

I ^ . jp
^

Ojl yO.I I ^ • jj 5jly? 11

^

0Jxik’4i)lj j^=>\ 4jjl

As well as the contemplation of the remembered in prayer is greater than the
prayer itself, of a surety, the good pleasure of the Lord of Paradise is greater than
Paradise itself, for it is the utmost finale of the inhabitants of Paradise.
It is narrated in a particular Hadith that the Prophet "peace be upon him"
told that Allah Almighty rises (with His Glory) to the faithful believers and says
to them: "Ask Me for whatever you like." They say: "We ask for Your good
pleasure." (Al-Bazzar and At-Tabarani on the authority of Anas). Their request
for good pleasure after vision is the greatest preference.
As for the servant's contentment, we are going to explain its real nature.
Concerning the good pleasure of Allah with the servant, it is different, though
close in meaning to His love for him. But it is impermissible to be uncovered
here, for the people's understanding falls short of perceiving it, and anyone of
them has the power to perceive it keeps it within himself.
In sum, there is no rank superior to the vision of Him Almighty, and those
who ask Him for His good pleasure, would do so in order to ensure their
permanent vision of Him Almighty. The bliss of vision then is the highest finale
and the greatest ambition, and when they are commanded to ask for more, they
would not ask but to ensure the permanent vision of Him, for they know that the
good pleasure is the cause of permanent removal of the veil.
Allah Almighty said too: " There will be for them therein all that they wish,
and more besides in Our Presence." (Qaf 35)

4 (jp) £>• £-43 tr4 bjt&i L

^

According to a commentator: "At the time of this more besides, the
inhabitants of Paradise would receive three wonderful things from the Lord of
the worlds: the first is a gift from Allah Almighty, the like of which they do not
have in the Garden, as confirmed by the statement of Allah Almighty: " Now no
person knows what delights of the eye are kept hidden (in reserve) for them, as a
reward for their (good) Deeds." (As-Sajdah 17)

The quarter of the saviors

512
4. Sjj 0^- \y'6 iLj ^jrT

2/ o?

C^>“' L* «j—®j (J" ^ $

The second is their being saluted with peace by their Lord Almighty, and this
is more excellent than the gift they would receive. In confirmation of that, Allah
Almighty said: ""Peace!" a Word (of salutation) from a Lord Most Merciful!" (Ya
Sin 58)
The third is the statement of their Lord to them: "I am well-pleased with
you." This would be, of a surety, greater than both the gift and salutation, as
confirmed by His saying: But the greatest bliss is the Good Pleasure of Allah: that
is the supreme felicity." (At-Tawbah 72)

I.e. greater than the bliss of Garden in which they are.
That is the excellence of the good pleasure of Allah with the servant, and it is
a fruit of his contentment with Allah Almighty.
As for the narrations, a mention may be made of the following:
It is narrated that the Prophet "peace be upon him" asked a group of his
companions: "Who are you (in faith)?" they said: "We are believers." He asked
them: "What is the sign of your faith?" they said: "We persevere at the time of
adversity, give thanks at the time of prosperity, and are contented with the fate of
Allah Almighty (no matter how good or evil it might be)." On that the Prophet
"peace be upon him" said to them: "You are really believers, by the Lord of the
Ka'bah."
According to another version, he "peace be upon him" said: "Those are wise
learned scholars who are about to (attain the rank of) Prophets because of their
religious comprehension."
It is further narrated that the Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "Blessed be
he who is guided to Islam and his sustenance barely suffices for his minimum
requirements of living, with which he is contented." (At-Tirmidhi on the
authority of Fadalah Ibn Ubaid).
It is also narrated that the Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "Whoever is
contented with the little sustenance from Allah Almighty, Allah then would be
contented with the little deed from him." (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the
authority of Ali Ibn Abu Talib).
It is narrated on the authority of one from the household of the Prophet
"peace be upon him": “Verily, if Allah Almighty loves a servant, He would try
him; and if he keeps patient, He would select him; and if he is contented, He
would choose him.” (Sahib Al-Firdaws on the authority of Ali).
It is further narrated that the Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "When it
is the Day of Judgement, Allah Almighty would create wings for a group of
my people to fly therewith from their graves to the Garden of Paradise to
graze and enjoy in them as they like. The angels would ask them: "Plave you
seen the reckoning?" they would say: "We have not seen any reckoning." They
would further ask them: "Have you crossed the bridge (that is over the Hell)?”

513
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
they would answer: "We have not seen any such bridge." They would ask
them once again: "Have you seen the Hell?" they would answer: "We have
seen anything like that." The angels would then ask them: "To which people
do you belong?" they would say: "To the people of Muhammad "peace be
upon him"." They would say to them: "We beseech you by Allah to tell us
about your deeds in the world." They would say: "We had two characteristics
because of which we have attained that rank by virtue of Allah's mercy." They
would ask them: "What are those?" they would say: "Whenever we were in
seclusion, we felt shy of disobeying Him, and we were contented with the
little that was doomed to us." On that the angels would say to them: "Then,
this rank is due to you." (Ibn Hibban on the authority of Anas; but it is
rejected since it contradicts the statement of Allah Almighty in the Qur'an: "
Not one of you but will pass over it: This is, with your Lord, a Decree which
must be accomplished." (Maryam 71)
4
ifift 34 l+L>- six/) ijso!3 ^
The Prophet "peace be upon him" further said in another narration: "O
assembly of poor! Be contented with Allah Almighty from the depth of your
hearts, perchance you would obtain the reward of your poverty, otherwise, you
would obtain nothing."
It is narrated from the children of Israel that they said to Moses "peace be
upon him": "Ask your Lord for a thing which, if we do, He would be wellpleased with us because of it." Moses "peace be upon him" said: "O my God!
You have heard what they said." On that he said: "O Moses! Tell them to be
contented with Me." This is attested by the statement of our Prophet Muhammad
"peace be upon him": "Whoever likes to know what he has with Allah Almighty,
let him first consider what Allah Almighty has with him, for the position of a
servant in the Sight of Allah Almighty is determined by the position of Allah
Almighty in the heart of the servant." (Al-Hakim on the authority of Jabir).
It is narrated from the news of David "peace be upon him" that Allah
Almighty said to him: "What do My allies have to do with their concern in this
world? Indeed, concern removes from their hearts the sweetness of the private
talk with Me. O David! My love for My allies should make them spiritual, not
distressed (with anything evil in this world)."
It is narrated that Moses "peace be upon him" said: "O Lord! Guide me to a
thing in order to do and obtain Your good pleasure because of it." Allah
Almighty revealed to him: "My good pleasure lies in what you dislike, and in no
way could you persevere for what you dislike." Moses "peace be upon him" said:
"O my Lord! Guide me to it." He said: "My good pleasure lies in your
contentment with My fate."
Moses "peace be upon him" said in his private talk with Allah Almighty:
"O Lord! Which of Your creatures is the dearest to You?" He said: "He, who,
if I even take away his beloved from him, would remain in agreement with
Me." He further asked him: "Then, which of Your creatures is that with
whom You are displeased?" He Almighty said: "He who seeks My guidance of
him to anything, and when I doom anything to him, he would be displeased
with My fate."

The quarter of the saviors
What is more severe than that is narrated, as Allah Almighty says: "I am Allah
and there is no god other than Me. Whoever does not persevere on My trial, does
not give thanks for My favor, and is not contented with My fate, then, let him
take a lord other than Me." (At-Tabarani and Ibn Hibban on the authority of Abu
Hind Ad-Dari).
More severe is the narration in which our Prophet "peace be upon him"
related from Allah Almighty that He says: "I have decreed the matters,
manipulated the affairs, and perfectly made all things: Whoever is contented,
would obtain My good pleasure with him until he meets Me; and whoever is
displeased would incur upon himself My displeasure with him until he meets
Me." (This narration is reported but with different wording by At-Tabarani on
the authority7 of Abu Umamah).
According to a famous narration: Allah Almighty says: "I created both good
and evil: Blessed be he whom I created for good and made good run on his hand;
and woe to him whom I created for evil and made evil run on his hand; and woe
to him who says disapprovingly: 'Why and how'." (Ibn Shahin on the authority of
Abu Umamah).
It is narrated that one of the previous Prophets kept complaining to Allah
of poverty, hunger and lice for ten years, and he received no answer. Then,
Allah Almighty revealed to him: "How many your complaints are! As such
your beginning was with Me before I created the heavens and the earth; and
as such it went forward for you from Me; and as such I decreed upon you
before I created this world: do you like Me to repeat the creation of this world
for your sake, or do you like Me to replace the decree for your sake in order
for what you like to prevail over what I like? By My Honor and Glory! If such
complaints lurk in your breast once again, I would erase you from the register
of Prophets."
It is further narrated that one of the young children of Adam "peace be upon
him" used to ascend and descend on his back playfully, while he was lowering his
head to the ground motionless and silent. One of his sons said to him: "O my
father! Do you not see what this child is doing with you? Would that you forbid
him to do so!" he said: "O my son! I have seen what you have never seen, and
learnt what you have never learnt. I did a single movement, therewith I was
caused to descend from the abode of dignity to the abode of humiliation, and
from the abode of bliss to the abode of wretchedness; and I fear if I moved, I
would be afflicted with what I know not."
It is further narrated on the authority of Anas Ibn Malik "Allah be pleased
with him" that he said: "I served the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" for
ten years, during which he never said to me of anything I did not do why I did
not do it, or of anything I did why I did it, nor did he say of anything which was,
would that it was not, or of anything which was not, would that it was; and if
anyone of his family disputed with me, he would say to him: "Let him, if anything
was decreed, it would have been." (both Al-Bukhari and Muslim).
It is narrated that Allah Almighty revealed to David "peace be upon him": "O
David! You will and I will, and of course what I will should be. So, if you admit
514

1

515
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
what I will, I would suffice you what you will, and if you do not admit what I will,
surely, I would trouble you in what you will, and nothing would be other than I
will."
As for traditions, a mention may be made of the following:
Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them" said: "The first of people to be
invited to Paradise would be those who praise Allah Almighty in whichever state
they are."
Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "I do not
rejoice but at what is decreed (by Allah Almighty)." He was asked: "What you
desire for?" he said: "What Allah Almighty decrees."
According to Maimun Ibn Muhran "may Allah have mercy upon him":
"Whoever is not contented with the fate (and doom of Allah Almighty), there is
no medicine for his foolishness."
According to Al-Fudail "may Allah have mercy upon him": "If you do not
persevere on the ordainment of Allah Almighty, you would not be able to keep
patient on what is doomed to yourself."
According to Abd-Al-Aziz Ibn Rawad "may Allah have mercy upon him": "It
is not necessary to eat parley bread with vinegar, nor to put on wool and hair, but
what counts is to be satisfied and pleased with Allah Almighty."
According to Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud "Allah be pleased with him": "To lick up a
piece of fire which might burn what it burns and destroy what it destroys is
dearer to me than to say of a thing which was, would that it was not, or of a thing
which was not, would that it was."
It is further related that a man saw a sore in the leg of Muhammad Ibn Wasi'
"may Allah have mercy upon him" thereupon he said to him: "I have pity for you
because of this sore." On that Muhammad said: "I have been grateful to this sore
since it appeared, for it did not appear in my eye."
It is related in one of Israeli tales that a man worshipped Allah Almighty for a
long time and once he was shown in a dream that 'so and so, the female shepherd
is your companion in Paradise.' He inquired about her, until he found her. He
hosted her for three days in order to check up her deed, during which he spent
the night standing (in prayer), whereas she spent the night sleeping, and he spent
the day fasting, whereas she did not fast. In the end he said to hen "Do you not
have any deed other than what I have seen from you?" She said: "By Allah, I do
nothing more than what you have seen, other than which I do not know." He
kept urging her to remember until she said: "I have only one simple characteristic,
i.e. I have never been in adversity and hoped to be in prosperity, and I have never
been sick and I hoped to be healthy, and I have never been in sun and I hoped to
be in the shade." The worshipper put his hand over his head and said: "Is this
only a simple characteristic? It is, by Allah, a great characteristic which servants
fail to attain."
According to one of the righteous predecessors: "Allah Almighty likes that if
He decrees a thing in the heaven, the inhabitants of the earth should be
contented with His decree."
According to Abu Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased with him": "The peak of faith

t

The quarter of the saviors
516
is to persevere on the judgment and be contented with the fate."
According to Umar "Allah be pleased with him": "I do not care in whichever
state of adversity or prosperity I become."
One day, Ath-Thawri "may Allah have mercy upon him" said and he was in
the house of Rabi'ah "may Allah have mercy upon her: "O Allah! Be well-pleased
with me." She said to him: "Do you not feel shy of Allah that you ask Him for
His good pleasure while you yourself are not contented?" he said: "I pray to Allah
for forgiveness." Ja'far Ibn Sulaiman said: "Then, when should the servant be
contented with Allah Almighty?" she said: "When his joy of calamity is equal to
his joy of favor."
According to Al-Fudail "may Allah have mercy upon him": "When both
giving and withholding become equal in one's sight, then, he has become
contented with Allah Almighty."
Ahmad Ibn Al-Hawari said: Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani said: "It is out of
Allah's bounty that He accepts from His servants the same as the servants accept
from their masters." I asked: "How is that?" he said: "Is it not that the servant's
purpose from the people is that his master should be pleased with him?" I
answered in the affirmative, thereupon he said: "Similarly, Allah's love for His
servants is that they should be contented with Him."
According to Sahl "may Allah have mercy upon him": "The fortunes of
servants from certainty (of faith) is in proportion to their fortune of contentment;
and their fortune of contentment is in proportion to the extent of their living
with Allah Almighty."
The Prophet "peace be upon him" said: ""It is out of Allah's wisdom and
glory that He made both satisfaction and joy in contentment and certainty (of
faith), and grief and anxiety in suspicion and discontentment." (At-Tabarani on
the authority of Ibn Mas'ud).

CHAPTER TWO
EXPLICATION OF REAL NATURE OF CONTENTMENT AND ITS NOTION
WITH WHAT OPPOSES INCLINATION
It should be known to you that the one who argues that nothing opposes
inclination except the patience, and that contentment is impossible, has indeed,
denied love. If love for Allah Almighty is assured, as it engages the whole
attention, no doubt, love develops contentment with the acts of the beloved,
from two perspectives:
The first is that his sense of pain becomes ceaseless, to the extent that no
matter how painful and aching his injury or wound might be, he feels not. The
typical example is the fighter who might receive injury and, in the thick of his
anger and fear, does not sense its pain, no matter how severe it might be, for
his heart is entirely engaged. Moreover, if one gets an operation of cupping on
his head while his heart is engaged, no doubt, he would feel no pain until the
cupper finishes from the operation. That is because if the heart is engaged in
anything to which it is wholly devoted, it perceives nothing other than it. The
same is true of the lover, whose attention is wholeheartedly devoted to the
vision or love of his beloved to the extent that anything to whose pain and grief

b

=

517
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
he is responsive while being in his normal state, might befall him, but he feels
no pain, no matter how painful or gloomy it might be, due to his engagement in
his love and attachment. This is in case he receives that from anyone else other
than his beloved: Then, what do you think if he receives it from his beloved?
Indeed, the engagement in love and attachment is one of the greatest
occupations that divert the heart from anything else. If it is imaginable in a little
pain caused by a simple love, it also could be imaginable in a severe pain caused
by a great love. Love, like pain, could be multiplied and intensified, and as well as
the love for the beautiful external pictures perceived by the sense of sight might
become strong, similarly, the love for the beautiful internal images perceived by
the light of insight might also become strong. To be sure, the beauty and glory of
the Divine presence are incomparable, to the extent that if something of it is
revealed to anyone, he might be astounded and become unconscious so much
that he might not sense anything occurring to him.
In this respect, it is narrated that the wife of Fath Al-Mawsili stumbled and
the nail of her toe got broken, thereupon she smiled. It was said to her: "Do you
not detect pain?" She said: "The pleasure of its reward has removed from my
heart the bitterness of its pain."
It is also related that Sahl had an ailment from which he used to treat others
but not himself, and when he was asked about that he said: "No doubt, the
beating of the beloved does not ache."
The other perspective is that he perceives and feels the pain, but at the same
time, he is contented with and desirous for it by his mind, even though it is
unfavorable to him by disposition. The typical example is the one who seeks
cupping and bloodletting: of course he feels the pain of both, but he is contented
with and desirous for it, and would further be under obligation to him who does
that for him. The same is true of the traveller in pursuit of profit: of course he
perceives the trouble and difficulty he might suffer from the journey, but at the
same time, his love for the fruit of the journey makes its difficulty and trouble
seem pleasant to him.
If one is afflicted with a trial by Allah Almighty, and he is certain that its
reward that is kept for him is more excellent that what he misses, he would be
contented with and desirous for it. Moreover, he would love it, and be grateful to
Allah for it. But it is possible that the love might be overwhelming so much to
the extent that the lover's fortune from the beloved is only to seek his good
pleasure, and nothing else. All of this is common among the people in their love
to each other. It gains its significance only by observing the beauty of the external
picture that is perceived only by sight, although this beauty is, in its reality, no
more than skin stuffed with bone, flesh and blood, and it contains impurities and
dirty things, and its beginning is from a dropped sperm, and its end to a putrefied
corpse. As for the instrument that perceives that external beauty, it is the
despicable eye which errs in what it sees in such a way that it magnifies the small
and minimizes the big, brings close what is far, and far what is close, beautifies
the ugly and defaces the beautiful.
If all of this is possible for the people in their relation with each other, then,

The quarter of the saviors
518
how should it be impossible in the love for the eternal beauty whose perfection is
unlimited, and which is perceived by the light of the insight which never errs nor
perishes by death in so much as it survives after death living in the Presence of
Allah, and joyful of the sustenance that is given to it by Allah Almighty? This is
clear if taken by consideration. It is also attested from the tales and statements of
lovers.
According to Shaqiq Al-Balkhi "may Allah have mercy upon him":
"Whoever sees the reward for adversity would never desire to have a way out
of it."
According to Al-Junaid "may Allah have mercy upon him": I asked Sari AsSaqati: "Should the lover detect the pain of trial?" He answered in the negative,
thereupon I asked: "And even if he is struck with the sword?" He said: "Yes, even
if he is struck with the sword seventy strikes, one after another."
Another one said: "I love everything that He loves, and even if He loves fire,
I love to enter fire (because He loves it)."
According to Bishr Ibn Al-Harith "may Allah have mercy upon him": "I came
upon a man who received one thousand lashes in the East of Baghdad and he
remained motionless and silent. Then he was carried to the prison. I followed
him and asked him: "Why have you received those lashes?" he said: "Because I
am a lover." I further asked him: "Then, why have you remained silent?" he said:
"Because my beloved was beside me looking at me." I said to him: "Then, what
do you think if you catch a glimpse of the Greater Beloved?" he made a cry so
loud that he fell dead out of it.
According to Yahya Ibn Mu'adh Ar-Razi "may Allah have mercy upon him":
"If the inhabitants of Paradise look at (the glory and beauty of) AJlah Almighty,
their eyes would go into their hearts, out of the pleasure they receive from their
vision of Allah Almighty for three hundred years and would never return to
them. Then, what do you think of hearts that fall in between His beauty and
glory? If they observe His glory, they would be taken by awe, and if they observe
His beauty, they would be lost."
According to Bishr "may Allah have mercy upon him" once again: At first, I
went to Abdan, and behold! There was a blind leper mad man who fell on the
ground out of epilepsy, and ants gathered to eat his flesh. I raised his head and
put it in my lap. When he restored his consciousness he asked: "Who is that
parasite who interferes between me and my Lord? Were He to cut me to pieces, I
would but increase in love for Him." Bishr commented: "Afterwards, I have
never disapproved any displeasure between a servant and his Lord."
According to Abu Amr Muhammad Ibn Al-Ash'ath: "The people of Egypt
remained four months during which they had no provision but their looking
at the face of Yusuf As-Siddiq "peace be upon him": Whenever they became
hungry, they would look at his face and be diverted by its beauty from the
feeling of the pain of hunger. Moreover, in the Holy Qur’an there is what is
more impressive than that, i.e. the women's cutting off their hands when they
saw him for their engagement in observing his beauty to the extent that they
felt no pain at all."

519
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
It is related that Jonah "peace be upon him" said to Gabriel: "Guide me to the
one who worships Allah most among the inhabitants of the earth." He guided
him to a man whom leprosy had torn his hand and feet and removed his sight.
Then, he heard him saying: "O God! You have caused me to enjoy of them as
much as You willed, and then deprived me of them as much as You willed, and
kept for me the hope in You, O Most Kind, Beneficent."
It is narrated from Abdullah Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with them" that one
of his children fell ill and he grieved for him so much that the people said about
him: “We fear this old man would be stricken if this child died.” Then, the child
died and Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with them" set out leading his funeral
procession, and none was cheerfiol than him. When Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased
with them" was asked about that he said: “I grieved just out of pity and mercy for
him, and when he died, we were contented with it.”
It is narrated on the authority of Masruq “may Allah have mercy upon him”
that he said: A man in the desert had a dog, a donkey and a cock. The cock used
to awaken them for Fajr prayer, and the donkey was used to transport water and
carry their tent for them, and the dog used to guard them. One day, a fox came
and took the cock, thereupon they grieved for it so much. The man was
righteous. He said: “May be it is good.” Then, a wolf came and split open the
belly of the donkey and killed it, for which they grieved so much. But the man
said: “May be it is good.” Then, the dog was afflicted and died, and he said: “May
be it is good.” In the morning of one day, they looked and behold! All people
surrounding them were taken as captives and they were left. Those who were
taken as captives were taken for what they had of the voices of dogs, donkeys
and cocks. In this way, the destruction of those animals was for their benefit as
decreed by Allah Almighty. Then, whoever knows what is hidden of the acts of
Allah should necessarily be contented with them.
It is further related that Jesus "peace be upon him" came upon a blind leper
paralyzed man whose flesh scattered about out of leprosy. He heard him saying:
“All perfect praise be to Allah Who saved me from many diseases with which He
tried a lot of His creatures.” Jesus "peace be upon him" said to him: “O man!
Which of trials I see that you do not have?” he said: “O Spirit of Allah! I am
better than him in whose heart Allah did not place what He placed in my heart of
His gnosis.” He said to him: “Indeed, you have told the truth. Give me your
hand.” He gave it to him and behold! He turned to be the best and the most
beautiful of people in features and appearance, after Allah Almighty had removed
from him all that he had. He then accompanied Jesus "peace be upon him" and
worshipped Allah while being in his company.
Once, the leg of Urwah Ibn Az-Zubair “may Allah have mercy upon him”
was cut off because of a severe disease that afflicted it, thereupon he said: “All
perfect praise be to Allah Who has taken only one from me. By Allah, if You
have taken one from me, You have left one for me, and if You have afflicted one,
You have cured the other.” Moreover, that night, he did not leave his devotional
recital.
Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased with him" used to say. “Both poverty and

The quarter of the saviors
520
richness are two riding mounts, and I do not care whichever of them I ride. If it
is poverty, patience lies in it; and if it is richness, generosity lies in it.”
It was said to a Gnostic: “Have you attained the finale of contentment with
Allah Almighty?” he said: “As for the finale, it is not, but I have attained the
station of contentment, to the extent that were He to make me a bridge over Hell
for the creatures to cross to Paradise and then were He to fill Hell with me in
fulfillment of His oath, and to be sacrificed for all the people, I would love that as
it is His decision, and be contented with it as it is doomed to me.”
It is narrated that Imran Ibn Al-Hussain "Allah be pleased with him" spent
the last thirty years lying on his back for he had ailment in his abdomen, and an
opening was made in his bed in order to be able to answer the call of nature while
lying. One day Mutarrif and his brother Al-Ala’ came to visit him and Mutarrif
went on weeping. He asked him: “Why are you weeping?” He said: “For this
difficult state in which you are.” He said to him: “Weep not, for as Allah
Almighty likes it to me, I should necessary like it for myself.” Then he said to
him: “Let me tell you something may Allah benefit you with it, but do not
announce it until I die. The angels come to visit me and I become affable with
them, and they greet me and I hear their salutation, therewith I know that this
trial is not punishment in so much as a cause of that great bliss. Whoever
witnesses this in his trial, how should he not be contented with it?”
When Sa’d Ibn Abu Waqqas "Allah be pleased with him" came to Mecca, and
he had lost his sight, the people hurried to him and ask him to invoke good upon
them, and his invocation used to receive answer from Allah Almighty. He
invoked for whomever asked him. Abdullah Ibn As-Sa’ib "Allah be pleased with
him" said: I went to him and he recognized me and said: “Are you the reciter of
the inhabitants of Mecca?” I answered in the affirmative. (He related a story
which ends with the following): I said to him: “O uncle! You invoke good upon
the people! Would that you invoke Allah for yourself that He should restore your
sight to you!” he smiled and said: “O my son! The fate of Allah Almighty is
dearer to me than my sight.”
On another occasion, a Sufi man lost his child and it was said to him: “Would
that you ask Allah Almighty to restore him to you!” on that he said: “To make
objection to His fate is more difficult on me than to lose my child.”
One of the worshippers said: “I committed a great sin because of which I
have been weeping for sixty years.” He strove his utmost in worship to repent
from that sin. It was said to him: “What is that sin?” he said: “I said once of a
thing which was, ‘would that it was not!”’
In sum, the internal insight is more truthful than the external sight, and
the beauty of the Divine Presence is greater and better than all kinds of
beauty. Every kind of beauty in the world is but a part of that primal beauty.
It is true that whoever loses his sight denies the beauty of pictures, and
whoever loses his hearing denies the pleasure of harmonious melodies and
tones. Similarly, whoever loses heart should necessarily deny these pleasures
which lie only in the heart.

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment

521

CHAPTER THREE
EXPLICATION OF THE FACT THAT INVOCATION NEVER
CONTRADICTS CONTENTMENT
It should be known to you that invocation is used in our worship and
remembrance of Allah Almighty; and this is attested by the many supplications
and invocations handed down from the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him"
therewith he used to supplicate on different occasions, and so did the Prophets
and Messengers before him, as we have already clarified in the Book of
Supplications. Moreover, Allah Almighty praised some of His servants who
invoke Him saying: " they used to call on Us with love and reverence, and
humble themselves before Us." (Al-Anbiya 90)
HJ iy)

LjSjj L_tj LifiJay ^

As for disapproval, unfavorableness of and displeasure with sins and
transgressions, Allah Almighty praised it, and further dispraised the people for
their satisfaction and contentment with that saying: " Those who rest not their
hope on their meeting with Us, but are pleased and satisfied with the life of the
Present, and those who heed not Our Signs." (Yunus 7)
4 (jfj)

p-*

iyioj} bflij ■djyr'ji “J

oj ^

He further said: " They prefer to be with (the women), who remain behind (at
home): their hearts are sealed and so they understand not." (At-Tawbah 87)
According to a famous tradition: "Whoever sees an evildoing which he
accepts seems as if he has done it."
According to another Hadith the Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "The
one who guides to evil is like him who does it." (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the
authority of Anas).
According to Abdullah Ibn Mas'ud "Allah be pleased with him": "Although a
servant might not do an evildoing, his sin is equal to its perpetrator." It was said
to him: "How is that?" he said: "That is because he accepts it."
According to another tradition: "If a servant is killed in the East (with no just
cause), and a man in the West accepts his killing, he would be a partner in killing
him."
As for good deeds and avoiding evil, Allah Almighty commanded the people
to compete each other saying: " and for this let those aspire, who have
aspirations." (AJ-Mutaftiffin 26)
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said: "Envy is
forbidden except in two things: a man whom Allah Almighty has given wisdom
which he circulates among the people, and teaches to them; and a man whom
Allah Almighty has given property and directed to consume it in its right places."
According to another version: "...and a man whom Allah Almighty has given
(the faculty of memorizing and reciting the) Qur'an with which he stands at night

The quarter of the saviors
522
and day (in prayer), thereupon the other says: "Were Allah Almighty to give me
the like of this, I would do the same as he does." (Al-Bukhari on the authority of
Abu Hurairah; and Muslim on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud).
As for aversion for the disbeliever, disapproval of their disbelief and
displeasure with their evil deeds, what is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an and
Hadith is beyond calculation. In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty said: " Let
not the Believers take for friends or helpers Unbelievers rather than Believers: if
any do that, in nothing will there be help from Allah: except by way of
precaution, that you may guard yourselves from them." (A1 Imran 28)
0* Vj

^

^ jA J-Ib tiil’i

Oji QA UJjl

^^

And: " O you who believe! take not the Jews and the Christians for your
friends and protectors; they are but friends and protectors to each other. And he
amongst you that turns to them (for friendship) is of them. Verily Allah guides
not a people unjust." (Al-Ma'idah 51)
y^'y->

ij**-*-

f

ftb*

j

bS IjxaI; jJiAli

^

i(0)}y&*** *^
And: " Thus do We make the wrong-doers turn to each other, because of
what they earn." (Al-An’am 129)

According to a certain tradition: "Indeed, Allah Almighty has taken the
covenant from every faithful believer to dislike all the hypocrites, and from every
hypocrite to dislike all believers."
The Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "The man would be gathered in the
company of whomever he loves."
The Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" further said: "Whoever loves a
people and takes them as friends and allies, would be gathered in their company
on the Day of Judgement." (At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu Qarsafah; and
Ibn Adi on the authority of Jabir "Allah be pleased with him").
The Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "The most trustworthy handhold of
faith is the love in (the religion of) Allah Almighty, and the aversion in (the
religion of) Allah Almighty." (Ahmad).
However, the evidences of that have already been mentioned in the love and
aversion in the religion of Allah Almighty in the Book of Etiquettes of
Companionship and the Book of Enjoining right and Forbidding evil.
But even, you may argue: "There are many Qur'anic Verses and Prophetic
narrations that command people to be contented with the fate of Allah
Almighty. Then, if sins are committed not by fate and decree of Allah
Almighty, this would be quite impossible, if not to affect monotheism; and if
they are committed by fate and decree of Allah Almighty, then, to dislike
them is to dislike the fate of Allah Almighty. Then, what is the way to
accommodate both contradictory notions? How could we accommodate both

523
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
contentment and aversion together?".
In reply to that, it should be known to you that this matter is abstruse on the
weak-minded whose understanding falls short of perceiving the mysteries of
knowledge. Some people were put to confusion because of it to the extent that
they saw that silence from evildoing is a station of contentment which they called
"good conduct", and of a surety, this is quite ignorance. Let us say that both
contentment and aversion contradict each other when they are on one thing from
one perspective. It is not contradictory to accept a thing from one perspective,
and dislike it from another perspective. For example, the enemy of you and of
your enemy might die: in this way, you dislike his death from the perspective of
his being the enemy of your enemy, and, at the same time, like his death from the
perspective of his being your enemy. Similarly, sin has two perspectives: one
pertains to Allah Almighty, as being an outcome of the act, preference, power
and will of Allah Almighty, and from this perspective, it should be accepted, in
submission to the Sovereign of the dominion, and satisfaction with what He
does. The other perspective pertains to the servant, as being a fruit of his earning,
described as evil, and given the sign that make it hateful to Allah Almighty and to
him; and from this perspective, it should be disapproved.
It is due on every servant who loves Allah Almighty to dislike such as Allah
dislikes, be displeased with such as Allah Almighty is displeased with, and
become enemy to such as Allah Almighty drives away from His presence. To be
sure, such as driven far from the degrees of closeness to Allah should be hateful
and loathsome to all lovers of Allah Almighty, in agreement with the beloved, by
showing aversion and anger with such as with whom the beloved is angry,
through driving him away from His presence.
In this framework we should understand all narrations and traditions about
love and aversion for the Sake of Allah Almighty, strictness and severity on the
disbelievers, and at the same time, contentment and satisfaction with the fate and
decree of Allah as being the fate of Allah Almighty. All of this stems from the
mystery of preordainment which we have no concession to disclose, i.e. both
good and evil are done by the will and power of Allah Almighty, but evil is
hateful and good is accepted. Whoever claims that evil is not from Allah is quite
ignorant; and the same is true of him who claims that both are from Him,
without differentiation between contentment (with good) and aversion (for evil):
this is out of deficiency of understanding.
It is impermissible to disclose this mystery, and it is rather preferable to keep
silent from it, and get disciplined with the etiquette of Sharia. In this issue, the
Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "Preordainment is the mystery of Allah
Almighty, so disclose it not." (Abu Na'im in his Hilyah on the authority of Ibn
Umar; and Ibn Adi on the authority of A'ishah, and both are weak). This pertains
to the science of Mukashafah (Revelation). But our purpose now is to explicate
the possibility to accommodate both contentment with the fate of Allah
Almighty on the one hand, and aversion for sins and transgressions on the other
hand, given that they are doomed by Allah Almighty. This purpose has become
clear with no need to disclose the mystery of preordainment

:

524

!

The quarter of the saviors

With this, it is also clear that supplication for forgiveness, and invocation for
protection from committing sins and transgressions and acquisition of all means
that help one fulfill his acts of religion do not contradict contentment with the
fate of Allah Almighty. Allah Almighty enjoined upon the servants to seek His
aid with supplication in order that invocation would extract from them the purity
of remembrance, submissiveness of heart, and compassion of imploration, so
that it would polish the heart, open the door of revelation, and bring about the
means of kindness of Allah Almighty. Similarly, carrying the mug and drinking
water do not contradict the contentment with the fate of Allah Almighty as
regards thirst. As well as drinking water to quench thirst is a cause manipulated
by the causer of causes, the same is true of invocation, which is a cause
manipulated and enjoined by Allah Almighty, the Causer of causes. We have
already mentioned that adherence to causes according to the established way of
Allah on earth does not contradict reliance. Thus, it also does not contradict
contentment for both contentment and reliance are adjacent. It is true that to
disclose trial by way of making a complaint, and disapproving it within the heart
to be done by Allah Almighty contradict contentment; whereas to disclose trial by
way of giving thanks for it, and showing the power of Allah Almighty does not
contradict contentment.
In this respect, one of the righteous predecessors said: "It is out of good
contentment with the fate of Allah Almighty not to say 'It is hot by way of
complaining." Of course, this applies to summer, and if it is in winter, it would
be by way of giving thanks. To be sure, complaint contradicts contentment with
the fate of Allah in whichever state one might be, and the same is true of
criticizing food which contradicts the contentment with the fate of Allah
Almighty, for to criticize the making is to cridcize the maker, and all things are
the making of Allah Almighty. Similarly, the statement: "Poverty is a trial and an
ordeal, dependents a cause of trouble and anxiety, and work a source of toiling
and difficulty", criticizes the contentment with the fate of Allah. Nay! One
should submit manipulation to the manipulator, and the dominion to its
sovereign, and rather say the same as Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: "I
do not care whether I have become rich or poor, for I do not know which of
them is good for me."

CHAPTER FOUR
EXPLICATION OF THE FACT THAT FLIGHT FROM OR CRITICISM
OF PLACES OF SINS AND DISOBEDIENCE DOES NOT DISAPPROVE
OF CONTENTMENT
It should be known to you that the weak-minded might think, though
falsely, that the forbiddance given by the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon
him" to leave the town in which the plague breaks out extends to imply
forbiddance to leave places where sins are committed, under pretext that each
of both is to flee from the fate of Allah Almighty; and this is quite impossible.
The reason which lies behind this forbiddance is that were the people to leave
the town after the breakout of plague in it, all the healthy would then go and

Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment

525

leave the sick neglected with none to take care of them, which would hasten on
their destruction. For this reason, the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him"
likened it, on many occasions, to flight from the batdefield. Were it to be flight
from the fate of Allah, he would not have given permission to those who are
close to such affected town to turn away and not enter it. We have already
mentioned the ruling on that in the Book of Reliance. Being so, it is clear then
that to flee from places where sins are committed is not to flee from the fate of
Allah Almighty. Nay! It is out of fate to flee from that from which one should
inevitably flee.
Similarly, to criticize the places where sins are committed, and the means
and causes that stimulate them for the purpose of defacing sins is not
blameworthy. The righteous predecessors used to do so to the extent that a
group of people agreed on criticizing Baghdad publicly, and calling for flight
from it. According to Ibn Al-Mubarak: "I have been to the East and West, and
have never seen a town more evil than Baghdad." It was said to him: "How is
that?" he said: "It is a town in which the favor of Allah Almighty is despised,
and disobedience of Allah Almighty is regarded with slightness." When he went
to Khurasan it was said to him: "How have you seen Baghdad?" He said: "I
have never seen in it but an angry policeman, a covetous trader, or a perplexed
reciter." Think not that this is backbiting, for he did not refer to a particular
person, but he simply intended to warn the people. He used to set out on
journey to Mecca, and his stay in Baghdad in expectation for the caravan was
sixteen days, and he used to give in charity sixteen Dinars, one for each day he
spent there.
Furthermore, a group of people such as Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz and Ka'b AlAhbar criticized Iraq. It is related that Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with them"
asked his freed slave: "Where do you live?" he said: "I live in Iraq." He said:
"What do you do in it? I heard that none lives in it but that Allah Almighty
assigns to him a companion of trial."
One day Ka'b Al-Ahbar "Allah be pleased with him" mentioned Iraq and said:
"There lies in it nine-tenths the evil and the chronic disease." It was said that
good was divided into ten parts, nine of which are in Sham and the remaining
tenth in Iraq, and that evil was divided into ten parts, nine of which are in Iraq
and the remaining tenth in Sham.
According to a traditionalist: We were sitting with Al-Fudail when a Sufi
wrapped in his garment came, and he was made to sit near him. He turned his
face to him and asked him: "From where are you?" he said: "From Baghdad." He
then turned away from him and said: "One of them comes to us in the uniform
of monks and when you ask him where he lives, he tells you that he lives in the
nest of wrongdoers."
According to Ahmad Ibn Hanbal "may Allah have mercy upon him": "Had it
not been for those disciples who are attached to us, we would have preferred to
come out of this town." It was said to him: "Then, where do you like to live?" he
said: "In the bordering openings."
This indicates to the fact that whoever is tried with a town in which sins Aare

The quarter of the saviors
526
committed, and good is litde, he has no excuse to continue to stay in it: on the
contrary, he should abscond it. In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty said: "
When angels take the souls of those who die in sin against their souls, they say:
"In what (plight) were you?" They reply: "Weak and oppressed were we in the
earth." They say: "Was not the earth of Allah spacious enough for you to move
yourselves away (from evil)?" Such men will find their abode in Hell, what an evil
refuge!" (An-Nisa' 97)

i ((^5)

Li

fJ* ^3 !Jii

0>c~L-j

dljlljli

oiAJl oj >

But if he is prevented because of dependents or relation with anything
whatever it might be, he should not be contented with his state in it, nor self­
reassured of it: But he should be always scared, with the following supplication
running on his tongue: "Our Lord! rescue us from this town, whose people are
oppressors; and raise for us from you one who will protect; and raise for us from
you one who will help!" (An-Nisa' 75)
iJlj 4i)i
^

jJ QA UJ

LxJ

L$1aI filial!

j ojLib yjj L.j }
0-iiA ^ L>-

That is because if wrongness becomes widespread, distress would descend
and destroy all the people including even the obedient among them, in realization
of the statement of Allah Almighty: "And fear tumult or oppression, which
affects not in particular (only) those of you who do wrong: and know that Allah
is strict in punishment." (Al-Anfal 25)
j "i All3 IJ-Ajlj ^
4
OjaJ: auT^ • jl Ij-dpTj
U*^y,4jl ^
However, there is difference among the religious scholars over which of the
three stations is the best: a man hopes to die out of longing for meeting Allah
Almighty, and a man prefers to live in order to serve his Lord Almighty, and a
man says: "I never prefer anything, but rather I would be contented with what
Allah Almighty wills." When this difference was raised to a Gnostic he said: "No
doubt, the contented one is the best, for he has the least aspiration."
One day, Wuhaib Ibn Al-Wurd, Sufyan Ath-Thawri and Yusuf Ibn Asbat
gathered together, and Ath-Thawri said: "Before today, I disliked the sudden
death, and today I hope to be die suddenly." Yusuf asked him: "What is the
reason for that?" he said: "For I fear affliction." Yusuf further said: "But as for
me, I do not like to survive longer." Sufyan asked him about the reason and he
said: "It may be that I would coincide with a day on which I would repent to
Allah Almighty and work righteous deeds." When Wuhaib was asked about his
opinion he said: "I never prefer anything. I like better what is dearer to Allah."
On that Ath-Thawri kissed him in between his eyes and said to him: "You are a
spiritual, by the Lord of the Ka'bah."

CHAPTER FIVE
EXPLICATION OF MANY STATEMENTS OF LOVERS
Allah Almighty said about His lovers (as related from Him): "My allies are

527
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
under My domes, and none knows them other than Me."
In confirmation of that, the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said:
"How many a disheveled one, covered with dust, having two coarse woolen
garments, of whom the people are careless, and if he takes oath that Allah should
do a thing, Allah Almighty would fulfill his oath." (Muslim on the authority of
Abu Hurairah).
The Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" further said: "The servant
would not complete his faith until the little becomes dearer to him than the
much, and to be anonymous dearer to him than to be famous." (Sahib Al-Firdaws
on the authority of Ali Ibn Abu Talhah).
The Prophet "peace be upon him" said too: "If anyone has the following
three characteristics, he shall have his faith complete: Not to fear, for the Sake of
Allah, the blame of a blamer, not to show off with anything of his deed, and if
two things are offered to him, one for the world and the other for the hereafter,
he would prefer the thing of the hereafter." (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the
authority of Abu Hurairah).
The Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" also said: "No servant will have
his faith complete until he obtains the following three characteristics: If he grows
angry, his anger would not cause him to deviate from the truth, and if he is
contented, his contentment would not cause him to do falsehood, and if he has
power over anything, he would not get what is not due to him." (At-Tabarani).
According to another narration, the Prophet "peace be upon him" said:
"Whoever is given the following three characteristics has been given the like of
what was given to the family of David "peace be upon him": Justice in both states
of contentment and anger, moderation in both states of richness and poverty,
and fear of Allah in secret and public."
Those are the conditions mentioned by the Messenger of Allah "peace be
upon him" for those endued with faith. Wonder at him who claims the
knowledge of religion and has in his heart even no atom of any of those
conditions. According to a certain tradition, Allah Almighty revealed to one of
His Prophets: "I only take for My bosom friend such as never wearies to
remember Me, is not engaged with anything other than Me, nor gives preference
to anything over Me, and even were he to be burnt with fire, he would not feel
the pain of the fire, and were he to be cut off by saws, he would not feel the pain
of iron."
Whoever does not attain this degree of overwhelming love, then, how should
he know what is beyond love of revelations and marvels? All of this is beyond
love, and love is beyond the perfection of faith; and the stations of faith and its
degrees of increase and decrease are beyond calculation. That is the significance
of the statement of the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" to Abu Bakr
As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased with him": "No doubt, Allah Almighty has given you
faith as much as is equal to the faith of all who believed in Him among my
nation, and He has given me faith as much as is equal to the faith of all who
believed in Him among mankind." (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of
Al-Harith Al-A'war from Ali Ibn Abu Talib).

The quarter of the saviors
According to another narration, the Prophet "peace be upon him" said:
"Verily, Allah Almighty has three hundred characteristics, and whoever meets
Him while having any of them, along with monotheism, would enter Paradise."
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased with him" said: "O Messenger of Allah!
Do I have any of them?" the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said: "You
have all of them O Abu Bakr; and the dearest of them to Allah Almighty is
munificence." (This is reported by At-Tabarani on the authority of Anas).
The Prophet "peace be upon him" further said: "I saw a balance hanging
from the sky and I was placed in a pan and my nation in the other pan, and I
overweighed them; and then Abu Bakr was placed in a pan, and the people of my
nation were brought and placed in the other pan, and I also overweighed them."
(This is reported by Ahmad on the authority of Abu Umamah).
However, the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" was wholeheartedly
devoted in love to Allah Almighty to the extent that his heart did not expand to
the intimate friendship of anyone else. In confirmation of that he "peace be upon
him" said: "Were I to take a bosom friend from the people, I would have taken
Abu Bakr as my bosom friend, but your companion (referring to himself) is the
bosom friend of Allah Almighty." (both Al-Bukhari and Muslim).
Now, it is of great benefit to conclude the book with many statements about
the love for Allah Almighty:
According to Sufyan: "Love (for Allah) is to follow the Messenger of Allah
"peace be upon him"" or to persist in remembrance of Allah according to
another one, or to give preference to the beloved according to a third, or to
dislike to survive in this world. All of those statements are but fruits of love. As
for love itself, we would not discuss it now.
One of the lovers said: "Love is a kind of attachment to the beloved, that is
beyond the power of hearts to perceive, and the faculty of tongues to express."
According to Al-Junaid: "Allah Almighty forbade love to anyone who is
attached to anything (other than Him)." He said once again: "Every love should
be for compensation and once the compensation disappears, it should necessarily
disappear."
According to Dhun-Nun: "Tell such as loves Allah Almighty to beware of
humiliating himself to anyone else other than Allah Almighty."
It was said to Ash-Shibli: "Describe to us the Gnostic and the lover (for
Allah)." He said: "As for the Gnostic, if he speaks (with what he knows), he
would be ruined; and as for the lover, if he keeps silent, he would be ruined."
One day, Rabi'ah Al-Adawiyyah said: "Who is that who could guide us to our
beloved?" one of her servant-maids said: "Our beloved is with us, but the world
has severed us from Him."
According to Ibn Al-Jalla': "Allah Almighty revealed to Jesus "peace be upon
him" the following: 'If I know the innermost secret of My servant and do not
detect in it the love for this world and the hereafter, I then would fill it with My
love, and safeguard it with My safeguard."'
According to Ibrahim Ibn Adham: "O my God! You know for certain that
Paradise does not counterbalance in my sight a mosquito's wing, in comparison

528

*

529
Book six: Love, longing, intimacy and contentment
with what you honored me of Your love, and removed my loneliness with Your
remembrance, and devoted me wholeheartedly to meditate Your magnificence
and grandeur."
According to As-Sari: "Whoever loves Allah Almighty lives; and whoever
inclines to this world deviates (from the right direction); and the foolish goes and
returns in vain; and the mindful is he who inspects his defects."
It was said to Rabi'ah: "How do you love the Messenger "peace be upon
him"?" she said: "By Allah, I love him so much, but my love for the Creator has
engaged me from the love for the creatures."
He "peace be upon him" was asked about the best of deeds, thereupon he
said: "To be contented with Allah Almighty, and love him."
According to Abu Yazid: "The lover loves neither the world nor the
hereafter, but loves only his Master and Lord Almighty."
It is said: "Love is to be close to the beloved joyfully and cheerfully."
It is further said: "The lover is dealt with according to four ranks: love, ,
reverence, modesty and exaltation, and the best of them all are exaltation and
love for both are brought with the inhabitants of Paradise in Paradise, and the
others are taken away from them."
According to Haram Ibn Hayyan: "If the faithful believer knows Allah
Almighty, he loves Him, and once he loves Him, he devotes himself in love to
Him, and once he detects the sweetness of devotion to Him, he does not look at
this world lustfully nor at the hereafter desirously, since this sweetness detains
him in this world, and relieves him in the hereafter."
According to Abdullah Ibn Muhammad: I heard a worshipping woman saying
while shedding tears: "By Allah, I have detested this life, so much that were death
to be a commodity, I would buy it out of longing for Allah Almighty and in love
for meeting Him." I asked her: "Are you confident of your work?" she said: "No,
but because I love Him and have good assumption of Him, do you think He
would punish me and I love Him?"
It is related that Allah Almighty revealed to David "peace be upon him":
"Were those who turn back from me to know how I expect them, how I am kind
to them, and how I have longing for them to leave sins, surely, they would have
died out of longing for me, and their joints would have been cut off because of
My love. O David! This is My will concerning those who turn back from Me,
then, what do you think about My will concerning those who turn to Me (in
love)? O David! The servant needs Me most when he dispenses with Me, and I
am the Most Merciful for My servant when he turns back from Me, and My
servant becomes the most excellent when he returns to Me."
According to Abu Khalid As-Saffar: One of the Prophets met a worshipper
and said to him: "O assembly of worshippers! You act upon a thing upon which
we, company of Prophets, never act. You act upon fear and hope, whereas we act
upon love and longing (for Allah Almighty)."
According to Ash-Shibli: Allah Almighty revealed to David "peace be upon
him" the following: "O David! My remembrance is available only to those who
remember Me, My Paradise to these who obey Me, My visit to those who have

The quarter of the saviors
530 ----------------------------------------------------------longing for Me, and I am for the lovers in particular."
Allah Almighty revealed to Adam "peace be upon him": "O Adam! Whoever
loves a beloved should necessarily give trust to his words, and whoever is affable
with a beloved should necessarily be contented with his deeds, and whoever has
longing for his beloved should necessarily be serious in his movement towards
him."
Al-Khawas used to strike his breast with his hand saying: "How longing I am
for Him Who sees me and I see Him not!"
According to Al-Junaid: "The Prophet Jonah "peace be upon him" kept on
weeping until he became blind, on standing (the night in prayer) until his body
got curved, and on praying until he got paralyzed, and then said: 'By Your Honor
and Glory! Had there been an ocean of fire between You and me, I would have
plunged it and crossed it to You out of longing for You."'
It is narrated on the authority of Ali Ibn Abu Talib "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: I asked the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" about his
sunnah and he said: "Gnosis is my capital, reasoning the foundation of my
religion, love (for Allah) my basis, longing (for meeting Him) my vehicle,
remembrance of Allah my companion, confidence my treasure, grief my friend,
knowledge my weapon, patience my garment, contentment my booty, destitution
(a source of) my pride, asceticism my craft, certainty (of faith) my power,
truthfulness my intercessor, obedience my love, Jihad my conduct, and the
comfort of my eyes is in prayer."
That is the end of the Book of Love, Longing, Intimacy and Contentment,
and it would be followed by the Book of Intention, Sincerity and Truthfulness,
Allah willing.

f I

!< ..m I i : irfmiTtimi. .cttnrymrt ?mhTi i nrrrj

|

J

It is the seventh book of the quarter of saviors of the revival of religion’s
sciences
In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful
We praise Allah Almighty with gratitude, believe in him with certainty of
faith, and admit His Oneness with truth. We testify that there is none worthy of
worship except for Allah, the Lord of the worlds, the Creator of the heavens and
the earth, Who obligates men, jinn and angels to worship Him Alone with
sincerity as confirmed by His statement: “And they have been commanded no
more than this: To worship Allah, offering Him sincere devotion, being True (in
faith).” (Al-Bayyinah 5)
4 Cp) **1
ijj-LJ ij£i L}
So, Allah Almighty does not want but the sincere religion, for He is not in
need of the partnership of all partners.
Allah’s blessing and peace as much as it could be upon His Prophet
Muhammad, the chief of the Messengers, and upon all the Prophets and
Messengers, and upon his pure and good family and companions.
Coming to the point: It has been revealed to the masters of heart, by the
insight of faith and the light of the Qur’an that happiness could be obtained only
by knowledge and worship. All the people are given to destruction except for the
learned, and all the learned are given to destruction except for the workers
among them, and all workers are given to destruction except for the sincere (in
faith) among them, and the sincere are on the verge of a great risk: work without
intention is a great suffering, and intention without sincerity is showing off, that
is closer to hypocrisy and disobedience, and sincerity without truthfulness and
certainty is useless. In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty said about every deed
with which Allah Almighty is not intended: “And We shall turn to whatever
deeds they did (in this life), and We shall make such deeds as floating dust
scattered about.” (Al-Furqan 23)
By my life, how should one make good his intention who does not know the
real nature of intention? How should one whose intention is good be sincere
unless he knows the real nature of sincerity? Moreover, how should a sincere one
be demanded to be true to his sincerity unless he knows the real nature of
truthfulness? So, the first duty of every servant who wants to obey Allah
Almighty is to learn intention in order to obtain knowledge, and then make it
good by work, after understanding the real nature of sincerity and truthfulness,
which are the servant’s means to salvation. We are going to explicate those
meanings in three chapters:
Chapter one: On the real nature and meaning of intention
531

532

The quarter of the saviors
Chapter two: On sincerity: Its real nature and meaning
Chapter three: On the real nature and meaning of truthfulness

CHAPTER ONE: INTENTION
It has the following topics:
Explication of virtue of intention
Explication of the real nature of intention
Explication of the fact that intention is better than deed
Explication of deeds that are related to the intention
Explication of the fact that intention is beyond choice

Explication Of Virtue Of Intention
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said: “Deeds
(their correctness and rewards) depend upon intentions, and every person gets
but what he has intended. So whoever emigrated for worldly benefits, or for a
woman to marry, his emigration is for what he emigrated for."” (Al-Bukhari on
the authority of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab).
It is further narrated that the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said:
“The majority of the martyrs from among my people are those who die on their
beds, and how many a man who is killed while fighting between both rows and
Allah Almighty knows best his real intention.” (Ahmad on the authority of Ibn
Mas’ud).
Allah Almighty further said: “if they wish for peace, Allah will cause their
reconciliation: for Allah has full knowledge, and is acquainted with all things.”
(An-Nisa’ 35)
Thus He Almighty made intention a cause of reconciliation.
The Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said: “Indeed, Allah Almighty
never regards your faces and property, but He rather considers your hearts and
deeds.” (Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah). He Almighty considers
hearts for they are the places of intention.
The Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" further said: “Verily, a
servant might do good deeds with which the angels ascend in sealed books,
and are put in front of Allah Almighty, thereupon He says: “Throw away this
book for he did not intend My Countenance with what it contains.” Then He
calls the angels: “Write for him such and such deeds! Write for him such and
such deeds!” the angels say: “O Lord! He did nothing of that.” He Almighty
then says: “But he intended to do it.”” (Ad-Daraqatni on the authority of
Anas).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Kabshah Al-Anmari that he said: The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “The example
of (the people of) this nation is like the example of four persons: A man whom
Allah gives both property and knowledge, upon which he acts in his property,
which he spends on what is right; and a man whom Allah gives knowledge but
He gives him no property, thereupon he says: ‘Had I been given the like of what
so and so had been given, surely, I would have done in it (the property) the same

Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth

533

as he does/ Both are equal in the reward; and a man whom Allah gives property,
but no knowledge, and he misuses his property, which he spends on what is
wrong; and a man whom Allah gives neither knowledge nor property, thereupon
he says: ‘Had I been given the like of what so and so had been given, surely, I
would have done in it (the property) the same as he does/ Both are equal in sin/’
(Ibn Majah). Do you not see how the one who has not shared him who has just
with the intention in the good deeds as well as in sins?
It is further narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him"
that the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said when he set out for the
holy batde of Tabuk: “In Medina, there are people who, we neither cut a valley
nor trample a place that fills the disbelievers with rage, nor spend a spending, nor
are stricken by hunger, but that they would share us in (the reward of) that while
they are in Medina.” They asked: “How is that O Messenger of Allah and they are
not with us?” he "peace be upon him" said: “They have been detained by a legal
excuse, thereupon they have shared us with their good intention.” (Al-Bukhari
and Abu Dawud).
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased with him" that
the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said: “Whoever emigrates and he
intends anything with his migration, (the reward of) that (intention) would be for
him.” A man emigrated and married a woman from us, for which he was called
the Emigrant of Umm Qais. (This is reported by At-Tabarani).
According to a certain tradition, a man was killed in the Cause of Allah, and
he was called the Killed of the donkey for he fought a man to take his belongings
and donkey, and he was killed, and attributed to his intention.
It is narrated on the authority of Ubadah Ibn As-Samit "Allah be pleased with
him" from the Prophet "peace be upon him" that he said: “Whoever fights with
the intention of getting only a she-kid’s rope, he would have only (the reward of)
what he intended.” (An-Nasa’i).
It is narrated on the authority of Ya’li Ibn Umayyah that he said: My father
said: I sought the aid of a man to fight besides me, and he said to me: “No, unless
you fix a charge to me for that.” I fixed a charge for that to him. I made a
mention of that to the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" who said: “He
has from his world and hereafter only the charge you have fixed to him.” (AtTabarani and Abu Dawud).
According to an Israeli tale, a man came upon a heap of sandhills and it was a
time of starvation, thereupon he said (to himself): “Had they been foodstuff, I
would have distributed it among the people.” On that Allah Almighty revealed to
the Prophet of their time: “Tell him that Allah Almighty has accepted your
charity, appreciated your good intention, and given you reward for your hope of
being foodstuff and you would have given it in charity.”
According to a famous tradition: “Whoever intends to do a good deed and he
does not do it, it would be written as a good deed for him.”
It is narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr "Allah be pleased with
him” that the Prophet "peace be upon him" said: “Whoever intends only this
world, Allah Almighty makes poverty in front of him, and causes him to leave the

'

I
;
i

The quarter of the saviors
' 534
world while being the most covetous of it; and whoever intends only the
hereafter, Allah Almighty makes his independence within his heart, recompenses
him with what he loses in the world, and causes him to leave it while being the
most abstinent from it.” (Ibn Majah on the authority of Zaid Ibn Thabit).
It is narrated on the authority of Umm Salamah "Allah be pleased with her"
that the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" made a mention of an army
which the earth would be caused to swallow up at Al-Baida’, thereupon she said:
“O Messenger of Allah! It would have such as forced and such as hired (to
fight).” On that he "peace be upon him" said: “They would be mustered
according to their intentions.” (This is reported by Muslim and Abu Dawud).
It is further narrated on the authority of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be
pleased with him" that he said: I heard the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon
him" having said: “Verily, those who fight each other would be raised according
to their intentions.” (This is reported by Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
It is also narrated that the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said:
“When both rows of fighters face each other, the angels descend and enlist the
people according to their ranks: so and so fights for the sake of this world, so and
so fights out of zeal, so and so fights out of fanaticism. Behold! Do not say then
that so and so was killed in the Cause of Allah. Indeed, whoever fights only in
order for the word of Allah Almighty to be superior really fights in the Cause of
Allah.” (Ibn Al-Mubarak ending it with Ibn Mas’ud; and Al-Bukhari and Muslim
on the authority of Abu Musa but with a different wording).
It is narrated on the authority of Jabir "Allah be pleased with him" that the
Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said: “Every servant would be raised on
the same intention on which he dies.” (This is reported by Muslim).
It is further narrated on the authority of Abu Bakrah "Allah be pleased with
him" that the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said: “If two Muslims
face each other with theii swords, both the killer and the killed would be in the
fire (of Hell).” It was said: “O Messenger of Allah! That is the (destiny of the)
killer. Then, what is wrong with the killed?” he "peace be upon him" said: “He
also has the intention to kill his foe.” (both Al-Bukhari and Muslim).
It is also narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with
him" that the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said: ‘‘Whoever marries a
woman on a certain dower which he has no intention to pay, then, is regarded an
adulterer (in his relation with her); and whoever takes a loan which he has no
intention to pay back is considered a thief.” (Ibn Majah; and Ahmad on the
authority of Suhaib).
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said:
<cWhoever gets himself perfumed for the sake of Allah Almighty would come on
the Day of Judgement with his smell more pleasant than the smell of musk; and
whoever gets himself perfumed for the sake of anyone else other than Allah
Almighty would come on the Day of Judgement with his odor more stinking than
the odor of the carcass.” (Abu Al-Walid As-Saffar on the authority of Ishaq Ibn
Abu Talhah).
As for the traditions, a mention may be made of the following:

535

Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth

Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: “The best of deeds is to do what is
enjoined by Allah Almighty, to abstain from what is forbidden by Allah Almighty,
and make true one’s intention in what is with Allah Almighty.”
Salim Ibn Abdullah wrote to Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz the following message:
“It should be known to you that Allah Almighty is in the aid of a servant as much
as is in proportion to his intention: if one has his intention perfecdy good, the aid
of Allah to him would be perfect, and as much as it decreases, the aid of Allah to
him decreases accordingly.”
According to a righteous predecessor: “How many a little deed that becomes
great by the good intention; and how many a great deed that becomes little by the
evil intention.”
According to Dawud At-Ta’i: “piety is the ambition of the dutiful: If he is
attached to this world even by all of his organs, his good intention should
necessarily return him one day to good; and the reverse is true of the ignorant.”
According to Ath-Thawri: “They used to learn how to be sincere in their
intention to work in the same way as you learn work.”
According to a religious scholar: “Seek the intention for work before you seek
work, and as long as you intend good, you are good.”
One of the beginners on the path visited the religious scholars and said to
them: tcWho could guide me to a work to do relentlessly for the Sake of Allah
Almighty, for I would not like that an hour of night and day comes upon me
without being one of the workers of Allah Almighty.” it was said to him: “I have
found your need: do good for the Sake of Allah Almighty as much as is within
your capacity, and if you weary or intermit, then, intend to do it, for the intention
to do a thing is like doing it.”
A righteous predecessor said: “No doubt, the favors of Allah He bestows
upon you is beyond your calculation, and your sins are too hidden from you to
know. But at least, be repentant in the morning and evening, perchance (the sins
you commit in the intervals) between both ends of the day would be forgiven for
you.”
According to Jesus "peace be upon him": “Blessed be an eye which sleeps
with no intention to do evil, and gets up on no sin.”
According to Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him": “The people would
be raised on the Day ofJudgement according to their intentions.”
It was the habit of Al-Fudail Ibn Iyad that whenever he recited the statement
of Allah Almighty: “And We shall try you until We test those among you who
strive their utmost and persevere in patience; and We shall try your reported
(mettle)” (Muhammad 31)

4 Cl5Is**

}

He would repeat it while weeping and say: “O our Lord! If You try us, You
would expose our defects and tear the screens (therewith we conceal our
shortcomings).”
According to Al-Hassan: “It is the intentions that cause the inhabitants of
Paradise to abide in Paradise and the denizens of the fire to abide in the fire.”
According to Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him": “The little of deeds

h

!

|

The quarter of the saviors
536
therewith My Countenance is intended is regarded abundant, and the abundance
of deeds therewith anything else other than My Countenance is intended is
considered little.”
According to Bilal Ibn Sa’d: “A servant might say a statement of a faithful
believer, thereupon Allah Almighty would leave neither him nor his statement
until He regards his deed; and if he does a deed, Allah Almighty would not
leave him until He regards his abstention (from evil); and if he abstains (from
evil), Allah Almighty would not leave him until He regards his intention: if his
intention is good, then, it is more fitting that anything else would be good
accordingly.”
In sum, intention is the fundament of work. Work lacks intention in order to
become good thereby as long as the intention itself is good, even if work is
impeded by an impediment.

Explication Of Real Nature Of Intention
It should be known to you that intention is a state in the heart which has
two sides: knowledge and work. The knowledge is primary since it is its basis
and condition, and work follows it for it is its fruit and offshoot. However, any
work, i.e. any optional motion or quietness could be achieved only by three
things: knowledge, will and power. Of a surety, man does not will what he
knows not, for he should necessarily know what he wills, nor does he work
what he wills not, for he should necessarily will what he works. Will is that the
heart is moved to do what seems to agree with the purpose immediately or
lately. Man is created in a way that allows for some things to agree with him and
his purposes, and others to disagree from him and his purposes. Thus, he needs
to draw what benefits him and agrees with his purposes, and avert from himself
what harms and opposes him. Thus, he lacks to know and perceive the
beneficial and harmful things in order to be able to bring the former and flee
from the latter.
To be sure, whoever does not see food nor know it could not have it, and
whoever does not see fire could not flee from it. Allah Almighty then created
guidance and knowledge, and made for them means which are the external and
internal senses. Furthermore, if he sees food and knows that it agrees with him, it
does not suffice him to have it unless he inclines to, and desires for it. The
patient, for example, sees food and knows well that it agrees with his disposition,
but he could not get it in view of his lack of inclination to, desire and motive for
it.
In sum, Allah Almighty created in man the desire, inclination and will. But
even, this also does not suffice him. How many a man who sees food, has desire
and motive for it, but fails to get it, in view of his being powerless. Thus, Allah
created for him power and moving organs and parts of body in order to be able
to get it. An organ does not move but by the power, and the power lies in wait of
the stimulating motive, and the motive lies in wait of the knowledge and
perception, or assumption and belief, i.e. to think, almost with certainty, that a
particular thing agrees with one’s disposition. If one thus believes, almost with
certainty, that such a thing which agrees with his disposition should be done, the

Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth

537

will is raised which develops inclination; and once the will is raised, the power
soon starts to move organs, for power serves will, and will follows the belief and
knowledge.
Intention in this meaning is that quality which stands in the middle, i.e. the
will which causes one, due to desire and inclination, to do what agrees with the
purpose immediately or lately. The first motive is the required purpose, which is
the stimulating rationale and the intended desire, and the intent is to be
stimulated to do, and the work is the power’s being motivated in service of will to
move organs. But the power might be motivated by one motive, or by two
motives which gather together on one work, and in case it is motivated by two
motives, each one of both might be independent and sufficient alone to motivate
the power; or both might be inseparable of each other; or one of both might be
sufficient and the other only a supporting assistant. From this four divisions
spring. Let’s give an example for each of them.
The first is to have only a sole motive, such as the case in which a wild
animal attacks a man: thus, every time he sees it, he flees from the place where it
is. Nothing then disturbs him but to flee from the wild animal. That is because he
has seen the wild animal and learnt that it is harmful, which motivated him to flee
and have desire for that flight, thereupon the power was raised to do it. In this
way, it is said that his intention to leave the place is caused only by the flight from
the wild animal. This intention is called the sincere, and work upon it is called
sincerity to the motivating purpose. In other words, this purpose is free from
partnership of anything else.
The second is to have two motives, each of which is independent and
sufficient alone to raise the will. Its example from the sensible observation is
that two men co-operate to carry a thing, and each of them has of power as
much as is sufficient to enable him alone to carry the same thing were he to
carry it alone. Another example relating to our purpose is that one’s poor
relative begs something from him and he gives it to him because of his poverty
and relationship together, knowing that he would have given it to him had it
been only for his poverty, regardless of relationship, or had it been only for his
relationship, regardless of his poverty. Its sign is that a non-relative poor comes
to beg something from him, and a rich relative comes to beg something from
him, and he desires to give it to both equally. A third example is of him whom
the physician advises to leave food, and then the day of Ajrafah comes upon
him which he fasts knowing that had it not been even the day of Arafah, he
would also have left food in compliance with the diet; and had it not been even
a diet, he would also have left food in order to observe fast of Arafah. But both
motives here gathered together and caused him to do the act, in a way in which
the second motive is to accompany the first. Let’s call this the accompanying
motive.
The third is that both motives are inseparable in the sense that each one
alone is not sufficient to raise the will. An example for it from the visible
observation is that two weak persons co-operate to carry something which each
of them alone could not carry. An example for it to serve our purpose is that

The quarter of the saviors
538
one’s rich relative begs a Dirham from him and he does not give it to him, and a
poor non-relative begs die same from him and he also does not give it to him.
But if his poor relative begs the same from him, he would give it to him. In this
way what raises his will here is both motives together, i.e. both relationship and
poverty. Another example is of a man who gives in charity publicly in pursuit of
reward and people’s appreciation in a way that were it only for reward, it would
not be sufficient to raise his will to give in charity, and were the beggar a wicked
and there is no reward for giving him in charity, only showing off would not be
sufficient to raise his will to do it. But were both motives to gather together, they
would join in moving the heart to give in charity. Let’s call this kind the joining
motives.
The fourth is that one of both motives is independent and sufficient to raise
the will, whereas the other is not so, but since it is added to the first, it has a
supporting and assisting effect. An example for it from the visible observation is
that a weak person helps a strong one carry a thing, given that were the strong to
be alone, he would be able to carry it, whereas were the weak to be alone, his
power would not be sufficient to enable him to do it. An example for it to serve
our purpose is that a man has a devotional recital in prayer and a custom in
charity, and it happens that at their due time, some people attend, thereupon his
act is reduced because of their seeing him, given that he knows that were he to be
alone in privacy, he would not weary to do his deed, and that were his deed not
to be an act of worship, only showing off would not be sufficient to motivate
him to do it. This is something of suspicion with which the intention is stained.
Let’s call this kind the assistance.
In sum, the second motive might be accompanying, sharing or assisting. We
shall explain the ruling pertinent to each of them in our talk about sincerity. Our
purpose now is to make a mention of the divisions of intentions, since the deed
follows its motive, and is subject to the same ruling. For this reason, it is said that
‘(the rewards of) deeds depend on intentions’ because they are subject to their
ruling, and have no ruling in themselves.

Explication Of The Mystery Lying Behind The Statement Of The
Messenger Of Allah "Peace Be Upon Him": "The Believer's
Intention Is Better Than His Deed"
It should be known to you that it might be thought that the mystery that lies
behind such preponderance is the fact that the intention is hidden which none
knows but Allah Almighty, and the deed is apparent, and to be sure, what is done
in secret is superior to what is done in public. That is true. But that is not
intended here, for if one intends to remember Allah Almighty within his heart, or
thinks about the public interests of Muslims, then, the general implication of the
Hadith requires that the intention of thinking is better than thinking itself.
Furthermore, it might be thought that the reason for preponderance is that the
intention survives to the end of deed, whereas the deeds do not survive. But this
reasoning is weak since this would mean ultimately that the much deed is better
than the little deed, and that is not true. To be sure, the intention of the acts of
prayer might not survive except for a few moments, whereas the deeds survive;

Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth

539

and the general implication here requires that one’s intention should necessarily
be better than his deed. In a third interpretation, it might be said that it means
that the intention in itself is better than the deed in itself without the intention.
That is true, but it is unlikely to be intended here, since deed without intention or
what is done heedlessly has no good at all, and intention in itself is good, and the
preponderance here implies such as share in good.
The meaning is that every act of worship consists of an intention and a deed.
If the intention is good, and the deed is also good, in this way, the intention is
more effective and superior in such act of worship to the deed in it. Thus, the
Hadith means that the believer’s intention in his act of worship is better and
more effective than his deed in it. The purpose is that a servant has the freedom
of choice in his intention and deed, in which intention is better. That is the
significance.
But why intention is preponderant is a thing which none understands but he,
who learns the religion’s purpose and way and the impacts of the different ways,
and then compares the different traditions with each other in order to seem to
him in the end what is preponderant in relation to the purpose. For example,
whoever says that bread is better than fruits means that it is better in relation to
the purpose of sustenance and nourishment, a thing which none knows but he
who understands that nourishment has a certain purpose, which is health and
survival, in which the various kinds of food have different effects, and learns the
effect of each kind and compares effects with each other.
The acts of worship are nourishment of hearts, whose purpose is their cure,
survival, safety in the hereafter, and happiness and enjoyment of meeting Allah
Almighty. The real purpose then is the pleasure of happiness of meeting Allah
Almighty. None would enjoy the meeting of Allah Almighty but he who dies as a
lover for, and a Gnostic of Allah Almighty. However, none loves Him but he
who has gnosis of Him, and none is affable with his Lord but he who
remembers Him more often for a long time. Intimacy is obtained by the
continuous remembrance, and gnosis by the permanent meditation, and love
necessarily follows gnosis; and the heart would not be devoted to the permanent
remembrance and meditation unless it is disengaged from the occupations of this
world, and it would not be disengaged from its occupations unless one is cut off
its desires, until he turns to be inclined to and desirous for good, disinclined from
and disliking for evil.
One inclines to good deeds and acts of worship because he knows well that
his happiness in the hereafter is suspended on them. This inclination which
depends on knowledge is strengthened by regular work. Thus, by good deeds and
acts of worship, the hereafter is intended, and by evils, the world is intended. The
inclination of the soul to the hereafter good things and disinclination from the
worldly evils disengage it to remembrance and meditation. This is confirmed only
by doing the acts of worship regularly and leaving sins by organs for there is an
interactive relation between the organs and the heart. The heart is the intended,
and the organs are but means to it.
That is the significance of the statement of the Prophet "peace be upon him":

The quarter of the saviors
540
<cVerily, in die body there is a piece of flesh (i.e. the heart), and if it is good, all
parts of the body would be good accordingly.” (This is reported by Al-Bukhari
and Muslim on die authority of An-Nu’man Ibn Bashir).
The Prophet "peace be upon him" further said: “O Allah! Make right both
the guardian and die subjects.” By the guardian he meant the heart. In
confirmation of that Allah Almighty said: “It is not their meat nor their blood,
diat reaches Allah: it is your piety that reaches Him.” (Al-Hajj 37)
Piety is the inherent quality of the heart.
From diis perspective, the deeds of hearts should be better than the
movements of organs. Henceforth, intention should necessarily be better, for it is
the heart’s inclination to and desire for good. Our purpose of doing deeds with
organs is to habituate the heart to will and incline to good and be disengaged
from the worldly desires and occupations, and devoted to remembrance and
meditation. This then should be necessarily good for it achieves the intended
purpose. That is the effect of all acts of worship, whose purpose is to change
hearts and alter their qualities apart from organs. Think not, for example, that
putting the forehead on the ground in prayer has no purpose other than the
confirmation of the quality of humility in the heart. Whoever finds humility in his
heart and then is submissive with his organs in imitation of it, would surely
confirm it within himself; and similarly, whoever finds smoothness in his heart on
an orphan, and then passes his hand over his forehead and kisses him, this
smoothness would be confirmed within himself.
That is why deed without intention is useless, for whoever passes his hand
over the head of an orphan while he is heedless with his heart, no effect would
spring from his organs to his heart in confirmation of smoothness, and similarly,
whoever puts his forehead on the ground in prayer while he is engaged in the
worldly concerns, no effect would spring from his forehead to his heart in
confirmation of humility. Thus, worship without intention is useless and invalid.
But if it is intended by means of showing off or honoring anyone else other than
Allah Almighty, it would be more evil, for it does not confirm but the opposing
quality, i.e. showing off, whose suppression is required, on the exclusion of the
very quality whose confirmation is required.
That is the significance of the fact that intention is better than deed. It is
within this context that you should understand the statement of the Messenger of
Allah "peace be upon him": "Whoever intends to do a good deed which he does
not do, it is written as a good deed for him." That is because the intention of the
heart is its inclination to do good, and disinclination from the world and love for
desires, and that is the highest good deed, and work only confirms it. What is
intended by slaughtering the sacrifice is not the flesh and the blood in so much as
the heart's disinclination from the love for this world, as shown in offering it for
the Sake of the Countenance of Allah Almighty. This quality occurs when
intention is made, even if the work itself is impeded by an impediment: “It is not
their meat nor their blood, that reaches Allah: it is your piety that reaches Him.”
(Al-Hajj 37)

Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth

541

Piety is the inherent quality of the heart.
That is the significance of the statement of the Messenger of Allah "peace be
upon him" in the holy battle of Tabuk: "Some people in Medina shared us in (the
reward of) our jihad." That is because their hearts were, in their true intention of
good, offering property and soul, and desire for martyrdom in order for the word
of Allah to be superior, like the hearts of those who set out for Jihad. But they
differed from them in bodies for impediments unique to the causes that are
external to the heart, which is required only to confirm the qualities of the heart.
It is with those meanings that you should understand all Hadiths and
narrations we have mentioned in the virtue of intention. So, compare them with
those, in order for their mysteries to be uncovered to you.

Explication Of Deeds That Are Related To Intention
It should be known to you that deeds, be they act, saying, movement,
quietness, bringing what is beneficial, averting what is harmful, meditation,
remembrance, or so, are ultimately divided into three categories: sins, acts of
worship, and permissible deeds.
The first division: sins
They never change by intention, and the ignorant should not understand
that, though falsely, from the statement of the Messenger of Allah "peace be
upon him": "Verily, the (rewards of) deeds depend upon intentions", thinking
that sin might turn into an act of worship by intention, like him who backbites a
man in order to please the heart of another, or feeds an indigent from the
property of another, or builds a school, a mosque or any such public building
with an unlawful property, putting in mind that his purpose is good. That is out
of ignorance, and intention does not change his act from being injustice,
transgression and sin. His purpose of good via evil in opposition to Sharia is
another evil. If he knows it, then he is an obstinate to the requirements of
Sharia, and if he is ignorant of it, he then is disobedient with his ignorance,
since the pursuit of knowledge is an obligatory duty binding on every Muslim,
and the good deeds should be known for Sharia: then, how should evil be
good?
How far! What causes the heart to do so is the hidden desire and internal
inclination. If the heart, for example, is inclined to the pursuit of majesty and
attraction of the hearts of people, Satan then takes it as a means of dissembling.
That is the significance of the statement of Sahl "may AJlah have mercy upon
him": "No sin therewith AJlah Almighty has ever been disobeyed more severe
than ignorance." It was said: "O Abu Muhammad! Do you know anything more
severe than ignorance?" he said: "Yes, ignorance of ignorance." It is true for
ignorance of ignorance closes entirely the door of learning. Whoever thinks that
he is a learned, then, how should he learn anything? This then requires that the
best deed therewith Allah Almighty has ever been obeyed is knowledge; and the
head of knowledge is the knowledge of knowledge, as well as the head of
ignorance is the ignorance of ignorance.

The quarter of the saviors
Whoever does not know and distinguish the beneficial from the harmful
sciences, surely, he would engage in those flowery sciences in which the people
are involved, for they are their means to this world. That is the substance of
ignorance and the fountainhead of corruption. The point is that whoever intends
to do good with a sin out of ignorance, is not excused unless he is still a new
convert to Islam, and has no opportunity to learn. Allah Almighty said: " if you
realize this not, ask of those who possess the Message." (An-Nahl 43)

542

4 (JS

^

ojJaI *1jiizj £

The Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said: "No ignorant should be
excused for his ignorance, and it is unlawful for an ignorant not to seek to
remove his ignorance, nor for a learnt to conceal his knowledge." (At-Tabarani
and Abu Na'im on the authority of Jabir).
The ruler's building schools and places of worship with the unlawful property
is similar to the evil scholar's teaching knowledge to the wicked and foolish
among people, who are involved in dissoluteness and debauchery, and limit their
concern only to disputation with scholars and contest with the weak-minded,
attraction of the hearts of people and collection of the ruins and chattels of this
world, and unlawful usurpation of the property of rulers, orphans and indigent. If
those learn, they would be the travellers on Allah's way. This mischief might
spread on earth, and the evil consequence of it returns in the end to the teacher
who teaches knowledge to a particular one and he knows well his evil intention.
The result is that this teacher dies, and the traces of his evil remain among the
people for a long time after him. Blessed be he who, when he dies, all of his sins
die with him.
Wonder at the ignorance of such as says: "The (rewards of) deeds depend
on intentions, and by so doing, I intended only to spread the religious
knowledge: So, if the learner uses it in mischief, then, the sin is due on him and
not on me, for I intended only that he should seek its aid to do good." But it is
the love for authority and majesty, and pride of knowledge that allure it in his
heart, and Satan, by means of his love for authority and majesty, dissembles
him. By my life! What does he says to him who gives a sword and a horse to a
highway man and then says: "I wanted to give in charity out of generosity and
munificence, with the intention that he should fight in the Cause of Allah with
the sword and horse, given that to provide fighters with horses and steeds of
war is among the greatest acts of worship therewith one comes close to Allah
Almighty, and since he used those in cutting the highway on the people, it is he
and not I who is sinful."
There is consensus among the juristic scholars that this is unlawful, although
generosity is among the characters that is the dearest to Allah Almighty, so much
that the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said: "Allah Almighty has three
hundred moral characters, and if one comes close to Him by any of them, he
would enter Paradise, and from among them, generosity is the dearest to Him
Almighty." By my life! Why has this generosity then been made unlawful? Why is
it incumbent upon him to consider the presumption of the state of this
wrongdoer? If it seems to him, from his behaviors, that he uses good in evil, it

543
Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth
becomes binding upon him to seek to deprive him of his weapon and not to
provide him with another one. Knowledge is a weapon, therewith Satan and the
enemies of Allah AJmighty should be fought. But at the same time, the enemies
of Allah Almighty might be aided with it, I mean here inclination. Whoever
continues to give preference to his inclination over his religion, to his world over
his hereafter, and he fails to change it due to his lack of virtue, then, how should
he be provided with knowledge to give him access to his desires?
The righteous predecessors continued to inspect the state of such as
frequented them to take knowledge from them. If he seemed to indulge in any of
the supererogatory deeds, they would disapprove him and not deal with him
generously; and if he seemed to be wicked and dissolute, they would discard him
and abstain from teaching him, for their knowledge that whoever learns a
question upon which he does not act and then skips to another one, seeks
nothing but an instrument of evil. All righteous predecessors sought refuge with
Allah Almighty from the wicked knowledgeable of the sunnah, and not from the
wicked ignorant.
In this context, it is related that one of the companions of Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal "may Allah have mercy upon him" used to frequent him for long years
and then Alimad happened to turn away from him, and abstained from talking
to him. He continued to ask him about the reason for his changing attitude
towards him and he told him not. But in the end he said to him: "I was
informed that you had covered with clay the external side of the wall of your
house and by so doing, you had taken as little as a finger's breadth, which is the
thickness of the clay, from the street of the Muslims. Thus, you are unfitting to
transmit knowledge."
In sum, the statement of the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him": "The
(rewards of) deeds depend upon intentions" is unique to the acts of worship and
permissible deeds, apart from sins. Both acts of worship might turn into sins by
the intention, and permissible deeds might turn into an act of worship or a sin
also by intention, unlike the sin which never turns into an act of worship by
intention.
The second division: acts of worship
They are related to intentions in terms of their validity and multiplying virtue.
In order to be valid In principle, one should intend thereby only to worship
Allah Almighty. If his intention is showing off, it turns into a sin. As for
multiplication of virtue, the more there are good intentions, the more the virtue
of the act of worship is multiplied, for by a single act of worship one might
intend to do many good things, and thus have a reward for each one of them.
Each has a good deed, and each good deed is multiplied ten times and more
according to the tradition. A typical example is to sit in the mosque: It is an act of
worship by which one might intend many good things, until it becomes one of
the virtuous deeds of the pious, therewith he attains the ranks of the nearest (to
Allah Almighty).
The first is to believe that it is the house of Allah Almighty and such as
enters it is a visitor of Allah Almighty, and thus by sitting in it, he intends to visit

;

The quarter of the saviors
544
his Lord Almighty, in the hope of getting what is promised by the Messenger of
Allah ’’peace be upon him" when he said: "Whoever sits in the mosque has
indeed visited Allah Almighty, and it is incumbent upon the host to deal with his
guest generously." (This is reported by Ibn Hibban on the authority of Salman;
and Al-Baihaqi on the authority of some companions).
The second is to sit in wait of prayer after prayer, and whoever sits in wait of
prayer seems as if he is in prayer. That is the significance of the statement of
Allah Almighty: "and remain stationed." (A1 Imran 200)

4© L>Mjj ^
The third is monasticism, by being in seclusion, i.e. to hold back seeing,
hearing and organs from motion and vibration, for sitting in seclusion in the
mosque is similar to fasting, and it is a kind of monasticism. For this reason, the
Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said: "The monasticism of my people is
to sit in seclusion in mosques."
The fourth is to give one’s attention to Allah Almighty, stick to remembrance
and meditation in the hereafter, and avert what diverts from that by sitting in
seclusion in the mosque.
The fifth is to devote oneself to the remembrance or at least hearing to the
remembrance of Allah Almighty, or reminding others of Him. In confirmation of
that, it is related in a tradition: "Whoever goes early in the morning to the
mosque in order to remember Allah or remind others of Him, is like the fighter
in the Cause of Allah Almighty." (At-Tabarani on the authority of Abu Umamah;
and both Sahihs on the authority of Abu Hurairah, but both with a change in
wording).
The sixth is to intend to benefit others with his knowledge, by enjoining
what is right and forbidding what is evil. To be sure, the mosque could hardly be
free from such as errs in his prayer, or does what is unlawful for him, thereupon
one might order him to do good and guide him to the teachings of religion,
thereby he becomes his partner in the knowledge which he teaches, and his good
things are multiplied.
The seventh is to gain a brother in the religion of Allah Almighty, which is
an ammunition for him in the hereafter; and the mosque is the nest of the people
of religion and lovers for, and in the religion of Allah.
The eighth is to leave sins out of shyness from Allah Almighty, and from
doing what violates the sanctity in the house of Allah Almighty. In this respect,
Al-Hassan Ibn Ali "Allah be pleased with them" said: "Whoever frequents the
mosque regularly, is provided by Allah Almighty with one of the following seven
characteristics: a brother to be gained in the religion of Allah Almighty, a mercy
descended (from Allah), beneficial knowledge, a word of guidance, disinclination
from evil, leaving sins out of fear or shyness (from Allah)."
The third division: permissible deeds
There is no permissible deed but that it might turn, by intention, to one of the
best acts of worship therewith one attains the highest ranks. How great is the loss
of him who takes no heed of that, and deals with it like an animal. Furthermore, a
servant should not regard with slightness any of the passing thoughts or steps or

545
Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth
moments, for he would be questioned about all of this on the Day of judgement:
why has he done this, and what has he intended thereby? This applies to the
permissible deed in which no unfavorableness Lies.
That is the significance of the statement of the Messenger of Allah "peace be
upon him" who said: "Its lawful brings about reckoning, and its unlawful brings
about punishment."
It is further narrated on the authority of Mu'adh Ibn Jabal "Allah be pleased
with him" from the Prophet "peace be upon him" that he said: "A servant would
be asked, on the Day of Judgement, about all things, and even about applying
kohl to his eyes, crumbling clay with his fingers and touching the garment of his
brother."
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said:
“Whoever gets himself perfumed for the sake of Allah Almighty would come on
the Day of Judgement with his smell more pleasant than the smell of musk; and
whoever gets himself perfumed for the sake of anyone else other than Allah
Almighty would come on the Day of Judgement with his odor more stinking than
the odor of the carcass.” (Abu Al-Walid As-Saffar on the authority of Ishaq Ibn
Abu Talhah). Using perfume in itself is permissible, but there should be intention
in it.
But you may argue: "What could one intend by perfume and it is one of the
fortunes of the self in this world? And how should he get himself perfumed for
the Sake of Allah Almighty?" in reply to that, it should be known to you that
whoever gets perfumed on Friday or at any time else, is imagined to intend to
enjoy the pleasures of this world, or to show pride of the great wealth he has so
that his fellows might envy him, or to be seen of men in order to attain majesty
and have possession of their hearts and is famed among them for his pleasant
perfume, or to gain affection therewith in the hearts of women who are foreign
to him in case he regards it lawful to look at them lustfully: All of this makes it
sinful to get perfumed, for which one's odor would be more stinking than the
carcass on the Day of Judgement.
But an exception is made for the first intent, i.e. to enjoy the pleasures of this
world, which is not sinful in itself. But he would be questioned about it on the
Day of Judgement, and to be sure, whoever is called to account would inevitably
be punished. Furthermore, whoever gets a permissible thing in this world would
not be punished for it in the hereafter, but at the same time, his bliss in the
hereafter would decrease as much as is in proportion to what he gets in this
world. What a loss it is to hurt)' to get what is perishable on the expense of what
is never-ending.
As for the good intention, it is that he should intend thereby to follow the
sunnah of the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" on Friday, to intend to
honor the mosque and respect the house of Allah, which he should not enter as a
visitor of Allah Almighty unless he is pleasant-smelling, to exude good odor
among his brothers when they sit beside him in the mosque, to avert the hateful
odor from himself which causes harm to the sitters by his side, to close the door
of backbiting against the backbiters when they like to backbite him because of

!

1
!

!
.

The quarter of the saviors
546
bad smell, thereby disobey Allah Almighty. However, whoever is exposed to
backbiting and he is able to avoid it, let him do it, otherwise, he would be a
partner in that sin. In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty said: " Revile not you
those whom they call upon besides Allah, lest they out of spite revile Allah in
their ignorance." (Al-An'am 108)
He also should intend thereby to treat his brain so that he would become
more prudent and intelligent, and it would become easier upon himself to
perceive the tasks of his religion by meditation. In this respect, Ash-Shafi’i
"may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "He, whose smell is pleasant,
becomes more mindful."
All of those good intentions are present when good prevails over the heart.
But if it is only the pleasures of this world which prevail over his heart, nothing
of those good intentions would be present in his mind, and even if they are
mentioned to him, his heart would not be moved for them. However, the
permissible deeds are numerous and intentions in them could not be calculated.
So, measure on that anything else.
For this reason, one of the righteous predecessors said: "I like to have
intention in anything I do, even whenever I eat, drink, sleep and enter the privy."
All of this is intended to bring one closer to Allah Almighty, for all that is
intended to sustain the body and disengage the heart from the burdens of the
body helps one do the religious assignments enjoined upon him. Whoever
intends by eating to devote himself to worship, by having sexual relation with his
wife to safeguard his religion, please his wife and beget righteous offspring to
worship Allah Almighty after him therewith the nation of Muhammad "peace be
upon him" increases in number, he then is obedient in his eating and sexual
intercourse, which constitute the greater part of the self fortunes in this world;
and it is not possible to intend good thereby particularly for him who is mainly
concerned with the hereafter.
For this reason, one should make good his intention even if he loses property,
and say: "Let it be in the Cause of Allah." If he receives the news of being
backbitten by others, he should soothe his heart with the argument that his sins
and evil deeds would be born by the backbiter, whereas the backbiter's good
deeds would be transferred to his account. Let him have such intention by
keeping silent from response to backbiting.
In confirmation of that, it is related in a particular tradition: "Indeed, a
servant would be called to account thereupon his deeds would be fruitless for
their being stained with evil until fire becomes assured to him. Then, righteous
deeds would be added to his account so much that Paradise becomes assured to
him. On that he wonders and says: "O Lord! I have never done those righteous
deeds." It would be said to him: "Those are the deeds of such as backbit, harmed
and wronged you."" (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami in his Firdaws on the authority of
Shith Ibn Sa'd).
It is narrated in another tradition: "A servant would come to the Day of
Judgement with good deeds as much as mountains, and were they to be pure for

547
Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth
him, surely, he would enter Paradise. But even, he would come and he had
wronged so and so, insulted so and so, and beat so and so, thereupon each of
them would take his right from his good deeds until no single good deed remains
with him. The angels would say: "His good deeds have been consumed, and there
are still claimants of rights." Allah Almighty would say: "Then, draw upon him of
their sins, and prepare a deed for him to the fire. mi
In sum, beware and beware of looking down upon any of your movements,
without avoiding its deceptive and evil nature, which you would not be able to
refute on the Day of questioning and reckoning, for Allah Almighty watches over
you, and sees all that you do: " Not a word does he utter but there is a sentinel by
him, ready (to note it)." (Qaf 18)
^ tip)
XJ dj* O* -hah h* ^
According to a righteous predecessor: "I wrote a message and liked to cover it
with dust from the wall of the house of my neighbour, but I felt it. Later on I said
to myself: "But it is no more than dust. What is its significance?" Then I covered
it with dust. Then, a visitant said to me: "The one who regarded with slightness
the dust of the wall of the house of his neighbour would know the evil reckoning
he would receive in the morrow."
On another occasion, a man prayed in the company of Ath-Thawri and he
saw his garment turned upside down, thereupon he wanted to set it right for him,
but he withdrew it and did not set it right. When he asked him about the reason
he said to him: "I put it on for the Sake of Allah Almighty, and dislike to set it
right for anything other than Allah Almighty."
According to Al-Hassan: "A man might hang to another on the Day of
Judgement and say to him: "Allah is in between me and you." He would say to
him: ""By Allah, I do not recognize you." He would say: "Nay! You took a brick
from the wall of my house, a thread from my garment, etc."
So, if you are one of those of determination and intelligence, and not of the
deceived, then, consider yourself, and account it tightly, before it would be
tightened on you, and watch your states minutely, and neither move nor keep
quiet unless you know well what you intend by your motion or quietness, and
what you get thereby from this world, and what you would lose from the
hereafter, and by which thing the world becomes preponderant to the hereafter.
If you know well that there is no motive other than religion, then, put your
determination and what has occurred to your mind to practice, by permission of
Allah Almighty, otherwise, abstain from doing it. On the other hand, watch your
heart in your abstention, for not to do a thing is regarded an act in itself, which
also needs a true intention. The motive should not be a hidden inclination which
none knows. Furthermore, do not be deceived by the apparent matters and
famous good things, and make sense to deep mysteries and secrets, that you
would come out of the sphere of those who are deceived.
In this respect, it is narrated that Zakariyya "peace be upon him" was building
a wall for charge in favor of some people who gave him a loaf since he did not
eat but from the earnings of his labor. Then, some people came to visit him and
he did not invite them to the meal until he finished from it. They wondered

!

hi

s,

The quarter of the saviors
548
because he was recognized for his generosity and asceticism , and they thought
that good lies in one's asking others to share food with him. In justification, he
said to them: "I am working for a people for charge, and they have given me this
loaf in order to sustain my body and become able to persist in their work. If you
eat with me, it would suffice neither you nor me, and I would further weary to
complete their work." As such the insightful should look at the internal matters
with the light of Allah Almighty. To weary to complete their work is shortage in
an obligatory duty, whereas not to invite them to share the meal with him is
shortage in a supererogatory deed, and of a surety, obligatory deeds should be
given priority to supererogatory deeds.
On another occasion, a man said: I entered upon Sufyan and he was eating,
and he did not talk to me until he finished and licked his fingers. Then he said to
me: "Had I not taken it by loan, I would have liked you to eat of it."
Sufyan said once again: "Whoever invites another to share food with him and
he has no desire for eating, then, in case he answers his invitation and eats, he
would bear two sins, and in case he abstains, he would bear only one sin." One of
the two sins is hypocrisy, and the other is to expose his brother to what he
dislikes were he to know it.
As such one should inspect his intention in all of his deeds, and neither do
nor abstain but with intention. But if the intention is not present, he should stop,
for intention is beyond choice.

Explication Of The Fact That Intention Is Beyond Choice
It should be known to you that the ignorant might hear what we have
mentioned as regards making good or multiplying one's intention, along with the
statement of the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him": "The (rewards of)
deeds depend on intentions", thereupon he says in himself whenever he teaches,
eats, or even trades: "I intend to eat, teach or trade for the Sake of Allah",
thinking it to be a real intention. How far! That is no more than a self-talk and
movement from one passing thought to another, and the real intention is far
from all of that.
The real intention is the self being raised, devotion and inclination to what
seems to it to agree with its purpose immediately or lately. If there is no
inclination in principle, it could not be invented or acquired only by will. Nay! It
is just like the statement of the satiated: "I intend to have appetite for and
inclination to food", or the statement of the disengaged: "I intend to love, honor
and be attached to in love so and so with my heart". That is quite impossible.
There is no way to acquire the heart's devotion and inclination to a particular
thing, unless its means and causes are acquired first, which one might or might
not be able to do. The self is raised to do an act in response to the motivating
purpose which agrees with and befits it. Unless man thinks that his purpose is a
cause of a particular act, he would not turn to it by intention. But one might not
be able to have such a belief every moment. If he thinks so, the heart would turn
to it in case it is disengaged, and not diverted from it by another purpose of
stronger effect, and this is not possible at any time.
Motives and diverters have many causes, which differ by the difference of

Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth
549
persons, states and deeds. If the desire for marriage is prevailing, and one does
not believe in a right purpose from children in world and religion, by no means
would he have sexual relation with the intention to beget children, and his
intention would not go beyond the fulfillment of desire, since intention is to
respond to the motive, and here there is no motive other than the sexual desire.
Similarly, if it does not prevail over his heart to establish the sunnah of marriage
in imitation of the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" whose virtue is
great, in no way would he intend, by marriage, to follow the Prophetic sunnah,
other than his saying so only with his tongue and heart, and that is a self-talk and
not intention at all.
For this reason, a group of righteous predecessors abstained from a set of
acts of worship under pretext that intentions concerning them were not present
in their mind. They said: "No intention in that is present in our minds in order
for us to do it."
It is said that Ibn Sirin did not offer funeral prayer on Al-Hassan Al-Basri
"may Allah have mercy upon him" and said: "No intention is present in my mind
to do so."
On another occasion, a man who was combing his head called his wife and
asked her to bring the comb, and she said: "Should I also bring the mirror?" he
kept silent for a while after which he answered in the affirmative. When he was
asked about that he said: "I had intention to get the comb, and not the mirror
and so I stopped for a while until intention was prepared by Allah Almighty."
It is narrated that Hammad Ibn Sulaiman died and he was one of the learned
scholars of Kufah, and it was said to Ath-Thawri: "Would you not attend his
funeral procession?" he said: "Had I had the intention to do so, surely, I would
have done it."
Whenever anyone of those was asked to do any righteous deed he would say:
"If Allah Almighty bestows upon me intention, I would do it."
Tawus "may Allah have mercy upon him" did not relate anything to others
without intention, and it happened that he was asked to relate, and he did not do,
and it happened that he related without being asked to do so. When he was asked
about the reason for that he said: "Do you like me to relate to you without
intention? If the intention is present in my mind to do, I would do it."
It is related that when Dawud Ibn Al-Muhabbar composed the book of Al'Aql, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal "may Allah have mercy upon him" came to him and
asked him for it, and he gave it to him. When he caught a glimpse of some pages
from it he returned it to him. He asked him: "What is wrong with it?" he said: "It
has many weak chains of transmission." Dawud said to him: "I have not directed
it depending on the chains of transmission, but rather look at it with the eye of
news, for I looked at it with the eye of work, thereupon I have benefitted with it."
Ahmad said to him: "Then, return it to me in order to look at it with the same eye
with which you had looked at it." He took it and it remained with him for a long
time after which he said to him: "May Allah reward you, for I have really
benefitted with it."
It was said to Tawus "may Allah have mercy upon him": "Invoke good upon

The quarter of the saviors
550
us." he said: "No, until I find intention within my self to do it."
A man said: "I am in pursuit of an intention to visit a patient to inquire about
his health for a month, and it has not been present yet."
According to Isa Ibn Kathir: I was walking in the company of Maimun Ibn
Muhran when he reached the door of his house, thereupon I turned away. His
son said to him: "Would you not invite him to have dinner with us?" he said: "I
have no intention to do so."
That is because intention always follows vision, and once vision changes,
intention changes accordingly. In their sight, they should not do a deed without
intention, due to their awareness of the fact that intention constitutes the spirit of
the deed, and the deed without true intention is but showing off and ostentation,
which is a cause of displeasure and not of nearness (to Allah). They also learnt
that the intention is not to say with one's tongue 'I intend to do such and such',
but it is that the heart is raised to do a thing, by virtue of Allah Almighty. It
sometimes might be available and sometimes not available.
It is true that if one, over whose heart religion prevails, the intention to do
good things more often would be present in his mind, for his heart is entirely
inclined to good in principle, and thus is raised to do the deeds and acts relating
to it But if one over whose heart the worldly things prevail, and he inclines to it,
such intention would not be available to him. Furthermore, the intention to do
the obligatory duties would hardly be available to him, and it is sufficient for him
in this issue to remember the fire, and beware of its torment, or the bliss of
Paradise and develop within himself the desire for it, perhaps a weak motive
might raise him to do and his reward would be in proportion to his desire and
intention. As for the intention of worship of Allah Almighty out of honoring and
glorifying Him for He is worthy of worship and exaltation, it is not available to
the one who desires for the world, although it is the dearest and highest kind of
intention, and a very few on the surface of the earth are those who could
understand, and even to have it.
However, the people's intentions concerning the acts of worship are of
different divisions: one of them does his deed in response to the motive of fear,
therewith he safeguards himself from the fire; and one of them does his deed in
response to the motive of hope, as he desires for Paradise. This, though being
less in rank than the act of worship in exaltation and glorification of Allah
Almighty for the Sake and Glory of Himself, and not for anything else, belongs
to the true intentions, for it is an inclination to what is promised in the hereafter,
and similar to what is familiar in this world. The desires of the abdomen and
genitals constitute the greater part of motives, and Paradise is the place to fulfill
them. So, whoever works for the sake of Paradise works indeed for his abdomen
and genitals, like the evil hireling, and his degree is that of a mindless, and he
would attain it by virtue of his deed, for the majority of the inhabitants of
Paradise belong to the mindless.
But the worship given by the mindful does not go beyond the remembrance
of Allah Almighty and meditation of His beauty and glory in a way that all deeds
are but affirmatives and accessories to that. The rank of those are too high to

Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth ------------------------------------- 551
allow them to turn to food and sexual relation in Paradise, which they did not
intend at all: but it is those who invoke their Lord every morning and evening,
seeking only His Countenance. Since the people’s reward is in proportion to their
intentions, no doubt, those would be blessed with looking at His Bounteous
Countenance, and mock at such as turn to the faces of the houris of lustrious
eyes, just as those who are blessed with looking at the faces of the houris of
lustrious eyes ridicule those who enjoy of looking at the faces of the women who
are created from clay, although the discrepancy between the Divine beauty and
glory on the one hand, and the beauty of the houris of lustrious eyes is greater
than the discrepancy between the beauty of the houris of lustrious eyes and the
beauty of women who are created from clay.
It is narrated that Ahmad Ibn Khadrawaih saw his Lord in a dream and He
Almighty said to him: "All the people ask Me for Paradise except for Abu Yazid,
who demands Me Alone." Abu Yazid saw his Lord in a dream and he asked him:
"O Lord! What is the way to You?" He said: "Abscond yourself and come to
Me." Ash-Shibli was seen in a dream after his death and he was asked: "What has
Allah Almighty done with you?" he said: "He did not ask me for a proof for any
claim other than one thing I have said. One day I said: "Which loss is greater than
the loss of Paradise?" on that He Almighty said to me: "Which loss is greater than
the loss of meeting Me?"
The point is that those intentions are of different degrees, and he, over whose
heart any of them prevails, might not find it easy upon himself to move to
another. The knowledge of those brings about acts and deeds which are not
rejected by the juristic scholars. Let us say that he who have the intention to do a
permissible thing, and have no intention to do a superior deed, then, to do the
permissible is preferable, and to do the superior deed becomes shortage in him,
for the (rewards of) deeds depend on intentions. It is like forgiveness, which is
better than retribution for injustice. But even, one might have intention to exact
retribution and have no intention to forgive: in which case, the former is better.
Another example is to have intention to eat, drink and sleep, in order to comfort
himself and become able to do the acts of worship in the future. But at the same
time, he has no intention to observe fast or offer supererogatory prayer, in which
case, eating, drinking and sleeping are better. Moreover, if one gets exhausted and
tired of worship for he has been regular on it for a long time, and knows that
were he to entertain himself for an hour he would refresh himself and become
able to resume worship, then, entertainment is better for him. According to Abu
Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased with him': "I comfort myself with something of
entertainment in order that it would be an aid for me on worship." According to
Ali "Allah be pleased with him": "Soothe the hearts (with something of
entertainment), for if they are forced (on worship), they would become blind."
Such subdeties are perceived only by the intelligent among the scholars. Do
you not see how the experienced physician treats with the flesh the one who
suffers from a high temperature, which the novice in medicine might relegate?
Similarly, the experienced in fighting might flee from his enemy by way of
trickery simply to draw him to a narrow place where he could attack and kill him

The quarter of the saviors
552
easily. Likewise, following the path to Allah Almighty is a journey of fighting with
Satan and treatment of the heart, during which the insightful stops on subdedes
of tricks which the weak relegates.

CHAPTER TWO
SINCERITY ITS VIRTUE, REAL NATURE AND DEGREES
Virtue Of Sincerity
From among the Holy Qur'anic Verses, a mendon may be made of the
statement of Allah Almighty: " And they have been commanded no more than
to worship Allah, offering Him sincere devotion, being True (in faith)." (AlBayyinah 5) and: " Surely, to Allah sincere devotion is due." (Az-Zumar 3)
And: "Except for those who repent, mend (their life), hold fast to Allah, and
purify their religion as in Allah's sight; if so they will be (numbered) with the
Believers." (An-Nisa 146)

4

^

l3

\*3

}

And: "Whoever expects to meet his Lord, let him work righteousness, and, in
the worship of his Lord, admit no one as partner." (Al-Kahf 110)
^@
I
V3 1^4^
UiJ iyr-y. 0^
^
It was revealed in connection with those who do righteous deeds for the Sake
of Allah, and like to be praised for it.
From among the Prophetic narrations, a mention may be made of the
statement of the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him": "There are three
qualities which bring about no envy in the heart of a Muslim man: one of them is
to be sincere in deed to Allah Almighty." (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of AnNu’man Ibn Bashir).
It is narrated on the authority of Mus'ab Ibn Sa'd from his father (Sa'd Ibn
Abu Waqqas) "Allah be pleased with him" that he said: My father thought he had
superiority over those who were of a lower social class, from among the
companions of the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" thereupon the
Prophet "peace be upon him" said to him: "Verily, Allah Almighty helps this
nation by virtue of the weak among its members and their invocations and
sincerity (in their religion to Allah)." (An-Nasa’i; and Al-Bukhari but with a
different wording).
It is further narrated on the authority of Al-Hassan from the Prophet
"peace be upon him" that he said: Allah Almighty says: "Sincerity is one of My
mysteries which I place in the heart of whomever I love from among My
servants."
It is narrated on the authority of Ali Ibn Abu Talib "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: It should not concern you that your deed is little, but what
should concern you is to be accepted (by Allah Almighty), for the Prophet "peace
be upon him" said to Mu'adh: "Be sincere in your deed, perchance the little
thereof would be sufficient for you." (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority
of Mu’adh).

553
Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth
It is further narrated that the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said:
"No servant is sincere in his deed to Allah Almighty for forty days but that the
fountainheads of wisdom spring from his heart on his tongue." (Ibn Adi on the
authority of Abu Musa).
It is narrated that the Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "Three persons
would be the first to be quesdoned on the Day of Judgement: the first is a man
whom Allah has given knowledge, thereupon Allah Almighty would ask him:
"What have you done with what you had of knowledge?" He would say: "O Lord!
I used to stand (in prayer and remembrance) for part of the hours of the night
and the sides of the day." Allah then would say: "You have told a lie." The angels
also would say: "You have told a lie. But you liked that people should say about
you: 'So and so is a learned', and it was said." The second is a man whom Allah
has given property, thereupon He would say to him: "I have bestowed favors on
you: what have you done with that?" he would say: "O Lord! I used to give it in
charity for part of the hours of the night and the sides of the day." Allah
Almighty would say: "You have told a lie." The angels also would say: "You have
told a lie. But you liked that people should say about you: 'So and so is generous',
and it was said." The third is a man who was killed in the Cause of Allah, to
whom Allah Almighty would say: "What have you done?" he would say: "O Lord!
I was commanded to fight in Your Cause, and I fought until I was killed." On
that Allah would say: "You have told a lie." The angels also would say: "You have
told a lie. But you liked that people should say about you: 'So and so is brave',
and it was said."
Then, Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him" said: Then, the Messenger
of Allah "peace be upon him" struck his thigh and said: "O Abu Hurairah!
Those would be the first persons with whom the fire of Hell would be kindled
to fierce heat on the Day of Judgement." Then, the narrator of that Hadith
entered upon Mu'awiyah and narrated it to him, thereupon he went on weeping
until he was about to die. Then, he commented: Allah has told the truth when
He said: " Those who desire the life of the Present and its glitter, to them We
shall pay (the price of) their deeds therein, without diminution. They are those
for whom there is nothing in the Hereafter but the Fire: vain are the designs
they frame therein, and of no effect are the deeds that they do!" (Hud 15:16)
OiAjTdljlljl (0)

LSujT o^l>jT
Iy>i£=>

^

^

jUT

^

j jU J-J

It is narrated in an Israeli tale that a worshipper worshipped Allah Almighty
for a long time when some people came to him and said: "There are some who
worship a tree other than Allah Almighty." He grew angry for that matter and
carried his mattock on his shoulder and went with the intention to cut off the
tree. But on the way, Iblis received him in the form of an old man and said to
him: "What do you want to do, may Allah have mercy upon you?" he said: "I
want to cut off this tree." He said to him: "What do you have to do with it? Have
you left your worship and engagement in your own affairs and devoted yourself
to something else?" he said: "This is a part of my worship." He said to him:

>

The quarter of the saviors
554
"Then, I would not let you cut it." He fought him and the worshipper took hold
of him and threw him on the ground and sat on his breast.
Iblis said to him: "Release me in order to talk to you." He stood from over
him, and Iblis said to him: "O so and so! Allah has cancelled out that duty from
you and has not enjoined it upon you. Since you yourself do not worship it, then,
what do you have to do with the others? Allah Almighty has Prophets along the
different sides of the earth, and had He willed, He would have sent anyone of
them to its people and ordered them to cut it." But the worshipper persisted in
his intention and Iblis fought him and the worshipper overpowered him, and
threw him on the ground and sat on his breast. When Iblis failed to prevent him
he said to him: "Do you desire for something to decide between you and me? It
is indeed better for, and more beneficial to you." He asked him: "What is that?"
He said: "Release me to tell you about it."
He released him and he said: "You are a poor man who has nothing: But you
are dependent on the people who maintain you, and perhaps you prefer to confer
favors on your brothers, console your neighbours and be satiated and
independent from the people." He answered in the affirmative. He said to him:
"Then, retract from that and I promise to deposit by the side of your head two
Dinars every night and in the morning you take them and spend them on yourself
and your dependents, and give in charity to your brothers: This would be more
beneficial to you and to the Muslims than to cut off that tree in place of which
another one might be planted, and in naught would cutting it harm them, nor
would it benefit your believing brothers."
The worshipper thought about what he had said and said: "The old man has
told the truth. I am not a Prophet upon whom it is binding to cut off that tree,
nor have I been commanded by Allah to cut it so that I would be disobedient by
leaving it. What he has mentioned to me is more beneficial." He promised to
fulfill to him what he had vowed, and the worshipper returned to his worshipping
place and spent the night there. In the morning, he found two Dinars by the side
of his head, which he took. The same occurred on the next and third days. But
on the fourth day when it was morning, he found nothing. He grew angry and
carried his mattock on his shoulder and on the way Iblis received him in the form
of an old man and asked him: "Where are you going?" he said: "To cut off that
tree." He said to him: "You have told a lie. You are not capable of doing that, and
you have no way to do so."
When the worshipper took hold of him in order to do with him the same he
did in the first time, he said to him: "How far!" Iblis then caught hold of him and
knocked him down and behold! He became like the bird between his legs. Iblis
then sat on his breast and said to him: "You should desist from that otherwise I
would slay you." The worshipper found that he had no power to resist him,
thereupon he asked him: "O so and so! You have overpowered me. So, release
me and tell me how I had overpowered you at first and now you have
overpowered me." He said to him: "In the first time, you grew angry for the Sake
of Allah, and your intention was for the hereafter, and for this reason, Allah
Almighty subjugated me to you. But this time, you grew angry for your sake and

Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth -------------555
for the sake of this world, thereupon I overpowered you."
Those tales are related in confirmation of the statement of Allah Almighty:
"Except Your servants among them, sincere and purified (by Your grace)."
(Al-Hijr 40)

iO

>

A servant could get rid of Satan only by being sincere in his worship to Allah
Almighty.
For this reason, it is related that Ma'ruf Al-Karkhi "may Allah have mercy
upon him" used to beat himself and say: "O my self! Be sincere (in your worship
to Allah), perchance you would get rid (of Satan)."
According to Ya'qub the Blind: "The sincere one is he who conceals his good
deeds in the same way as he conceals his misdeeds."
According to Sulaiman: "Blessed be he who takes even a single step that is
held valid thereby he intends nothing other than Allah Almighty."
Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him" wrote the following
message to Abu Musa "Allah be pleased with him": "Whoever makes sincere his
intention, Allah suffices him what is between him and the people."
One of the allies of Allah wrote to one of his brothers: "Be sincere in your
deeds, the little thereof would be sufficient for you."
According to Ayyub As-Sikhtiyani: "To make sincere one's work is more
difficult upon the workers than all deeds they do."
According to Mutarrif: "Whoever purifies (his intention to Allah), (the
reward) would be purified for him; and whoever mixes (his intention to Allah
with anything else), (the reward) would be mixed (with punishment) for him."
According to Yahya Ibn Mu'adh: "Sincerity purifies the deed from defects in
the same way as the milk is purified from excrement and blood."
It is narrated that there was a man who used to set out in the uniform of
women and attend everywhere women assembled. One day, he happened to
attend a gathering of women. Then, a pearl was stolen and they cried to close the
door in order to inspect for it. They inspected one by one until it was the turn of
the man and there was a woman with him. He invoked Allah sincerely: "If I was
saved from this scandal, I would never return to do the like of that once again."
Then, the pearl was found with that woman. They cried: "Then, release the
remaining free woman (i.e. the man who was putting on the uniform of women),
for we have found the pearl."
According to Sari As-Saqati "may Allah have mercy upon him" : "To offer a
two-rak'ah prayer in seclusion with sincerity is better than to write seventy or
even seven hundred Hadiths in order to be high."
According to another man: "In sincerity for even as little as an hour lies
salvation (from punishment) forever, but sincerity could rarely be observed."
It is said: "Knowledge is seeds, and deed is to sow such seeds, whose water is
sincerity."
According to a wise man: "If Allah Almighty is displeased with a man, He
gives him three, and withholds from him three: He gives him the company of the
righteous people, and withholds from him to be accepted by them; gives him the

The quarter of the saviors
556
righteous deeds, and withholds from him to be sincere in them; and gives him
wisdom and withholds from him to be truthful in it."
According to As-Susi: "What Allah requires from the deeds of the people is
to be sincere in them."
According to Al-Junaid: "Allah Almighty has servants who were endued with
reason: when they were endued with reason, they did deeds, and when they did
deeds, they were sincere in them, and then sincerity invited them to all doors of
righteousness."
According to Muhammad Ibn Sa'id Al-Marwazi: "The whole matter goes
back to two principles: An act from Him with you , and an act from you to Him.
You then should accept what He does with you, and be sincere in what you do
for Him, thereupon you would be happy by both and attain felicity in both
abodes."

Explication Of Real Nature Of Sincerity
It should be known to you that everything is imagined to be mixed with
another. If it is purified from all things, it is called pure. In this sense, to do a
deed that is pure and not stained with anything else is called sincerity. Allah
Almighty said: " From what is within their bodies, between excretions and blood,
We produce, for your drink, milk, pure and agreeable to those who drink it." (AnNahl 66)

4 SjS

L4JU-

In order for milk to be pure, it should not be contaminated with blood or
excretion or anything else.
Sincerity or purity (of faith) then is opposed to ascription of partners.
Whoever is not sincere (or pure in his faith) is an associator of partners. But
ascription of partners is of several degrees: sincerity in observing the oneness of
Allah, i.e. monotheism is opposed to ascription of partners to Allah Almighty (in
worship), i.e. polytheism. On the other hand, polytheism might be hidden and
apparent. The same is true of sincerity. Both sincerity and its opposite occur
upon the heart, which is their place. That lies principally in intentions and
purposes.
We have already mentioned the real nature of intention which goes back to
response to motives. If the motive is one, the deed resulting from it is called
sincerity to what is intended. Whoever gives in charity with the intention of
showing off is sincere to his intention of showing off; and whoever does so with
the intention to come close to Allah Almighty also is sincere to his intention of
closeness to Allah. But it is customary to dedicate the name of sincerity to the
sole intention of coming close to Allah Almighty, as being purified from all
stains. It is like atheism, which means inclination: But it is dedicated only to
deviation from the truth.
Let's now talk about such as is motivated by the intention to come close to
Allah Almighty, but this motive is mixed with another one, whether it is showing
off or anything else of the worldly fortunes. A typical example is to observe fast
in order to benefit with the diet that he gains by fasting, along with the intention

557
Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth
to come close to Allah Almighty; or to emancipate a slave in order to get rid of
his sustenance and relieve himself of his bad manners; or to perform Hajj in
order to make good his mood, or flee away from an evil or enemy to which he is
exposed in his country; or to offer night prayer with the intendon to avert
slumber from himself, and become able to watch his family; or to learn
knowledge in order to become easy on him to get what suffices him of wealth, or
to be honored among his clan, or to guard his house and property with the honor
and power of knowledge; or to engage in teaching and preaching in order to
relieve himself of the distress of silence and enjoy of the pleasure of discourse; or
to perform Hajj while walking in order to relieve himself of the charge of hiring a
riding mount; or to perform abludon in order to get clean or cold; or to take bath
in order to make pleasant his smell; or to relate Hadith in order to be recognized
for his high knowledge of Isnad; or to sit in seclusion in the mosque in order to
alleviate from himself the rental fee of residence; or to observe fast in order to
lighten from himself the burden of cooking food and rather devote himself to his
engagements; or to visit a patient to inquire about his health in order to be visited
when he falls ill; or to attend a funeral procession in order that the funeral
processions of his family would be attended by the people; or to do good in
order to be recognized for it, and regarded with the eye of rectitude and
reverence: if his intention in all of those deeds is to come close to Allah
Almighty, but something of those passing thoughts is mixed with that intention,
which makes the deed easier on him, then, his deed would not be pure, and he
would not be sincere in it to the Countenance of Allah Almighty, in so much as
he would ascribe partners to Him in it. Allah Almighty said: "I am the most
independent from all partners."
In sum, if the deed to be done for the Sake of Allah is intended also for any
of the worldly fortunes with which the soul is comforted and to which the heart
inclines, no matter how little or much it might be, its purity then would be
contaminated, and the heart's sincerity in doing it stained. Man is more often
involved in his fortunes and dipped in his desires, and anyone of his deeds and
acts of worship could hardly be free from any of such transitory fortunes. For
this reason, it is said: "Whoever has even a single moment in all his lifetime pure
in which he is sincere (in his deed) to the Countenance of Allah Almighty has
indeed been saved." That is because sincerity rarely occurs, and it is very difficult
for the heart to be purified from all those stains.
The pure deed which one does with sincerity to Allah is that which is
motivated only by seeking to obtain closeness to Allah Almighty. If the motives
are only those worldly fortunes, then, it would be very difficult upon the person,
and this is self-evident. But our subject is such of deeds intended, in principle, to
obtain closeness to Allah Almighty, but this intention is stained with any of those
worldly fortunes. Those stains might be compatible, sharing, or assisting, as we
have already mentioned in intention. Overall, the psychological motive might be
equal to, stronger or weaker than the religious motive. Each has its specific ruling
as we shall see later.
Sincerity then is to purify the deed from all those stains, be they little or

■

.

The quarter of the saviors
558
much, in order to be intended only to get closeness to Allah, in such a way that
there is no motive other than it. This is imagined only from him who loves, and is
wholeheartedly devoted to Ailah Almighty, and mainly concerned with the
hereafter, which leaves in his heart no place for the love for this world, to the
extent that he even does not like eating or drinking: but he desires it only in the
same way as he desires to answer the call of nature, as being necessary by
predisposition. In other words, he has no desire for food because it is food in so
much as because it makes him strong enough to worship Allah Almighty, hoping
to be sufficed the evil of hunger in order not to need eating at all. In this way,
there remains in His heart no place for the unnecessary fortunes of this world,
and what is necessary is required by him just because it is essential to maintain his
religion. He is concerned only with Allah Almighty.
If such a person does any deed like eating, drinking or answering the call of
nature, he would be sincere in his deed and his intention true in his movement
and stillness. For example, if he sleeps in order to become strong enough to
resume his worship, his sleep would be regarded an act of worship, and he
would attain the degree of the sincere in it. But whoever is not so, then, the
door of sincerity in worship is closed against him. As well as he, over whose
heart the love for Allah Almighty and the hereafter prevails, would be sincere in
his deeds, similarly, he, over whose heart the love for the world, majesty and
supremacy, i.e. the love for anything other than Allah Almighty prevails, would
lose that sincerity in his acts of worship. Thus, the treatment of sincerity is to
break the self fortunes and severe from worldly covets and rather dedicate
oneself to the hereafter until it prevails over the heart. In this way, sincerity
becomes easy.
Many are the deeds in which one is troubled, thinking he does them with
sincerity to the Countenance of Allah Almighty, and he is deceived in that
assumption, simply because he does not see the evil that stains them. In this
respect, it is narrated from a man that he said: "I compensated the prayers of
thirty years which I had offered in the mosque in the first row. That is because
one day I delayed for a legal excuse, and offered the prayer in the second row.
But I felt shy of people for they saw me praying in the second, and they used to
see me praying in the first row. Then, I came to know that people's vision of
me in the first row was the cause of my pleasure and the comfort of my heart,
whereas I felt not."
This is an abstruse subdety from which the deeds could hardly be safe, and
few are those who make sense to it, except such as helped and guided by
Allah Almighty. But the heedless see all their good deeds in this world
misdeeds in the hereafter, and it is those who are intended by the statement of
Allah Almighty: " But something will confront them from Allah, which they
could never have counted upon! For the evils of their Deeds will confront
them, and they will be (completely) encircled by that which they used to mock
at!" (Az-Zumar 47:48)
^ ijilf l. ^

Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth
559
And: "Say: "Shall we tell you of those who lose most in respect of their
deeds? "Those whose efforts have been wasted in this life. While they thought
that they were acquiring good by their works?" (Al-Kahf 103-104)
i©

omJI (0) *^PI

’Jh }

From among the people, the scholars and learned are exposed most to this
affliction, because what motivates the majority of them to spread knowledge, for
the most part, is the pleasure of possessing the hearts of people, and having a
great number of followers, and cheerfulness of praise and gratitude they receive,
and Satan always dissembles them by saying to them: "Your purpose is to spread
the religion of Allah Almighty and defend the Sharia enjoined by the Messenger
of Allah "peace be upon him"." Thus, the preacher more often reminds the
people of the favor of advising them and admonishing the rulers, and rejoices of
the people's accepting his speech, and turning to him, while he claims that he
rejoices of his supporting the religion that is made easy for him, given that were
anyone of his fellows better than him to appear, and were the people to turn to
him and leave that preacher, this would aggrieve him so much. Had his motive
been only the religion, he would have thanked Allah Almighty for He has sufficed
him this task by anyone other than him.
But even, Satan does not leave him, and rather says to him, by way of
dissembling: "Your grief is not because of the people's turning from you in so
much as because of the reward's being cut from you, for had they been
admonished by your speech and advice, surely, you would have received reward
for that." Therefore, the poor man does not know that his submission to the
truth and relieving himself of the matter is better, more rewardable and more
beneficial for him in the hereafter.
By my life, were Umar "Allah be pleased with him" to be aggrieved for Abu
Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" undertook the imamate of prayer, would his
grief be praiseworthy or blameworthy? However, no religious man has doubt
that had he been aggrieved, his grief would have been blameworthy. But his
submission to the truth, and giving the matter to him who was more fitting for
it than him was more beneficial for him in religion than to take care of the
affairs of people, given its great reward. Moreover, Umar "Allah be pleased with
him" rejoiced for somebody more fitting than him undertook the matter. What
is the matter with the learned and scholars that they do not rejoice of the like of
this?
The knowledge of real nature of sincerity is a deep ocean in which all the
people sink, barring the extraordinarily preeminent and distinguished, who is
excepted in the statement of Allah Almighty: "Except Your servants among
them, sincere and purified (by Your grace)." (Al-Hijr 40)
So, let the servant be vigilant in watching those subtleties, otherwise, he
would join the devotees of Satan while he feels not.

Explication Of Statements Of Righteous In Sincerity
According to As-Susi: "Sincerity is not to see sincerity (from yourself), for
whoever sees sincerity from himself, then, his sincerity needs sincerity." His

The quarter of the saviors
560
statement refers to the necessity to purify the deed from conceit because of it, for
to turn to and regard sincerity with importance is a kind of conceit, and conceit
itself is one of evils. The pure deed which one does with sincerity is that which is
purified from all evils. But even, that is only one evil.
According to Sahl "may Allah have mercy upon him": "Sincerity is that the
servant's movement and stillness are only for Allah Almighty and not for
anything or anyone else." However, this statement is comprehensive. Similar to
it is the statement of Ibrahim Ibn Adham: "Sincerity is that the intention should
be true with Allah Almighty." On another occasion, it was said to Sahl: "Which
thing is more difficult on the soul?" he said: "Sincerity, for it has no portion
from it."
According to Ruwaim: "Sincerity in deed is that its doer does not want
recompense for it in both abodes (i.e. the world and the hereafter)." This
statement refers to the fact that the fortunes of the soul are but transitory and
deferred evils. The worshipper whose purpose is to be blessed in the pleasures
and delights of Paradise is also defective, for the deed should not be intended but
for the Countenance of Allah Almighty, in reference to the sincerity of the
sincere affirmers of truth. That is indeed the absolute sincerity. Nevertheless,
whoever does deeds in the hope of Paradise and for fear of the fire is also sincere
but simply in relation with the transitory fortunes, since he pursues only the
fortunes of both abdomen and genitals. Therefore, what should be really pursued
is the Countenance of Allah Almighty. He further said: "None moves but for a
certain fortune, and freedom from fortunes is a Divine quality, and whoever
claims it is a disbeliever."
Abu Bakr Al-Baqillani judged as disbeliever the one who claims freedom
from the fortunes, under pretext that such freedom is characteristic only of the
God. What he has mentioned is indeed true. But the people intended by such
freedom is purification from what they call fortunes, which stand for the desires
that are described in Paradise. But to take pleasure in gnosis, private talk and
looking at the Countenance of Allah Almighty is the sole portion of those, and
they do not regard it a fortune. Were all pleasures and delights of Paradise to be
offered to those in recompense for the pleasure of obedience, private talk and
prostration to Allah Almighty, of a surety they would regard them with slightness,
and rather look down upon them all. Their movement then is for a certain
fortune, and their obedience for a certain fortune, but this fortune is their
worshipped god alone and not anything else.
According to Abu Uthman: "Sincerity is to forget the vision of all the
creation with the permanent looking at the Creator." This is, however, a
reference to the evil of showing off only. For this reason, one of them said:
"Sincerity in the deed is that no Satan should see it lest he would corrupt it, nor
an angel lest he would write it." That is a reference to the concealment only. In
confirmation of that, it is said: "The sincere among deeds is that which is
hidden from the people, and purified from all engagements and relations." That
comprehends all intended purposes. According to Al-Muhasibi: "Sincerity is to
banish the people in treatment with the Lord."" This refers only to the negation

Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth

561

of showing off. It is similar to the statement of Al-Khawas: "Whoever drinks
from the cup of authority has indeed deviated from the sincerity of worship."
The disciples asked Jesus "peace be upon him": "What is the pure among the
deeds?" he said: "It is that which one does with sincerity to Allah Almighty and
dislikes that none else should praise him for it" This also encourages to leave
showing off. According to Al-Junaid: "Sincerity is to purify the deed from all
stains of impurities." According to Al-Fudail: "To leave the deed for the sake of
people is showing off, and to do deeds for the sake of people is polytheism; and
sincerity is that Allah delivers you from both."
It is also said: "Sincerity is to forget all fortunes and persist in watching (over
yourself)." That is, indeed, the comprehensive account.
However, the statements in this issue are too numerous for this context to
permit to mention, and there is no benefit to relate many transmitted texts after
the reality is uncovered. The satisfactory account is that of the master of the
foremost and the last of people "peace be upon him" when he was asked about
sincerity thereupon he said: "It is to say: 'My Lord is Allah', and then to stand
straight as you have been commanded." (Ibn Majah and Muslim on the authority
of Sufyan Ibn Abdullah Ath-Thaqafi but with change of wording), i.e. not to
worship your inclination nor yourself, and not to worship but your Lord Alone,
and stand straight in His worship as you have been commanded. That is a
reference to cutting off everything other than Allah Almighty from the field of
vision; and this is indeed the sincerity.

Explication Of Degrees Of Impurities And Evils That Stain Sincerity
It should be known to you that the evils and impurities that stains sincerity
are hidden in part, apparent in part, weak and clear in part, and strong and hidden
in part. But their different degrees concerning appearance and concealment could
hardly be understood without an example. The most apparent impurity that
distracts sincerity in this respect is showing off. So, let's set forth an example for
it.
The first degree: Satan gets the evil into the praying person in his prayer no
matter sincere he might be. If some people look at or enter upon him, he tells
him to improve his prayer in order for that attendant to look at him with the eye
of reverence and rectitude. The result is that his organs become submissive, his
limbs calm and his prayer improved; and that is the apparent showing off, which
is not hidden even from the novice.
The second degree: according to which the novice understands that evil,
and bewares of it, thereupon he does not obey Satan, and rather continues in his
prayer as he is with no change. But Satan comes to him while he is doing good
and says to him: "You are followed and imitated by others in all of your deeds,
and all you do influence the people, and of course, you would receive the reward
of their good deeds in which they follow you if you do good, and their sin would
be due on you if you do evil. So, make good your deed in front of them,
perchance they would follow you in submission and improvement of worship."
That kind is more abstruse than the first, which might deceive him who is not
deceived by the first. But it is showing off which invalidates sincerity. If he sees

The quarter of the saviors
562
submissiveness and perfect worship good he approves for the person who
follows him, why should he not approve the same while being in seclusion? Of
course no one could be dearer to him than his own self. That is, indeed,
dissembling. Whoever follows him would receive reward for his good worship.
But as for him, he would be punished for disclosing from himself what is not his
reality.
The third degree is more subtle than this: according to which the servant
tests himself and takes heed of the Satan's scheme, putting in mind that his
difference in worship in the presence of an assembly from his being in seclusion
is indeed showing off, and that sincerity is that his prayer in seclusion should be
the same as his prayer in the presence of the assembly. He should feel shy of his
Lord Almighty and of himself to be submissive only in the presence of the
people more than he is usually when he is in privacy, thereupon he devotes
himself to worship in privacy and improves his prayer as much as he approves
for himself in the presence of an assembly, for this is also an abstruse and subde
degree of showing off,, for the intention to improve his prayer in privacy is just
to make it the same in the presence of an assembly, with no difference then
between them. Thus, his devotion in both privacy and assembly is to the
creatures and not to the Creator. But sincerity is that it is the same for him to be
seen in his prayer by men or animals.
The fourth degree is more abstruse and subde: according to which it is
true that the people look at him in his prayer, but at the same dme, Satan fails
to tell him to be more submissive in prayer for their sake, for hd knows well
that he has made sense of that. Therefore, he says to him: "Think about the
glory and grandeur of Allah Almighty, before Whom you are standing now, and
feel shy that Allah Almighty should look at your heart while it is heedless of
Him." The result then is that his heart would be present, and his organs
submissive, thinking it to be sincerity, although it is plotdng and cunning. Were
his submissiveness to be for the Sake of Allah's Glory and Grandeur, surely,
this passing thought would occur to his mind while being in privacy, and not in
the presence of the assembly.
The sign of safety from this evil is that this passing thought should be
familiar to him in privacy as well as in the presence of anyone else, and that the
presence of anyone else is not the cause of that passing thought, just as the
presence of the animal is not so. As there is still difference within himself
between the man's seeing him and the animal's seeing him, he has not become
purely sincere, and his internal secret is still contaminated with the hidden
polytheism manifested in showing off. That concealed polytheism is more
hidden within the heart of mankind than the creeping of the black ant in the
dark night on the soft rock.
None is saved from Satan but he whose sight is delicate and he is happy with
the protection and guidance of Allah Almighty, otherwise, Satan always sticks to
those who devote themselves to the worship of Allah Almighty, and never is
heedless of them for a single moment in persistence to turn them to showing off
in all they do, even when they apply kohl to their eyes, trim their mustaches, get

Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth

563

perfumed and put on fine clothes on Friday. Those are customs to be done on
particular occasions, and one has a hidden fortune in them, for they are visible by
others, and with them disposition is affable. Satan then invites him to those and
urges him not to leave them at all. In this way, the heart's being stimulated to do
them is caused by response to that hidden desire, which turns him from the
sphere of sincerity.
Whoever is not safe from all of those evils is not sincere in his worship. For
this reason, it is said that a two-rak'ah prayer to be offered by a learned scholar is
better than a year of worship from an ignorant. What is intended here is the
learned scholar who is insightful of the subdeties of the evils of deeds, in order to
be able to purify himself from them. But the ignorant's vision is restricted to the
apparent worship, by which he is deceived. In this way the acts of worship are
different among the people, and the ways of evils to them is beyond calculadon.
So, let this amount, no matter litde it might be, benefit the reader, and of course,
the prudent is satisfied with the litde and the foolish is not influenced even by the
much. So, it is of no avail to give him more.
Explication Of The Ruling Of The Deed In Connection With Which
Sincerity Is Stained; And To What Extent It Is Rewardable
It should be known to you that if the deed is not pure to Allah Almighty, and
rather stained with anything of the worldly fortunes, its state is debatable among
the scholars, who differ whether it deserves reward, punishment or nothing at all.
As for that thereby nothing other than showing off is intended, of a surety, it
deserves punishment and displeasure. As for that which is pure thereby the
Countenance of Allah Almighty alone is intended, no doubt, it is a cause of
reward. But our talk now is about that which is stained .
What seems from the different narrations is that there is no reward for it. But
even, there are some traditions that contradict the majority . What we see, and all
knowledge is with Allah, is to look at the strength of the motive: If the religious
motive is equal in strength to the self motive, then, the deed would neither get
reward nor bear punishment. If the motive of showing off is stronger, then, the
deed is fruitless and harmful, and leads to punishment. It is true that the
punishment for it is less in degree than that of the deed thereby only showing off
is intended. If the intention of coming close to Allah is stronger than the other
motive, then, it deserves reward as much as is equal to the extent of strength by
which the religious motive excels the other.
That is confirmed by the statement of Allah Almighty: " Then shall anyone
who has done an atom's weight of good, see it! And anyone who has done an
atom's weight of evil, shall see it." (Az-Zalzalah 7-8)

4

lCr*3 ^

And: " Allah is never unjust in the least degree: if there is any good (done) He
doubles it, and gives from His own presence a great reward." (An-Nisa' 40)

{0

\'Jr \ ii jJ

oj

(jjj y

Thus the intention of good should not be caused to suffer along with that of
evil.

The quarter of the saviors
Let us say, in explanation of this, that deeds effect the heart by confirming
their qualities. The motive of showing off is among the destructives, and it is
nourished and sustained by doing according to it; Whereas the motive of good
is among the saviors, and it is nourished and sustained by doing according to it.
If both qualities gather together in the heart, they are opposing. Thus, if one
does according to the requirement of showing off, he would strengthen the
quality of showing off, and if he does according to the requirement of coming
close (to Allah), he would confirm the quality of coming close, and so on. One
of them is destructive, and the other is a savior. If both are strengthened
equally, they would counterbalance each other. Of course the more one of them
is prevailing, the more it is effective on the heart; and in no way could this
effect be lost.
If one does what brings him a span closer to Allah and then does what moves
him a span farther from Him, then, he would return to his original state, with
neither reward nor punishment. If he does what brings him two spans closer to
Allah and does what moves him a span farther from Him, then, he would remain
only a span close to Allah. In confirmation of that, the Prophet "peace be upon
him" said: "And do the good deed simply following the misdeed, so that it would
erase it." If sheer showing off is erased by sheer sincerity, then, when both gather
together in the heart, they would necessarily counterbalance each other. That is
attested by the consensus of the nation on the fact that whoever sets out for Hajj
and he has goods to traffic therewith, his Hajj would be held valid for which he
would receive reward, given that the intention pertaining to it is stained with a
worldly fortune.
Regardless of what might be said in this respect, the right is to say that as
long as the intention of Hajj is the main motive for setting out on journey, and
the traffic no more than an assisting motive, he would get reward for the
journey no matter how little or much it might be. In my sight, there is no
differentiation, in relation to the fighters in the Cause of Allah, between fighting
disbelievers in a place where there is a plenty of war spoils and fighting
disbelievers in a place where there is a little or no spoils at all. It is unlikely to
say that putting in mind that differentiation makes fruitless the entire reward of
their Jihad. It is fair to say that if the main and principal motive is to make
superior the word of Allah Almighty, while the desire for booty is secondary,
the reward then would not become fruitless. It is true that his reward is not
equal to him whose heart does not turn to the booty in principle, for this
turning is shortage.
You may argue that the Holy Verses and traditions indicate that the stain of
showing off thwarts the reward, and the same is true of the stain of pursuit of
booty, traffic and all worldly fortunes. It is narrated on the authority of Tawus
and others that a man asked the Prophet "peace be upon him" about him who
does favor or gives in charity and likes to be praised for his deed: would he get
reward for his deed? He "peace be upon him" did not know what to say to him
until the following Holy Verse was revealed: " Whoever expects to meet his Lord,
let him work righteousness, and, in the worship of his Lord, admit no one as
partner." (Al-Kahf 110)
564

Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth
4 CP i^-i

oiCxj Ii^LJ Vj

Sup

----------------------------------

565

aIIj i^ $

(Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and Al-Hakim). Of course, he intended to gather both
reward and praise together.
It is narrated on the authority of Mu'adh "Allah be pleased with him" that the
Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "The least degree of showing off is a kind of
polytheism." (This is reported by At-Tabarani and Al-Hakim).
It is further narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with
him" from the Prophet "peace be upon him" that he said: "It would be said to
him who joined partners with Allah in the deed he did: "Take your reward from
him for whom you did it."
It is narrated on the authority of Ubadah "Allah be pleased with him" that
Allah Almighty says: "I am the most independent among those who are
independent from any partner: whoever does a deed for Me in which he joins a
partner with Me, I then give My portion to that partner." (Malik in his Muwatta*).
It is also narrated on the authority of Abu Musa "Allah be pleased with him"
that a Bedouin came to the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" and said:
"O Messenger of Allah! A man fights out of bravery, and a man out of
fanaticism, and a man fights in order for his high position to be known: Which of
those fights in the Cause of Allah?" on that the Prophet "peace be upon him"
said: "Whoever fights in order for the word of Allah to be superior fights in the
Cause of Allah."
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: "You say that so and so is a martyr,
and perhaps he (before he is killed) has filled in between his riding mount with
silver coins."
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Mas'ud "Allah be pleased with him" that
he said: The Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "Whoever emigrates seeking
anything of those worldly fortunes, then, it would be for him."
In reply to that, let me say that those Hadiths do not contradict what we have
mentioned. They address such as does not intend by his deed but the worldly
fortunes. We have mentioned that this is obedience and aggression, not because
pursuing the worldly fortunes is unlawful. What is unlawful is to pursue it by the
religious deeds, for that implies showing off and perverting the worship from its
right place. We seek refuge with Allah Almighty from that. Man could hardly be
free from those secondary stains except rarely, and of course they reduce the
reward, but do not thwart it entirely.
But this does not mean that man, by so doing, is not on the verge of a great
risk, for he might think that the stronger motive is the intention to come close to
Allah, while the self fortunes prevail over his innermost secret. That is extremely
hidden. Reward does not come but by the sheer sincerity, and a servant could
hardly be certain of his sincerity, no matter how cautious he might be. For this
reason, even after perfect industriousness, he still continues to be wavering
between acceptability and rejection, lest his worship might have an evil whose
unfavorable consequence is more than the reward expected from it. As such were
the fearful from among these endued with deep insights, and as such everyone
endued with insight should be.

.
;

i

The quarter of the saviors
That is the significance of the statement of Sufyan "may Allah have mercy
upon him": "I do not mind about what seems from my deed."
According to Abd-Al-Aziz Ibn Abu Rawad "may Allah have mercy upon
him": "I have lived neighboring that house for sixty years, and performed Hajj
sixty times, and I have never done any of the deeds of Allah Almighty but that I
counted myself and found that Satan's share in it is greater than Allah's, would
that I neither have a reward nor bear a sin."
Nevertheless, the deed should not be left when there is fear from the evil of
showing off, for that is the final purpose of Satan. The point here is that sincerity
should not be lost. When one leaves the deed, he has indeed wasted both the
deed and the sincerity together. According to Al-Fudail: "To leave the deed for
the sake of people is showing off, and to do deeds for the sake of people is
polytheism; and sincerity is that Allah delivers you from both."

566

CHAPTER THREE: TRUTH
ITS VIRTUE AND REAL NATURE
Explication Of Virtue Of Truth
Allah Almighty said: " Among the Believers are men who have been true to
their Covenant with Allah." (Al-Ahzab 23)

4

^ bJ41P ^ (yo-i J

^

The Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said: "No doubt, truthfulness
leads to righteousness, and righteousness leads to Paradise, and one continues to
tell the truth until he is written with Allah as a sincere affirmer of truth; and lie
leads to wickedness, and wickedness leads to fire (of Hell), and one continues to
tell lies until he is written with Allah as a liar." (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the
authority of Ibn Mas'ud).
It suffices for the virtue of truthfulness that Allah Almighty describes the
Prophets "peace be upon them" as sincere affirmers of truth in His statement:
"(Also) mention in the Book (the story of) Abraham: He was a man of truth: A
prophet" (Maryam 41)

2^
And: "Also mention in the Book (the story of) Isma'il: he was (strictly) true to
(what he promised, and he was a Messenger (and) a Prophet." (Maryam 54
4© ^

0<r /aj\

v-^Ji

}

And: "Also mention in the Book the case of Idris: he was a man of truth (and
sincerity), (and) a prophet." (Maryam 56)

4Sjp ^

o&Cri)*lJ^

According to Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them": "There are four
characteristics, and whoever gets them has indeed profited: Truthfulness,
modesty, good manners and gratitude."
According to Bishr Ibn Al-Harith "may Allah have mercy upon him":

Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth---------------------------------

567

Whoever treats Allah with truthfulness gets estranged from the people."
According to Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani "may Allah have mercy upon him":
Make truthfulness your riding mount, truth your sword, and Allah Almighty
your finale."
A man said to a wise: "I have never seen a truthful person." On that he said
to him: "Had you been truthful, you would have recognized the truthful."
It is narrated on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Ali Ai-Kinani "may Allah
have mercy upon him": "We have found that the religion of Allah Almighty is
based on three principles: Truth, truthfulness and jusdee. Truth pertains to
organs and parts of body, jusdee to hearts, and truthfulness to minds."
In his comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: " On the
Day of Judgment will you see those who told lies against Allah; their faces will
be turned black; is there not in Hell an abode for the Haughty?" (Az-Zumar
60)
^

^

cSy* ^-4rr <_$

<Sy

^

Ath-Thawri "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "It is those who claimed
the love for Allah Almighty to which they were not true."
Allah Almighty revealed to David "peace be upon him": "O David! Whoever
is true to Me in his secret, I would confirm his truthfulness among the creatures
in public."
According to a learned man: "There is a consensus among the religious
scholars and jurists on three characterisdcs, and if they are held valid, salvadon
lies in them, and none of them could be achieved without the others: Faith in
Islam that is pure from religious innovadons and inclinadons, truthfulness to
Allah Almighty in deeds, and the lawfulness of sustenance."
According to Wahb Ibn Munabbih "may Allah have mercy upon him": "I
have found on the margin of the Torah twenty-two pieces of wisdom which the
righteous among the children of Israel used to gather on and study: "There is no
treasure more beneficial than knowledge, nor is there wealth more profitable than
forbearance, nor is there a status lower than auger, nor is there a companion
more pleasing than the good deed, nor is there a friend more disgraceful than
ignorance, nor is there honor more cherished than piety, nor is there is generosity
more fulfilling than leaving inclination, nor is there a deed better than meditation,
nor is there a good deed higher in rank than patience, nor is there a misdeed
more shameful than arrogance, nor is there a medicine more lenient than
kindness, nor is there an ailment more painful than foolishness, nor is there a
messenger more just than the truth, nor is there an evidence more sincere in
advice than truthfulness, nor is there poverty more humiliating than covet, nor is
there richness more wretched than collecting wealth, nor is there a life more
pleasing than health, nor is there a living more satisfying than chastity, nor is
there a worship better than submission (of heart to Allah), nor is there asceticism
better than satisfaction, nor is there a guard more keeping than silence, nor is
there an absent closer than death."
According to Muhammad Ibn Sa’id Al-Marwazi "may Allah have mercy upon
him": "If you seek Allah with truthfulness, He endows you with a mirror
therewith to see everything of wonders of this world and the hereafter.

The quarter of the saviors
According to Abu Bakr Al-Warraq "may Allah have mercy upon him":
"Observe truthfulness in what is between you and Allah, and kindness in what is
between you and the people."
It was said to Sahl "may Allah have mercy upon him": "What is the
foundation of that matter (of religion) on which we are?" He said: "Truthfulness,
generosity and bravery." It was said to him: "Give us more." He said: "Piety,
modesty and lawful sustenance."
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them" that
he said: The Prophet "peace be upon him" was asked about perfection,
thereupon he said: "To tell the truth, and act upon truthfulness."
In his comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: " That (Allah)
may question the (Custodians) of Truth concerning the Truth they (were charged
with)" (Al-Ahzab 8)
568

e

i0 j

x

..

Al-Junaid "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "Those who are true to
themselves would be questioned about the extent to which they are true to their
Lord Almighty. That is, indeed, a very dangerous matter.
!I

I

Explication Of Real Nature, Meaning And Ranks Of Truth
It should be known to you that truthfulness applies to six things: truthfulness
in speech, truthfulness in intention and will, truthfulness in determination,
truthfulness in fulfillment of determination, truthfulness in the deed, and
truthfulness in achieving all stations of religion. Whoever is characterized by
truthfulness in all of those six is a sincere affirmer of truth.
On the other hand, the truthful are of different ranks according to the fields
to which they are true. Whoever has a fortune of truthfulness in anything of
those six, he is regarded truthful but in relation with that very thing.
The first type: Truthfulness in speech. Its field is news and narrations. The
news might pertain to the past or to the future, including the fulfillment of the
promise. In this respect, it is incumbent upon every servant to keep his/her
tongue, and not to tell but the truth. That is the most famous and prominent type
of truthfulness. Whoever keeps his tongue from telling about things differently
from what they really are is indeed truthful.
Therefore, this truthfulness has two supplementary conditions: the first is to
avoid allusion and indirect reference to things. It is said that allusion acts on
behalf of telling lies. What is forbidden concerning telling lies is to tell about a
thing differently from what it really is. But in some cases, the allusion is needed
and required to serve a particular benefit, like, for instance, disciplining children
and women, caution from wrongdoers, fighting enemies, and avoiding their
learning anything about the secrets of the king, and so on. Whoever is forced to
do anything of that, his truthfulness in it is that his speech should be for the Sake
of Allah Almighty, in so far as is commanded by truth and required by religion: if
he observes that condition, then, he would be truthful in his speech even if he
tells about the thing differently from what it really is, for truthfulness is not
intended for itself in so much as to indicate and invite to the truth. So, let him
regard not its external form but its internal significance.

Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth
569
It is true that in such cases, one should incline to allusion as much as is
possible for him to do. Whenever the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" intended to set out for a holy batde, he would allude to
another one, in order to conceal from the enemies the news of the originally
intended batde. (This is reported by Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of
Ka'b Ibn Malik). That does not belong to telling lies at all.
In confirmation of that, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" said: "Not a liar is he who makes peace between two, by saying or
conveying good words between them (on behalf of each other)." (Al-Bukhari and
Muslim on the authority ofUmm Kulthum Bint Uqbah Ibn Abu Mu'ait).
He "peace be upon him" gave concession to speak (be it true or false)
according to what serves the benefit in three cases: Making peace between two
persons, having two wives, and fighting in the Cause of Allah. Truthfulness in
those cases turns to intention, according to which nothing is observed but the
truthfulness of intention and will of good. If his purpose is valid, his intention is
true, and his will is good, he would be truthful regardless of his speech, in which
case, allusion is preferable.
The second condition is to observe the meaning of truthfulness in his words
therewith he talks privately to his Lord Almighty. It is like his statement: "For me,
I have set my face, firmly and truly, towards Him Who created the heavens and
the earth, and never shall I give partners to Allah." (Al-An'am 79)

4^ "^3

d>0^~3isfirr3^^3 <jj \

If, while saying so, his heart is diverted from Allah Almighty, and rather
devoted to worldly hopes and his own desires, then, he is a liar. The same
applies to his statement: "You do we worship" and: "I am the servant of Allah":
if he is not characterized by the real servitude and has another purpose than
Allah Almighty, he would not be truthful in his speech, and on the Day of
Judgement, if he is asked to prove his servitude to Allah Almighty, he would fail
to confirm it. That is because if he is a servant of himself, a servant of his
world, or a servant of his desires, of a surety, he would not be true to his
statement that he is a servant of Allah Almighty. That is the meaning of
truthfulness in speech.
The second type: Truthfulness in intention and will. That kind goes back
to sincerity. That is, there is no motive for his movement and stillness other
than Allah Almighty. If it is stained with any of the worldly fortunes, then the
truthfulness of intention would become invalid, and by that consideration, it
is possible to call him a liar. A righteous said: "Truthfulness is to observe the
oneness of Allah in your purpose." In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty
said: " When the Hypocrites come to you, they say, "We bear witness that you
are indeed the Messenger of Allah." Yea, Allah knows that you are indeed His
Messenger, and Allah bears witness that the Hypocrites are indeed liars." (AlMunafiqun 1)

oj i# at* 4ibj

atj *at

>

Although they told the truth when they said that he is the Messenger of Allah,

5

:

The quarter of the saviors
570
Allah Almighty described them as liars, not in terms of their speech, but in terms
of their intention and mysteries of hearts. Thus, one meaning of truthfulness goes
back to the true intention, which is sincerity. Every truthful should be sincere in
his intention.
The third type is truthfulness in determination. A man might have
determination first before deed, saying: "If Allah bestows money upon me, I
would give in charity", and "If I meet an enemy, I would fight in the Cause of
Allah Almighty", and "If Allah Almighty endows me with an office of ruling, I
would do justice and not disobey Allah Almighty", etc. That determination might
coincide with truthful and perfect power in himself, or hesitation, reluctance or
inclination in it, that contradicts truthfulness. Here, the truthful or sincere
affirmer of truth is he whose determination coincides with perfect power in all
good things, with neither reluctance, nor hesitation, nor inclination from it. It is
the same as stated by Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him": "To
move forward with my head being chopped off is better for me than to be a ruler
over a people including Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him"." He found in
himself the decisive determination and truthful love not to be a ruler in presence
of Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him".
Of a surety, the sincere affirmers of truth in determination are of different
ranks: One might have determination, but not strong enough to lead him to
accept killing. Moreover, among the truthful believers, there was such as if he was
given the freedom to choose whether he or Abu Bakr should be killed, his life
would be dearer to him than that of Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him"
The fourth type: Truthfulness in fulfillment of determination. The soul
might have an immediate determination to do a particular deed, since there is
no trouble nor difficulty in giving a promise. But when one comes to do the
promised deed, his determination would weaken before the prevailing desires,
and thus he would not be able to fulfill his determination. That contradicts
truthfulness in it. This is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty: "
Among the Believers are men who have been true to their Covenant with
Allah." (Al-Ahzab 23)
^

IJ J $'P U Iji -LyO J U-J

^ ^

It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" from his
paternal uncle Anas Ibn An-Nadr "Allah be pleased with him" that he did not
attend the holy battle of Badr with the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him". He felt it difficult on himself and said: "I was absent from
the first holy battle fought by the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him". By Allah, if Allah gives me the opportunity to attend another holy
battle with the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" I
would show to Allah what I am going to do in fighting." In the coming year, he
attended the holy battle of Uhud. Sa'd Ibn Mu'adh "Allah be pleased with him"
received him and asked him: "Where are you going O Abu Amr?" He said: "How
pleasant the smell of Paradise is! Indeed, I detect its smell behind Uhud." He
fought until he was killed, and over eighty sword strikes and arrow shots were
found in his body. His sister (Ar-Rubai) Bint An-Nadr said: "I have never
recognized the body of my brother except from the dress he was wearing." On

Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth
571
that occasion, the following Holy Verse was revealed: " Among the Believers are
men who have been true to their Covenant with Allah." (Al-Ahzab 23)
i=»

4 ©>

^ b j4lP ^

^

(This is reported by At-Tirmidhi).
It is further narrated that on the day of the holy battle of Uhud, the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" stood at the body
of Mus'ab Ibn Umair "Allah be pleased with him" while he was lying on his face
as a martyr, and he was the carrier of the flag of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" on that day. On that he said: "Among the
Believers are men who have been true to their Covenant with Allah: Of them
some have completed their vow (to the extreme), and some (still) wait: But they
have never changed (their determination) in the least." (Al-Ahzab 23)

4

cr* (*4~?3 jACr* (*-$4*

^ b 4-p ^ *y*

J j

y^ o* ^

(Abu Na'im in his Hilyah on the authority of Ubaid Ibn Umair)
It is narrated on the authority of Fadalah Ibn Ubaid that he said: I heard
Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him" saying: I heard the Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" saying: "The martyrs are four
types: (The first is) a believing man of good faith who met the enemy and was
true to Allah in fighting until he was killed: It is that to which the people would
raise their eyes on the Day of Judgement as such" and he raised his head until his
hat fell down from him. The sub-narrator said: "I do not know whether it was the
hat of Umar "Allah be pleased with him" or the hat of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" which fell down." "(the second is) a
man of good faith, and when he met the enemy, he seemed as if his face was
beaten with thorns, and while being so, he received an arrow and was killed: He
would be in the second rank. (The third is) a believing man who mixed a
righteous deed with a bad deed, and when he met the enemy, he was true to Allah
in fighting until he was killed: such would be in the third rank. (The fourth) is a
man who transgressed against his soul, and when he met the enemy, he was true
to Allah in fighting until he was killed: that would be in the fourth rank." (AtTirmidhi).
Mujahid "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: Two men came out before
an audience and said: "If Allah Almighty bestows upon us wealth we would give
in charity." But when Allah gave them wealth, they withheld it. On that occasion,
Allah Almighty revealed: " Amongst them are men who made a Covenant with
Allah, that if He bestowed on them of His bounty, they would give (largely) in
charity, and be truly amongst those who are righteous. But when He did bestow
of His bounty, they became covetous, and turned back (from their Covenant),
averse (from its fulfillment). So He has put as a consequence Hypocrisy into their
hearts, (to last) till the Day whereon they shall meet Him: Because they broke
their Covenant with Allah, and because they lied (again and again)." (At-Tawbah
75-76)

44^*

04 ^

4?3*^

572

l

t

The quarter of the saviors

That type of truthfulness is more severe on the people than the previous one.
One might have determination to do a thing, and when it comes to
implementation, he fails to fulfill his promise to do it, in view of his prevailing
desire and inclination. For this reason, Umar "Allah be pleased with him" made
exception in his statement when he said: "To move forward with my head being
chopped off is better for me than to be a ruler over a people including Abu Bakr,
unless myself makes alluring to me something at the time of killing which I do
not detect now, for I do not feel safe that killing would be severe on it for which
it might change and swerve from its determination."
The fifth type: Truthfulness in deeds. It is that one endeavors in order that
his external deeds would not give false impression in opposition to what is really
lurking within himself. It is not to leave the deeds in so much as to strive his
utmost to make his inward confirm his outward behaviors. That is quite different
from showing off, for the dissembler is he who does so intentionally, i.e. to make
his apparent deed give false impression of his internal secret. One might seem to
stand submissive in his prayer, but not with the intention that people should see
him, and his heart is heedless of prayer. Whoever looks at him sees him standing
in front of Allah Almighty, while his heart is engaged in his worldly desires and
inclinations.
This kind of deeds gives false impression of the internal secret, in which one
is liar and not truthful, although he does not do so with the intention to be seen
of men. One could be saved from that only by being in secret just like being in
public, i.e. to make his inside similar to, if not better than, his outside. In sum, if
the outward appearance is different intentionally from the inward thoughts, then,
it is called showing off, therewith sincerity is lost, and if it is different
unintentionally, then, truthfulness is lost.
That is the significance of the statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him" in his supplication: "O Allah! Make my secret
better than my public, and make righteous my public."
According to Yazid Ibn Al-Harith: "If one's secret is similar to his public,
then, that is justice; and if his secret is better than his public, then, that is
excellent; and if his public is better than his secret, then, that is injustice."
According to Atiyyah Ibn Abd-Al-Ghafir: "If the believer's secret agrees with
his public, Allah Almighty then commends him before angels, saying: 'That is
really My servant.'"
According to Abd-Al-Wahid Ibn Zaid: "Whenever Al-Hassan ordered the
people to do anything, he would act upon it most among them, and whenever he
forbade them to do anything, he would leave it most among them. I have never
seen a man whose secret is similar to his public than him "may Allah have mercy
upon him"."
Overall, to have one's secret similar to (if not better than) his public, is a kind
of truthfulness that is required from all the servants.
The sixth type: Truthfulness in the stations of religion. It is the highest
degree and the dearest kind of truthfulness. It is like truthfulness in the stations

573
Book seven: Intention, sincerity and truth
of fear, hope, honoring, asceticism, contentment, reliance (on Allah), love (for
Him), and all such stations. Those stations have starting points, ending points,
and final facts, and the truthful is he who attains their final facts.
In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty said: " Only those are Believers who
have believed in Allah and His Messenger, and have never since doubted, but
have striven with their belongings and their persons in the Cause of Allah: such
are the sincere ones." (Al-FIujurat 15)
And: "But it is righteousness to believe in Allah and the Last Day...Such are
the people of truth, the God-fearing." (Al-Baqarah 177)

i fjp

o* £ o*

0^-3 ^

It is narrated that Abu Dharr "Allah be pleased with him" was asked about
faith thereupon he recited that Holy Verse. It was said to him: "We asked you
about faith!" he said: "I asked the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" about faith, thereupon he recited to me that Holy Verse."
Therefore, to attain the final facts of those stations is very difficult, for they
are infinite. But every servant has a certain fortune from them in accordance with
his state of weakness and strength. The stronger his fortune is, the closer he is to
truthfulness, and vice versa. The gnosis of Allah Almighty, honoring Him and
fear of Him are never-ending.
For this reason, the Prophet "peace be upon him" said to Gabriel "peace
be upon him": "I like to see you in your real form on which you are created."
He said: "You could not endure that." He said: "No, let me see you." He gave
him an appointment in Baqi' on a night in which the moon was full, and when
he came to him, the Prophet "peace be upon him" looked at him and behold!
He filled the horizons, i.e. the sides of the sky. On that the Prophet "peace be
upon him" fell unconscious. When he restored his consciousness, Gabriel
"peace be upon him" had returned to his form in which he used to appear to
him. The Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "I have never think that there is
such one among the creatures of Allah." Gabriel "peace be upon him" said to
him: "Then, what do you think if you see Israfil? Indeed, the Throne (of
Majesty) is on his shoulder, and his feet are penetrating underneath the
farthest end of the lowest earth. But even, he shrinks, out of the grandeur of
Allah Almighty, until he becomes like a swallow." Consider then how
grandeur and majesty overwhelm him so much that he is reduced to such a
state. All the angels are not like this, due to their disparity in gnosis. That is
the truthfulness in honoring.
It is further narrated on the authority of Jabir "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "On the night I was made to set out on a night journey to the heaven, I
came upon the highest company (of angels and Prophets), and Gabriel was as
quiet as a worn-out covering (that is thrown on the camel's back), out of fear
and honoring of Allah Almighty." (Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Anas).
Although the Companions were fearful, they never attained the degree of the

The quarter of the saviors
574
fear of the Prophet "peace be upon him". The Prophet "peace be upon him" said:
"None shall attain the real nature of faith until he sees all the people like the dung
in comparison with Allah, and when he returns to himself, he sees it the most
despicable of them all."
On the other hand, the degrees of truthfulness are never-ending. If one is
truthful in all those stations, he then is the sincere affirmer and lover of truth. But
the people are different in their truthfulness according to their fortunes from
them. According to Sa'd Ibn Mu'adh "Allah be pleased with him": "There are
only three things in which I am strong, and in all things other than them, I am
weak: I have never offered a prayer during which I engaged in a self talk until I
finished from it; nor have I attended a funeral procession during which I engaged
in anything other than it until its burial was finished; nor have I heard anything
from the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" but that I
thought it to be true." In his comment on that, Sa'id Ibn Al-Musayyab "may Allah
have mercy upon him" said: "I have never thought that those characteristics
could gather but in the Prophet "peace be upon him"." Many are the companions
who offered prayers and attended funeral processions, and did not attain such a
high degree of truthfulness.
According to Abu Bakr Al-Warraq: "Truthfulness are of three kinds: the
truthfulness of monotheism, the truthfulness of obedience, and the truthfulness
of gnosis. The truthfulness of monotheism implies the laymen of believers. Allah
Almighty said: " And those who believe in AJlah and His Messengers, they are the
Sincere Lovers and affirmers of Truth." (Al-Hadid 19)

4 (jfS 0'I13 ^
The truthfulness of obedience includes those of knowledge and abstention.
The truthfulness of gnosis implies those alliance of Allah Almighty, which are like
the mountains on the earth."

I

According to Ja'far As-Sadiq: "Truthfulness is self-mortification and not to
give preference to anyone over Allah Almighty in the same way as He does not
give preference to anyone over you, as shown in His statement: "He has chosen
you." (Al-Hajj 78)
//

E

It was revealed to Moses "peace be upon him": "If I love a servant, I would
try him with distresses so heavy and severe that even the mountains could not
withstand in order to see his truthfulness: If I found him truthful, I would take
him as an ally and beloved, otherwise, if I find him complaining Me to My
creatures, I would disappoint him and care not." Among the signs of truthfulness
is to conceal both adversities and acts of worship, and dislike to show them to
anyone of the people.
That is the end of the book of truthfulness and sincerity, and it would be
followed by the book of watching and reckoning, and praise be to Allah.

cffifiTft WfTMfltiTvfijffl
It is the eighth book of the quarter of saviors of the revival of religion
sciences
In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
Praise be to Allah, Who stands over every soul (and knows) all that it does,
watches over every organ and knows what it commits, learns the secrets of the
hearts when they have an inner thought, and accounts the passing thoughts of
His servants when they are disturbed, from Whose knowledge nothing even as
little as an atom's weight in the heavens and on earth escapes, Who would reckon
His servant for all of their deeds, be they significant or insignificant, Who accepts
the acts of worship from His servants, no matter how little they might be, and
forgives for them their sins no matter how great they might be: Exalted be He
Whose favor extends over all servants, and Whose mercy encompasses all the
creatures in the world and hereafter. By virtue of His gifts, the hearts expand to
faith, by virtue of His success and help, the organs and parts of body are devoted
to and disciplined by the acts of worship, by virtue of His guidance, the darkness
of ignorance is removed from the hearts, by virtue of His support, the plots of
Satan become futile, and by virtue of His care, the scale of good deeds
overweighs (that of misdeeds in the hereafter).
Allah's blessing and peace be upon Muhammad, the chief of all the Prophets
and Messengers, and upon his family, the chiefs of the people, and his
companions, the leaders of the pious and righteous. Coming to the point:
Allah Almighty said: " We shall set up scales of justice for the Day of
Judgment, so that not a soul will be dealt with unjusdy in the least. And if there
be (no more than) the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it (to account): and
enough are We to take account." (Al-Anbiya' 47)
9 +

blah

&
V >

i>.

^

Ul3l

And: " And the Book (of Deeds) will be placed (before you); and you wilt see
the sinful in great terror because of what is (recorded) therein; they will say, "Ah!
woe to us! what a Book is this! it leaves out nothing small or great, but takes
account thereof!" they will find all that they did, placed before them: and not one
will your Lord treat with injustice." (Al-Kahf 49)

ilij jujai
C
And: "On the Day that Allah will raise them all up (again) and show them
the truth (and meaning) of their conduct. Allah has reckoned its (value),
though they may have forgotten it, for Allah is Witness to all things." (AlMujadilah 6)
575

The quarter of the saviors

576
4 (J|J

J5T Jp XTj i%'\ ai^J- l IjL*p lL

ST

fy> ^

And: " On that Day will men proceed in companies sorted out, to be shown
the Deeds that they (had done). Then shall anyone who has done an atom's
weight of good, see it! And anyone who has done an atom's weight of evil, shall
see it" (Az-Zalzalah 6-8)
@ je>ji '5=-*“ V*

U(0)

^liT j J_^aJ

^

4 CjS -,0^ '.5*And: "And fear the Day when you shall be brought back to Allah. Then shall
every soul be paid what it earned, and none shall be dealt with unjusdy." (AlBaqarah 281)

i @)

^

fr fry y

jj

^L>y^ry ^y l*53'3 $

And: "On the Day when every soul will be confronted with all the good it has
done, and all the evil it has done, it will wish there were a great distance between
it and its evil. But Allah cautions you (to remember) Himself. And Allah is full of
kindness to those that serve Him." (A1 Imran 30)
* -r

,

\Jl~aj 1 -L* 1 jAIajj

o'

*y *■y*

cuLp Lj

JJ>- qa cuLp l»

J-^=»

^^

And: " And know that Allah knows what is in your hearts, and take heed of Him;
and know that Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Forbearing." (Al-Baqarah 235)
4

o' 'i^ip'3 Ojj Jlo- li

l3 jvJlju aJJI o' [_j-<dp'3 ^

Thus, those endued with insights came to know that their Lord is (as a
Guardian) on a watch-tower over them, and that on the Day of Judgement, they
would be called to account, and questioned about even the atom's weights of
passing thoughts and glances. Moreover, they have become certain that nothing
would save them from that except their accounting and watching over themselves
at every moment in this world. That is because whoever accounts himself in this
world before he would be called to account, no doubt, his reckoning on the Day
of Judgement would be lightened from him, but whoever does not account
himself in this world, would persist in grief and regret, and his standing on the
Day of Judgement would be very long, and his sins would lead him to humiliation
and disgrace.
When this fact was exposed to them, they came to know that nothing would
save them from that unfavorable consequence other than their obedience to
Allah, Who commanded them to adhere to patience as he stated: " O you who
believe! persevere in patience and constancy; vie in such perseverance; remain
positioned permanently to guard yourselves; and fear Allah; that you may
prosper." (AJ Imran 200)
4. @)
■*& L^'j [>Wj3 '^
They first remained positioned in guard of themselves by putting conditions,
then by watching, then by reckoning, then by punishing themselves, then by

577
Book eight: Watching and reckoning
mortifying themselves, and finally by admonishing themselves. In this way, they
have six stadons concerning their being positioned in guard of themselves. Each
of those should be explained in detail to explicate its virtue and real nature. The
origin of them all is reckoning. But every kind of reckoning follows putting
conditions and then watching, and in the event of loss, it leads to admonishment
and punishment. So, let us go on explicating those stations, and success is with
Allah Almighty.

CHAPTER ONE
FIRST STATION: PUTTING CONDITIONS
It should be known to you that the final demand of those involved in
traffic who share in commodities and goods at the time of accounting is the
sound profit. As well as the trader gives his property to his partner to invest it
in traffic, and in the end he accounts him, the mind in this issue stands for the
trader on the way to the hereafter. The profit he demands is the purification
of the soul, therewith it prospers. In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty
says: " Truly he succeeds that purifies it, And he fails that corrupts it!" (AshShams 9-10)

To be sure, its prosperity results from the righteous deeds. The mind seeks
the aid of the soul in this trade, by using and subjugating it in what justifies and
purifies it, in the same way as a trader seeks the aid of his partner to invest his
wealth for him.
As well as the partner might turn into a foe to dispute with him over the
profit, and this is why he needs first to put conditions on him, second to watch
over him, third to account him, and fourth to punish or admonish him, similarly,
the mind needs first to put conditions on the soul, by offering to it the duties and
stipulating the necessary conditions, and guiding it to the way of prosperity, and
asking it with firmness to follow the ways that are shown to it. Then, it does not
neglect to watch over it even for a single moment, for were it to indulge in
watching over it, it would prove treacherous and waste the capital.
After finishing from that, it should account it, and ask it to fulfill the
conditions put on it. That is a traffic whose profit is the supreme Paradise, and
attainment of the Lote Tree with the Prophets and martyrs. So, to account the
self minutely is more important than to account anyone else in the profits of this
world, given that they are despicable in comparison with the never-ending bliss of
the hereafter. Whatever the worldly profits might be, they are perishable, and no
good lies in a good that is perishable:On the contrary, perishable evil is better
than perishable good, for when evil perishes, the pleasure with its disappearance
becomes permanent, whereas the sorrow for the loss of the perishable good
survives forever.
For this reason, it is incumbent on everyone who has faith in Allah and the
Last Day not to indulge in accounting himself and making it tight upon it in its
motion and stillness, passing thoughts and steps. Every breath one takes during
his lifetime is a precious gem that could never be substituted, for by which a

The quarter of the saviors
578
treasure could be purchased, whose bliss is inexhaustible.
When one gets up in the morning and offers Fajr prayer, he should dedicate
his heart for an hour to put conditions on himself, saying to it: "I have no good
to traffic with other than the lifetime, and once it is over, the capital is consumed.
That new day is a respite given to me by Allah Almighty, and were He to send me
to death, I would hope that He should return me to the world even for one day
to work righteousness. So, work as if you died and then returned once again to
this world. Beware and beware of wasting any moment of that day, for any breath
I take is a precious gem that could not be valued.
Furthermore, it should be known to you, O soul, that every day and night
consists of twenty-four hours. It is narrated that "per a day and a night, twentyfour stores set in rows are spread before the servant. One of them is opened to
him which he sees filled with lights, representing the good deeds he has done at
that certain hour, for which he becomes joyful and cheerful because of seeing
those lights, which are his means with Allah the Sovereign, so much that were it
to be distributed among the denizens of the fire, that joy would dazzle them from
feeling the pain of the fire. At the same time, another black dark store is opened
to him, exuding stink whose darkness overwhelms him, representing the hour in
which he has committed sins, for which he receives of terror and horror so much
that were it to be distributed among the inhabitants of Paradise, it would distract
their pleasure and delight in it. A third empty store is opened to him, having
nothing to please or aggrieve him."
Thus, he should ask himself to strive its utmost to fill its store with good
things on that very day, and not to rely on laziness and idleness, lest it would
lose the high degrees of Illiyyun that others might attain, which brings about
never-ending grief and regret, even were such to be forgiven and admitted to
the Garden. A wise man said in this connection: "Suppose that the evildoer is
forgiven, is it not that he would lose the reward of the doers of good?" by
that, he refers to the loss and grief such would receive. In confirmation of
that, Allah Almighty said: " The Day that He assembles you (all) for a Day of
Assembly, - that will be a day of mutual loss and gain (among you)." (AtTaghabun 9)

i0o*-U^JT\’y.iU'i
As such his advice to his soul during "his different times should be.
After that, he should resume advising it concerning its seven organs: the eye,
the ear, the tongue, the abdomen, the genitals, the hand and the foot. These are
servants to his soul in that traffic. For the Hell, there are seven gates, to each of
which a portion is allotted. Those gates are assigned to the sinners according to
the organ with which they disobey Allah. Thus, one should advise them to
safeguard themselves from committing sins as follows:
The eye should be kept from looking at the unlawful, or looking at a Muslim
with the eye of contempt, and in sum from looking at what is dispensable, for
Allah Almighty would question the servant about his dispensable glances, in the
same way as He would ask him about the useless speech. Once he diverts it from
that, he should immediately engage it in what is profitable for it, i.e. to do only

'

\

Book eight: Watching and reckoning

579

that for which it is created. He should look at the wonders of the making of Allah
Almighty with the eye of consideration to take lessons to learn, to look at the
good deeds to take them as example to follow, to look at the Book of Allah and
the sunnah of His Messenger "peace be upon him", and to go through the books
of wisdom and knowledge to receive admonition and get benefit.
He should do the same concerning all organs, particularly the tongue and the
abdomen. As far as the tongue is concerned, it is free in talking, and there is no
restriction on it. Its crime is severe concerning backbiting, talebearing, telling lies,
giving prestige to oneself, criticizing and condemning others, invoking evil on
enemies and disputation in speech, etc. But it is created only to persist in
remembrance and reminding others of Allah Almighty, learning and teaching,
guiding the servants to the way of Allah Almighty, making peace and
reconciliation between people, and the like of such good things. So, one should
put condition on himself not to move his tongue during the day but in
remembrance of Allah Almighty. One's speech should be remembrance, his look
consideration, and his silence meditation: " Not a word does he utter but there is
a sentinel by him, ready (to note it)." (Qaf 18)
As for abdomen, one should force himself to leave greed and not eat but
from the lawful, avoid what is suspicious, withdraw from appetence, and restrict
himself only to what is necessary to sustain him. In this issue, he should put
condition on himself that in case she does anything in opposition to that, he
would punish it by withholding all abdominal appetites from it, so that it would
lose more than what it gains.
As such he should put conditions on himself concerning all organs and parts
of body. Then, he should resume his advice to it concerning the regular acts of
worship which he does daily, and then the supererogatory deeds which he has
power to do. Those conditions are lacking everyday. But if one gets accustomed
to do so for many days and his soul complies with him in fulfillment of them,
then there is need for him to repeat putting such conditions everyday. If it
complies with him in part and not in all, he still needs to put conditions at least in
the remaining part. But even, everyday, there is a new event that requires a new
ruling and prescription, in which Allah Almighty has a right on him. That applies
most to him who is engaged in anything of the worldly occupations, for no day
could pass without a new incident in which he needs to observe the right of
Allah. He then should put condition on himself to adhere to uprightness and
honesty, comply with the truth concerning its course, and beware of the evil
consequence of negligence.
That is the beginning stage of being positioned in guard of oneself. It is to
reckon the self before the deed. However, reckoning might be after or before the
deed by means of warning of what would be in the future, as confirmed by the
statement of Allah: " And know that Allah knows what is in your hearts, and take
heed of Him; and know that Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Forbearing." (AlBaqarah 235)

The quarter of the saviors

580

In confirmadon of such reckoning, Allah Almighty says: "O you who
believe! when you go abroad in the cause of Allah, invesdgate carefully." (AnNisa' 94)
And: "O you who believe! if a wicked person comes to you with any news,
ascertain the truth, lest you harm people unwittingly, and afterwards become full
of repentance for what you have done." (Al-Hujurat 6)
l»j3 io' i_^v.L>.i9 jlL

ii jSc.

o! iijx* i*

^

4O
->^*3 ti Jp iy>r^=L^i
And: "It was We Who created man, and We know what dark suggestions
his soul makes to him: for We are nearer to him than (his) jugular vein." (Qaf
16)
^
V/1
^
^
illj ^
He said so by means of warning of what would be in the future.
In this respect, it is narrated on die authority of Ubadah Ibn As-Samit that
the Prophet "peace be upon him" said to a man by way of instruction: "If you
intend to do a thing, then, think first about its consequence: if it is right, then, do
it, otherwise, desist from it."
According to a wise man: "If you like your mind to prevail over your
inclination, then, do not behave in response to the desire immediately, until you
think about the consequence: indeed, regret resides in the heart longer than does
the relief of desire."
According to Luqman: "If a faithful believer sees the consequence (before he
does anything), he would be safe from regret."
It is further narrated on the authority of Shaddad Ibn Aws "Allah be pleased
with him" from the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
that he said: "The intelligent among the people is he who accounts himself
(during his lifetime), and works for what is to come after his death; and the
foolish is he who subjugates his soul to its inclination and then expects from
Allah (to forgive for him)."
According to Umar "Allah be pleased with him": "Reckon yourselves before
you would be called to account (on the Day of Judgement), and weigh them
before you would be weighed and be ready for the greater display."
He wrote the following phrase to Abu Musa Al-Ash'ari "Allah be pleased with
him": "Account yourself at the time of ease even before you do at the time of
adversity." He asked Ka'b "Allah be pleased with him": "How do you find it in
the Scripture?" he said: "Woe to the accountant of the earth from the Accountant
of the heaven." He struck him with the stick and said: "Except for such as
reckons himself." On that Ka'b said to him: "O Commander of Believers! That
(which you have said) is besides (what I have said) in the Torah, with nothing
between them."

Book eight: Watching and reckoning

581

CHAPTER TWO
SECOND STATION: WATCHING
Once a man put such conditions on himself, there still remains his role of
watching and observing it with the watching eye. That is because were it to be left
freely, it would transgress the due bound and become corrupt. So, let us here
mention first the virtue of watching, and then its different degrees.
Explication Of Virtue Of Watching
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah (Al-Bukhari) and Umar
(Muslim) "may Allah be pleased with them" that Gabriel "peace be upon him"
appeared in the form of a good-looking man and asked the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" about Ihsan (faithfulness), thereupon
he said: "It is to worship Allah as if you see Him, and it is true that you really do
not see Him, you should put in mind that He sees you."
Allah Almighty said, in confirmation of that: " Is then He Who stands over
every soul (and knows) all that it does, (like any others)?" (Ar-Ra'd 33)
4
{Js- Vli 'jA ^3\ ^
And: "Knows he not that Allah does see?" (Al-'Alaq 14)
4 0 CSji
^
And: "for Allah ever watches over you." (An-Nisa' 1)

i 0 Ct;

birii bj ►

And: "Those who faithfully observe their trusts and their covenants." (AlMu'minun 8)
i 0 bjt-j
r* oyf!3 >
Ibn Al-Mubarak "may Allah have mercy upon him" said to a man: "Watch
(the commandments of) Allah Almighty." He asked him about its interpretation,
thereupon he said to him: "Be as if you ever see Allah."
According to Abd-Al-Wahid Ibn Zaid "may Allah have mercy upon him": "If
my master watches over me, then, I do not care about anyone else."
According to Abu Uthman Al-Maghribi: "The best thing to which one should
adhere in this way is accounting and watching of himself, and driving his work
with the help of knowledge."
According to Ibn Ata': "The best act of worship is to watch over the Real (the
commandments of Allah) all the time."
According to Al-Jariri: "This matter (of religion) of ours is based on two
principles: to adhere to watching over (the commandments of) Allah Almighty,
and make knowledge stand to lead your outward behaviour."
According to Abu Uthman: Abu Hafs said to me: "When you sit to instruct
the people, instruct first yourself, and do not be deceived by their gathering
round you, for they indeed watch over your outward conduct, whereas Allah
Almighty watches over your inward secret."
It is related that a Shaykh had a student whom he honored and highly

The quarter of the saviors
582
esteemed. His colleagues, who were older than him, complained to the Shaykh
how he made that young man more eminent than them. To prove his worth of
that estimation, he invited all of them and gave each a bird and a knife and asked
each of them to slay his bird in a place where none could see him. All of them
returned some time later with their birds slain, except for that young man who
returned with his bird still living. He asked him why he had not slain it, thereupon
he said to him: "I have not found a place where none could see me, for Allah
Almighty watches over me wherever I am." They appreciated from him that
watching (of the commandments of Allah) and said: "You are worthy of
honoring more than us."
It is further narrated that when Zulaikhah intended to have sexual relation
with Yusuf "peace be upon him" she stood and covered the face of an idol which
she worshipped. On that he said to her: "What is wrong with you? Do you feel
shy of watching a non-living being and I do not feel shy of watching (Allah) the
Irresistible Sovereign?"
It is further related that a young man seduced a girl to have sexual relation
with her and she said to him: "Do you not feel shy?" he said: "Of whom should I
feel shy given that none sees us other than the stars?" she said: "Then, where is
the Creator of those stars?"
According to Malik Ibn Dinar "may Allah have mercy upon him": "There are
Gardens of Eden, from those of Paradise, in which there are houris created from
the roses of Paradise." He was asked: "Then, who would live in them?" he said:
Allah Almighty says: "Such as live in the Gardens of Eden are those who, when
they intend to do sins, remember My grandeur and then watch Me, whose backs
bow out of fear of Me. By My Honor and Glory, I intend to send punishment on
the inhabitants of the earth, and once I look at those who are hungry and thirsty
for fear of Me, I divert punishment from them."
When Al-Muhasibi "may Allah have mercy upon him" was asked about
watching (of Allah) he said: "The first step of it is the heart's knowledge of the
nearness of Allah Almighty."
It is narrated that Allah Almighty said to the angels: "You are entrusted to
watch the outward conduct, and I am watcher over the inward secrets."
According to Sahl "may Allah have mercy upon him": "The heart does not
get adorned with anything better and more honorable than the servant's
knowledge that Allah is witness and watcher over him wherever he is ."
When a wise man was asked about the following statement of Allah Almighty:
" Allah well pleased with them, and they with Him: all this for such as fear their
Lord and Cherisher" (Al-Bayyinah 7)

He said: "It is he who watches (the commandments of) his Lord, reckons
".himself and gets provision for his place of return
Dhun-Nun was asked: "By which should one attain Paradise?" He said: "By
five things: uprightness in which there is no crookedness, vigilance in which there
is no forgetfulness, watching (the commandments of) Allah Almighty in secret

Book eight: Watching and reckoning
583
and public, expecting death by getting ready for it, and reckoning yourself before
you would be reckoned."
Humaid At-Tawil said to Sulaiman Ibn Ali: "Instruct me." He said: "If you
disobey Aliah while you are in privacy thinking that He sees you, then, you have
dared to commit a grievous thing; and if you think that He sees you not, then,
you have disbelieved in Allah."
According to Sufyan Ath-Thawri "may Allah have mercy upon him": "You
have to watch (the commandments of) Him from Whom nothing is hidden, hope
in the One Who has the power to fulfill the promise, and beware of Him Who
has the power to punish."
It is narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Dinar that he said: I set out
in the company of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him" to Mecca
and on the way we halted to spend the night for rest. Then, a shepherd came
down towards him from the mountain and Umar said to him: "O shepherd! Sell
me a goat." He said: "I am a slave (and those goats belong to my master)." He
said: "Tell him that the wolf has eaten it." He said: "Then, where is Allah?" on
that Umar wept and in the morning he went and bought that slave from his
master and emancipated him. He said to him: "This word emancipated you in
this world, and I expect it would emancipate you (from the fire) in the
hereafter."
Explication of real nature and degrees of watching
It should be known to you that watching, in its real nature, is to observe the
watcher, and devote the whole attention to him. Whoever avoids doing anything
for the sake of somebody, it is said that he watches him, and observes his sake.
Watching then is a state of the heart produced from knowledge. This state is
reflected on the works of organs and the heart. As for the state, it is that the heart
observes the watcher, is devoted and concerned with him. As for the knowledge
which produces that state, it is the awareness of the fact that Allah Almighty
knows all things concerning the innermost secrets and intentions, watches over
the works and deeds of the servants, and stands over every soul and knows all
that it does, and that the secret of the heart is exposed to Him in the same way as
the outward conduct is exposed to the people.
Once this knowledge becomes certain, i.e. has no doubt at all, it then
possesses and prevails over the heart. Such as have that certain knowledge are the
closest to Allah Almighty. They are divided into the sincere affirmers of truth,
and the companions of the right hand. Their watching is of two degrees:
The first degree is the watching of the nearest (to Allah) among the sincere
affirmers of truth. It is the watching of honoring and veneration. That is, the
heart is entirely engaged in observation of that glory and majesty, to the extent
that it has no place to care about anything else. But we do not want to talk
much about the works of that watching in detail, for it is restricted to the heart,
whereas the organs abstain from turning to the permissible, let alone the
forbidden. It is that man whose concerns turn into only one for Allah Almighty
suffices him ah concerns and anxieties. Whoever attains that degree becomes
heedless of all the people, so much that he never sees who is with him given

5

:

The quarter of the saviors
584
that his eyes are open, nor hears what is said to him, given that his ears are
sound. That is not impossible. One might be wholeheartedly concerned even
with anything or anyone in this world, which is despicable in comparison with
the Sovereign of the world, to the extent that he does not sense anything else.
It was said to Abd-Al-Wahid Ibn Zaid: "Do you know that anyone in this
time of yours is entirely engaged in his own state from anything else in this
world?" he said: "I do not know but a man who would enter upon you this hour."
A short while later, Utbah Al-Ghulam came in, to whom Abd-Al-Wahid said:
"From where have you come O Utbah?" he said: "From such and such a place"
on the way of the market. He asked him: "Whom have you met on the way?" he
said: "I have met none."
It is related that Yahya Ibn Zakariyya "peace be upon him" passed by a
woman whom he pushed and she fell down on the ground. He was asked: "Why
have you done so?" he said: "I did not think her to be but a wall."
It is further related on the authority of a man who said: "I came upon a group
of people fighting each other, and there was one sitting apart from them. I
moved forward towards him to talk to him and he said: "The remembrance of
Allah Almighty is more pleasant." I asked him: "Are you alone?" he said: "I have
my Lord and two angels." I asked: "Who among those started first?" he said: "He,
for whom Allah has forgiven." I further said to him: "Where is the right way?" he
beckoned to the sky and then stood and went away, saying: "Most of Your
creatures are occupied from You. mi
That is a speech of one who is wholeheartedly engaged in contemplation of
Allah Almighty: he never speaks but from Flim, nor hears but in Him. Such does
not need to watch his organs and tongue, for they never move but within the
limit of the state in which he is.
The second degree is the watching of the pious among the companions of
the right hand. They have certainty of faith in Allah's knowledge of their outward
and inward conduct and hearts. But their observation of glory and majesty does
not confound their hearts: they rather remain in the moderate state, having a
place to turn to different states and works, along with their watching and
observation ( of majesty and glory). It is true that their shyness from Allah
Almighty prevails over them to the extent that they neither do nor abstain from
doing anything before verifying of its validity. They also refrain from anything
that might expose them to shame on the Day of Judgement. Since they see that
Allah Almighty learns all things about them in this world, they do not need to
wait the Day of Judgement.
Whoever is in that degree needs to watch all of his movements and stillness,
passing thoughts and glances, and in sum, all his preferences. He should regard
them twice: once before the deed and the other during the deed.
As for the consideration before the deed, he should check whether what
seems to him and motivates him to do a thing is just for the Sake of Allah Alone
or in compliance with the inclination of the soul and fulfillment of Satan's desires.
He should stop at it until it is revealed to him by the light of the truth: if it is for
the sake of Allah Almighty, let him implement it; and if it is for the sake of

Book eight: Watching and reckoning

585
anything else, let him feel shy of Allah, and desist from it, and blame himself for
thinking about doing it. That pause in the beginning of matters until their reality
are revealed is inevitable and there is no way to discard it. In confirmation of that,
it is narrated that "Concerning every movement made by a servant, no matter
how trivial it might be, three records are spread out: the first pertains to the
reason, the second to the way it is done, and the third to the purpose of doing it."
Once a servant knows that he would be given to such demands and rebuke in
case his work is done for anything or anyone other than Allah Almighty, of a
surety, he would demand himself before it would be demanded (in the hereafter),
and prepare an answer to the question. Let his answer be right. Let not him do
anything before verification of its validity, nor move his eyelid nor his finger
before meditation.
In confirmation of that, it is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said to Mu'adh Ibn Jabal "Allah be pleased with
him": "The man would be questioned even about applying kohl to his eyes,
rubbing clay and touching the garment of his brother with his fingers."
According to Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him": "It was the habit
of the righteous predecessors that whenever anyone of them wanted to give in
charity, he would think and verify first: If it would be for the sake of Allah
Almighty Alone, he would implement it, otherwise, he would not do it."
That is the first (pre-work) consideration in that watching, from which none
is delivered except by strong knowledge and real gnosis of the mysteries of deeds,
innermost secrets of the soul and intrigues and plots of Satan. Unless one knows
well himself and his Lord, his enemy Iblis, knows what agrees with his
inclinations and desires, and differentiates in his intention between it and what
Allah likes and approves, no doubt, he would not be delivered in that watching.
Most people do things out of ignorance of what Allah Almighty dislikes, thinking
that they do good. Think not that the ignorant who has the power to learn is
excused for his ignorance. How far! Seeking knowledge is an obligation due upon
every Muslim.
That is why a two-rak'ah prayer to be offered by a learnt is better than one
thousand rak'ahs to be offered by a layman, for the learned knows well the evils
of souls, intrigues and plots of Satan, and places of deception and conceit, from
which he safeguards himself, unlike the ignorant who does not know that: then,
how should he avoid it? The ignorant continues to trouble himself and Satan
continues to be in joy and schadenfreude at him. We seek refuge with Allah from
heedlessness and ignorance, for ignorance is the fountainhead of wretchedness
and the basis of loss.
It is then the ruling of Allah that one should watch himself whenever he
intends to do anything, and seeks to implement it with the organs, and pause until
it is revealed to him, by the light of knowledge, that it is for the sake of Allah
Almighty, thereupon he should implement it, or for the inclination of the soul
thereupon he should desist from it. Unless the first step towards falsehood is
driven away, it surely would develop desire, and desire would develop concern,
and concern would develop decisive intention, and decisive intention would

The quarter of the saviors
586
develop the act, and the act would develop perdition and destruction. For this
reason, the substance of evil should be cut off from its beginning and primal
source, i.e. the passing thought, which leads to all things.
If die reality of the event is abstruse and darkens on anyone, he should
discover it with the light of knowledge, and seek refuge with Allah Almighty from
the cunning of Satan by means of inclination. If he fails to do so depending on
his own knowledge, let him then seek guidance by the light of the knowledge of
the religious scholars, and flee from the misleading scholars who devote
themselves to this world in the same way as, if not more than, he flees from
Satan. It is related that Allah Almighty revealed to David "peace be upon him":
"Ask not about Me such of scholars as intoxicated by his love for this world, lest
he would cut you of My love, for such scholars are diose who cut the way upon
My servants."
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "Indeed, Allah likes the judicious sight when there is a suspicious
matter, and the perfect mind when there is an attacking desire." (Abu Na'im in
his Hilyah on the authority of Imran Ibn Hussain). In this Hadith, he "peace be
upon him" combined both things, i.e. sight and mind, which are concomitant.
Whoever does not have a perfect mind to discern evil from good does not
necessarily have a judicious sight to see such difference.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: "You are now in a time, in which the best of you is he who hastens (to do
good), and there would come upon you a time during which the best of people
would be he who verifies (first before doing anything)."
That is why a set of companions, including Sa'd Ibn Abu Waqqas, Abdullah
Ibn Umar, Usamah Ibn Zaid and Muhammad Ibn Maslamah "Allah be pleased
with them" refrained from taking part in the conflict between those of Iraq and
those of Sham when the matter was abstruse on them. Whoever does not refrain
from doing a thing in which suspicion lies, indeed follows his own inclination and
admires his own opinion, and deserves the description given by the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" in his statement: “You should
keep enjoining what is good upon one another, and forbidding one another to do
evil until when you see niggardliness being prevalent, the own desires and
inclinations being followed, the world being given preference (over the hereafter),
and everyone having an opinion will come to admire his own opinion, then, you
just have to protect your own soul, and let the common people, for there will be
days to come upon you, on which whoever patiendy perseveres (on sticking to
his faith) will be like the one grasping a piece of fire (in his hand), and whoever
works (righteousness) will have a reward like the reward of fifty workers who
work as your work.” (Abu Dawud on the authority of Abu Tha'labah AlKhushani).
Furthermore, whoever delves into a suspicious matter without verification
opposes the following statement of Allah Almighty: " And pursue not that of
which you have no knowledge; for every act of hearing, or of seeing, or of
(feeling in) the heart will be enquired into (on the Day of Reckoning)." (AlIsra' 36)

Book eight: Watching and reckoning ----- —------------------------------------- 587
4

^AiP

y^xJlj £~LXJl <j] ^*lp t-4j> viD

C* OLAJ

^

He also, by so doing, disagrees with the statement of the Messenger of Allah
Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "Beware of assumption (with no
evidence), for (groundless) assumption is the falsest of speech."
Due to the difficulty of that matter, Abu Bakr As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased
with him" used to supplicate with the following supplication: "O Allah! Show me
the truth as truth, and bestow upon me (the favor of) following it, and show me
falsehood as falsehood and bestow upon me (the favor of) avoiding it, and make
it not suspicious for me lest I would follow my inclination."
It is related that Jesus "peace be upon him" said: "The matters are of three
kinds: one which seems clear, and it is that which you should follow. Another
which seems false, and it is that which you should avoid. The third is suspicious:
it is that which you should entrust to the one who is knowledgeable of it." (AtTabarani on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" used to
supplicate with the following supplication: "O Allah! 1 seek refuge with You from
saying anything in religion without knowledge."
Knowledge then is the greatest favor Allah bestows upon the servants. Faith
and revelation of truth also are kinds of knowledge. For this reason, Allah
Almighty says, by way of reminding His servants of His favors:: " and great is the
Grace of Allah unto you." (An-Nisa' 113)
4 (0)

viUp 4JJl 3-iii

Here, He Almighty refers to knowledge. He further says: " if you realize this
not, ask of those who possess the Message." (An-Nahl 43)

oj /Ai' Jif

V

And: "Verily We take upon Ourselves to guide." (Al-Lail 12)
And: "Nay more, it is for Us to explain it (and make it clear)." (Al-

Qiyamah 19)

4 2fS

pt

And: " And unto Allah leads straight the Way." (An-Nahl 9)

According to Ali "Allah be pleased with him": "Inclination is a partner of
blindness; and success lies in abstention from anything when you are put to
confusion: how excellent certainty (of faith) is which drives away anxiety! Regret
is always the consequence of falsehood; and in telling the truth lies safety.
Perhaps a far thing is closer than another which seems close. The stranger is he
who has no beloved; and the sincere affirmer and lover of truth is he whose truth
in his absence is acknowledge. The evil assumption never produces a beloved.
Generosity is the best character, and modesty is a means to every kind of beauty.
The most trustworthy handhold is piety; and the strongest means you utilize is

-

The quarter of the saviors
588
that which is between you and Allah Almighty. You have from your world only
what you mend therewith your resting place. Sustenance is of two kinds: that
which you pursue, and that which pursues you, which, if you do not come to get,
it would come to you. If you grieve for what is lost which is in your hand, then,
do not grieve for what is lost which is not n your hand. Take evidence from what
really was for what has not been yet. Indeed, all matters almost resemble each
other, and man rejoices when he gets what he was not to lose, and grieves when
he loses what he was not to get. So, do not rejoice so much at what you have
from your world, nor should you grieve so much for what you lose from it: on
the contrary, let your happiness be with (the good deeds) you have sent forward,
and your grief be for (the good deeds) that you have failed to do, your
engagement be in your hereafter, and your concern be with what is to come after
your death."
In sum, the first consideration a watcher should have is to see whether his
intention and deed are for the sake of Allah Almighty or for the sake of anything
else. On that occasion, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: "If one has the following three characteristics, he shall have
completed faith: not to fear, in (the religion of) Allah the blame of a blamer; not
to make show of anything of his deed; and if two things are offered to him, one
for this world and the other for the hereafter, he would give preference to the
hereafter over the world." (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami in his Firdaws on the
authority of Abu Hurairah).
What is revealed to him, for the most part, is that the deed is permissible, but
does not concern him, thereupon he leaves it, out of faith in the statement of the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": "It is out of man's
good faith in Islam to leave what does not concern him."
The second consideration of the watcher is when he starts to do the deed. It
is to inspect the way it should be done in order to fulfill the right of Allah in it,
make good his intention concerning it, complete its form and then do it in the
best and most perfect way possible. He should do the same in all his states. If he
watches Allah Almighty in all of this, he would be able to worship Him with
good intention and deed, and observation of related etiquette.
If he is to sit, for instance, he should sit facing the Qiblah, out of faith in the
statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him":
"The best posture of sitting is that in which one faces the Qiblah." (Al-Hakim on
the authority of Ibn Abbas). He also should not sit on buttocks crossing his legs,
for one does not sit with kings like this, and it is the Sovereign of kings Who sees
him. According to Ibrahim Ibn Adham "may Allah have mercy upon him":
"Once, I sat on my buttocks crossing my legs, thereupon I heard a caller saying to
me: "It is as such that one sits with kings?" afterwards, I have never sat in that
posture."
If he is to sleep, he should sleep on his right side, facing the Qiblah, and so
on. In all of this, he should act upon all etiquettes we have already mentioned in
this book. In all that one does, he is either in obedience, or in disobedience, or
doing the permissible. His watching concerning obedience is to be sincere and

Book eight: Watching and reckoning

589

perfect in worship, observe the etiquettes, and safeguard himself from evil. His
watching concerning disobedience is to turn to Allah in repentance and show
regrets, give up the sin, feel shy and modest, and engage in meditation. His
watching concerning the permissible is to observe the etiquettes, witness the
benefactor in the favor, and give thanks for it. A servant, in all his states, has:
either a distress on which he should patiently persevere, or a favor for which he
should give thanks; and all of this is out of watching. Moreover, a servant, in all
of his states, has an act which he should do, a forbidden thing which he should
avoid, or a recommended deed which he is encouraged to do, to hasten to get
forgiveness from Allah Almighty. Everyone of those has certain limits which
should be observed by permanent watching, and whoever transgresses the limits
set by Allah Almighty has indeed wronged himself.
One then should inspect himself continuously in those three divisions. If he
finishes from the obligatory duties, and finds power in himself to do the
supererogatory deeds, let him then seek the best of deeds to engage in, for
whoever has the opportunity to get more profit and he wastes it, he indeed is in
great loss. Profits are attained by the excellent deeds, and it is with this that the
servant takes provision from his world for his hereafter as confirmed by Allah
Almighty: "But seek, with the (wealth) which Allah has bestowed on you, the
Home of the Hereafter, nor forget your pordon in this World: but do you good,
as Allah has been good to you." (Al-Qasas 77)
UiijTCr*
40} iLJj loll

U-j
1

>

1j

All of this might be obtained with padence for only an hour, for there are
three types of hours: a gone hour, which the servant has spent in trouble or in
pleasure; a coming one, which the servant does not know whether or not he
would live until he catches; and a present hour in which he should strive his
utmost and watches (the commandments of) his Lord Almighty. Thus, one
should not have his hope in this world as long as, say, fifty years: on the contrary,
he should live is present dme as if he is in his last breaths, for it may be so and he
does not know. If it is to be really his last breath, he should spend it in a way he
does not dislike that death should approach him on it.
Let all his states be the same as narrated on the authority of Abu Dharr
"Allah be pleased with him" that the Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "A
faithful believer should not be on journey except in three cases: to get provision
for a place of return, to sustain his living, or to take pleasure in what is not
unlawful." (Ahmad, Ibn Hibban and Al-Hakim). It is further narrated that he
"peace be upon him" said in the same Hadith: "A rational one should have only
four hours: an hour in which he talks privately to his Lord, an hour in which he
reckons himself, an hour in which he meditates on the making of Allah Almighty,
and an hour in which he devotes himself to get food and drink." This hour helps
him spend the other hours.
Moreover, even in the hour in which one devotes himself to food and drink,
he should persist in doing the best of deeds, i.e. the remembrance of Allah

The quarter of the saviors
590
Almighty, and meditation on His wonders. Every kind of food has of wonders
and marvels that which, if one thinks about, it would be much better than a lot
of deeds to be done by organs. In this respect, the people are of many divisions:
some of them meditate that with the eye of consideration and contemplation;
and that is the station of those endued with sound minds. Others look at that
with the eye of displeasure and aversion, and observe how they are forced to it,
and hope to dispense with it, but they find themselves oppressed by necessity to
be in need of it, and subjugated to their desires in it. That is the station of the
ascetic. Some try to see the Maker in the making, from which they upgrade to the
attributes of the Creator, and the contemplation of that is a means to remember
gates of thoughts and revelations to be opened for them; and that is the highest
station. It is one of the stations of the Gnostics and signs of lovers (for Allah
Almighty). A fourth division of people look at that with the eye of desire and
greediness, thereupon they grieve for what they have lost of it, and rejoice at what
they get of it, criticize what disagrees with their inclination and disposition of it,
and consequendy, criticize its maker, without knowing that the maker of all
things is Allah Almighty, and by criticizing the making, they indeed criticize Him.
That is the significance of the statement of the Messenger of Allah "peace be
upon him" when he said: "Abuse not the time, for Allah is the (creator and
disposer of) time." (Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
That is the second station of keeping positioned, by permanent watching
of deeds.

CHAPTER THREE
THIRD STATION: RECKONING SELF AFTER DOING THE DEED
Virtue Of Reckoning Self
Here, a mention may be made of the statement of Allah Almighty: " O you
who believe! Fear Allah, and let every soul look to what (provision) he has sent
forth for the morrow. Yea, fear Allah: For Allah is well-acquainted with (all) that
you do." (Al-Hashr 18)
4
y>- 4*1 0] ^
That is a reference to reckoning on the previous deeds. Similar to that is the
statement of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him": "Reckon
yourselves (in this world) before you would be reckoned (in the hereafter), and
weigh them before you would be weighed."
It is narrated that a man came to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" and said: "O Messenger of Allah! Advise me." He "peace be
upon him" said: "Are you getting to act upon that advice?" he answered in the
affirmative, thereupon he said to him: "If you intend to do a thing, then, consider
first its resulting consequence: if it is right, then, implement it, otherwise, if it is
error, desist from it."
In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty said: " And O you Believers! turn you
all together towards Allah, that you may attain Bliss." (An-Nur 31)
y>Ssu

4jI

4)i\ jj \y.yj ^

Book eight: Watching and reckoning

591
Repentance is to consider the act after finishing from it and then show regrets
for it. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "I
pray for forgiveness of Allah Almighty, and turn to Him in repentance one
hundred times per day."
Allah Almighty further said: " Those who fear Allah, when a thought of evil
from Satan assaults them, bring Allah to remembrance, when lo! they see
(aright)!" (Al-A'raf 201)
4 @p*
\ kJl^>
lij IjaJI
According to Maimun Ibn Muhran: "A man does not become one of the
pious until he reckons himself stricter than he reckons his partner." Of a surety,
both partners account each other after finishing from the deed.
It is narrated on the authority of A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" that Abu
Bakr As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased with him" said to her when he was at his last
breaths: "None among the people is more beloved to me than Umar." Then he
said to her: "What have I said?" She repeated to him what he had said, and then
he resumed: "None among the people is dearer to me than Umar." Look how he
considered his word after saying it and when he reflected it, he replaced it with
another one.
Consider also the narration of Abu Talhah "Allah be pleased with him" when
the bird distracted his mind in prayer thereupon he reflected the matter and made
his garden an object of charity for the Sake of Allah Almighty in regret for his sin
and expectation of the recompense for the good he had lost.
It is further related that Abdullah Ibn Salam "Allah be pleased with him"
carried a bundle of fire wood, and when the people saw him they said to him: "O
Abu Yusuf! Your slaves and sons might suffice you that burden!" on that he said:
"I liked to try myself whether or not it would have aversion for that."
According to Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him": "The faithful
believer always stands over himself to reckon him strictly; and the reckoning (in
the hereafter) would be light on a people who reckon themselves in this world;
and reckoning would be heavy on the Day of Judgement on a people who take
this matter without reckoning."
It is narrated on the authority of Anas Ibn Malik "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: One day I set out in the company of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab until he
entered a fenced garden and I heard him saying, and there was a wall between
him and me: "Umar Ibn Al-Khattab, the Commander of Believers! Bravo! Bravo!
By Allah, you should fear Allah, otherwise, He will punish you."
In his comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: " And I do call
to witness the self-reproaching spirit; (eschew Evil)" (Al-Qiyamah 2)

4^>^

r^1 Vs ^

Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "The faithful believer ever
blames himself: What I have intended by my word? What have I intended by my
food? What have I intended by my drink? But the wicked always goes on without
blaming himself."
According to Malik Ibn Dinar "may Allah have mercy upon him": "May Allah

The quarter of the saviors
592
have mercy on a servant who says to himself: 'Am I not the owner of such and
such a thing?' Then, he criticizes and then reins himself and forces it to abide by
the Book of Allah Almighty which becomes his guide."
According to Ibrahim At-Taimi "may Allah have mercy upon him": "I
imagined myself in Paradise eating of its fruits, drinking of its rivers and
embracing its virgin houris. Then, I imagined myself in the fire (of Hell) eating of
its Zaqqum tree, drinking of its pus, and being bound in its chains and fetters. On
that I said to myself: 'O soul! Which of both you like?' it said: 'I like to be sent
back to the world in order to work righteousness.' I said to it: 'Then, now you are
still in your wish: so, work righteousness.'"
According to Malik Ibn Dinar "may Allah have mercy upon him": I heard AlHajjaj saying in his sermon: "May Allah have mercy upon a man who reckons his
own self by himself before its reckoning would be entrusted to another one than
him. May Allah have mercy upon a man who takes lead of his deed in order to
consider what he intend by it. May Allah have mercy upon a man who considers
his measure. May Allah have mercy upon a man who regards his weight..." he
went on saying as such until he caused me to weep.
Explication Of Real Nature Of Reckoning After Doing The Deed
It should be known to you that as well as there is a time in the beginning of
the day in which a servant puts conditions on himself by way of advising it, there
should also be a time in the end of the day in which he demands the soul and
reckons it for every movement and act it has done during the day, just like the
traders, along the entire world, do with their partners in the end of every year,
month, week or day. If they do so in the perishable worldly matters for fear they
would lose anything of it, then, how should one not do so concerning his destiny
which leads him to the permanent never-ending happiness or wretchedness? His
indulgence in doing so results from heedlessness and lack of success and felicity:
We seek refuge with Allah from heedlessness.
Reckoning with one's partner is to review the capital and the resulting
increase or decrease, in order to know and distinguish profit from loss. If there is
a profit, he would take it and give thanks to him; and if there is loss, he would
demand him for surety and obligate him to amend it in the future. Similarly, the
servant's capital in his religion is the obligatory duties, his profit results from
supererogatory and excellent deeds, and his loss results from sins. The season of
this trade is the whole duration of the day, and his partner is his soul which
orders him to do evil:
First of all, he should reckon it on the obligatory duties: if he has fulfilled
them perfectly, he would thank Allah Almighty for it, and exhort it to do the like
of them; and if he has missed all or some of them, he would demand it to
compensate the missed ones; and if he has fulfilled them imperfectly, he would
obligate it to complete them with the supererogatory deeds; and if he has
committed a sin, he would engage in punishing and mortifying it in order to take
from it what he makes up therewith the things in which he has indulged. The
same applies to every movement and act he does like his vision, passing thoughts,
sitting, standing, eating, drinking, sleeping and even his silence.

Book eight: Watching and reckoning
593
Furthermore, one should reckon his own self for the entire lifetime day by
day and hour by hour, concerning all of his external and internal organs, and even
his breaths. Were one to put a stone in his house for every sin he commits daily,
surely, his house would be filled with stones so much along a short time of his
life. But unfortunately, one indulges in making a record of sins, nothing of which,
anyway, is missed by the angels who record everything on him and keep it in the
account of his deeds.
It is narrated that Tawbah Ibn As-Summah, who lived in Raqqah, used to
reckon himself severely day by day. He accounted one day and behold! He
found out that he was sixty years old. By accounting their days, he found out
that they were twenty-one thousand and five hundred days. On that he cried
saying: "Woe to me! Should I meet the Sovereign with nearly twenty-one
thousand sins? How should it be then given that everyday there are more than
ten thousand sins?" he fell unconscious, and behold! He died. Immediately, they
heard a voice saying: "How good lying it is that leads direcdy to the highest
Paradise!"
As such one should reckon his own soul relendessly.

CHAPTER FOUR
FOURTH STATION: PUNISHING SELF
Whatever one reckons himself, it could hardly be free from committing sins
and mistakes. For this reason, one should not neglect it. If he neglects it, it would
be too easy on him to commit sins. He then should punish it. For example, if he
eats a morsel of food whose source is suspicious with greed, he should then
punish his abdomen by giving it to hunger; and if he looks at the unlawful, he
should punish the eye by preventing it from looking at anything entirely. The
same applies to punishing any organ and part of his body, in case it commits
indulgence, by preventing it from its own desire and appetence. That was the
habit of the travelers on the path to the hereafter.
It is narrated on the authority of Ibrahim Ibn Mansur that a worshipper
talked to a woman (who was unlawful for him) and he continued to talk to her
until he put his hand over her thigh. But he regretted and (to punish himself for
that) he placed his hand into the fire until it got stiff.
It is further narrated that from among the children of Israel, there was a
man who worshipped Allah in his hermitage for a long time. Once, he looked
from the window of his hermitage and behold! There was a fascinating woman
who attracted him. He intended to come out to her (to have sexual relation with
her), and once he got out his foot to descend to her, Allah rescued him by
reminding him of his previous good deeds. He said to himself: "What is that
which I intend to do?" He restored his right direction and Allah Almighty
protected him from that sin. When he intended to return his foot to the
hermitage he said to himself: "How far! How far! How could a leg that has
come out with the intention to disobey Allah return to my hermitage once
again? That would never be." He left it hung outside the hermitage, exposed to
sun, rain, frost and wind until it tore to pieces and then fell down. Allah
Almighty appreciated for him that conduct, and revealed his mention in one of
His Scriptures.

i

The quarter of the saviors
It is related that both Ghazwan and Abu Musa "Allah be pleased with them"
were in a holy battle when a girl was exposed and Ghazwan looked at her
(lustfully). Showing regret for his doing, he raised his hand therewith he slapped
his eye until he gouged it out. He said to it: "You peep into what causes harm to
you."
It is narrated from one of those righteous that he looked only once at a
woman (lustfully), thereupon he made it binding upon himself, (by way of
punishment) not to drink the cold water along his lifetime, and rather he kept
drinking the hot water in order to embitter his life on himself.
It is narrated from Hassan Ibn Abu Sinan that he passed by a chamber and
then asked himself: "When has this been built?" then he turned to himself and
said to it: "How do you ask about what concerns you not? By Allah, I would
punish you by observing fasts for a whole year." He then observed fasts for a
whole year consecutively."
It is further related from Tamim Ad-Dari "Allah be pleased with him" that he
slept one night and failed to stand for Tahajjud prayer. In order to punish himself
for his indulgence, he kept standing in prayer for the whole night everyday for a
complete year.
It is narrated on the authority of Talhah "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: One day, a man rushed in the street and put off his garment and rolled
himself in the scorching sand, saying to himself: "Taste (the scorching heat),
given that the fire of Hell is more sweltering." Such being the case, he saw the
Prophet "peace be upon him" under the shade of a tree, thereupon he came to
him and said: "My self has overpowered me." The Prophet "peace be upon him"
said to him: "Was it necessary for you to do what you had done? Behold! The
gates of the heaven were opened to you, and Allah Almighty showed pride to the
angels because of you." Then he said to his companions: "Take provision from
your brother." They went on saying to him, one after the other: "O so and so!
Invoke good upon me." The Prophet "peace be upon him" asked him to
comprehend them all in invocation, thereupon he said: "O Allah! Make piety their
provision, and unite their decision on guidance." The Prophet "peace be upon
him" said: "O Allah! Grant him success." The man said: "O Allah! Make Paradise
their returning place." (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya)
Hudhaifah Ibn Qatadah "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: It was said
to a man: "How do you do with yourself concerning its desires?" he said:
"Nothing on the surface of the earth is more hateful to me than it. Then, how
should I fulfill for it its desires?"
Ibn As-Sammak entered upon Dawud At-TYi "may Allah have mercy upon
him" when he died, and his dead body was lying on the ground. On that he said
to him: "O Dawud! You have imprisoned yourself (in this world) before you
would be put to prison and punished yourself before you would be punished (on
the Day of Judgement); and today you would get the reward of Him for Whom
you worked."
Wahb Ibn Munabbih said: There was a man who worshipped Allah for a
long time, and then he seemed to have a need from Allah Almighty. He stood
594

595
Book eight: Watching and reckoning
(in prayer) for seventy Saturdays, on each of which he ate only eleven dates and
then asked Allah Almighty for his need, but it was not given to him. Then, he
returned to himself and said to it: "It is from you that I was put to affliction.
Had there been good in you, surely, you would have been given your need."
Then, an angel descended to him and said: "O man! This hour of yours is much
better than your whole previous worship; and Allah Almighty has fulfilled your
need."
Abdullah Ibn Qais said: "We were in a holy batde when the enemy faced us,
and a cry was made to the people who, in turn, stood to the fighting on a very
windy day. Behold! There was a man in front of me, and he was saying to himself:
"O my soul! Have I attended such and such a batde and you said to me 'Guard
yourself for the sake of your family and children', and I obeyed you and returned?
Has the same not occurred in another batde? By Allah, on that day I would
oppose you, and it is incumbent upon Allah to take away or leave you." I (the
narrator) said to myself): "Let me peep at him to day in order to see what he
would do." When the people attacked their enemy, he was among the first of
them. When the enemy launched an opposing attack against us, and we were
exposed, he was steadfast and remained firm in his place and persisted in fighting
until he was killed in the end of the day. I counted over sixty wounds in his body
and his riding mount."
There are a lot of examples for such punishment as therewith those of
resolute power used to punish themselves whenever they committed sins or fell
in mistakes. Wonder at you when you punish your slave, slave-girl, child, and
their like when they err or sin for fear that if you indulge in punishing them, they
might transgress against you. But at the same time, you neglect to punish your
own self when you err or sin, given that it is the greatest enemy to and the most
transgressing against you, and the harm you receive from its transgression against
you is more than that you receive from the transgression of anyone of your
children or slaves against you. Their final end is to distract the living of this world
upon you, and were you to know, you would learn, with certainty, that the real
good, and never-ending permanent bliss lie in the living of the hereafter; and it is
your own self which embitters on you the living of the hereafter. That is why it is
worthier of punishment than anyone else.

CHAPTER FIVE
FIFTH STATION: SELF-MORTIFICATION
When one reckons his own self and finds that it has sinned or erred, he
should punish it with the previous punishments. But if he sees that it slows
down, out of laziness, to do anyone of the excellent deeds or devotional
recitals, he should discipline it, by giving it heavy religious assignments, and
force it to adhere to a lot of religious duties and tasks, perchance he would
compensate what he has missed. That was the custom of the righteous workers
of Allah Almighty.
As such Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him" punished himself
when he missed the Asr prayer in congregation: He gave in charity a piece of land
belonging to him priced at two hundred thousand Dirhams. It was the habit of

The quarter of the saviors
596
Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with them" that whenever he missed an obligatory
prayer in congregation, he would stand in prayer during the whole of that night.
One night, he delayed offering Maghrib prayer until two stars appeared,
thereupon he emancipated two slaves. On another occasion, Ibn Abu Rabie'ah
missed the two-rak'ah prayer (to be offered before) Fajr, thereupon he
emancipated a slave.
Some of them used to make it binding upon himself, by way of punishment,
to observe fasts for a whole year consecutively or to set out on journey for Hajj
on foot, or to give in charity the whole of his property. All of this was in order to
keep the soul steadfasdy stationed, and punish it with what saves it.
You may say: "My soul does not agree with me to be involved in that
mortification and those devotional recitals regularly: then, what is the way to deal
with it?" in reply to that, let me tell you that the way to do so is to listen to what
is reported in the traditions about the excellence of self-mortification:
It is narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr Ibn Al-As "Allah be
pleased with him" that he said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and
peace be upon him” said: “He, who stands for prayer by night with even ten
Holy Verses, will not be enrolled among the heedless; and he who stands for
prayer by night with one hundred Holy Verses will be enrolled among the
devout; and he who stands for prayer by night with one thousand Holy
Verses will be enrolled among the highest (assembly of) worshippers." (Abu
Dawud)
It is further narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with
him" that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
“Allah’s Mercy be upon a man who gets up at night, offers (supererogatory)
prayer, and awakens his wife and she offers prayer, and if she refuses, he
sprinkles water over her face; and Allah’s Mercy be upon a woman who gets up at
night, offers (supererogatory) prayer, and awakens her husband and he offers
prayer, and if he refuses, she sprinkles water over his face.” (Abu Dawud and Ibn
Majah).
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "Stick to standing at night (to offer supererogatory prayers), since it
was the practice of the previous righteous before you." (At-Tirmidhi).
Among the best ways besides to treat it is to get the company of one of the
servants of Allah Almighty who strives his utmost in worship, and take him as an
example to follow. But this way of treatment now has become difficult for you
could hardly find such as strives his utmost in worship in the same way as the
previous ones did. So, one should turn from seeing to hearing, for nothing
nowadays benefits more than hearing their news and knowing their states and
traditions. Although their trouble was over (as they died) their reward and bliss
remain perpetually and ceaselessly. How great is their dominion, and how sorry
are those who do not imitate them!
Let us here relate of the attributes and good merits of those who strive their
utmost in worship, in order for the novice on the path to Allah might be moved
by desire to strive his utmost in imitation of them.

Book eight: Watching and reckoning

597
The Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said: "Allah's mercy be upon a
people who seem sick (because of worship), although they are not sick."
(Ahmad). According to Al-Hassan: "It is worship which fatigues them."
Allah Almighty said: " And those who dispense their charity with their hearts
full of fear, because they will return to their Lord." (Al-Mu'minun 60)
i
oAj
J] fr1
^ Oyyi OiAHj }
According to Al-Hassan: "They do what they do of the deeds of
righteousness, and at the same time fear that this might not deliver them from the
punishment of Allah Almighty."
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Blessed be he who lives long and his deed is good." (At-Tabarani on the
authority of Abdullah Ibn Bishr).
It is narrated that Allah Almighty says to His angels: "What is the matter with
My servants that they strive their utmost (in worship)?" they say: "O our God!
You fairly frightened them of something which they came to fear, and attracted
them to something for which they came to have longing." On that Allah, the
Exalted and the Blessed says: "Then, how would they be if My servants see Me?
Of a surety, they would strive their utmost more and more."
Al-Hassan Al-Basri "may Allah have mercy upon him" said: "I have caught a
people and accompanied many of them, and they neither rejoiced at anything of
this world they received, nor grieved for anything of it they lost, for it was, in
their sight, more trivial than this earth which you trample. Anyone of them
happened to have no more than a single garment along his entire life, nor did he
ever order his wife to cook food for him, nor did he ever make anything between
his body and the earth. At the same time, I caught them and they acted upon the
(principles and teachings of the) Book of their Lord and the sunnah of their
Prophet "peace be upon him": whenever night fell upon them, they would stand
on their toes (in prayer) and spread their faces on the ground (in prostration),
with their tears flowing over their cheeks, talking privately to their Lord Almighty
in the hope of being released (from His punishment). If they did a good deed,
they would rejoice at it, give thanks to Allah for it, and ask Him to accept it from
them; and if they committed a misdeed, it would aggrieve them, and they would
ask Allah Almighty to forgive it for them. By Allah, they remained as such and on
the same state; and by Allah, they were neither completely free from sins, nor
saved but by forgiveness."
The wife of Masruq said about him: "He was not seen but with his legs
swollen because of the long times he used to spend in prayer. By Allah, I many
times sat behind him, weeping out of pity for him."
According to Abu Ad-Darda' "Allah be pleased with him": "Had it not been
for three things, I would not have liked to live in this world even for a single
moment: To be thirsty for the Sake of Allah at the very noon when it is very hot;
to fall in prostration to Allah in the middle of the night; and to sit with people
who pick up the most pleasant of words, in the same way as the most pleasant of
fruits are picked up."
It is related that Al-Aswad Ibn Yazid used to strive his utmost in worship: he

i

The quarter of the saviors
598
observed fasts during die scorching heat until his body would turn green and
pale. Alqamah Ibn Qais said to him: "Why do you punish yourself as such?" he
replied to him: "It is its dignity which I intend thereby." He used to observe fasts
so much until his body would turn pale and to offer prayer for a long time until
he would fall down out of tiredness. Both Anas Ibn Malik "Allah be pleased with
him" and Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him" entered to visit him and
inquire about his health and said to him: "Indeed, Allah Almighty did not order
you to do all of this." He said to them: "I am but a slave owned (by Allah), and so
I never leave anything leading to submissiveness but that I do it."
It is narrated from one of those righteous that he used to pray one thousand
rak'ahs everyday until he became paralyzed. But he continued to pray the same
one thousand rak'ahs everyday as sitting. Whenever he offered Asr prayer he
would move crawling, and then say: "I wonder at the creatures: how do they like
a substitute for You? I wonder at the creatures: how do they become affable with
anything else other than You? I wonder at the creatures: how do their hearts seek
light with remembrance of anyone other than You?"
It is said about Thabit Al-Bunani "may Allah have mercy upon him" that
prayer was endeared to him, thereupon he said: "O Allah! If You are to permit
anyone to pray in his grave, then, permit me to pray in my grave."
According to Al-Junaid: "I have never seen one more devoted to worship
than As-Sari "may Allah have mercy upon him": Ninety-eight years came upon
him, during which he was never seen lying except in his fatal illness."
According to Al-Harith Ibn Sa'd: Some people came upon a monk and saw
how he strove his utmost extremely in worship. They talked to him about that
and he said: "What is that to do when people are doomed to face terrors while
they are heedless? They indeed dedicated themselves to their own fortunes from
this world, and forgot their greater fortune from their Lord." On that all the
people who were present went on weeping.
Abu Muhammad Al-Maghazili said: Abu Muhammad Al-Jariri spent a year in
the neighbourhood of the Ka'bah in Mecca during which he never slept, nor
spoke, nor even reclined his back against a pillar, nor stretched his legs. Such
being the case, Abu Bakr Al-Kittani passed by him and saluted him. he asked
him: "O Abu Muhammad! By which thing have you the power to spend that
period in seclusion?" He said: "He (Allah) learnt my true secret, thereupon He
helped me against my outward conduct." Al-Kittani lowered his head and turned
away and was given to deep reflection.
According to Thabit Al-Bunani: "I caught a people anyone of whom used to
offer (supererogatory) prayer so long that after prayer he would not be able to go
to bed except as crawling."
It was said that Abu Bakr Ibn Ayyash spent forty years during which he never
lay his side on the ground; and one of his eyes got troubled and his family did not
know about it for twenty years.
It also was said that the devotional recital of Samnun was the prayer of five
hundred rak'ahs everyday.
It was said to Abdullah Ibn Amir: "How could you persevere on the

Book eight: Watching and reckoning

599

sleeplessness at night and thirst at the scorching noon?" He said: "It is nothing
except that I have turned the food of the day to the night, and the sleep of the
night to the day; and that is of no significance."
It is narrated on the authority of one of the companions of Ali "Allah be
pleased with him" that he said: I offered Fajr prayer behind Ali Ibn Abu Talib
and when he concluded the prayer with the end salutation (Taslim), he turned
away towards his right side and the signs of gloominess were visible on his face.
He stayed as such until sun rose thereupon he turned his hand and said: "I saw
the companions of Muhammad "peace be upon him", and by Allah I do not see
today anyone like them. Whenever morning came upon them, they would be
unkempt and pale, and covered with dust for they had spent the night in
prostration and standing in prayer for the Sake of Allah, reciting the Book of
Allah, and changing between their feet and foreheads; and whenever they
remembered Allah, they would bend in the same way as the trees bend on a
windy day, and their eyes would overflow with tears so much until their garments
would be wetted. But it seems that those people (who were present with him
when he said so) spent the night heedless."
It is further related that Abu Muslim Al-Khawlani hung a whip in the mosque
of his house to frighten himself therewith. He used to say to himself: "Stand up,
and by Allah, I would proceed on with you (in worship) until you and not I
would get tired." But whenever he wearied, he would take hold of his whip and
lash his leg with it saying: "You are worthier of beating than my riding mount."
He used to say: "Do the companions of Muhammad "peace be upon him" think
that they would take him for themselves on the exclusion of us? No, by Allah, we
would contest them over him until they know that they left good successors after
them."
It is further narrated that Safwan Ibn Sulaim had his legs twisted in view of
his standing in prayer for a long time. He died while he was prostrating. He used *
to say: "O Allah! I like meeting You, so, like meeting me."
It is narrated on the authority of Al-Qasim Ibn Muhammad that he said:
"Whenever I came out early in the morning everyday, I would go first to
A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" to pay her salutation. One day I went to
her and found her offering Duha prayer and reading while weeping: "But
Allah has been good to us, and has delivered us from the Penalty of the
Scorching Wind." (At-Tur 27)

i (©>-*•^33 1*3* ^

>

She also went on supplicating, repeating and imploring and I kept standing
for a long time and she remained in the same state. Saw that, I suggested to
myself to go to the market and finish from my needs and then return to her.
When I finished from my needs and returned to her, she was still in the same
state of repeating the Holy Verse and supplicating and weeping."
According to a righteous predecessor: "I do not feel afraid of death except
that it would impede me from standing at night (in prayer and remembrance)."
According to Ali Ibn Abu Talib "Allah be pleased with him": "The sign of the
righteous is the paleness because of spending the night wakeful, bleary-eyedness

The quarter of the saviors
600
because of weeping so much, and dryness of lips because of observing fasts, and
they also have the dust color of the submissive."
It was said to Al-Hassan "may Allah have mercy upon him": "What is the
matter with those who offer Tahajjud prayer at night that they are the most goodlooking among the people?" he said: "That is because they stay in seclusion with
(Allah) the Most Gracious, thereupon He dresses them in the dress of His light."
According to Ja'far Ibn Muhammad: "Utbah AJ-Ghulam used to interrupt
the night with three cries: whenever he offered Isha' prayer, he would place his
head in between his knees and go in meditadon. When one-third the night
elapsed, he would make a cry, and then place his head in between his knees and
go on meditadon. When two-thirds the night elapsed, he would make another
cry, and then place his head in between his knees and go on meditadon until
when it was a short while before dawn, he would make a third cry. I related that
to one of the inhabitants of Basrah who said: "Do not care about his cry, but
rather about the state in which he is in the interval between the cries undl he
cries."
According to a wise man: "Allah Almighty has servants upon whom He
confers favors thereupon they know Him, and expands their breasts thereupon
they obey him and rely on Him in all of their affairs. Their hearts thus have
become metals of pure certainty (of faith), containers of good wisdom, chests of
grandeur, and stores of power. Although they seem to go and return among the
people, their hearts tour in the dominion of the invisibles and take shelter in the
unseen, and return with indescribable subdeties of benefits. Inwardly they are like
good brocade, and outwardly like torn-out handkerchiefs. This rank could hardly
be attained by ostentation, but it is the bounty of Allah Almighty which He gives
to such as He pleases."
It is related by one of the righteous that he said: "While I was walking in
between the mountains of Jerusalem, I descended to a valley and behold! There
was a high voice that is responded to by those mountains. I followed the voice
and behold! I became in the middle of a garden with clusters of trees, and there
was a man standing, reciting repeatedly the following statement of Allah: "On
the Day when every soul will be confronted with all the good it has done, and all
the evil it has done, it will wish there were a great distance between it and its evil.
But Allah cautions you (to remember) Himself. And Allah is full of kindness to
those that serve Him." (A1 Imran 30)
I-tjJU I J_41 jASojj [ qIaj 01

^jA cT*.-P LIj Ijy^a

{j*

£• L*

^yj ^

I sat behind him listening to him while he was repeating that Holy Verse after
which he cried so high that he fell unconscious. An hour later he restored his
consciousness and then I heard him saying: "I seek refuge with You O Allah
from the rank of the liars. I seek refuge with You O Allah form the deeds of the
false. I seek refuge with You O Allah from the deviation of the heedless (from
the truth). To You the hearts of the fearful are submissive, the hopes of the
indulgent aspire, and to Your grandeur the hearts of the Gnostics are humiliated."

Book eight: Watching and reckoning

601
Then, he shook off his hands and said: "What do I have to do with this world,
and what does this world have to do with me?" I called him: "O servant of Allah!
I have been sitting behind you, in expectation for your leisure." On that he said:
' How could one have leisure who races the time for fear death might hasten to
overtake him? how could one have a leisure whose days have gone by and only
his sins remain?" then he resumed: "You are fitting for it and for every adversity I
expect." Then, he was engaged from me for an hour after which he recited:
"Even if the wrong-doers had all that there is on earth, and as much more, (in
vain) would they offer it for ransom from the pain of the Penalty on the Day of
Judgment: but something will confront them from Allah, which they could never
have counted upon!" (Az-Zumar 47)
AJI

C lL

Then, he made a loud cry after which he fell unconscious and I thought he
died. But when I came close to him and checked his body, I found him still
breathing. When he recovered he said: "Who am I? Grant me pardon for my
misdeed out of Your bounty and cover me with Your covering, forgive for my
sin with Your Bounteous Countenance when I stand in front of You." I said to
him: "I beseech you by Him Whom you expect for yourself and confide, to talk
to me." He said to me: "I advise you to stick to the speech of Him Who benefits
you, and leave the speech of him whom sins have destroyed. I have been in that
place since Allah Almighty willed, struggling Iblis, who have not found an aid to
divert me from what I have been in except for you. So, leave me, O deceived
man: You have made idle my tongue and caused a part of my heart to incline to
your speech. I seek refuge with Allah form your evil, and I expect to grant me
refuge from His displeasure and confer from His mercy upon me." I then said to
myself: "That might be an ally of Allah Almighty and I fear to engage him and
incur punishment upon myself in this very place." I turned away and left him."
It is related that Karz Ibn Wabarah used to recite the Holy Qur'an in full
thrice everyday and mortify himself in the acts of worship. It was said to him:
"You have troubled yourself so much." He said: "What is the term of this
world?" It was said: "Seven thousand years." He further asked: "What is the term
of the Day of Judgement?" it was said: "Fifty thousand years." On that he said:
"Then, how should anyone of you fail to do even one-seventh that Day and, at
the same time, like to feel safe (from its punishment)?".
As such was the conduct of the righteous predecessors in keeping stationed
and watching their own souls. So, whenever your own self rebels against you and
fails to be regular on the acts of worship, at least consider the states of those
righteous, for the like of them now are very rare. If you could see such of people
as imitate them, it would be more effective on the heart, and more ready to
stimulate you to follow them. Of a surety, the story, no matter impressive it
might be, is not like the vision with the eye. If you fail to see such of people as
imitate them, do not indulge in listening to the narrations about the states of the
righteous predecessors. Then, give yourself the freedom to choose to imitate

The quarter of the saviors
602
them and they are the best rational and religious, or to follow the ignorant
heedless among the people of your own time. If you think within yourself that
those are too strong for anyone to imitate, then, consider the states of the striving
women and encourage your own self to disdain to be less in rank than those
righteous women:
It is narrated from Habibah Al-Adawiyyah that whenever she offered Isha'
prayer, she would go up to the surface of her house after straightening her veil
and headcover over her body and say: "O my God! The stars now have got
sunken, eyes shut down because people have slept, and gates of houses closed,
and ever)7 lover has become in seclusion with his/her beloved; and that is my
standing in front of You." Then she would devote herself to prayer until when
dawn rose she would say: "O my God! That night has gone away, and the
morning has become bright: by my life: Have You accepted from me my
(standing in prayer and supplication for You at that) night so that I would be
pleased and get comforted, or rejected it from me so that I would grieve? By
Your Honor: That would be my practice as long as You leave me in this world.
By Your Honor: even if You drive me away from Your gate, I would not leave,
for Your generosity and Bounty I am certain of."
It is further narrated that Ajzah, and she was blind, used to spend the
whole night every night in prayer and remembrance. Whenever it was a short
while before dawn, she would call with a sad voice: "O my God! To You
worshippers have cut the darkness of nights, in a race among each other to
Your mercy and the bounty of Your forgiveness. With You O my God, and
not with anyone else, I ask You to make me in the first group of the
forerunners (to the Garden), elevate me up to Your presence in Illiyyin, place
me in the rank of these close to You, and join me with Your righteous
servants: You are the Most Merciful of those who show mercy, the Grandest
of those who are grand, and the Most Generous of those who are generous: O
Most Generous!" then, she would fall in prostration and keep supplicating and
weeping until dawn.
According to Muhammad Ibn Mu'adh: A worshipping woman told me: I
saw in a dream as if I was admitted to Paradise, and behold! The inhabitants of
Paradise were standing at their gates. I asked: "What is the matter with the
inhabitants of Paradise that they are standing at their gates?" It was said to me:
"They have come out to look at a woman who adorned the gardens of Paradise
with her arrival." When I asked about her it was said to me: "She is a black
slave-girl from the women of the Tree called Sha'wanah." I said: "That is my
sister (in religion of Allah)." Such being the case, she was brought on a flying
female horse. When I saw her I called her: "O my sister! Do you not see my
position from you? Would you not invoke Allah for me to join me with you?"
She smiled and said: "It is not time for your arrival here. But anyway, learn (and
abide by) two things from me: Make grief abide in your heart, and give priority
to the love for Allah over your inclination; and once you do so, death will harm
you not whenever you die."
According to Abdullah Ibn Al-Hassan: "I had a Roman slave-girl of whom I

Book eight: Watching and reckoning

603

was very fond. She was sleeping beside me one night and when I got up I did not
find her sleeping in the bed. I searched for her and behold! She was falling in
prostration and saying: "O my God! I swear by Your love for me to forgive for
me my sins." I said to her: "Do not say 'by Your love for me' but rather say 'By
my love for You'." She said: "O master! By His love for me, he Has turned me
out from polytheism to Islam, and by His love for me he made me get up (to
remember Him) at night while a lot of people are sleeping."
It was the habit of Mu'adhah Al-Adawiyyah that whenever day came upon
her, she would say: "That is the very day on which I would die." Then, she would
not have food until night; and when night came upon her she would say: "That is
the very night on which I would die." Then, she would remain in prayer and
remembrance until morning.
According to Ad-Darani: I spent one night in the house of Rabi'ah AlAdawiyyah, and then she stood (to offer prayer) in a Mihrab she had and I also
stood (to offer prayer) in one corner of the house. She kept standing (in prayer
and remembrance) until a short while before dawn. I asked: "What is the reward
of he who has given us power to stand (in prayer) that night?" She said: "To
observe fast for Him tomorrow."
Sha'wanah used to say in her supplication: "O my God! How longing I am
to Your meeting, and how great is my hope in Your reward. You are the Most
Generous with Whom the hope of the hopeful never fails, nor does cease the
longing of those who have longing. O my God! If my appointed term has
become near and nothing of my deeds have brought me close to You, I then
have made the confession of my sins the means to justification. If You forgive
for me, then, who is worthier than You to do so? And if you punish me, then,
who is worthier than You of justice in this respect? O my God! I have wronged
myself in looking at it and it remains only Your looking at it (with mercy): so,
woe to it if You do not make it happy. O my God! You have been still
munificent to me along all days of my lifetime, so, do not withhold Your
munificence from me after my death. I hope that He Who has taken care of me
during my life with His goodness to relieve me after my death with His
forgiveness. O my God! How should I despair of Your good vision after my
death given that You have conferred upon me but good favors during my life?
O my God! If my sins have frightened me, then, my love for You has given me
shelter. O my God! Had You wanted to put me to humiliation, You would not
have guided me aright; and had You wanted to put me to shame, You would
not have screened me: so, let me enjoy of that to which You have guided me,
and make permanent for me that with which You have screened me. O my
God! I do not think You would reject my need in which I have consumed my
lifetime. O my God! But for the sins I have committed, I would never fear
Your punishment; and but for Your generosity I know well, I would never hope
in Your reward."

CHAPTER SIX
SETH STATION: SELF REPROACHING AND BLAMING
It should be known to you that your greatest enemy is your own self. It was

The quarter of the saviors
604
predisposed to enjoin evil and flee from good; and you have been commanded to
justify and straighten it and bind it with the chains of oppression to abide by the
worship of its Lord, and prevent it from its desires and wean it from its pleasures.
If you neglect it, it would deviate and rebel against you and you would not be able
to have control over it once again. But if you keep constant blaming and
reproaching of it, your own self then would be the self-reproaching by which
Allah Almighty took oath, and is expected to be the reassured self, that is invited
to become one of the righteous well-pleased and pleasing servants of Allah
Almighty.
It is said in this respect: "Be not heedless of reminding your own self (of
Allah) and blaming it (for its evil) even for a single hour, and engage not in
instructing others unless you engage first in instructing your own self."
It is related that Allah Almighty revealed to Jesus "peace be upon him": "O
son of Maty! Instruct your own self first before you instruct the people! Behold!
Feel shy of Me."
In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty said: "But teach (your Message): for
teaching benefits the Believers." (Adh-Dhariyat 55)

4 (0) Oiol*

^

Your way to do so is to turn to it, and show to it its ignorance and
foolishness. It disdains so much whenever it is attributed to foolishness. You
should also remind it of the state of heedlessness in which it is, of Paradise and
Hell to either of which it would inevitably be destined to go, and of the fact that
death always comes unexpectedly, for which it should get ready at any moment,
asking it to consider the following statement of Allah Almighty: "Closer and
closer to mankind comes their Reckoning: yet they heed not and they turn away.
Never comes (aught) to them of a renewed Message from their Lord, but they
listen to it as in jest." (Al-Anbiya 1-2)

Send woes upon it saying:
"Woe to you O self] If you do evil thinking that your Lord never sees you,
then, how disbelieving are you! But if you do evil in spite of your awareness of
the fact that He sees you, then, how daring and rude are you! Woe to you! If
anyone of the servants does with you what you dislike, how angry would you be
with him: then, how do you dare to expose yourself to the anger, wrath,
displeasure and punishment of Allah Almighty? How could you endure His
punishment? do you deceive yourself with your reliance on the generosity and
bounty of Allah Almighty, and His needlessness of your worship and
obedience? Why do you not rely on the generosity and bounty of Allah
Almighty in your worldly affairs? If you are troubled by a worldly desire which
you need to fulfill with money, why do you strive your utmost to obtain it,
without reliance on the generosity of Allah? Do you think that Allah Almighty
is generous in the hereafter and not in the world? Of course you know that the

Book eight: Watching and reckoning
605
established way of Allah Almighty never changes, and that the Lord of the
world and hereafter is the same One Lord, and man would not earn but the
fruit of his work.
Woe to you O self! What a great hypocrite you are! You claim faith, although
the trace of hypocrisy is visible on you. Allah Almighty said: "There is no moving
creature on earth but its sustenance depends on Allah: He knows the time and
place of its definite abode and its temporary deposit: All is in a clear Record."
(Hud 6)
^4= <4iJ&jj 145jjJp VJ
Lj♦ }
That is in connection with this world. As for the hereafter, He Almighty said:
" That man can have nothing but what he strives for." (An-Najm 39)

4©

^

JrJ o'j ^

In this way, He ensured to you your worldly affairs, and satisfied you from
striving in it. But you have belied Him by your deeds, and come to compete for
it. On the other hand, He entrusted the hereafter affairs to your striving, but you
turned from it as deceived and conceited. That is not characteristic of faith. If
faith depends only on the tongue, then, why would the hypocrites be in the
lowest bottom of the fire?
Woe to you O soul! What is the matter with you that you do not believe in
the Day of Reckoning? If that is your faith, then how disbelieving and
ignorant are you! Do you give lie to the statement of Allah Almighty: " From
a sperm-drop: He has created him, and then moulds him in due proportions;
Then does He make his path smooth for him; Then He causes him to die, and
putts him in his Grave; Then, when it is His Will, He will raise him up
(again)." (Abasa 19-22)

4 {(Jp)

& i^J p ({fj

'kiii p ^

(j}

If you do not give lie to that, then, why do you not take your precaution? If
you O self knows all of this, then, why do you postpone your work in this world
given that death awaits to snatch you away at any time and without respite? By
what consideration do you feel safe from death to be hastened on to you?
I do not think you slacken to take consideration but for one of two things:
hidden disbelief or apparent foolishness. As for the hidden disbelief, it is your
weak faith in the Day of Reckoning, and lacking knowledge of the great
significance of reward and punishment, as for your apparent foolishness, it is
your reliance on Allah's generosity and forgiveness, without turning to His plan
and scheme, and needlessness of your worship, although you do not rely on His
generosity in a morsel of food or a grain of money, or a single word you hear
from the people. Nay! You fulfill your purpose in those worldly affairs using all
tricks and ways available to you.
Do you not know, O self, that this world is the abode of the Sovereign of all
kings, and what you have in it is not really yours? Do you not know that
whatever you have in this world, you would inevitably leave by death? In
confirmation of that, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be

The quarter of the saviors
606
upon him", the chief of all Messengers and Prophets, said: "(Gabriel) the Holy
Spirit inspired to me that it is the same for you to love whomever you love, for
you are going to leave him; and it is the same for you to do what you like, for
you would be rewarded for it; and it is the same for you to live as you will, for
you would necessarily die."
Woe to you! Do you not know that whoever takes much pleasures in this
world indeed increases his grief and detrimental poison at death where he feels
not? Do you not consider those who were before you, how they built and raised
their constructions and then went away and left what they had done, and how
Allah Almighty make their enemies inherit their land and property? Do you not
see how they gather what they eat not, build what they live not, and hope what
they realize not? Anyone of them inhabits his world although he should
inevitably leave it, and at the same time destroys his hereafter to which he should
necessarily go. Do you not feel shy, O self, to help those in their foolishness?
Suppose you are not insightful, and rather inclined, by disposition and nature, to
imitation and emulation, then, at least, choose whomever you should imitate:
Make comparison between the minds of the Prophets, scholars and wise men and
the minds of those who turn over this world.
O self] It may be that the love for majesty and authority has intoxicated you
from perceiving the real nature of those facts. But even, do you not know that
majesty itself disappears by the disappearance of you as well as of those who
obey you? How then should you sell the perishable for the never-ending? If you
do not leave this world out of desire for the hereafter, due to your ignorance and
blindness, at least, leave it out of refraining from your despicable partners in it.
Why do you not abstain in its little given that its much discards you? Why do you
rejoice at a world in which Jews and Christians might precede you to its pleasures
and ornaments? Woe to a world in which those despicable people precede you!
How ignorant and foolish are you, since you reject to be one of these close to
Allah, from among the Prophets, martyrs, and sincere affirmers and lovers of
truth, in the neighbourhood of Allah the Lord of the world, in order to be among
the foolish and ignorant. What sorrow if you lose both the world and religion,
then, you should hasten.
Woe to you O self] You now have become on the threshold of death: Who is
it that would pray, fast or even give in charity on behalf of you after death? Woe
to you! You have only a limited number of days in this world, which are your
goods, and you have wasted the most part of it: If you keep weeping for the rest
of your lifetime for what you have wasted of it, you would still run short of
fulfillment. It should be known to you that death is your appointed term, grave is
your abode, dust is your bed, worms are your companions in it, the great terror is
ahead of you, and the soldiers of death are awaiting your soul to come out and
leave your body. Do you not know that anyone after death hopes to return to this
world even for a single day in order to compensate what he wasted in it? If you
are to sell to anyone of them a single day of your lifetime for his entire world, he
would buy it with good pleasure.
Woe to you! You always adorn your outward to the people and challenge

Book eight: Watching and reckoning
607
Allah Almighty in your secret. Do you feel shy of the creatures and not of the
Creator? Do you enjoin good upon the people while you are stained with vices?
Do you invite to Allah and you flee away from Him, and remind others of Him
and you forget Him? do you not know that the sinful is more stinking than the
dung, and the dung never purifies anything else? So, why do you covet of
purifying others and you are not pure in yourself?
Woe to you! You have made yourself a donkey of Iblis to lead you wherever
and however he likes. But even, you are fond of your deed which is full of
mistakes and errors. Allah Almighty cursed Iblis for a single mistake after he had
worshipped Him for two hundred thousand years; and drove Adam out of the
Garden only for a single mistake although he is His Prophet.
Woe to you O self] You devote yourself to a world that is leaving you, and
turning away from the hereafter which is coming to you. How many a man
receives his day and does not complete it, and how many a man hopes in the
morrow which he does not realize! Remember a day when Allah Almighty
would not leave a servant, whom He ordered to do good and forbade to do
evil, without questioning him about his deed, its significant and insignificant, its
secret and public. Consider then with what you would stand in front of Allah
and with which tongue you would answer Him, and prepare answer for every
question, and make right your answer, and do deeds along the remaining short
days of your lifetime for the sake of long days to live after death, in a perishable
abode for the sake of a permanent abode, in an abode of grief and trouble for
the sake of an abode of bliss and eternity. Work before you would not be able
to work.
It should be known to you that religion has no substitute, faith has no
replacement, body has no successor; and whoever has his riding mount the day
and night, he would be conveyed to the end of his journey. So, get admonished,
0 self, with that admonition, and accept that advice, for whoever turns away
from admonition seems to be pleased with the fire, and I do not think you are
pleased with it. If it is harshness of the heart which prevents you from
accepting admonition, seek the aid of Tahajjud and standing for prayer and
remembrance of Allah by night. If it remains, then, be regular on fasting. If it
still remains, abstain from mixing and talking to others. If it still remains,
adhere to maintaining kinship ties and kindness to the orphans. If, after all of
this, it does not vanish, then, you should know that Allah Almighty has set a
seal on your heart which locked it and that the darkness of sins heaped up on
its external and internal surface. In this way, habituate yourself to the fire, for
Allah Almighty created Paradise and created men for it, and created fire and
created men for it.
It is related by Wahb Ibn Munabbih that when Allah Almighty caused Adam
"peace be upon him" to descend from the Garden to the earth, he kept shedding
tears, and on the seventh day of his descent, Allah Almighty looked at him and he
was grieved and sad. He revealed to him: "O Adam! What is that trouble I see in
you?" he said: "O Lord! My calamity has got aggravated, and my sin encircled me.
1 have been driven out of the dominion of my Lord into the abode of humiliation

The quarter of the saviors
608
after dignity, in the abode of wretchedness after happiness, in the abode of
suffering after comfort, in the abode of affliction after wellbeing, in the abode of
loss after stability, in the abode of death and annihilation after survival and
eternity. Then, how should I not weep for my mistake?" On that Allah Almighty
revealed to him: "O Adam! Have I not chosen you for Myself, and made you live
in My abode, and favored you with My dignity, and warned you of My
displeasure? Have I not created you with My Own Hand, breathed in you of My
Spirit, and made My angels fall in prostration to you? But you disobeyed My
command and forgot My covenant and thus exposed yourself to My displeasure.
By My Honor and Glory, were I to fill the earth with men like you all
worshipping and exalting Me, and then they disobeyed Me, I would enlist them
among the disobedient." On that Adam "peace be upon him" kept weeping
ceaselessly for three hundred years.
Ubaidullah Al-Bajli used to weep so much. He used to say in his weeping
along the night: "O my God! The more I live long, the more my sins increase.
Every time I intend to leave a mistake, another desire appears to me."
According to Mansur Ibn Ammar: I heard one night a worshipper in Kufah
talking privately to Allah with the following: "O Lord! By Your Honor, I have
not intended by my sin to oppose You, and when I disobeyed You, I was not
ignorant of Your position, nor regarding with slightness Your vision of me: But it
is my soul which made it alluring to me, and my wretchedness helped me, and
Your screening me deceived me. The result is that I disobeyed You with my
ignorance, and opposed You with my act. Who is it now to deliver me from Your
punishment, and by the rope of whom should I hold fast if You cut off Your
rope from me? How sorry I would be when I stand in front of You in the
hereafter, when those of light burdens would be permitted to cross the path and
those of the heavy burdens would be ordered to place their burdens. In the
company of each of both would I be?"
)

Those are the ways of people in their private talk to their Lord, and blaming
and reproaching themselves, and their purpose of their private talk is to please
Allah Almighty, and their purpose of blaming themselves is to alert and take care
of their own selves. Whoever then neglects private talk to AJlah and blaming
himself is about not to please Allah, nor to look after his own self.
End of book of Reckoning and Watching, followed, Allah willing, by the
Book of Meditation.
All perfect praise be to Allah Alone, and Allah's blessing and peace be upon
our master Muhammad, his family and companions.

J
It is the nineth book of the quarter of Saviors in the revival of religion’s
sciences
In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
All perfect praise be to Allah Who did not make an ending limit to His
Power and Honor, nor gave understandings and minds an access to His
grandeur and majesty: On the contrary, He left the hearts and minds of the
pedtioner in the field of His supremacy confused and wandering, and every
time they move thinking they would attain what they seek for, they would be
repelled by the lights of glory, and every time they intend to turn away in
despair, they would be called, from pavilions of beauty, to wait in padence, and
asked to go on meditadon in the glory of the Lord. But even, if they reflect the
glory of the Lord, they would not be able to give it its due esdmate; and if they
seek further in their attributes, then, they should consider the favors of Allah
He bestowed upon them in succession, and give Him thanks for every favor
and grace, and reflect how the oceans of fate overflow upon the people in the
worlds in good and evil, benefit and harm, ease and difficulty, felicity and loss,
amendment and destruction, belief and disbelief, approval and disapproval. But
if they go beyond considering the acts to the Divine essence, it would be
extremely grievous.
May Allah send blessing and peace upon Muhammad, the chief of mankind,
and upon his family and companions, each of whom has become a full moon in
the heaven of religion. Coming to the point:
It is related in the Prophetic sunnah that “meditation (in the signs and favors
of Allah) for an hour is better (in value) than worship for a year.” (Ibn Hibban on
the authority of Abu Hurairah; and Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority of
Anas). Allah Almighty urges, more often, the people to meditate, reflect and
consider. It is not hidden that thought is the key to lights and the beginning step
towards insight, the network of sciences and the grid of knowledge. Although
most people know its favor and grace, they, therefore, are ignorant of its real
nature, fruit and source.
For this reason, it is important to reveal the reality of that, and this is the
topic of this book:
We shall begin, Allah willing, by explication of the virtue of meditation; real
nature and fruit of meditation; and then fields and areas of thought.

CHAPTER ONE
EXPLICATION OF VIRTUE OF MEDITATION
Allah Almighty enjoined meditation and consideration in many locations of
His Book. He praised those who give thought as shown in His statement: “Men
who celebrate the praises of Allah, standing, sitting, and lying down on their
sides, and meditate the (wonders of) creation in the heavens and the earth, (with
609

The quarter of the saviors
610
the thought): "Our Lord! not for naught have you created (all) this! Glory to You!
Give us salvation from the Penalty of the Fire.” (A1 Imran 191)
^

jLJ I Cr>\JLP lliS

! JLLA Q^Sl>- L» Hjj ^

It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them" that
he said: A people meditated in (the essence of) Allah Almighty, thereupon the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to them:
“Meditate about the creatures of Allah and not in (the essence of) Allah, for you
would never be able to give Him His due estimate.” (Abu Nairn).
It is further narrated that once the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" came out to a people and they were sitting in meditation. He
asked them: “Why are you silent?” They said: “We are silent because we are
meditating in the creatures of Allah Almighty.” On that he said to them: “As such
you should do. Meditate about the creatures of Allah Almighty, and do not
meditate about (the essence of) Allah Himself. However, in that West, there is a
white land, whose light is its whiteness, and whiteness is its light, and it is as long
as is the course of the sun (from East to West) along forty years. There are
creatures from among the creatures of Allah Almighty, who have never
disobeyed Him in the least.” They asked: “O Messenger of Allah! Where is Satan
from them?” he said: “They do not know whether or not Satan was created.”
They further asked: “Do they belong to the offspring of Adam?” he said: “They
even do not know whether or not Adam was created.” (this is narrated on the
authority of Abdullah Ibn Salam).
It is narrated on the authority of Ata’ that he said: I went in the company of
Ubaid Ibn Umair to A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her" and she talked to us
from behind a partition. She said: “O Ubaid! What prevents you from visiting
us?” he said: “I follow the statement of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him": “Postpone your visit, perchance you would become
dearer.” He further said to her: “Tell us about the most wonderful thing you saw
from the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him".” She
wept and said: “All his deeds were wonderful. Once, he came to me when it was
my night-and-day turn, and when his skin touched mine he said to me: “Let me
worship my Lord Almighty.” He stood and went to the water-skin to perform
ablution, and then offered prayer in which he wept so much that his tears wetted
his beard. Then he fell in prostration so long until his tears wetted the ground.
Then, he lay on his side until Bilal came to inform him of the due time of
Morning prayer. He asked him: “O Messenger of Allah! What causes you to
weep, given that Allah has forgiven for you your previous and later sins?” He
said: “May Allah have mercy upon you O Bilal! Why should I not weep and Allah
Almighty revealed to me that night: “Behold! in the creation of the heavens and
the earth, and the alternation of Night and Day, there are indeed Signs for men of
understanding.” (A1 Imran 190)

i

J&\5 JJI

j Zul >

Woe to him who recited it and then did not meditate because of it.” (Ibn
Hibban). It was said to Al-Awza’i: “How should one meditate about them?” he

Book nine: Meditation

---- ------------------------

611

said: “To recite and then understand them well.”
It is narrated on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Wasi’ that a man went to
Umm Dharr after the death of Abu Dharr "Allah be pleased with him", to ask
her about his worship, thereupon she said to him: “He used to spend his day in
meditation in one corner of the house.”
It is narrated that Al-Hassan said: “Meditadon (in the signs of Allah) for an
hour is better than standing for a night (in prayer).”
According to Al-Fudail: “Reflection is a mirror that lets you see your good
and bad deeds.”
It was said to Ibrahim: “You always have long reflection.” On that he said:
“Reflection is the marrow of mind.”
According to Tawus, the disciples said to Jesus "peace be upon him": “O
Spirit of Allah! Is there on the surface of the earth anybody like you?” he said:
“Yes, he, whose speech is remembrance (of Allah), whose silence meditation (in
the signs of Allah), and whose vision consideration, is like me.”
According to Al-Hassan: “He, whose speech is not wisdom, it is falsehood;
and he, whose silence is not meditation (in the signs of Allah), it is forgetfulness;
and he, whose vision is not consideration, it is amusement.”
It is said, in comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: “Those
who behave arrogantly on the earth in defiance of right, them will I turn away
from My Signs: even if they see all the Signs, they will not believe in them” (AlA’rafl46)
i (r3) tp

^

bji OjjQtj]\ lgj\\iL ^

“It means I would prevent their hearts and minds from meditation and
contemplation (of My signs).”
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “Give your eyes their fortune of worship.” They said: “O Messenger
of Allah! What is their fortune of worship?” He said: “To look at the Mushaf (the
Qur’an), meditate its signs and Verses, and take consideration at its wonders.”
(Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and Ibn Hibban).
It is related from a woman who lived in the desert near Mecca that she said:
“Were the hearts of the pious to know, by virtue of meditation and
contemplation, what is kept for them in the unseen, of the good of the hereafter,
no living would be pleasing to them in this world, nor would they be satisfied
with anything they have.”
It is further related that Luqman used to sit in privacy for long times, and
whenever his freed slave passed by him, he would say to him: “O Luqman! You
sit in seclusion for long times. Would that you sit with the people!” he said:
“Indeed, the long privacy is more convenient to stimulate meditation; and the
deep meditation is an indication of the way to Paradise.”
According to Wahb Ibn Munabbih: “The long meditation leads to knowledge,
and knowledge leads to work.”
According to Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz: “The meditation of the favors of Allah
Almighty is among the best acts of worship.”

612

The quarter of the saviors
Abdullah Ibn Al-Mubarak said one day to Sahl Ibn Ali and he was silent,
swimming in his meditation: “Where have you reached in your thought?” he said:
“The bridge (that is held over Hell).”
According to Bishr: “Were the people to meditate about the grandeur of
Allah Almighty, surely, they would never disobey Him.”
According to Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them": “A two-rak’ah prayer
to be offered moderately with meditation is better than the standing for a whole
night (in prayer) without meditation.”
According to Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani: “Habituate your eyes to weep so
much, and your minds to meditate (about Allah’s signs).” He said once again:
“Meditation about this world veils one from the hereafter and leads to his
punishment; whereas meditation about the hereafter develops wisdom and brings
hearts to life.”
According to Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them": “Meditation about
good invites one to act upon it; and regret for evil invites one to leave it.”
It is related that Allah Almighty said in one of His Scriptures: “I do not accept
the words of every wise man: but rather I consider his concern and inclination. If
he is concerned with, and inclined to Me, I make his silence meditation and
speech praise even if he speaks not.”
According to Al-Junaid: “The noblest and highest assembly is to sit with
meditation in the field of monotheism, to breathe from the breezes of wisdom
and knowledge, to drink, with the cup of love, from the ocean of affection, and
to regard Allah Almighty with good assumption.”
According to Ash-Shafi’i: “Seek the aid of silence for talking, and of
meditation for understanding.” He said once again: “The correct vision of
matters is the best salvation from the evil of conceit; and decisiveness in opinion
is safety from indulgence; and regret, deliberation and meditation reveal firmness
and good sense; and consultation of wise men makes firm the soul and
strengthens the insight. So, think before you decide to do anything, be cautious
before you take the initiative to do it, and consult (the wise men) before you
proceed on.” He further said: £fVirtues are four: One is wisdom, and its substance
is meditation. The second is chastity, and its substance lies in the desire. The third
is power and its substance lies in anger. The fourth is justice, and its substance
lies in the balance of the forces of the self.”

CHAPTER TWO
EXPLICATION OF REAL NATURE AND FRUIT OF MEDITATION
It should be known to you that the meaning of meditation is to bring two
items of knowledge into the heart in order to deduce therefrom a third item.
A typical example is that if one inclines to the transitory things (of this life),
and gives preference to the life of world, and at the same time, wants to know
that the hereafter is more fitting to be given preference than the world, he has
two ways to know this:
The first is to hear this fact from another one, i.e. that the hereafter is better
and more fitting for preference than this world, thereupon he imitates him, and
gives trust to his statement without having insight of the reality of the matter. He

■

Book nine: Meditation
613
then inclines, with his work, to the hereafter, simply depending on the statement
of the other one. That is called imitation, and not knowledge.
The other way is to know that the more enduring should be more fitting for
preference, and then learn that the hereafter is more enduring, and deduce, from
both items of knowledge, a third item, i.e. that the hereafter is more fitting for
preference. This third item is indeed based on the previous two, thus, to bring
two item of knowledge into the heart in order to deduce therefrom a third item
of knowledge is called meditation, consideration, contemplation, remembrance,
reflection and deliberation: All are almost synonyms of the same meaning, with
slight variation according to which each focuses on a certain point of the
meaning. Remembrance, for example, is given to bringing the first two items of
knowledge, without going beyond them to the third one. Thus,
meditation/contemplation/reflection is more comprehensive than remembrance.
The benefit of remembrance is to repeat knowledge in order to confirm them,
whereas the benefit of meditation is to increase the different categories of
knowledge and bring new kinds into the heart. That is the difference between
remembrance and meditation.
If different items of knowledge gather in the hart in pairs according to a
particular order, they would produce a further knowledge. Knowledge then is a
fruit of knowledge, which turns into a cause of another knowledge to be
produced therefrom, and so on. In this way, knowledge, sciences and meditation
continue to develop and grow in the mind endlessly. To know the way to utilize
and invest knowledge to be productive as such occurs once through a Divine
light to be inspired to the heart, as was the state of the Prophets "peace be upon
them”; and this is very rare. It once occurs by learning and practice; and this is
more often.
On the other hand, the reflector might have those items of knowledge with
their fruit, while he does not know the way it occurs, and fails to express it in
words. How many a person knows, for certain, that the hereafter is better and
more fitting for preference than this world. But were he to be asked about why
he knows that, he would not be able to give answer, although his knowledge of
that is produced from the two previous items of knowledge, i.e. that the more
enduring should be more fitting for preference, and since the hereafter is more
enduring, the hereafter then should be more fitting for preference.
That is the real nature of meditation, i.e. to bring two items of knowledge in
order to deduce therefrom a result. As for the fruit of meditation, it lies in
sciences, states and deeds. But its special fruit here is knowledge. It is true that
when knowledge occurs in the heart and mind, their state necessarily changes,
and the change of the heart’s state leads to the change of the deeds of organs.
Meditation, in this sense, is the key and fountainhead of all good things. It is that
which reveals to you the excellence of meditation, as being better than
remembrance and memorization. Since the meditation of the heart is more than
remembrance, and to be sure, the remembrance of the heart is better than the
deed of the organs. That is why meditation is more excellent than all deeds.
That is the significance of the statement: “Meditation for an hour is better

614

The quarter of the saviors
than the worship for a whole year.” It is said that it refers to the movement from
what is disliked to what is liked, and from desire and prudence to asceticism and
satisfaction. It is also said, in its interpretation, that refers to that which results in
contemplation and piety in the hearts. For this reason, Allah Almighty said: “in
order that they may fear Allah, or that it may cause their remembrance (of Him).”
(Ta Ha 113)

*X

>

There are then five degrees: First is remembrance, which is to bring two items
ot knowledge into the heart. The second is meditation, which is to pursue the
knowledge that is intended by them, i.e. the result. The third is to obtain the
desired knowledge which enlightens the heart. The fourth is to change the heart’s
state because of getting the new know-ledge. The fifth is the organs’ service of the
heart according to the occurring state. This new knowledge which enlightens the
heart enables it to see what it did not see before that, which, in turn, is reflected
on changing its state. The result is that the organs do, on the light of the new
knowledge, deeds w’hich were not available before because of darkness in the
absence of that light.
The fruit of meditation then is sciences and states, and sciences are limitless,
and the states in which the heart is imagined to turn to are also beyond calculation.
This means, of course, that the fields of meditation are innumerable.
It is true that we do our best to enumerate its fields according to the tasks
of religious sciences and stations of the followers of the path (to the
hereafter). But this, if done, would be general and not detailed, for the details
require to give explanation to all sciences and branches of knowledge, and this
is quite impossible. However, all contents of that book with its four volumes
give explanation to some of them. But even, it is important to refer, though
briefly, to the general fields of meditation; and this will be, Allah willing, the
topic of the next chapter.

CHAPTER THREE
EXPLICATION OF FIELDS OF MEDITATION
It should be known to you that the fields of meditation might be religious or
worldly. Our topic here is limited to the religious fields. By religion we mean the
relation that is between the sen-ant and his Lord. All thoughts of anyone are
related either with the sen-ant, his attributes and states, or with the worshipped
Lord, His attributes and acts. What is related with the servant includes meditation
in what is liked or w-hat is disliked by Allah Almighty. What is related with the
Lord Almighty includes meditation in His essence, attributes, most beautiful
names, or in His acts, dominion and kingdom, i.e. all that is in the heavens and
earth and what is in between them.
The fields of meditation are limited to those four things. The lover of Allah
Almighty should not go, with his meditation, beyond his beloved. Since his
meditation is limited to those four divisions, he then does not deviate from love
in principle.
Let’s begin with the first division, i.e. to meditate in one’s attributes and acts,

Book nine: Meditation

615

in order to distinguish what is liked thereof from what is disliked. That division
of meditation addresses the science of pracdcal religion (Mu’amalah), which is
intended from that book, whereas the other division addresses the science of
revelation (Mukashafah). Therefore, what is liked and disliked, in the sight of
Allah Almighty, is divided into the apparent, like the acts of worship and sins,
and the hidden like the saving and destructive attributes, which lie in the heart;
and we have mentioned them in detail in the quarter of Destructives and the
quarter of Saviors.
Sins are divided into what is related only with the seven organs, and what
is related with the whole parts of the body, like the flight from the battlefield,
undutifulness to parents and living in an unlawful residence, etc. as far as what
is disliked is concerned, meditation should include three things: first: to
meditate whether or not it is disliked in the Sight of Allah Almighty. Second:
To meditate that in case it is really disliked, then, what is the way to avoid it?
Third: To consider: Does he have this disliked thing presently, which means
that he should leave it immediately, or would he be exposed to it in the future,
which means that he should do his best to avoid it, or did he commit it in the
past, which means that he should make amend for it? The same also applies to
what is liked.
If those divisions gather together, the fields of meditation then would be over
one hundred. The servant is forced to meditate in some or most of them. It would be too lengthy to explain each one of those in detail. But anyway, all are
included in four general divisions: acts of worship, sins, saviors and destructives.
Let us refer to each briefly.
First, sins: In the morning of everyday, one should inspect his seven organs
and then all parts of his body in general about a present sin which he is
committing to avoid, a past sin which he did to make amend for, or a probable
sin to which he might possibly be exposed in the future to keep himself far from.
Let him first inspect his tongue which is apt to backbiting, talebearing, telling lies,
insulting and abusing others, etc. he should state first, within himself, that those
are disliked in the Sight of Allah, and then consider the evidences from the
Qur’an and sunnah for the severe punishment resulting from them. Then, let him
meditate in his state, and how he is exposed to any of those while he feels not,
and how he should avoid them, putting in mind that he could not do so except
by being in seclusion, or sitting only with the righteous among men, to
disapprove of him whenever he speaks with what is disliked by Allah. As such he
should meditate concerning all his organs and parts of body. Once he knows, by
virtue of that meditation, the reality of his states, he would then engage in
watching over himself along the day, in order to safeguard the organs from
committing any such sins.
Second, the acts of worship: He should first consider the obligatory duties
binding on him, how he should perform them, and guard them from any
deficiency or indulgence, or amend the shortage therein by supererogatory
deeds. Then, let him inspect organs one by one, and meditate in the acts
unique to each, of what is liked by Allah Almighty. Let him say, for instance,

The quarter of the saviors
616
that “the eye has been created to look at the dominion of the heavens and the
earth, by way of consideration, to be used in obedience of Allah Almighty,
and look at the Book of Allah and the sunnah of His Prophet "peace be upon
him”: Then, since I am able to do so, why should I not do it?” The same is
true of his remaining organs.
Third, the destructive attributes which lie in the heart. They include such evil
attributes as desire, anger, niggardliness, envy, bad assumption, arrogance,
haughtiness, showing off, heedlessness, etc. let him consider those attributes and
whether or not his heart is free from them. If he thinks that his heart is free from
them, let him think how to test it, by way of confirmation. Man always considers
himself good although when putting himself to trial, he might not prove so. Each
of those has a distinctive sign by which it might be recognized as we have
mentioned in the quarter of Destructives. If the sign indicates that he has one of
such attributes, he should then think how to deface it in his sight, in order to be
able to avoid it. Once he knows the evil of each attribute, he should think about
the way of remedy to remove that attribute from his heart. We have mentioned
that one of the ways of remedy is to do the opposite of the evil attribute until it is
removed from himself.
Fourth, the saving characteristics: It is to repent from sins, show regrets for
disobedience, give thanks for favors and persevere with patience on the trials and
ordeals, fear (from punishment), have hope (in the Garden), abstain in this world,
be sincere and true in the acts of worship, love and honor Allah Almighty, be
contented with His acts and decrees, be attached in love to meeting Him, be
submissive and humble to Him, and so on. We have already mentioned all of this,
along with the causes and signs, in this quarter of Saviors. So, let the servant
meditate, everyday, about what he lacks of those characteristics which bring him
close to Allah Almighty. If he detects that he lacks some of them, he should
know that those are states which in themselves are fruits of sciences, and sciences
are fruits of thoughts and reflections.
If he, for instance, likes to motivate within himself the state of repentance
and regret, let him first inspect his sins and bring them to his mind, and regard
them with seriousness in his heart and then consider the severe threat and
promised punishment for them as mentioned in the Book of Allah and the
sunnah of the Prophet "peace be upon him", putting in mind that by committing
them, he exposes himself to the displeasure and wrath of Allah Almighty, which
stimulates within himself the state of regret.
On the other hand, if he likes to motivate within himself the state of
gratitude, let him first inspect the favors and grace of Allah He bestowed upon
him. If he likes the state of love and attachment, let him reflect the glory, majesty,
beauty and grandeur of Allah Almighty, by looking at the wonders of his wisdom
and making as we shall show later in the second division of meditation. The same
applies then to all the other states he likes to obtain.
That is the way of meditation to obtain sciences which produce the
inclination to liked states and disinclination from disliked states. We have
assigned to each one of those state a particular section in this book. Nothing

Book nine: Meditation

617

combines them more beneficial than recitation of the Holy Qur’an with
meditation, for it contains all stations and states, and healing for the worlds from
all heart diseases, develops in the soul both fear and hope, padence and gratitude,
love and attachment, etc, and averts from all blameworthy attributes. So, the
servant should recite it with reflection, and repeat each Verse he needs to
meditate in again and again even if he is to recite it over one hundred times.
Indeed, to recite a single Qur’anic Verse with meditation is better than to recite
the entire Qur’an from the beginning to the end on one night without
deliberation. Let him pause at each Holy Verse for reflection as long as it needs,
for underneath every word lie countless mysteries, which could be understood
only with deep reflection and pure heart and mind.
The same also is true of learning the news of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" for he was given the faculty of
expression with the shortest words that bear the widest and most
comprehensive meanings. Each word of his is an ocean of wisdom. Consider,
for instance, his statement: “The Holy Spirit (Gabriel) inspired to me that ‘it is
the same to you to love whomever you love, since you would inevitably leave
him (by death), to live as long as it might seem to you, since you would
necessarily die, and to do deeds as you like since you would be rewarded for
them.” This statement comprehends the wisdom of all the foremost and last
generations, and is sufficient for those who reflect on it along their lifetime.
Were to know its meaning, and have certain faith in it, surely, it would overtake
them entirely so much that they would no longer turn to that world with all its
pleasures and delights.
That is the way of meditation in the sciences of practical religion, and the
attributes of the servant, and whether they are liked or disliked in the Sight of
Allah Almighty. The beginner should spend his time in those thoughts in order to
fill his heart with the praiseworthy manners and noble stations, and keep his
inward and outward away from what is disliked. But even, one should put in
mind that this, though being superior to the other acts of worship, is not the
ultimate finale in itself: Indeed, whoever is engaged in it is veiled from the
ultimate finale of the sincere lovers and affirmers of truth, i.e. to be blessed in
meditation in the majesty and beauty of Allah Almighty, which involves the heart
so much that it is consumed from itself, or in other words, is diverted from itself
and its states, stations and attributes. That is because his concern is
wholeheartedly devoted to his beloved. It is the utmost pleasure of lovers.
But what we have mentioned is to meditate in the way to fill the inward, to be
fitting for closeness and connection. If one spends his entire lifetime in mending
himself, then, when would he be blessed in the closeness to Allah? The self­
consumption in the One and Real is the purpose of the petitioners, and the
utmost bliss of the sincere affirmers and lovers of truth.
As such you should understand the way of religion if you are among the men
of closeness. But if you are like an evil slave who never moves but for fear of
punishment and in the hope of reward, then, sufficient for you are the physical
movements with the apparent deeds, for in this case, there would be a very thick

The quarter of the saviors
618
veil between you and the heart. If you do the deeds to the best, it is true that you
would be from among the inhabitants of Paradise, but still not one of these of
closeness (to Allah).
If you know the fields of meditation in the sciences of practical religion
between the servant and his Lord, you should take heed of them every morning
and evening. Do not neglect yourself: neither your attributes that keep you away
from Allah Almighty, nor your states that bring you close to Him. Every novice
(on the path) should have a notepad to record in it both the destructive and
saving attributes, both sins and acts of worship, and measure himself on it
everyday. Ten suffice him for the destructives; and if he is saved from them, he
would be safe from the others: niggardliness, arrogance, haughtiness, showing
off, envy, extreme anger, greed for food, greed for sex, love for property, and
love for majesty. For the saviors, ten also suffice him: Regret for sins, patience on
trials and ordeals, contentment with the fate, gratitude for favors, moderate fear
(from punishment) and hope (in the reward), abstinence from this world,
sincerity in deeds, good manners and love for and submission to Allah Almighty.
The total is twenty.
Let him first turn to the destructive ones and strive his utmost to remove
them from himself one by one, and every time he purifies himself from one of
them, let him tag it and move to the next one, and give thanks to Allah for
helping him do so, putting in mind that if he succeeds to remove any of them, it
goes back to the power and will of Allah Almighty; and were it to be entrusted to
himself, he would not be able to remove even the least vice. On the other hand,
let him turn to the saving attributes, one by one and do his best to acquire them
and make them a part of his character, following the same method adopted in
removing the destructive ones. That is the way to be followed by the serious
novice.
As for the righteous, they should record in their notepads all apparent sins
and crimes, for whatever righteous one might seem, he could hardly be free from
some of those sins in his organs. Unless one engages in purifying his organs, by
no means would he be able to engage in purifying his heart. Everyone should be
concerned with the sins which he himself does more than in the sins committed
by others. To be sure, religion is not in need of anyone, but none could dispense
with religion. Among the most destructive attributes to be avoided particularly by
scholars is showing off, according to which one seeks majesty and celebrity,
thinking he serves the religion. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: “Love for majesty and property causes showing off to
grow in the heart in the same way as water causes seeds to grow in the earth.”
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said:
“No rabid wolves have been sent to a fold of sheep, more destructive than those
two of love for property, honour and majesty in the religion of a Muslim person.”
(At-Tirmidhi and An-Nasa'i on the authority of Ka’b Ibn Malik).
If one detects in himself that characteristic, he should remove it, and it could
not be removed unless one lives in seclusion and privacy from the people, and
abstains from mixing with them. That is indeed the duty of the pious scholars. As

619
for the like of us, we should meditate in what strengthens our faith in the Day of
Reckoning. Our deeds are not the deeds of such as has faith in Paradise and Hell.
Whoever fears a thing should inevitably flee from it, and whoever has hope in a
thing should necessarily pursue it. In order to flee from the fire, we should leave
sins and crimes and keep away from what is suspicious. But we do not do so. In
order to pursue Paradise, we should increase our supererogatory deeds, after
fulfilling the obligatory duties. But even, we fall short of doing our obligatory
dudes, let alone the supererogatory deeds. Thus, we have obtained from the fruit
of knowledge nothing other than our being imitated by the laymen in the
greediness for the world, under pretext that had this been blameworthy, surely,
the scholars would have been more entided to leave it. Would that we were
among the laymen and not scholars, and when we die, our sins die with us.
That is the field of meditation available to the scholars and righteous in the
science of practical religion. Once they finish from that, let them promote
therefrom to the meditation in the glory and beauty of Allah Almighty, and bless
themselves with contemplating Him with the eye of the heart. But this could be
achieved only after getting rid of all destructive attributes, and acquiring all saving
characteristics. If something of that contemplation emerges to anyone before
finishing from both tasks entirely, it would soon disappear like the flash of
lightning.
The second division is the meditation in the glory, majesty and grandeur of
AJiah Almighty. It has two stations: the supreme station, which is to meditate in
His essence, attributes, and the meanings of His names. But it is that from which
we have been prevented. It is said: “Meditate in the creation of Allah Almighty,
and not in the essence of Allah.” That is because the minds are too limited to
endure to comprehend Him Almighty in perception. The example of all the
creatures, in their sights to Allah Almighty is like bats in their sights to the light of
the sun: they never endure looking at it. The example of the sincere affirmers and
lovers of truth, from among all the creatures, is like mankind in their sights to the
sun: Although they could look at it, they could not persist in looking at it more
than a few moments, after which the sight would be damaged and lost. The right
then is not to expose oneself to meditation in the essence and attributes of Allah,
for most minds could hardly endure that.
For this reason, Allah Almighty revealed to one of His Prophets: “Tell not
My servant about My attributes lest they would deny Me, but rather tell them
about Me with what they could understand of Me.” Since the meditation in the
essence and attributes of Allah Almighty leads to a great risk from that
perspective, the discipline of Sharia and rectitude of the creatures require not to
expose ourselves to meditation in that field.
Let's us then move to the second station, which is to meditate in His acts,
areas of His power, and wonders of His making: This indicates to His glory and
majesty, holiness and exaltation, perfect knowledge and wisdom, comprehensive
overall power and will. In this way, we look at His attributes from the traces of
His attributes, for we could not endure looking at His attributes in the same way
as we could not endure looking at the light of the sun, but rather look at the
Book nine: Meditation

!

!

I

The quarter of the saviors
620
ground while illuminated with the light of the sun. we indeed attest how great the
light of the sun is from the light of the moon and the other planets, for those are
but traces of the light of the sun. All things in existence are among the traces of
the power and will of Allah Almighty. We then see the attributes of the Maker
from meditation in His making, which stands for intermediary between us and
His acts and attributes. That is the significance of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him": “Meditate in the creation of Allah, and not in
the essence of Allah.”

CHAPTER FOUR
EXPLICATION OF THE WAY OF MEDITATION IN THE
CREATION OF ALLAH ALMIGHTY
It should be known to you that all things in existence, other than Allah
Almighty, are the creation and making of Him Almighty, and in each atom and
molecule lie wonders and marvels indicative of His power, will, wisdom and
glory. It is impossible to calculate all of this for "If the ocean were ink (wherewith
to write out) the words of my Lord. Sooner would the ocean be exhausted than
would the words of my Lord, even if we added another ocean like it, for its aid."
(Al-Kahf 109)
^

LjJ*

llL>- j}j jJj cuiLfcf jjjjj qI (JIj j>x-jT wUll fjj

ISI jl*

cP* $

However, let's refer to an example as representative of all.
We say that the created existents are divided into what is unknown to us, and
thus it is impossible for us to meditate in them. How many existents which we do
not know as confirmed by Allah Almighty: “and He has created (other) things of
which you have no knowledge.” (An-Nahl 8)

And: “Glory to Allah, Who created in pairs all things that the earth produces,
as well as their own (human) kind and (other) things of which they have no
knowledge.” (Ya Sin 36)

And: “From changing your Forms and creating you (again) in (Forms) that
you know not.” (Al-Waqi’ah 61)

The second division of the existents are things which are known to us in
general, but not in their details. It is those details then in which we could
meditate. Those are divided into what we have perceived by the sense of sight,
and what we have perceived but not with the sense of sight, like angels, jinn,
devils, Throne (of Majesty), Kursi, etc. the area of meditation in those things is
narrow and even abstruse. So, let us leave them for the visibles that are under
the reach of understanding, like the seven heavens, the earth and what is
between them. The heavens are visible with their planets, stars, orbs and their
movements. The earth also is visible with its mountains, minerals, rivers,
oceans, trees, plants, animals, etc. what is between the heavens and the earth,

621

Book nine: Meditation

i.e. the atmosphere, is also visible with its clouds, rains, snow, tempests, winds,
thunders, lightning, etc.
Those are the visible things in the heavens, the earth and what is between
them. Each of those things is divided into different kinds, and each into a variety
of branches, diverse in character, form and external and internal attributes, and so
on in an endless series. All of this represents the area and field of meditadon. No
atom, nor a mountain, nor a tree, nor a star, nor a planet, nor anything in the
heavens, the earth and what is between them, moves but that it is Allah Almighty
Who moves it for one, ten or even coundess wisdoms lying underneath it. All of
these are witnesses to the oneness, grandeur, supremacy and majesty of Allah
Almighty. They are the signs that indicate to Him Almighty.
The Holy Qur’an invites us again and again to reflect those signs, saying:
"Behold! in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the alternation of
Night and Day, there are indeed Signs for men of understanding." (A1 Imran
190)

im

j&h jjf ^<3

<j^ a ^jj ►

Do you not see that Allah Almighty says, from the beginning to the end of
the Qur’an: “And among His signs” is such and such? Let’s mendon here the
way of meditadon in those signs.
Among His signs is the man himself, who is created from a sperm-drop and
ahs of and wonders marvels which one could spend his lifedme without being
able to comprehend and encompass all of them. O heedless of his own self: how
could you be ignorant of yourself and at the same dme covetous of knowing
others than you? Allah Almighty commanded you in His Holy Book to deliberate
yourself saying: “As also in your own selves: Will you not then see?” (AdhDhariyat 21)
- » * ':tr~ A * (

i©

9

He Almighty reminded you that He created you from a despicable spermdrop saying: " Woe to man! What has made him reject Allah? From what stuff
has He created him? From a sperm-drop: He has created him, and then moulds
him in due proportions; Then does He make his path smooth for him; Then He
causes him to die, and putts him in his Grave; Then, when it is His Will, He will
raise him up (again)." (Abasa 17-22)

i © Ay&\ ;U iSj p 0 Agfa Jed p
In confirmation of that, He Almighty said too: “Among His Signs is this,
that He created you from dust; and then, behold, you are men scattered (far and
wide)!” (Ar-Rum 20)
Jz\ EJ ^ y \y qa
ol
)
And: ccWas he not a drop of sperm emitted (in lowly form)? Then did he
become a clinging clot; then did (Allah) make and fashion (him) in due
proportion.” (Al-Qiyamah 37-38)

The quarter of the saviors

622
^(@5

^p

ij? O?

£

And: “Have We not created you from a fluid (held) despicable? The which
We placed in a place of rest, firmly fixed, For a period (of gestation), determined
(according to need)?” (Al-Mursalat 20-22)

\

<J] ((pj'A 4

O

Cr?

P' ^

And: “Does not man see that it is We Who created him from sperm? Yet
behold! he (stands forth) as an open adversary!” (Ya Sin 77)
4

y*

cr?

bl cr^P S- -^3' f

And: “Verily We created Man from a drop of mingled sperm, in order to try
him: so We gave him (the gifts), of Hearing and Sight.” (Al-Insan 2)
^ (r7j») lywaj

i

A-lxIj

•I

^jA

I Lib*- llj

Then, He Almighty clarified how Fie turned the sperm-drop into a clinging
like-leech clot of congealed blood, then into a morsel of flesh, and the morsel of
flesh into bones covering it in His saying: “Man We did create from a
quintessence (of clay); Then We placed him as (a drop of) sperm in a place of
rest, firmly fixed; Then We made the sperm into a clot of congealed blood; then
of that clot We made a (fetus) lump; then We made out of that lump bones and
clothed the bones with flesh; then We developed out of it another creature. So
blessed be Allah, the Best to create!” (Al-Mu’minun 12-14)
A 0 jicr^jT UJlL>- j*J (^r

(J&y*

>-i; LaJL>- AijLiol JLj Lei

4 *bjaj

?“ P

Cr?

Crf Cr^P

1 h«11 li^LSo ibilaP Aii-eJl LLiUtJ 4_jiyo » 4_lL*JI UJLLki 4_aJx-

The repetition of the word sperm-drop across the Holy Book is not intended
to be heard without reflection. Consider the sperm which is no more than a
despicable drop, and were it to be left in the air for an hour, it would putrefy.
Consider then how Allah Almighty brings it out from between backbone and
ribs; and how He gathers between the male and the female, and draws affection
and love in their hearts; and how He leads them, by virtue of love and desire, to
have sexual intercourse; and how He brings the sperm-drop from the male as a
result of ejaculation of semen into the female’s womb; and how He causes it to
penetrate the ovum and fertilizes it to produce the first cell of the fetus; and how
He develops the sperm-drop in the womb to turn into a clinging leech-like clot of
congealed blood; and how He turns this clot of blood into a morsel of flesh; and
how He extracts therefrom bones, nerves, strings, and veins; and how He forms
from that the different organs and parts of body, beginning from the head, the
eye, the ear, the nose, the mouth, and all the other oudets, and then creates hands
and feet, ending with fingers which He divides by joints; and how He forms the
internal organs like the heart, the stomach, the liver, the kidney, both lungs, the
intestines, the uterus in the woman, the bladder, and so on, each having a
particular form, to do a specific duty; and how He composes each of those

Book nine: Meditation

623
organs from different parts, each in proportion to its place and function; and so
on. Were one to consider the wonders that lie in only one of those, surely, he
would spend his entire lifetime even without being able to fathom it as it should
be.
The point here is not to know the detailed anatomy of the body for this
science is unique to the physicians which are more acquainted with it. But the
purpose is to meditate, therefrom, in their Creator and Manipulator: how He
creates them and gives them their due proportions, in the most fitting way that
were they to change in form, increase or decrease even by one, they would cease
to function. The purpose of the physician from regarding them is to know the
way to remedy them, whereas the purpose of those endued with insight is to
attest the glory of their Creator Who gives them form. How different those views
are from each other!
The field of meditadon is to consider those parts of body one by one, and
then as a whole. Each has coundess wonders and marvels, given that the wonders
of the attributes and characteristics which are not perceived by senses, are greater.
If all of this is the making of Allah which He produces from a drop of despicable
semen, then, what do you think about the wonders of His making in the
dominion of the heavens and the earth and what is between them? Think not that
even a single atom in the dominion of the heavens and the earth is free form one
or more wisdoms. They are more perfect and more elaborate than the human
body. Moreover, all wonders on earth are insignificant in comparison with the
wonders of the heavens. That is the meaning of His statement: “What! Are you
the more difficult to create or the heaven (above)? (Allah) has constructed it: On
high has He raised its canopy, and He has given it order and perfection. Its night
does He endow with darkness, and its splendour does He bring out (with light).”
(An-Nazi’at 27-29)

^ ds

£>*"13 U-0
dJ 1i
jjj
^
Consider then the original state of the sperm-drop and the new state to
which it turns to be, and think if both men and jinn gather together to create in
it any of the five senses or any part of the body, or to breathe spirit into it,
could they be able to do? Wonder at you when you look at a well-drawn picture
on a wall and appreciate its making, given that the maker does not create it in so
much as gathers together the different constituents which are originally created
by another, i.e. the Real Creator, and composes it therefrom. Is there any
comparison between that and the creation of man from a despicable spermdrop? Were the cover to be removed from the womb, surely, one might be able
to see how it acquires the form and shape step by step, without seeing the
maker and giver of form himself: have you ever seen a thing being made with
no direct relation or contact between it and its maker? Moreover, were the
foremost and the last, from among jinn and men, to gather together in attempt
to modify the figure of a man from the very form and shape in which it is
created by Allah Almighty, of a surety, they would fail to find a form better
than that in which it is created. Exalted be Allah: How excellent is He, and how
evident is His proof!

The quarter of the saviors
Consider also how the womb of the mother is expanded in proportion to the
growth of the fetus inside it, and how the fetus itself moves and bends within it
in order to befit the size of the womb surrounding it; and when it is delivered as a
babe, how he is guided to pick up the breast of his mother for milk; and how that
milk is produced from between blood and excretion as nourishment palatable
and suitable to the babe; and how this milk comes out from small holes made on
the surface of the teat, and how they are narrow so much in order for milk not to
come out without being sucked by the child; and how the child is guided to the
process of sucking; and how, when he grows and milk becomes not suitable to
his body, teeth are created for him gradually, in order to move from nourishment
of milk to the nourishment of food. Consider also how his parents are guided to
have affection and love for him which enables them to be in his service when he
was powerless and helpless during his early childhood, until he becomes an adult,
then a man, then old-aged, whether an obedient believer or a disobedient
disbeliever, as confirmed by the statement of Allah Almighty: “Has there not
been over Man a long period of time, when he was nothing, (not even)
mentioned? Verily We created Man from a drop of mingled sperm, in order to try
him: so We gave him (the gifts), of Hearing and Sight. We showed him the Way:
whether he be grateful or ungrateful (rests on his will).” (Al-Insan 1-3)
624

£-1^1

O*
4

L>15 IjTlS.

J_A bl

<j^ (J1

^

laL*— iiJjuixj -ulilj

That is a synopsis of the wonders of the making of your body which could
not be surveyed at all. But anyway, your body is the nearest field to your
meditation, and the clearest evidence indicative of the greatness and grandeur of
your Creator. Therefore, you are heedless of that, for you are engaged in fulfilling
the appetites of your abdomen and the sexual desires of your genitals. You know
nothing about yourself except that whenever you become hungry, you eat,
whenever you get tired, you sleep, whenever you grow angry, you fight, and
whenever your sexual desire is provoked, you have sexual relation, and so on.
Animals share you in all of this.
But the characteristic that is unique to human beings, from which the animals
are veiled, is your gnosis of Allah Almighty through reflecting the dominion of
the heavens and the earth, and the wonders in the horizons and within selves. It
is with that reflection that a servant becomes a member in the company of the
angels made near to Allah, and would be mustered in the company of the
Prophets and sincere affirmers and lovers of truth made close to the presence of
the Lord of the worlds. Of course, this rank is not fitting for animals, nor for a
man who is contented from this world only with the same desires of animals.
That man is worse than the animal, for the animal, in the end, has no power to
do more than that, unlike him, for whom Allah Almighty created the power, but
he himself makes it idle, and stops it from function. In this way, he is ungrateful
to the favor of Allah in it: Such are like animals, and even more straying from the
path.
If you then know the field of meditation in your body, move therefrom to

Book nine: Meditation

625

meditation in the earth on which you live, with its mountains, rivers, oceans,
plants, animals and minerals, and then up to the dominion of the heavens. Reflect
His statement: “With power and skill did We construct the Firmament: for it is
We Who create the vastness of Space. And We have spread out the (spacious)
earth: how excellendy We do spread out!” (Adh-Dhariyat 47-48)

And: “It is Fie Who has made the earth manageable for you, so traverse you
through its tracts and enjoy of the Sustenance which He furnishes: but unto Him
is the Resurrection.” (Al-Mulk 15)

i

Ai -&JC* L$3

41>^t»

tsjjr> >

And: “Who has made the earth your couch, and the heavens your canopy.”
(Al-Baqarah 22)
^ (^|3) t.Li-Ulj Li»

<^1)1 ^

Allah Almighty, more often, remembers the earth in the Qur’an, due to its
numerous wonders: Its surface is made a residence for the living, and its inside as
a grave for the dead, as confirmed by His statement: “Have We not made the
earth (as a place) to draw together The living and the dead, And made therein
mountains standing firm, lofty (in stature); and provided for you water sweet (and
wholesome)?” (Al-Mursalat 25-27)

i 0 tfij> Z

i-53

uL^-j

.!>' @

jJf >

He further said, confirming the wonders of the earth and the heavens, and
that He did not create them in vain: “We created not the heavens, the earth, and
all between them, merely in (idle) sport; We created them not except for just
ends: but most of them do not understand.” (Ad-Dukhan 38-39)

In short, the wonders of the earth are countless, and everything on the
earth, be it mountains, air, trees and plants, minerals, oceans, seas, rivers,
birds, animals, etc, deserves to be an object of meditation and reflection. Were
one to spend his entire lifetime in an attempt to extract the numerous pieces
of wisdom lying behind a single one of those things, surely, his lifetime would
be consumed without being able even to perceive a few number of them. Of
course, all of those wonders we see indicate to the grandeur and majesty of
the Creator Almighty.
Among His signs also is the dominion of the heavens and the earth and what
is in between them of celestial bodies. Whoever perceives all things and fails to
perceive the wonders of the dominion of the heavens has, indeed, perceived
nothing at all. The earth, all with its oceans, mountains, rivers, plants and animals,
in comparison with the heavens, are like but a single drop in a great ocean.
Consider how Allah Almighty honored the heavens in His Book. There is almost
no Surah but that the heavens are mentioned in it. Moreover, Allah Almighty

The quarter of the saviors
626 —------------------------------------------------often swears by them in more than one Surah.
Allah Almighty did not swear by the sperm-drop which all the foremost and
the last generadons failed to perceive the mysteries lying behind it. Then, what do
you think about that by which He Almighty swore, and made a place of
sustenance saying: “And in heaven is your Sustenance, as (also) that which you
are promised.” (Adh-Dhariyat 22)
4 © 1)3
ii3 ^
He also praised those of men who reflect on the creation of the heavens and
the earth, saying: “and contemplate the (wonders of) creation in the heavens and
the earth, (with the thought): "Our Lord! not for naught have you created (all)
this! Glory to You!” (A1 Imran 191)
C-iU- L

*ZJ>'y+lS\

j

^

4*1 i)3j>

jllJl Ol j_P lLa3

$

> Ijlla

On the other hand, He criticized those who are heedless of that, saying: “And
We have made the heavens as a canopy well guarded: yet do they turn away from
the Signs which these things (point to)!” (Al-Anbiya’ 32)
^

(3

j*-*

^-J&

\^>yL£- LbJl~* f. Lo_*lJ I Uli>j

He further said: “And (have We not) built over you the seven Firmaments,
And placed (therein) a Light of Splendour?” (An-Naba’ 12-13)
4

^

^

ill—

IslLj ^

And: £CWhat! Are you the more difficult to create or the heaven (above)?
(Allah) has constructed it: On high has He raised its canopy, and He has given it
order and perfection.” (An-Nazi’at 27-28)
4 ©)

£*j {©

£i;.i)T>*i ui>- ujj

^

Think not that to be invited to see the dominion of the heavens means to
stretch up your sight and look at the blueness of the sky and the light of the stars!
Indeed, all animals share you in that vision. If that is what is intended, then, why
did Allah Almighty praise Abraham "peace be upon him" saying: “So also did We
show Abraham the power and the laws of the heavens and the earth, that he
might (with understanding) have certitude.” (Al-An’am 75)
4 © o^y^cy O3&Q30*3^3

!•

<Jy

'^>3 \

In general, all that is perceived by the sense of sight is referred to in the
Qur’an as kingdom of visibles, and all that is beyond the perception of sight is
referred to as the dominion of the invisibles and unseen. Allah Almighty is the
knower of the kingdom of the visibles, and the subduer of the dominion of the
invisibles; and none encompasses anything of His knowledge except for what
He wills, and He also never discloses His unseen to anyone except such of
Messengers as He likes.
So, O rational man, hasten to contemplate the dominion of the invisibles,
perchance the gates of the heavens might be opened to you and you tour with

Book nine: Meditation

627
your heart in their different sides until your heart becomes in front of the Throne
(of Majesty) of Allah, Most Gracious. At that point, it may be that you are
expected to attain the rank of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him"
who said: “My heart has seen my Lord.” That is because to attain the farthest,
you should first exceed the nearest; and the nearest thing to yourself is your own
self, then the earth which is your residence, then the atmosphere surrounding
you, then the animals and plants and all that is on die surface of the earth, then
the wonders of the area that is in between the heavens and the earth, then the
seven firmaments of the heaven with their stars and celestial bodies, then the
Kursi, then the Throne (of Majesty), then the angels, who are the carriers of the
Throne ( of Majesty) and the keepers of the heavens, and therefrom you raise up
to contemplation of the Lord of the worlds: that is a rank between you and which
there are long distances and great obstacles, given that you still has not finished
from the nearest obstacle to you, i.e. the knowledge of your own self at least
outwardly.
But instead of that, you give the free rein to your tongue to claim rudely that
you know your Lord, and the creation of your Lord, then, in which thing further
do you need to reflect? Nay! Raise your vision towards the sky and look at their
perfect constitution and complete system in which there is no flaw. Among its
great wonders is that there is nothing on earth but that it has a picture of its like
in the heavens. Reflect also the course of the sun in its orb for a year round the
galaxy, and how it rises and sets everyday, and how it is subjugated by its Creator
to man, and but for its rising and setting, there would be no difference between
both day and night, and it would rather be either perpetual night or perpetual day.
The change of the position of the sun concerning the sky produces different
seasons along the year, ranging from summer whose heat is scorching, autumn
and spring, whose temperature is moderate, and winter, whose cold is severe.
Overall, there is no covet of calculating all wonders of the dominion of the
heavens. That is only a guide to the way of meditation in it. There is nothing
created by Allah Almighty in the heavens, on earth and in between them but
that Allah has, in creating it, countless pieces of wisdom lying behind it.
Measure on that the parts of your body, the wisdom of creating each of which
is infinite. But even, there is no comparison between the wonders of the world
of the earth and the wonders of the dominion of the heavens. Sufficient for
example is to know that the men of knowledge have agreed that the sun is one
hundred and sixty two times the earth. The same is true of the other stars.
According to a certain narration, the distance between each two firmaments of
the heaven is as long as a five hundred-year journey. (At-Tirmidhi on the
authority of Abu Hurairah).
Consider also that the stars which are bigger than the earth are thousands of
thousands. Consider also their movement so rapidly that you take no heed of it.
Consider how Gabriel "peace be upon him" expressed that speed of movement
in the narration in which the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" asked him: “Has the sun declined?” he said: “No, yes.” He asked him:
“How do you say no, yes?” he said: “From the moment I said no until I said yes,

The quarter of the saviors
628
the sun has moved as long as a five hundred-year journey.” Consider also the
power of Allah, Exalted in wise, how He fixed its image, given its great
immensity and remoteness of its ends from each other, in the eyeball, given its
very smallness.
But at the same time, you should not look at the sky with its hugeness and
great stars and celestial bodies in so much as you should look at its Creator: how
He created it and raised the heavens without any pillars that you can see, so that
all the world seems to be like a single house, and the sky its ceiling. Wonder at
you that you enter the house of a rich man and admire its good building,
wonderful colouring, beautiful engravings, and the like of that, and, meanwhile,
live in and see that big house with its earth, wonderful plants, animals, mountains,
rivers, oceans, atmosphere and ceiling, and do not talk about it even with a single
word of appreciation, given that the latter is incomparable to the former. There is
no reason for this except that the latter is the creation of your Lord Almighty,
and you have indeed forgotten yourself, your Lord and the house of your Lord
Almighty, and rather engaged in the desires of your belly and genitals. You have
no concern but to fill your stomach with food, although whatever you eat, you
would not be able to eat one-tenth a lot of animals eat. In this way, they excel you
in that appetence. The same is true of your sexual desire. You also have no
concern but to gather wealth to be as rich as you could, and collect acquaintances
to obtain majesty over others, although there might be in your city of Jews and
Christians some who are richer and wealthier than you, and have of majesty and
authority what is greater than you have. But you are deceived by that and heedless
of reflection on the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and of the bliss of
looking at the beauty and glory of the Lord of the dominion.
Your example is like an ant which made a hole for itself in the palace of a
very rich king and when it comes out of that hole, it has been concerned only
with its hole, which diverts it from having any care for the palace with its
wonders and inhabitants. As well as the ant is heedless of the palace with its
wonders and inhabitants, you are heedless of the house of Allah with its marvels
and angels who form its inhabitants. You do not know from the sky no more
than the ant knows from the ceiling of your palace, nor do you know from the
angels of the heavens who are the inhabitants of the house of Allah no more than
the ant knows about you and the inhabitants of your house. But there is a great
difference between you and the ant: although the ant has no way to know more
about you, the wonders and marvels of your palace and its inhabitants, you have
the power to tour in the dominion and know of wonders what a lot of people are
heedless of.
Now, let’s withdraw the rein of talk in that matter, for it is a field which has
no end. Were we to spend long lifetimes, by no means would we be able to
explain what Allah Almighty conferred upon us of knowledge. All what we know
is but a despicable little amount in comparison with what is known by the learned
scholars; and all that is known by the learned scholars is but a despicable little
amount in comparison with what was known by the Prophets "peace be upon
them"; and all what was known by the Prophets is but a very little amount in

Book nine: Meditation

---------------

629

comparis°n with what was known by our Prophet Muhammad "peace be upon
him"; and all what was known by all the Prophets is but a very littde amount in
comparison with what is known by the angels who are near to Allah Almighty,
like Gabriel, Israfil, and others, "peace be upon them"; and all the knowledge
given to all the creatures, including angels, jinn, men, is, in comparison with the
knowledge of Allah Almighty, not worthy of the term of knowledge. It is more
apt to be called confusion, bewilderment, amazement, shortage and failure than
to be called knowledge. Exalted be He Who made His servants know what they
are doomed to know, and then addressed all of them saying: “of knowledge it is
only a littde that is communicated to you, (O men!)" (Al-Isra’ 85)

That is an explication of the general fields and areas in which the thought of
those who give thought tours in the creation of Allah Almighty. It has no thought
in the essence of Allah AJmighty. But meditation in the creation inevitably leads
to the gnosis of the Creator AJmighty: His greatness, majesty, grandeur, glory and
power. The more you know about the wonders of His creation, the more your
gnosis of His glory and majesty is perfect.
The reflection on the wonders and splendor of the creation of Allah Almighty
with the intention to know Him is limitless. But each servant gets from it only as
much as is equal to what is doomed to him. Any normal person reflects that is
inevitably led to his error and wretchedness, whereas only the one helped by
Allah, who reflects on that, is led to his happiness and guidance. There is no atom
in the heavens or on earth, or in between them but therewith Allah AJmighty lets
astray whomever He likes, and guides whomever He likes. Whoever reflects on
those things only as being the act and making of Allah AJmighty would profit the
gnosis of the glory and majesty of Allah AJmighty, and be guided aright; and
whoever reflects on them as being acts and things effecting each other more than
being related with the Causer of the causes, would be wretched and go astray.
We seek refuge with Allah Almighty from error and from falling in the slips
of the ignorant, by virtue of His grace, favor, generosity, bounty and mercy.
That is the end of the ninth book of the Revival, all perfect praise be to Allah
Alone; and Allah’s blessing and peace be upon Muhammad, his family and
companions. Next, Allah willing, is the book of death and hereafter with which
the whole series is concluded.

—

•M®

t 1

It is the tenth book of the quarter of saviors in the revival of religion sciences
In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful
All perfect praise be to Allah, Who smashed, by death, the necks of the
tyrants, and broke the backs of the Khosraus and Caesars, whose hearts remained
heedless of the remembrance of death until the true promise came to them and
threw them into the holes, thereby they were moved from palaces to tombs, from
the light of the cradles to the darkness of the graves, from playing with girls and
boys to suffering from insects and larva, from enjoyment of food and drink to
rolling in the earth and dust, from company to loneliness, and from the soft beds
and thrones to the harmful lying places. Consider then: Have they been able to
protect and safeguard themselves from death? Consider also, do you sense the
existence of anyone of them or hear his voice?
Exalted be He Who possesses the power over all things, and is Alone worthy
of eternal survival thereby He humiliated all the others by what He doomed to
them of death and nonexistence, and made death salvation for the pious and a
promise for them to meet Him Almighty, and made the grave a narrow prison for
the wretched up to the Day of Recompense and Judgement. His is the bestowal
of apparent and hidden favors, and He has the right to exact retribution (from
whomever He likes) with oppressive vengeance, and to Him be all thanks in the
heavens and the earth, and all perfect praise be to Him in the world and the
hereafter.
Allah's blessing and peace, as much as is fitting, be upon Muhammad, the
master of apparent and evident marvels, and brilliant and outstanding signs, and
upon his family and companions. Coming to the point:
It is fitting for him who is doomed to death, not to meditate, nor to
remember, nor to get ready, nor to expect but for death, and he is more entitled
to regard himself among the dead, and see it among the inhabitants of the graves.
Everything to come is very near, and what is far never comes. The Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "The intelligent is he who
mortifies himself and works for the life to come after death; and the foolish is
he who follows his own desires, and hopes from Allah (to reward him)." One
could not find it easy to get ready for a thing unless its remembrance is renewed
in his heart, and the remembrance is renewed only when one pays attention to
the reminder when it is mentioned. In this respect, we are going to mention
what a servant should know, by way of remembrance continually, the matter of
death, its preceding and succeeding events, the states of the hereafter and
resurrection, Paradise and Hell, in order to help him get ready for death.
Indeed, departure from this world has become near, and only a little in the
lifetime that remains, although the people are heedless of that: “Closer and
closer to mankind comes their Reckoning: yet they heed not and they turn away.”
(Al-Anbiya’ 1)
630

Book temremembrance of Death and hereafter life
40 tiy**j*+

--------------------------

631

<4 p-*3 ^

Let us mention the issues related to death in two parts.

Part one: what precedes and succeeds death to the
sounding of the trumpet
It contains eight chapters:
Chapter one: Excellence of remembrance of death and exhortadon to
remember it.
Chapter two: Remembrance of long and short hope.
Chapter three: Remembrance of death agonies and difficuldes.
Chapter four: The death of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him", and his righdy-guided successors after him.
Chapter five: The speech of such as on the threshold of death, from among
the rulers and righteous.
Chapter six: Opinions of the learned about funerals and graves, and ruling
on visiting graves.
Chapter seven: The real nature of death, and what the dead receives in the
grave until the trumpet is sounded.
Chapter eight: Concerning what is known about the states of the dead by
reveladon in the dreams (of the living).

CHAPTER ONE
EXCELLENCE OF REMEMBRANCE OF DEATH
AND EXHORTATION TO REMEMBER IT
It should be known to you that such as involved in this world, and
engaged in its deceiving desires and delights are heedless of the death, and
whenever it is mendoned to them, they would have aversion for it. It is those
in connection with whom Allah Almighty said: “Say: "The Death from which
you flee will truly overtake you: then will you be sent back to the Knower of
things secret and open: and He will tell you (the truth of) the things that you
did!” (Al-Jumu’ah 8)
In this respect, the people are either involved (in the world), a beginning
repentant, or an advanced Gnostic.
As for him who is wholeheartedly involved in this world, he rarely
remembers death, and even were he to remember it, he does so in sigh for what
he missed of his world, and he always mentions it simply in order to blame it.
The mention of death does but increases such one in remoteness from Allah
Almighty.
As for the repentant, he more often remembers death in order for fear to be
stimulated in his heart, which helps him fulfill the requirements of repentance to
the best. If he dislikes death, he does so for fear it would snatch him before
com pleting his repentance and mending his provision. He indeed is excused for

The quarter of the saviors
632
that aversion he might have for death. Such is not included under the statement
of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": “Whoever
dislikes to meet Allah, Allah dislikes to meet him.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on
the authority of Abu Hurairah). He does not dislike death for he dislikes to meet
Allah Almighty in so much as he dislikes death for fear he might lose the meeting
with Allah because of his shortage and indulgence. The distinctive sign for that is
to be relentlessly engaged in getting ready for that meedng, otherwise, he would
be joined with the one who is involved in the pleasures and delights of this world.
As for the Gnostic, he always remembers death for it is his appointment
with his Beloved, and the lover never forgets his appointment with his beloved.
Such a person, more often, feels death is too slow to come to him, for he likes
it to come soon, in order to get rid of the abode of the disobedient and move to
the neighbourhood of the Lord of the worlds. In this connection, it is narrated
that when death approach Hudhaifah "Allah be pleased with him" he said: “A
beloved has come while being in a state of destitution: never prospers such as
regrets. O Allah! If You know that poverty is dearer to me than richness,
sickness than health, and death than living, then, make death easy on me until I
meet You.”
The repentant then is excused for his aversion for death, and the Gnostic is
excused for his love and hope for death. Higher than both in rank is he who
entrusts his affair to Allah Almighty, and prefers for himself neither death nor
living: on the contrary, the dearer to him is that which is the dearer to his Lord
Almighty. That person, by his excessive love and alliance, attains the station of
submission and contentment, which is the farthest finale. Anyway, the
remembrance of death is rewardable and meritorious, even for the one who is
involved in the pleasures of this world, for it helps him desert the life, since it
embitters upon him the delights of this world; and anything which embitters
upon one his desires and pleasures is among the means of salvation.

Explication Of Excellence Of Remembrance Of Death
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“Remember, more often, (death) the destroyer of pleasures.” (At-Tirmidhi, AnNasa’i and Ibn Majah on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: <fWere animals to know about death what mankind know, you would never
have eaten anything thereof.” (Al-Baihaqi on the authority of Umm Habibah AlJuhaniyyah).
It is narrated on the authority of A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her" that she
said: “O Messenger of Allah! Would there be anyone to be mustered in the
company of the martyrs?” He said: “Yes, whoever remembers death twenty times
per night and day.” That superiority goes back to the fact that remembrance of
death causes desertion from this world, and imposes readiness for the abode of
the hereafter, whereas heedlessness of death invites to involvement in the desires
and pleasures of the world.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “Death is the gift of the faithful believer.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya, At-Tabarani

633
Book tenrremembrance of Death and hereafter life
and Al-Hakim on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Umar). That is because the world
is the believer’s prison, in which he persists in suffering and difficulty of resisting
his desires and appetencies, and averting his Satan; and death releases him from
that torment.
The Prophet "peace be upon him" said too: “Death is expiation for every
Muslim.” (Abu Na’im, Al-Baihaqi and Al-Khatib on the authority of Anas). The
Muslim intended here is the true believer, from the evil of whose tongue and the
harm of whose hand the Muslims are safe, and who has the good manners of the
faithful believers, and is not contaminated from disobedience but with the minor
sins. Death purifies him from them, and plots them out so long as he avoids the
major sins and establishes the obligatory duties.
It is further narrated on the authority of Ata’ Al-Khurasani that he said: the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" came upon a
gathering of people who were laughing so much loudly, thereupon he said to
them: “Mix your gathering with the remembrance of the disturber of pleasures.”
They asked: <fWhat is the disturber of pleasures O Messenger of Allah?” He said:
“Death.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“Remember death , more often, for it purifies from sins and causes abstinence
from this world.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“Sufficient is death for a separator (of people from each other).” (Al-Harith Ibn
Abu Usamah on the authority of Anas).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “Sufficient is death for a preacher.” (Al-Baihaqi and At-Tabarani on the
authority of Ammar Ibn Yasir).
It is also narrated that once the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" came out to the mosque and found some people sitting
there, and they were engaged in talk and laughter, thereupon he said to them:
“Remember death! Behold! By Him in Whose Hand is my soul, were you to
know what I know, you would laugh little and weep much.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya
on the authority of Ibn Umar).
On another occasion, a mention was made of a man to the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and they appreciated him so
much. He asked them: “How does your companion remember death?” they said:
“We have almost never heard him remembering death.” On that he said: “Then,
your companion is not fitting (for your appreciation).” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on
the authority of Anas; and Ibn Al-Mubarak).
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with them" that
he said: I went to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" in the company of nine and I was the tenth of them. A man from the Ansar
asked him: <fWho is the most intelligent among the people O Messenger of
Allah?” He said: “Who remembers death most among them, and gets ready for it
most among them: those are the most intelligent among men for they have

The quarter of the saviors
634
combined both die honor of this world, and the dignity of the hereafter.” (Ibn
Majah and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
From among the traditions, a mention may be made of the statement of AlHassan: “Death has scandalized the world and left no joy for such of men as
endued with sound minds.”
According to Ar-Rabie Ibn Khuthaim: “There is no absent which a faithful
believer waits better for him than death.” He said once again: “Let none sense of
my death, and rather hand me over to my Lord stealthily.”
A wise man wrote die following to one of his brothers: “O my brother! Be
careful of death in this abode before you go to an abode in which you would
hope for death, but you could not find it.”
It was the habit of Ibn Sirin that whenever a mention of death was made in
his presence, every part of his body would become motionless as if it died.
It was also the habit of Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz to gather the juristic scholars
and learned every night in order to remember death, resurrection and the
hereafter until they would weep so much as if they were attending a funeral
procession.
According to Ibrahim At-Taimi: “Two things have interrupted upon me the
pleasures of this world: Remembrance of death, and standing in front of Allah.”
According to Ka’b: “Whoever knows death (as it should be known), all
calamities and anxieties of this world become insignificant in his sight.”
It is narrated on the authority of Safiyyah "Allah be pleased with her" that a
woman came to complain to A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her" about the
harshness of her heart, thereupon she said to her: “Remember death more often,
perchance your heart would become soft.” She did accordingly, and her heart
turned soft. She returned to thank A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her.”
It was the habit of Jesus "peace be upon him" that whenever a mention of
death was made in his presence, his skin would dribble blood.
It was the habit of David "peace be upon him" that whenever death and
resurrection were mentioned in his presence, he would go on weeping so much
that his joints would be about to dislocate; and whenever mercy was mentioned
to him, he would restore his original state.
Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz asked a religious scholar to admonish him thereupon
he said to him: tcYou would not be the first caliph to die.” He said: “Give me
more.” He said: “There were none of your fathers up to Adam "peace be upon
him" but that he tasted death; and now it is your turn.” Umar then wept so much
for that.
Ar-Rabie Ibn Khuthaim was reported to have dug a grave in his house in
which he slept many times every night in order to persist in remembrance of
death. He said in this respect: “If the remembrance of death leaves my heart even
for a single hour, it would corrupt.”
According to Mutarrif Ibn Abdullah Ibn Ash-Shakhir: “Death indeed has
embittered upon the people of bliss their bliss. Seek then bliss, if you could, in
which there is no embitterment.”
Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz said to Anbasah: “Remember death more often: if
your living is abundant, it would constrict it upon you; and if your living is
constricted, it would enlarge it upon you.”

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
635
Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani said: I asked Umm Harun: “Do you like death?”
she answered in the negadve. I asked her why and she said: “If I disobey anyone
of mankind, I would have no longing for meeting him. Then, how should I like
to meet Him (Allah) since I disobey Him?”
Explication Of The Way To Remember Death
It should be known to you that death is of great risk and danger, and those
who are heedless of death are so because they neither meditate in nor remember
it; and even such as remembers it does not remember it with his heart disengaged
from worldly desires. For this reason, the remembrance of death has no
impression upon his heart.
The way to remember death with verificadon is first to disengage one’s heart
from anything except for remembrance of death that is ahead of him. Once he
persists in remembering death, it would influence on his heart, and consequendy
his joy and pleasure with this world would decrease and his heart would get
broken. The most effective way to that is to remember, more often, his fellows
who preceded him to death, and how they turned into corpses under the earth,
exposed to insects and larva, leaving behind them all their property they gathered,
and children and families they had, and how they were heedless of death when it
attacked them suddenly and they expected it not. At this point, let him consider
his own self, and how he is heedless like them, and his consequence would be like
theirs.
According to Abu Ad-Darda’ "Allah be pleased with him": “When you
remember the dead, regard yourself as one of them.”
According to Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased with him": “The happy is he who
is admonished by the state of the other.”
According to Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz: “Do you not see that you prepare,
every morning and evening, somebody to go to Allah Almighty, whom you place
in a hole under the earth, taking dust as a cushion, leaving behind him his
beloved, and cutting all means and relations with this world?”.
To persist in those thoughts, along with entering the graves and seeing the
patients renews remembrance of death in the heart until it prevails over one and
becomes always before his eyes. At that point, one is about to dedicate himself
to it, and desert the abode of deception, otherwise, to remember death only
with tongue is of no significance and very litde impact on the heart. If he is
pleased with anything in this world, let him remember, at once, that he is going
to leave it.
Once Ibn Muti’ looked at his house and admired it so much. But a short
while later, he wept so much and said: “By Allah, had it not been for death, I
would have been pleased with you; and had it not been for the fact that we are
going to be buried in the narrow graves, we would have got comforted with this
world.” Then, he wept more until his voice raised high.

CHAPTER TWO
CONCERNING LONG HOPE; AND EXCELLENCE OF SHORT HOPE; AND
WHY IT IS LONG; AND HOW IT IS REMEDIED
Excellence Of Short Hope
It is narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with

)

The quarter of the saviors
636
them" that the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" said
to him: “When you are in the morning, think not about the evening, and when
you are in the evening, think not about the morning (of the next day); and take
from your life provision that benefits you in your death, and from your health
what benefits you during your sickness, for you do not know, O Abdullah, what
you would be in the morrow.” (Ibn Hibban and Al-Bukhari).
It is further narrated on the authority of Ali "Allah be pleased with him" that
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “What I
fear for you most is two things: Following inclinadon and the long hope. As for
following inclination, it keeps off the truth; and as for the long hope, it is the love
for this world.” Then he "peace be upon him" resumed: “Behold! Allah Almighty
gives the world to whomever He likes as well as to whomever He dislikes, and if
He likes a servant, He gives him only faith. Behold! Religion has its men and the
world has its men. So, be among the men of the religion, and be not among the
men of the world. Behold! This world is about to leave, turning its back to you.
Behold! The hereafter is about to come, turning its face towards you. Behold!
You (in this world) are on a day of work on which there is no reckoning. Behold!
You are about to go to a day of reckoning on which there would be no work.”
(Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
It is further narrated on the authority of Umm Al-Mundhir "Allah be pleased
with her" that she said: One evening, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" looked at the people and said: “Do you not feel shy of
Allah?” they asked: “What is the matter O Messenger of Allah?” he said: “You
gather (wealth) which you devour not, hope (for things) which you realize not,
and build (houses in) which you live not.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: Usamah Ibn Zaid bought from Zaid Ibn Thabit a slave-girl by
one hundred Dinar on credit for a month, thereupon I heard the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" saying: “Do you not wonder at
Usamah that he has bought on credit for a month? Verily, Usamah is of a long
hope! By Him in Whose Hand is my life, my eyes have never twinkled but that I
thought both eyelids would not close together before Allah takes my soul (by
death), nor have I raised my limb but that I thought I would not put it down
once again before I die, nor have I taken a morsel of food but that I thought I
would not swallow it before I get choked out of death.” Then he "peace be upon
him" said: “O mankind! If you have sound minds, then, regard yourselves among
the dead. By Him in Whose Hand is my soul, what you are promised would
inevitably come, and you never frustrate (the power and will of Allah).” (Ibn Abu
Ad-Dunya).
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them" that
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" used to come
out to urinate and then clean himself with dust. I said to him: “O Messenger of
Allah! Water is close to you.” On that he said: “What makes me know that I
would (have respite to) reach it?” (Ibn Al-Mubarak, Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and AlBazzar).

637
Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" picked up three sdeks and fixed one of them in front of him, another beside
it and the third far from them. He said: “Do you know which thing this
represents?” they said: “Allah and His Messenger know best.” On that he said:
“The first represents man, the second his appointed term (death), and the third
the hope, and while the son of Adam lives in his hope, death attacks him before
he realizes his hope.” (Ahmad and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “The son of Adam has ninety-nine deaths awaiting him: if all of them
miss him, of a surety, the old age would befall him.” (At-Tirmidhi on the
authority of Abdullah Ibn Ash-Shakhir).
It is narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” drew a square and then drew a line in the middle of it and let it extend
outside the square and then drew several small lines attached to that central line,
and said: “This is the human being, and this (the square) in his lease of life,
encircles him from all sides (or has encircled him), and this (line), which is outside
(the square), is his hope, and these small lines are the calamities and troubles
(which may befall him), and if one misses him, another will snap him, and if the
other misses him, a third will snap him." (Al-Bukhari).
It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “The
son of Adam grows old and two characteristics remain with him: greediness (for
wealth) and hope (for long life).” (Muslim).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “The first generation of this (Muslim) Ummah was saved by certainty (of
faith) and abstinence (in this world), and the last generation of it would be given
to destruction because of niggardliness and hope.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the
authority of Amr Ibn Shu’aib from his father from his grandfather).
It is narrated that while Jesus "peace be upon him" was sitting, there was an
old man working with his spade therewith he was raising dust. Jesus "peace be
upon him" said (by way of supplication): “O Allah! Remove hope from his
heart.” On that the old man threw the spade and lay on his back for an hour.
Then Jesus "peace be upon him" said once again: “O Allah! Restore hope to his
heart.” On that the old man stood and started working with the spade once again.
Jesus "peace be upon him" asked him about the reason for that, thereupon he
said: “While I was working with the spade, my self said to me: To which time are
you going to work given that you are an old man?’ I then threw the spade and lay
on my back. But some time later my self said to me once again: TBy Allah, you
should continue to earn your living so long as you survive.’ On that I stood up
and took the spade and started working.”
It is narrated on the authority of Al-Hassan: “Does all of you like to enter
Paradise?” they said: “Yes O Messenger of Allah.” On that he said: “Then, make
short your hopes, put your appointed terms ahead of you, and feel shy of Allah
Almighty.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).

The quarter of the saviors
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" used to say
in his supplication: “O Allah! I seek refuge with You from world that prevents
the good of the hereafter; and I seek refuge with You from life that prevents the
good of the death; and I seek refuge with You from hope that prevents the good
of the deed.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Hawshab direct from the
Prophet "peace be upon him").
From among the traditions, a mention may be made of the statement of
Mutarrif Ibn Abdullah: “Were I to know when my appointed term (of death)
would be, I would fear for myself the loss of my mind. But Allah Almighty
conferred upon His servants the favor of heedlessness of death; and had it not
been for such heedlessness, they would not have been blessed in living, nor
would markets have been established between them.”
According to Al-Hassan: “Forgetfulness and hope are great favors Allah
bestowed upon mankind, otherwise, by Allah, Muslims would not have been able
to walk in the streets.”
According to Ath-Thawri: “I was informed that man was created as foolish,
and had it not been for this fact, he would not have been blessed in living.”
According to Abu Sa’id Ibn Abd-Ar-Rahman: “The world has been inhabited
only by virtue of the lack of mind of its inhabitants.”
According to Salman Al-Farisi "Allah be pleased with him": “Three things
raised my attention and caused me to laugh: the hopeful for this world whom
death invites, a heedless, of whom death is not heedless, and a laughing one who
does not know whether Allah, the Lord of the worlds is displeased or pleased
with him. furthermore, other three things aggrieved me and caused me to weep:
Departure of the beloved, Muhammad "peace be upon him" and his party, the
terror of the standing in front of Allah Almighty, and I do not know whether to
Paradise or to Hell I would be admitted.”
A righteous one said: I saw Zurarah Ibn Abu Awfa "Allah be pleased with
him" in a dream after his death and I asked him: <fWhich deed is the most
effective among you?” He said: “Reliance (on Allah) and short hope.”
According to Ath-Thawri: “Abstinence from this world is to have short hope.
It is not to eat the rough of food nor to put on the coarse of garments.”
It is reported that Al-Mufaddal Ibn Fadalah asked his Lord Almighty to
remove hope from him thereupon the appetite for food and drink vanished from
him. Then, he invoked his Lord once again to restore hope to him, thereupon the
appetite for food and drink returned to him once again.
It was said to Al-Hassan: “Do you not wash your shirt O Abu Said?” he said:
“The matter (of death) comes sooner than (to have a respite for) this.” According
to Al-Hassan: “Death lies in your forelocks, and the world is folded behind you.”
According to a wise man: “I am like a man stretching his neck and the sword
(of death) is awaiting him, when to chop off his head.”
According to Dawud At-Ta’i: “Were I to hope to live for a month, surely, I
would bring great things. But even, how should I have such a hope and I see
distresses striking the people at any moment during night and day?”
A person wrote the following to his brother (in the religion of Allah):
638

)

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
639
“Coming to the point: The world is but a dream, and the hereafter wakefulness,
and death is in the midway between them; and we are now living in A confused
medley of dreams. And peace be upon you.”
According to Al-Hassan: “Before Adam "peace be upon him" erred, his hope
(for life) was behind his back and his appointed term (of death) in front of him.
But when he erred, he turned to the opposite, and made his hope (for life) in
front of him, and his appointed term (of death) behind his back.”
It is reported on the authority of Abu Zakariyya At-Taimi that while
Sulaiman Ibn Abd-Al-Malik was in the mosque, a stone with inscription was
brought to him and Wahb Ibn Munabbih was invited to read it for him and it
went as follows: “O son of Adam! Were you to see how close you are to your
appointed term, surely, you would abstain in your long hope (you have for
this life), desire for increase in your deed, and shorten your greediness and
trickery. If your foot slips, it is your regret which would inevitably receive you
in the morrow: You would neither be able to return to your world, nor to add
anything to your good deeds. So, doo deeds (as much as you could) for the
Day of Judgement before the coming of regret and grief.” On that Sulaiman
wept so much excessively.
Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz addressed the people with a sermon in which he
praised Allah and lauded Him and then said: “O people! You have not been
created in idle sport, but you have a place of return where Allah Almighty would
gather you to decide among you, and you would be superior to each other (by
virtue of your deeds): Failing and wretched in the morrow would be a servant
whom Allah drives away from His mercy which extends over all things, and from
His Paradise whose breadth is equal to the breadth of the heavens and the earth.
Safety in the morrow would be for him who fears AJlah, and sells the little for the
much, the perishable for the never-ending, and the wretchedness for the
happiness, do you not see that you are going to join the ruined, and others would
succeed you in this world? Do you not see that every morning and evening you
send off a dead whose hope for and relation with life have been cut off and you
place him underneath the earth, leaving him alone to face reckoning? By Allah, I
say this statement of mine and know with certainty that there is none among you
more sinful than I. But it is out of the established way of Allah to enjoin upon
you to obey Him and forbid you to disobey Him.” Then, he prayed for
forgiveness of Allah and placed the sleeve of his garment over his face and went
on weeping so much until his tears wetted his beard. After that sermon, he did
not return to his gathering once again until he died.
According to Al-Qa’qa’ Ibn Hakim: “I have got ready for death since thirty
years, and should it come to me now, I would not like to change anything to
make it after another.”
According to Ath-Thawri: I saw an old man in the mosque of Kufah saying:
“I have been sitting here in this mosque for thirty years, in expectation for death
to attack me, and should it come to me now, I would neither command myself to
do anything, nor forbid it from anything, nor do I have a right upon anyone, nor
does anyone have a right upon me.”

The quarter of the saviors
Abu Muhammad Ibn Ali Az-Zahid said: We set out to follow a funeral
procession in Basrah, and Dawud At-Ta’i was among us. Then, he withdrew and
sat on one side while the dead body was being buried. I came and sat near him.
He addressed me saying: tcWhoever fears the threat, the far would become close
to him; and the more one’s hope is long, the more his deed is weak; and
everything to come is very close. It should be known to you, O brother, that
everything which occupies you from your Lord Almighty is a cause of pessimism
upon you. It should be known also that all the inhabitants of this world are going
to be among the inhabitants of the graves. But the inhabitants of the graves
regret for what they leave behind, and rejoice at what they send forward. What
the inhabitants of the graves regret for is the same for which the inhabitants of
the world fight each other, over which they compete each other, and on which
they dispute with each other in the courts.”
It is reported that Ma’ruf Al-Karkhi pronounced Iqamah for prayer and asked
Muhammad Ibn Abu Tawbah to proceed on to lead the prayer, diereupon he said
to him: “If I lead you in this prayer, I would not lead you in any prayer
afterwards.” He said: “Do you talk to yourself that you would (live until you)
offer another prayer? We seek refuge with Allah from the long hope, for it
prevents the good of the deed.”
Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz said to the people in his sermon: “This world is not
the abode of your stability. But it is an abode which Allah Almighty doomed to
perish, and doomed its inhabitants to leave it. How many a strong building which
is going to be ruined a few moments later, and how many a joyful resident who is
going to leave a short time later. So, make good your journey on it, may Allah
have mercy upon you, and take provision, for the best provision is piety. The
world is like a shade which has shrunk and gradually vanished. While mankind
was competing in this world, Allah Almighty invited him, according to what is
doomed to him, and threw him by death, therewith his traces and good things he
has made and gained in his world were taken away from him, and given to others
than him. The world never pleases in so much as harms: it pleases little and
aggrieves much.”
Abu Bakr As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased with him" used to say in his sermon:
“Where are the good-looking people who were fond of their youth? Where are
the kings who built the cities and fortified them with strong walls and fences?
Where are those who used to emerge victorious in the batdefields? All of them
went away and became in the darkness of the graves. We ask for salvation.”
640

Explication Of Why Hope Is Long, And Its Remedy
It should be known to you that there are two reasons for the long hope: one
is ignorance, and the other is the love for this world.
As far as the love for this world is concerned, it is that if he is affable with
it, its desires, delights, pleasures, and occupations, it becomes too heavy on him
to leave it. Thus, his heart refrains from meditation in death, which is the means
to leave it. However, whoever dislikes a thing averts it from himself. Man
always has nostalgia for the false wishes: He wishes only for what agrees with
his ambition, and it is only his survival in this world that agrees with his

641
Book tenrremembrance of Death and hereafter life
ambition. He continues to imagine it and estimate it within himself, along with
the subsequents of his survival therein, and needs of property, family, children,
and all means of sustenance in it. He devotes himself to meditation in that only,
which diverts him from the remembrance of death, and consideration of its
closeness in time to him.
If, by chance, the idea of death occurs to his mind, and his need to get ready
for it, he would soon procrastinate it and gives to himself false promises saying
to it: “There are still many days ahead of you until you grow old and then you
could repent.” When he grows up, he would say: “Postpone repentance until you
become an old man.” But when he becomes an old man, he would say: “Take
respite until you finish from building this house and inhabiting that estate, or
until you return from that journey or from preparation of your child (for
marriage), or from defeating that enemy which teases you...”and so on he delays
it day after day, and each occupation leads him to another, until death snatches
him at a time he thinks it not, causing his grief to be very long.
The cry of the majority of the denizens of the fire of Hell results from that
procrastination. Such person is ignorant of the fact that what invites him to
procrastination at present would be with him in the future. He thinks, though
falsely, that one day he would be able to disengage himself from it. But
nonsense! None has the power to disengage himself from it but he who is
careless of it. these false wishes go back to the love for this world, and
heedlessness of the significance of the statement of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": “Love whomever you love, for you
would inevitably leave him.”
As for ignorance, it is that man might rely on his youth, because of which he
regards death too far to come to him. But this little man does not think that death
could easily attack anyone in his very youth. He also might regard death too far to
come because of his good health, given that it is not unlikely that death might
overtake him suddenly. If that poor person thinks that death has no specific time
to come, of course, he might feel it and engage in getting ready for it. but it is
ignorance of those facts on the one hand, and his love for the world on the other
hand that invite him to make long his hope, and be heedless of considering the
closeness of death to him. Such a man thinks that although death is surrounding
him, as it befalls others, he never imagines it to befall him. The way to remedy
that is to compare himself with others and know that death would inevitably
befall him as it befalls others. His procrastination, from this perspective then, is
quite ignorance.
If you know that all of this goes back to those two causes, i.e. ignorance and
love for this world, you should then learn that The way of remedy is to remove
these causes that lead to it. as for ignorance, it might be averted by pure
meditation with the full presence of the heart, and hearing the instructive wisdom
from the pure hearts.
As for the love for this world, to remove it from the heart is very difficult
since it is the chronic disease, whose remedy wearied the first and last
generations. There is no remedy for it except to have faith in the Last Day and its

The quarter of the saviors
642
formidable punishment and abundant reward. Once he is certain of that, the love
for this world leaves his heart, because the love for what is serious always
removes from the heart the love for what is despicable. If he sees how the world
is despicable in comparison with the hereafter which is valuable, surely, he would
disdain from turning to the world, even if the kingdom of the whole earth from
the East to the West was given to him. How then if he has from the world only
the litde? We ask Allah Almighty to show to us the world as He showed it to the
righteous among His servants.
There is no remedy to consider death in the heart but to think about the
dead among one’s fellows and kinship, and how death attacked them at a time
they thought it not. Whoever got ready for it has indeed attained a great
felicity; and whoever was deceived by the long hope has indeed received an
evident loss.
Let one then think about his parts of body, and how they would be exposed,
after death, to the insects and larva, and nothing in himself would remain except
for beneficial knowledge and righteous deed which he did only with sincerity to
the Countenance of Allah Aimighty. Let him also think about the punishment of
the grave, as we will show later, resurrection and terrors of the Day of
Judgement, etc. It is the like of those ideas which renew the remembrance of
death in his heart, and invite him to get ready for it.

Explication Of The Different Ranks
Of People Concerning Long And Short Hopes
It should be known to you that people are different in this issue. Let us sum
up them as follows:
Some of them hope for long survival, which they desire forever. In
confirmation of that, AJlah Almighty said: tcYou will indeed find them, of all
people, most greedy of life, even more than the idolaters: each one of them
wishes he could be given a life of a thousand years.” (AJ-Baqarah 96)

Some others wish to survive as long as to reach the old age, and that is the
farthest point of lifetime one sees; and that person loves the world so much
excessively. In confirmation of that, the Messenger of Allah "AJUah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: “The old man’s heart is that of a youth in love for two
things: the long life and greediness for property.” (Both Sahihs on the authority
of Abu Hurairah).
Others wish to life only for a year, and do not engage in preparing their
livelihood for what is beyond it: In the summer, one prepares his things until the
next winter, and in the winter, he does the same until the next summer and so on.
Once he gathers what sustains him for a year, he engages in worship.
Some of them hope to life only for a season, and no more: one of them
neither saves in the summer the garment of the winter, nor does he save in the
winter the garment of the summer.
Some of them reduce their hope only to a day and a night: such prepares only
what sustains him during his day and not until tomorrow. Jesus "peace be upon

I

643
Book temremembrance of Death and hereafter life
him" said: “Do not care about the morrow: If it is added to your lifedme, then,
you would receive your sustenance on it, otherwise, care not about the lifetime of
anyone other than you.”
Some of them have their hope as short as no more than an hour, as
confirmed by our Prophet "peace be upon him" when he said to Abdullah Ibn
Umar: “When you are in the morning, think not about the evening, and when
you are in the evening, think not about the morning (of the next day).”
Some of them do not estimate to live even for an hour. The Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" sometimes practiced Tayammum,
although he might find water within less than an hour saying: ‘It may be that I
would (die before I) reach it.”
Some of them make death ahead of them, as if it awaits to befall anyone of
them at any moment. It is that man who offers the prayer of such as bids farewell
to this world. It is in connection with him that Mu’adh Ibn Jabal "Allah be
pleased with him" replied to the question of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" when he asked him about the real nature of his
faith, thereupon he said: “I never take a step but that I think I would not be able
to follow it with another (because of death).” (Abu Na’im in his Hilyah on the
authority of Anas). It is further reported from Al-Aswad, and he was an
Abyssinian, that he was offering prayer at night, during which he was looking
sideways. It was said to him: “What is the matter with you?” He said: “I look at
the angel of death from which direction he would come to me.”
Those are the different ranks of the people concerning their hope; and each
has his specific degree with Allah Almighty. Of course, such as whose hope is
reduced to less than a month is not like him whose hope is as long as a month
and a day: There is difference between them in degree with Allah Almighty, for
never does Allah deal unjustly with anyone even in the least, and whoever does
an atom’s weight of good would inevitably see it.
Therefore, the trace of the short hope appears more evident in the way one
hastens to work. Everyone claims his hope is short and he is a Liar, his falsehood
appears clear in his deeds. He might take care of means which he does not need
along a year, and this signifies that his hope is not short as he claims. The sign of
success is to make death ahead of him, of which he is not heedless even for a
single moment. So, let him get ready for the death which awaits him at present
time: If he lives to the evening, let him thank Allah Almighty for his obedience to
Him and wasting not his day, and then do the same in the evening until morning,
and so on. That is easy but only on him who disengages his heart from the
morrow and what would be on it. if such a person dies, he would be happy and
gainful, and if he lives, he would be pleased with his good readiness and the
pleasure of his private talk (with Allah). Death is happiness for him, and life is
addition of good to his account.

Explication Of The Necessity To Hasten To Work
And Caution Of The Evil Of Delay
It should be known to you that if one has two absent brothers, one of whom
is expected to come in the next morning, and the other within a month, surely, he

The quarter of the saviors
644
would not get ready to receive the one whose expected arrival is far before the
one whose expected arrival is near. Whoever expects death to come after a year,
would engage in the term itself and forget what is beyond it, which prevents him
from hastening to work, as he sees respite for him to delay the work as he likes.
In this connection, it is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be
pleased with him" that the Prophet "peace be upon him" said: "Hasten to do
(good deeds) before (the coming of) seven (things): Do you expect but poverty
that causes one to forget (any other engagement), richness that causes one to
transgress all due bounds, sickness that corrupts (body or religion), old age that
brings about senility (by which one might deviate from right), swift destructive
death, (the affliction of) Ad-Dajjal, and it is absent, though expected evil, or the
Hour (of Judgment), and the Hour is more disastrous and more bitter?" (AtTirmidhi).
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas “may Allah be pleased with
them” that the Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said to a man while
instructing him: "Avail yourself of five (good benefits you have) before (the
coming of) five (evils you would suffer from): (avail yourself of) your youth
before (the coming of) your old age, your health before (the coming of) your
illness, your richness before (the coming of) your poverty, your
disengagement before (the coming of) your occupation, and your life before
(the coming of) your death." (Al-Hakim).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “A lot of people are given to loss in two favors: Health and vacation.” (AlBukhari on the authority of Ibn Abbas). It means they never avail themselves of
those things until when they pass, they feel of their great value.
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them" that
he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“Whoever fears (to be exposed to the assault of Satan) let him proceed on the
way (to the hereafter straightly to be safe from him), and whoever proceeds on
the way (to the hereafter directly) would necessarily attain the position he seeks
for. Behold! The commodity of Allah is very expensive! Behold! The (price of
the) commodity of Allah is Paradise!” (At-Tirmidhi).
It was the habit of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" that whenever he sensed any portion of heedlessness or conceit from
his companions, he would called them with a high voice: “Death would
necessarily and inevitably come to you, either with wretchedness or with
happiness.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Zaid As-Sulaimi).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “I am a warner (of evil), death is a raider, and the Hour (of Judgement) is
your appointment.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with them" that
he said: One day the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" came out when the sun was almost setting thereupon he said: “Nothing of
this world remains except as little as is equal to the remaining portion of that day

i

645
Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life ----compared with what passed thereof.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “The example of this world is like a garment that has been divided from its
first to its last except for a thin thread at its end by which it is still connected, and
this thread is about to be cut.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Anas).
It is further narrated on the authority of Jabir "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: Whenever the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" delivered his speech in which he made a mention of the Hour (of
Judgement), he would raise his voice and his cheeks turn red, as if he were a
warner of an army, saying: “I have warned you in the morning and evening.
Behold! I have been sent (as a Messenger) and the Hour (of Judgement) as close
to each other as are those”, and he would join his fingers. (Muslim and Ibn Abu
Ad-Dunya).
It is further narrated on the authority of Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased with
him” that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
recited the following Qur’anic Verse: “Those whom Allah (in His plan) wills to
guide, He opens their breast to Islam; those whom He wills to leave straying, He
makes their breast close and constricted.” (Al-An’am 125)

Then he commented: “Once the light (of faith) enters the breast, it would be
made spacious for it to come in.” it was said: “O Messenger of Allah! Is there any
sign indicative of that?” he "peace be upon him" said: “Yes, it is to desert the
abode of deception (the world), turn to the abode of eternity (hereafter), and get
ready for death before it comes.”
In his comment on the following Qur’anic statement: “He Who created
Death and Life, that He may try which of you is best in deed; and He is the
Exalted in Might, Oft-Forgiving” (Al-Mulk 2)

As-Suddi said: “It means to try you as to which among you remembers death
most, gets ready for it best, and fears and bewares of it most.”
According to Hudhaifah "Allah be pleased with him": Every morning and
evening, a caller calls: “O people! Remember the departure! Remember the
departure!” in confirmation of that, Allah Almighty said: “This is but one of the
mighty (Portents), A warning to mankind, To any of you that chooses to press
forward, or to follow behind.” (Al-Muddaththir 35-37)

4.

O*

(S^ y tr) ^

According to Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him”:
“Deliberation is good in all things except in the deeds of righteousness to the
hereafter (which one should hasten to do).”
Al-Hassan used to say in his admonition: “Hasten (to good)! Hasten (to
good)! (What relates you with this world) is only the breaths and once they stop,
you would die and your deeds therewith you come close to Allah Almighty would
cease from you. May Allah have mercy upon such as looks at himself and weeps

■

The quarter of the saviors
646
for the number of his sins.” Then he recited the following Holy Verse: “So make
no haste against them, for We but count out to them a (limited) number (of
days).” (Maryam 84)
A*

4

-uu UjJ

^

“It refers to the limited number of breaths: the last breath is the coming out
of your soul. The last number is your departure from your family, and entering
your grave.”
It is reported that Abu Musa Al-Ash’ari "Allah be pleased with him" tired
himself so much in worship towards the end of his life, and it was said to him:
fCWould that you are kind and gentle to yourself!” on that he said: “If horses are
launched in race and they come close to the end, they would exert as much effort
as is within their capacity; and what remains of my lifetime is lesser than what has
passed thereof.” He remained in such a state until he died.
In his comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: “but you
led yourselves into temptation; you looked forward (to our ruin); you doubted
(Allah's Promise); and (your false) desires deceived you; until there issued the
Command of Allah. And the Deceiver deceived you in respect of Allah” (AlHadid 14)
VT |I JIjjli

i ©i

I

jUj ^

^ ^ '<■ W-

A commentator said: “It means you have tempted yourselves with desires and
pleasures of this world, and then you looked forward to the repentance (of Allah
upon you), and became in doubt until death came to you. That is because the
deceiver, i.e. Satan, deceived you.”
Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased with him" said: “None of you gets up in the
morning but that he is a guest (on this world), and what he has is but borrowed
to him: The guest would necessary leave, and the borrowed thing should be given
back to its real owner.”
According to Al-Hassan: ‘Tatiently persevere and be steadfast, for there
remains only a few days and you are standing travelers, and death is about to
invite anyone of you and he is going to respond quickly. So, move (from this
world to the hereafter) with the good of what is present with you.”
It is reported that Abu Ubaidah Al-Baji said: We visited Al-Hassan during
his fatal illness in which he died thereupon he said to us: “Welcome to you. May
Allah greet you with peace, and admit you and us to the abode of residence.
That is a good assembly: If you patiendy persevere and are true (to yourselves),
and fear Allah Almighty, then, let not your fortune, may Allah have mercy upon
you, from that only to hear the news with one ear and let it come out from the
other. Whoever saw Muhammad "peace be upon him" saw him in the morning
and evening having never placed a brick over another nor a pipe over another
(for the purpose of building). But knowledge was raised to him and he
endeavored to obtain it. we ask Allah for salvation. On which thing do you
ascend? By the Lord of the Ka’bah, you have come, as if the matter were along

Book teniremembrance of Death and hereafter life

647
with the mercy of Allah Almighty, to a servant who has made his Living only
one, whose food is only a fragment (of bread), and garment only a piece of
cloth, and he stuck to the ground and devoted himself wholeheartedly to
worship, wept for his mistakes and sins, fled away from punishment, and
sought the mercy of Allah, until his death would approach him while being in
such a state.”
Asim Al-Ahwal said: Fudail Ar-Raqashi said to me and I was begging him: “O
man! Let not the great number of people divert you from yourself, for the matter
(of death) approaches you alone from among them. Do not say ‘Let me go here
and there’, thereupon wasting the day in vain. The matter is accounted and kept
upon you, and you do not see anything much better and more beneficial than a
new good deed to plot out therewith an old sin.”

CHAPTER THREE
DEATH AGONIES AND DIFFICULTIES; AND WHAT IS FAVORABLE OF
STATES WHENEVER IT COMES
It should be known to you that if a servant is to receive no calamities, nor
distresses, nor disasters other than the death agonies and terrors, it would be
more worthy to embitter his living upon him, and remove all joy and delight he
might have in this world, and further cause him to make long his reflection on it,
and become more ready and well-prepared for it, given that it is apt to receive
death at every breath he takes. Luqman said to his son, for instance: “O my son!
Since it (death) is a matter which you do not know when to meet it, then, get
ready for it before it takes you aback.” Wonder at one in the most pleasant
delight in his life, remains in the thick of pain and anxiety just because he expects
for the coming of a soldier into him simply to lash him a few number of lashes.
Then, what about the expectation for the death angel at any moment of life, of
which one might be heedless? Is it not an indication of his ignorance, arrogance
and haughtiness?
Furthermore, it should be known to you that the pain of death agonies is not
known in its reality but to him who experiences it, and anyone else knows it only
by comparing it to what he experiences during his life. It is well known that the
organ which has no spirit does not sense the pain. Then, it is the spirit that senses
the pain. If any part of the body is injured, the spirit senses pain as much as is in
proportion to that injury. Then, what about its pain if the injury is to affect the
spirit directly? Death agony is severe pain that affects the whole spirit in entirety.
That is why the pain of burning with the fire is more severe than the pain of
injury. The death agony then is measured on that of burning. The one struck with
a sword or a knife cries because there still remains some power in his heart and
tongue, whereas the dead could not even cry for the death agony ruins the power
of his body entirely, to the extent that in spite of his severe pain, he has no power
to cry in expression of it.
If there still remains some power when his spirit is taken away from his body,
a voice of lowing and gargling would be heard from him, and his colour would be
changed and turn into that of dust, from which he was originally created. That is
because the severe pain circulates in his body from the top to the bottom, from

The quarter of the saviors
648
the inside to the outside until his eyeballs raise, his lips and tongue shrink, his
testicles raised up, and his fingers turn green. Then, each part of his body dies
gradually, one after the other, beginning from his feet, then his legs, then his
thighs, up to the end. Each part falls in demise one after another, until the soul
comes up to the throat: At that time, his sight is cut off the world and its
inhabitants, the gate of repentance is closed in his face, and he is encircled by all
grief and regret.
In this respect, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “The repentance of a servant continues to be accepted (by Allah) so
long as he has not gargled yet.” (At-Tirmidhi and rendered Hassan by Ibn Majah
on the authority of Ibn Umar).
In his comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: “Of no effect
is the repentance of those who continue to do evil, until death faces one of them,
and he says, "Now have I repented indeed"” (An-Nisa’ 18)
4

►

p-A Jjp- I _)vx>- I3J ^>-

^

4jyJl O—IsJj

Mujahid said: “When he sees with his own eyes the messengers (of death),
then, the countenance of the angel of death seems visible to him. Then, ask not
about the bitterness and soreness of death, particularly when its agonies start to
come upon one in succession.
For this reason, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" used to say (by way of supplication): “O Allah! Make easy on Muhammad
the agonies of death.” But even, people do not seek refuge with Allah from it,
nor do they regard it seriously, due to their ignorance of it. to be sure, things,
before they occur, are perceived by the lights of Prophethood and alliance (with
Allah). That is why the Prophets and allies (of Allah Almighty) feared so much of
death, to the extent that Jesus "peace be upon him" said: “O assembly of
disciples! Invoke Allah to make easy upon me that agony, i.e. of death.”
It is reported that a group of the children of Israel came upon a graveyard and
said to each other: “Would that you invoke Allah to bring out to you from that
graveyard a deceased man to ask him about death agonies.” They invoked Allah,
and behold! There was a man standing in front of them, and the traces of
prostration were visible in between his eyes, and he has just come out of one of
those graves. He asked them: “O people! What do you want from me? I tasted
death fifty years ago, and until now, the bitterness of death never has vanished
from my heart.”
A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her" said: “I never envy anyone when the
death agonies are easy on him after what I had seen from the severe agonies of
death of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him".”
It is reported that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" used to say: “O Allah! You take the soul from between the nerves, bones
and fingers. O Allah! Help me on death, and make it easy on me.” (Ibn Abu AdDunya on the authority of Sa’mah Ibn Ghailan Al-Ja’fi).
It is further reported on the authority of Al-Hassan from the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" that once he made a mention of
death and its bitterness, soreness and pain, and said about it: “It is as strong as is

r
Book temremembrance of Death and hereafter life
649
equal to three hundred sword strikes.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" was asked about death and its severity, thereupon he said: “The least degree
of death is like a caltrop in a piece of wool: Should a caltrop come out of wool
but that it has some thereof sticking to it?” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority
of Shahr Ibn Hawshab).
It is narrated that once the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" entered upon a patient during his last moments, and he said: “Indeed,
I know well what he receives. There is no vein he has but that it feels the pain of
death, with its severity.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Salman and
Ubaid Ibn Umair).
It is reported that Ali "Allah be pleased with him" used to encourage his
companions to fight their enemies saying: “If you are not killed (in fighting in the
Cause of Allah), you would inevitably die anyway. By Him in Whose Hand is my
soul, one thousand sword strikes is easier on me than to die on bed.”
According to Al-Awza’i: “We were reported that the deceased continues to
sense the pain of death so long as he is still not resurrected from his grave.”
According to Shaddad Ibn Aws "Allah be pleased with him": “Death is the
greatest terror on the believer in the world and the hereafter; and it is more
severe than sawing, filing and boiling. Were a deceased to be raised from his
grave and tell the inhabitants of this world about death, they would have
benefited no living nor enjoyed any sleeping.”
According to Zaid Ibn Aslam from his father: “If there still remains anything
due on a believer to attain his degree in Paradise, which he has not attained by his
deed, the agonies of death would be aggravated on him, in order to get therewith
his degree in Paradise. If, contrastingly, there is a favor done by a disbeliever for
which he has not been rewarded in this world, death agonies would be made easy
on him in order to get the reward of his favor, and thus be led to the fire of
Hell.”
It is related from somebody that he used to ask a lot of patients about what
pain they received from death agonies. When he himself fell fatally ill, he was
asked about what he detected, thereupon he said: “It is as if heavens were folded
on the earth, and my breath comes out of a needled hole.”
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “The sudden death is a relief for a faithful believer and a grief for a
wicked.” (Ahmad on the authority of A’ishah).
It is narrated on the authority of Makhul from the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" that he said: “Were (the pain of) a
single hair to be taken from a deceased and directed on the inhabitants of both
the heavens and the earth, they would have died entirely, by permission of Allah
Almighty, for death lies in each hair of the deceased; and never does death come
upon anything but that it dies accordingly.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority
of Abu Maisarah).
It is further reported that “were a single drop of death pain to be placed on all
the mountains of the earth, all of them would have dissolved immediately.”

'

The quarter of the saviors
It is reported that when Abraham "peace be upon him" died, Allah Almighty
asked him: “How have you found death, O My intimate friend?” he said: “It is
like a thorny skewer to be placed in a piece of wet wool, and then pulled
therefrom.” On that He Almighty said to him: “No doubt, in spite of that, WE
have made it easy on you.”
It is reported that when Moses "peace be upon him" died and his soul rose up
to Allah Almighty, his Lord asked him: “How have you found death, O Moses?”
he "peace be upon him" said: “I have found myself like a bird when it is being
roasted on a roaster: it neither dies in order to get comforted, nor is saved to fly
once again.”
It is reported from the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" that during his last breaths, he had a vessel of cold water, in which he
dipped his hand and passed over his face, saying: “O Allah! Make easy on me the
death agonies!” (both Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of A’ishah), and
Fatimah "Allah be pleased with her" said: “How distressed am I for your distress
O my father!” on that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: “There would be no distress upon your father after today.” (AlBukhari on the authority of Anas).
It is reported that Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him" said to
Ka’b Al-Ahbar: “Relate to us about death O Ka’b.” he "Allah be pleased with
him" said: tcWell O Commander of Believers. Death is like a thorny branch to be
placed into the inside of the body of a man, with each thorn sticking to a vein,
and then it is pulled therefrom severely and violendy, thereupon it takes what it
takes and leaves what it leaves (from veins).”
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“While a servant is in the thick of distress and agonies of death, his joints bid
farewell to each other saying: “Peace be upon you! I am going to leave you, and
you are going to leave me to the Day of Judgement.” (Al-Iraqi on the authority of
Abu Hadbah from Anas)
If those are the agonies of death in relation with the allies and devotees of
Allah Almighty, then, what about us, given that we are involved in sins and
mistakes? We receive the remaining calamities along with death agonies, for death
calamities are three: the first is the difficulty and hardship of demise, as we have
mentioned it.
The second calamity is to witness the image of the death angel, from which
terror and fear enter the heart. If the greatest and the strongest of men sees his
image while taking up the soul of a sinful servant, by no means would he endure
it it is reported that Abraham, the intimate friend "peace be upon him" said to
the death angel: “Could you show me your image while taking up the soul of a
wicked servant?” he said: “But you would not endure it.” he said: “Nay (I would
do).” He said to him: “Then, turn your face away from me.” He did accordingly,,
and when he turned to him once again, behold! He saw a dark hairy blackcomplexioned stinking man, putting on black clothing, and from whose mouth
and nostrils the flame of fire and smoke coming out, thereupon Abraham "peace
be upon him" fell unconscious. When he got up, the death angel has returned to
650

Book tenrremembrance of Death and hereafter life

651

his first image. He said to the death angel: “If the wicked does not face, at his
death, nothing but the image of your face, it would be very sufficient for him.”
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
from the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" that Q"he
Prophet) David "peace be upon him" was a jealous man, and whenever he came
out, he would shut the gates of his house (in order that none would enter in his
absence). One day he came out and shut the gates and, by chance, while his wife
was looking (from the window), she saw a man in the middle of the house. She
said: “Who has admitted that man? If David should come and see him, he would
punish him severely.” When David "peace be upon him" returned and saw him,
he asked him: “Who are you?” he said: “I am the one who never fears kings, nor
is prevented by veils.” David "peace be upon him" said to him: <fYou are then, by
Allah, , the death angel.” David "peace be upon him" then became motionless in
his place. (Ahmad and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
It is reported that Jesus "peace be upon him" came upon a skull and struck it
with his foot and said: “Speak, by permission of Allah.” It said: “O Spirit of
Allah! I am the king of such and such a town in such and such a time. While I
was sitting on my throne with my crown over my head, and my soldiers and
retinue surrounding me, the death angel seemed to me and removed from me
each organ solely and then my soul came out unto him.”
It is only the disobedient men who suffer from that terror (of death agonies),
and the Prophets and allies (of Allah) are relieved of it. It is related from the
Prophets "peace be upon them" only the pain of demise, without the terror or
fright to be perceived by him who witnesses the image of the death angel as such.
If one sees it in a dream on one night, it would embitter on him his remaining
life, then, what about seeing it in that very state (of death)?
As for the obedient, he sees him in the best and prettiest form. It is narrated
on the authority of Ikrimah from Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them" that
Abraham "peace be upon him" was a jealous man, and he had a house of
worship, and whenever he came out, he would shut the door behind him (in
order for none to intrude it in his absence). One day he returned and found a
man in the middle of the house. He asked him: “Who has admitted you to my
house?” he said: “Its (real) Lord has admitted me to it.” He said: “I am its lord.”
He said: “It is the One who has more claim over it than you and me that has
admitted me to it.” He asked him: “Then, who are you from among the angels?”
he said: “I am the angel of death.” He said: “Could you show me your image in
which you take up the soul of the believer?” he said: “Well, turn your face away
from me.” He did accordingly, and when he turned to him once again, behold!
He saw a young man...and he mentioned of his prettiness, smartness, and good
scent (what Allah willed him to mention), and then said to him: “O death angel!
If the believer does not face, at his death, but such image of you, it would be very
sufficient for him.”
This includes also to witness the two keeping angels. Wuhaib said: “We were
informed that no one dies until his two keeping angels who write down his deeds
seem to him: If he is an obedient, they would say to him: “May Allah reward you

The quarter of the saviors
652
on behalf of us. How many a true gathering in which you made us sit, and how
many a righteous deed into which you brought us .” If he is a wicked, they would
say to him: “May Allah reward you not on behalf of us! How many an evil
gathering in which you made us sit, how many an immoral deed into which you
brought us, and how many a foul word which you caused us to hear. May Allah
reward you not on our behalf.”
The third calamity is the disobedient men’s vision of their places in the fire of
Hell, and fear before witnessing them. At their death agonies, while they become
very weak, with their souls submitdng to come out and leave their bodies, they
would not die until they are given one of two tidings by the death angel: “Receive
tidings of the fire, O enemy of Allah”, or “Receive the glad ddings of Paradise, O
ally of Allah.” That is the cause lying behind the fear experienced by those
endued with sound minds.
In this respect, the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “None of you would come out of this world (by death) until he knows
first where his destiny would lead him, and see his place in Paradise or in the fire
(of Hell).” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Ali).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
tcWhoever likes to meet Allah, Allah likes to meet him; and whoever dislikes to
meet Allah, Allah dislikes to meet him.” They said: “But all of us dislike death.”
On that he "peace be upon him" said: “It is not that which is intended. If a
faithful believer is given access to see the place and destiny upon which he would
come, he should subsequently like to meet Allah, and Allah would like to meet
him.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Ubadah Ibn As-Samit "Allah
be pleased with him").
It is reported that Hudhaifah Ibn Al-Yaman said to Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be
pleased with them" towards the end of the night: “Get up and check in which
hour we are.” Ibn Mas’ud got up and went and then returned to him saying: “The
red (light of dawn) has appeared.” On that Hudhaifah said: “I seek refuge with
Allah from a morning that leads to the fire (of Hell).”
It is further reported that Marwan entered upon Abu Hurairah "Allah be
pleased with him" to visit him (and he was in his fatal illness), and said (by way of
supplication): “O Allah! Alleviate that difficulty on him.” But Abu Hurairah said:
“No, O Allah, aggravate it more on me.” Then Abu Hurairah went on weeping
and said: “By Allah, I neither weep out of grief for this world, nor because I am
going to leave you. But I am expecting one of both tidings from my Lord, either
of Paradise or of the fire (of Hell).”
It is narrated in a particular Hadith that the Prophet "peace be upon him"
said: “Indeed, if Allah Almighty is pleased with a servant, He would say to the
death angel: “O death angel! Go to so and so and bring his soul to me to relieve
him. The deeds he has done are sufficient for Me. I indeed have tried him and
found him just as I like from him.” Then, the angel of death descends in the
company of five hundred angels, having with them sticks of basil and roots of
saffron, and each of them give him a glad tidings (of Paradise) similar to what the
others give him. The angels stand in two rows, in expectation for his soul to

Book tenrremembrance of Death and hereafter life

653

come out, having the basil with them. When Iblis looks at them, he places his
hand over his head (out of grief), and his soldiers say to him: “What is die matter
with you O our chief?” he says: “Do you not see the honor given to that servant?
Where have you been from him?” they say: “We did our best with him, but he
was infallible.”” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of Tamim Ad-Dari "Allah
be pleased with him").
According to Al-Hassan Al-Basri: “The believer’s comfort lies in his meeting
with Allah; and if one’s comfort lies in the meedng with Allah Almighty, the day
of his death then would be the day of his pleasure, delight, safety, honor and
exaltation.”
It was said to Jabir Ibn Zaid at his death: “What do you wish?” He said:
“Only a glimpse I catch of Al-Hassan.” When Al-Hassan came to visit him, it was
said to him: “That is Al-Hassan.” He raised his head and looked at him, and then
said: “O my brothers! It is only at this hour that I am going to leave you, either to
Paradise or to the fire (of Hell).”

Explication Of Such Of States As Favorable
For The Would-Be Dead At Death
It should be known to you that the dearest state in which a would-be
deceased should be is quietness and tranquility, and from his tongue to utter the
testimony of faith, and from his heart to have good assumption of Allah.
As for the state, it is reported that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said: “Watch the dead with three things: when his
forehead sweats, his eyes shed tears, and his lips get stiff, then, it is the mercy of
Allah that has descended upon him. But if eh snores like the stifled, his color
turns red, and his lips shrink, then, it is the punishment of Allah that has afflicted
him.” (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Salman: unauthentic).
That his tongue utters the testimony of faith, is a sign of good. It is reported
on the authority of Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri "Allah be pleased with him" that he said:
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “Dictate
to the would-be deceased among you (the testimony of faith, i.e.) There is none
worthy of worship except for Allah’, (according to the narration of Hudhaifah)
for it effaces such of mistakes as committed before it.”
It is further reported on the authority of Uthman "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “Whoever dies and he knows that there is none worthy of worship except
for Allah, would enter Paradise.”
Uthman "Allah be pleased with him" said: “When a would-be deceased comes
to his last breaths, dictate to him There is none worthy of worship except for
Allah’, for there is no servant whose deeds are concluded with it but that it would
be his provision to Paradise.”
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: “Be present with the would-be
deceased among you (during their last breaths), and remind them (of Allah), for
they see what you see not, and dictate to them There is none worthy of worship
except for Allah’.”
It is reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"

!

I

1

The quarter of the saviors
654
that he said: I heard the Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" saying:
“The death angel attended to take up the soul of a man and looked at his heart
and found nothing of faith therein. But when he loosened his jawbones, he found
his tongue sticking to his palate while saying ‘There is none worthy of worship
except for Allah", thereupon his sins were forgiven for him because of this word
of pure faith.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and At-Tabarani).
On the other hand, the dictator should not be pressing in his dictation. But he
should rather be gentle and kind, for the tongue of the patient might not be able
to utter, which makes him feel it difficulty on himself, as he regards the testimony
heavy on himself, and refrains from saying it, which might be a cause of his evil
conclusion. The point here is that man should die with nothing in his heart other
than his beloved, i.e. Allah the One and Only. In this way, his death and coming
to his beloved become the highest pleasure. But if the heart is engaged in this
world with its delights and pleasures, and the word of testimony runs only on the
tongue, and the heart does not conform to it, then, he would fall into the risk of
the Divine will. To be sure, only the movement of the tongue is pointless, unless
Allah is bountiful with acceptance.
As for the good assumption of Allah Almighty, it is favorable at that time. We
have mentioned that in the Book of Hope. There are many narrations in favor of
the superiority of that good assumption of Allah:
It is reported that Wathilah Ibn Al-Asqa’ "Allah be pleased with him" entered
upon a patient (during his last breaths) and asked him: “Tell me: What is your
assumption of Allah?” He said: “Although my sins have overwhelmed me, and I
am on the verge of destruction, I hope for the mercy of my Lord.” On that
Wathilah glorified Allah and so did the family of the deceased accordingly. He
glorified Allah and said: I heard the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" saying: Allah Almighty says: “I am just as My servant
assumes of Me. So, let him assume of Me what he likes.” (Ibn Hibban, AI-Baihaqi
and Ahmad).
It is further reported that the Prophet "peace be upon him" entered upon a
man to visit him during his last breaths, and asked him: “How do you find
yourself?” he said: “I hope for (the mercy of) Allah and fear of my sins.” On that
he "peace be upon him" said: “Never do both gather together in the heart of a
servant at the like of that state but that He Almighty gives him what he hopes for,
and secures him from what he fears.”
It is reported on the authority of Thabit Al-Bunani that he said: There was a
young man of bad temper, and his mother used to admonish him more often
saying: “O my son! You shall have a day (when you die). So, remember your
day.” When death approaches him, she turned over him and said: “O my son! I
used to warn you of this death time of yours.” He said: “O mother! I have a Lord
who does favor so much; and I hope He will not deprive me today of some of
His favor.” Thabit commented: “Then, his Lord bestowed mercy upon him by
virtue of his good assumption of his Lord Almighty.”
It is further reported on the authority of Jabir Ibn Wada’ah that he said:
There was a rebellious youth and when death approached him his mother asked

Book temremembrance of Death and hereafter life
655
him: O my son! Do you have any bequest?” he said: “Yes, do not deprive me of
my ring for it has the Name of Allah Almighty, by virtue of which Allah may
bestow mercy upon me.” When he was buried, he was seen in a dream (by
somebody) in which he said: “Tell my mother that the word (the Name of Allah)
has benefitted me, and Allah has forgiven for me.”
A Bedouin fell fatally sick and it was said to him: “You are on the threshold
of death.” He said: “Where I would be taken?” it was said: “To Allah Almighty.”
He said: “Then, why should I dislike to go to Him from Whom nothing but good
is seen?”
According to Abu Al-Mu’tamir Ibn Sulaiman: When death approached my
father he said to me: “O Mu’tamir! Tell me about concessions, perchance I would
meet Allah Almighty while having good assumpdon of Him.” Indeed, it was
favorable in their sight to make a mendon to anyone his good deeds at his death,
in order to strengthen his good assumption of Allah Almighty.
Explication Of Grief At Meeting The Angel Of Death Through Many

Tales
According to Ash’ath Ibn Aslam: Abraham "peace be upon him" asked the
angel of death, and he has two eyes, one in the front and the other in the back:
“O angel of death! What do you do if you are to take up many souls
simultaneously, one in the East and another in the West, and the epidemic broke
out in a land, and two armies faced each other in another place?” he said: “I call
the spirits, by permission of Allah, and they soon become in between those two
fingers of mine.” He further said: “The whole earth was spread out to him, and
became like a wash tube in front of him to take therefrom what he likes.” He
gave him the glad tidings of being the intimate friend of Allah Almighty.
Solomon, son of David "peace be upon them" said to the angel of death:
“What is the matter with you that you do not do justice among the people? You
take up the spirit of so and so, and leave so and so.” He said: “I have, in this
issue, no better knowledge than you. It is but books being thrown to me,
containing the names (of those to be taken by death).”
It is reported on the authority of Wahb Ibn Munabbih that one of the kings
asked for a dress to set out on journey, and one was brought to him, but it did
not appeal him. After many were brought to him, he chose one. The same
happened in the horses and riding mounts he asked for. Then, he set out in his
procession, in the company of his slaves and horses, and Satan had blown in him
the air of arrogance and haughtiness. On the way, he met a man of shabby
clothes who greeted him with peace, but the king gave no reply. He then caught
hold of the rein of his riding mount, and when the king scolded him to leave it,
he said to him: “But I have a need for you.” He said: “Then, wait until I
dismount.” He said: “No, but now. Give me your ear to tell you about it in
secret. ” He gave ear to him and he said: “I am the angel of death.” The king said:
“Then, give me respite until I return to my family, fulfill my need, and give my
bequest.” He said: “No, but let it be now." He took up his soul, and the king fell
down as if he were a piece of wood.
On the way the angel of death met a faithful believer whom he greeted with

r

The quarter of the saviors
656
peace, and the man returned die greeting. He told him that he had a need for
him, and when the man gave ear to him, he told him that he was the angel of
death. He said: ‘Welcome to the one whose absence from me has been very long.
There is no absent on the surface on the earth dearer to me than you.” The angel
of death said to him: “Then, fulfill your need for which you have come out.” The
man said: “I have no need dearer to me than to meet Allah Almighty.” He said to
him: “Then, choose in whichever state you like me to take up your soul.” He said:
“Do you have power to do so?” he answered in the affirmative and said: “I have
been commanded to do so.” He said: “Then, give me respite until I offer ablution
and pray and then take up my soul while I am falling in prostration.” He took up
his soul while he was in prostration.
According to Abu Bakr Ibn Abdullah Al-Muzni: “A man from the children of
Israel gathered much wealth and when he became on the threshold of death, he
told his sons to bring him the different kinds of his property, and much horses,
camels, slaves, etc, were brought to him, and when he caught a glimpse of that,
he went on weeping in sigh for leaving it. When the angel of death saw him
weeping he said to him: “What causes you to weep? By Him Who gave you all of
this, I would not leave you until I separate your soul from your body by death.”
He said to him: “Then, give me respite until I distribute my property.” He said:
“No respite is available now. Why have you not done so before the coming of
your appointed term?” then, he took up his soul.
According to Ata’ Ibn Yasar: “When it is the night of the middle of Sha’ban, a
book is given to the angel of death and it is said to him: “This year, take up the
souls of the names that are in this book.” Then, a servant cultivates his land,
marries women and builds houses and palaces and does not know that his name
is in that book.
According to Al-Hassan: “There is no day but that on which the angel of
death checks each house three times: whomever of them he finds has fulfilled his
sustenance and consumed his time, he would take up his soul. Once he takes up
his soul, his family cry and weep for him, thereupon the angel of death catches
hold of the gateposts and says: “By Allah, I have neither devoured anything of his
sustenance, nor have I consumed his lifetime, nor have I decreased of his
appointed term. I shall return to you again and again until no one of you remains
alive.” Al-Hassan commented: “By Allah, were they to see his standing and hear
his words, they would be astonished from their deceased, and rather weep for
themselves.”
It is narrated on the authority of Al-A’mash from Khaithamah that he said:
Once, the angel of death visited Solomon, son of David "peace be upon them"
and had a long gaze at a man from among his sitters. When he came out the man
asked him: “Who is that man?” he said: “The angel of death.” He said: “I have
seen him gazing at me as if he has wanted me.” Solomon asked him: “Then, what
do you want?” he said: “I like you to deliver me from him, and command the
wind to carry me and convey me to the farthest end of India.” He did
accordingly, and the wind carried him. Then, the angel of death visited Solomon
once again and he said to him: “I have seen you gazing for a long time at one

Book temremembrance of Death and hereafter life
657
from among my sitters.” He said: “Yes I w„„j
, ~~
to take up his soul in the farthest end of Indi^ ** ^ f°r 1 was commanded
a at a
with you. So I wondered (how should he go to M.ZS foT “d h' was
me to take up
his soul there).”

chapter FOUR

The Death Of The Messenger Of Allah
"Allah’s Blessing And Peace Be Upon Him"
It should be known to you that you have a good pattern in the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" as living and dead, in all of his
deeds, acts and words. All his states are but a source of instruction and giving
lessons to such as likes to take consideration. No one was more honored in the
Sight of Allah than him. He was His intimate friend, beloved, chosen, private
converser, Prophet and Messenger. But even, did He Almighty give him a respite
beyond his appointed term? Did He delay the time of his death even for a single
moment when it was due upon him? No! He sent to him the honorable angels
entrusted to take up souls, who, in turn, took up his pure soul and carried it to a
mercy and good satisfaction and good things, and a good sitting place of truth in
the presence of Allah the Most Gracious.
Moreover, he received the severe agonies of death, and his moaning was
audible, his anxiety was apparent, his suffering was visible, his colour changed, his
forehead sweated, and so on to the extent that those who attended his death time
wept for his severe trouble. Has then the office of Prophethood averted the
decree from him? Has it lightened from him the suffering and torture of death he
was doomed to receive? Of course not, although he is, in the Sight of Allah, the
lord of the station of praise, and the fountain lake which the people would come
upon to drink, the first upon whom the earth would split open, and the lord of
intercession on the day of presentation.
Why then should we not imitate the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" in all of his deeds and acts? Why should we not be among
the pious, given that all of us would inevitably come upon the fire of Hell? That
is confirmed by the statement of Allah Almighty: “Not one of you but will pass
over it: This is, with your Lord, a Decree which must be accomplished. But We
shall save those who guarded against evil, and We shall leave the wrong-doers
therein, (humbled) to their knees.” (Maryam 71-72)
^jyjkjajT j jS3 \yui oiAh

l*1>-

yj

o!3 ^

So, let every servant consider as to whether he is nearer to the wrongdoers or
to the pious. Consider yourself after you consider first the conduct of the
righteous predecessors, who were, in spite of their high position, from among the

The quarter of the saviors
658
fearful. Then, consider the conduct of the chief of the Messengers "peace be
upon him" who was certain of the matter, and consider how he was distressed
when it was his time to leave this world, and how he was when he turned to the
Garden of shelter.
In this respect, it is narrated on the authority of Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased
with him" that he said: We entered upon the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" in the dwelling place of our mother A’ishah "Allah be
pleased with her" and it was a short time before his death. He cast a glance of us
and his eyes shed tears "peace be upon him". Then he said: “Welcome to you!
May Allah greet you, give you shelter, support and help you. I advise you to fear
Allah Almighty, and I entrust you to Allah Almighty: I am, to you, from Him an
evident warner. Do not be arrogant over Allah Almighty on His earth and in His
servants. Now, it is time of death, turning to Allah Almighty, to the Farthest
Lote-Tree, to the Garden of shelter, and to the fully satisfying cup . Greet
yourselves and those who enter your religion after me with peace on behalf on
me.” (Al-Bazzar).
It is further reported that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" said to Gabriel "peace be upon him" at the time of his death:
“Who would take care of my people after me?” Allah Almighty revealed to
Gabriel that ‘Give my beloved the glad tidings that I would never disappoint him
concerning his people; and give him the happy news that he would be the first of
people to come out of the earth when they would be resurrected, and their chief
and master when they would be gathered together; and that Paradise would be
forbidden to all nations until his people would enter first.” On that he said:
“Now, I have got comforted.” (At-Tabarani on the authority of Jabir and Ibn
Abbas "Allah be pleased with them").
It is reported on the authority of A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her" that she
said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
commanded us to wash his body with seven water-skins drawn out from seven
springs. We did accordingly and he felt some comfort. He came out and led the
prayer, prayed forgiveness for, and invoked good upon the martyrs of Uhud, and
advised people to be kind and good to the Ansar. He said: “Coming to the point:
O assembly of Muhajirs! You would increase in number, and the Ansar would
remain with no increase. The Ansar are my shelter to which I have taken refuge.
So, deal generously with the doer of good among them, and forgive the doer of
evil among them.” Then he said: “A servant has been given the freedom to
choose this world, or what is with Allah Almighty, and he chose what is with
Allah Almighty.” On that Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" went on
weeping, thinking that he "peace be upon him" intended himself (by death). The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “Be quiet O
Abu Bakr! Close all doors of the mosque except for the door that is opposite to
the house of Abu Bakr, for I do not know there is anyone better to me in
company than Abu Bakr.” (Ad-Darimi in his Musnad).
It is reported on the authority of A’ishah “Allah be pleased with her” that she
said: "The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” died in my house,

Book tenrremembrance of Death and hereafter life
659
on the day of my turn, while he was leaning on my chest closer to my neck, and
Allah made my saliva mix with his Saliva at his death. Abd-Ar-Rahman entered
upon me with a Siwak in his hand and I was supporting (the back of) The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” (against my chest).
I saw The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” looking at that
(Siwak) and I knew that he loved the Siwak, so I said (to him ): "Shall I take it for
you ? " He nodded in agreement. So I took it and it was too stiff for him to use,
so I said: “Shall I soften it for you ?" He nodded his approval. So I softened it
and he cleaned his teeth with it. In front of him there was a jug or a tin
containing water. He started dipping his hand in the water and rubbing his face
with it, he said: “None has the right to be worshipped except Allah. Death has its
agonies." He then lifted his hands (towards the sky) and started saying: “With the
highest companion," till he expired and his hand dropped down. Thus, I came to
know that he "peace be upon him" would not choose us.” (Al-Bukhari).
It is narrated on the authority of Sa’id Ibn Abdullah from his father that he
said: When the Ansar saw that the ailment of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" became increasingly aggravated, they went
round the mosque, and Al-Abbas "Allah be pleased with him" was the first to
enter upon him, and he informed him about their position and fear (of death
for him). Then, Al-Fadl entered upon him and informed him about the same,
and so did Ali "Allah be pleased with him". He "peace be upon him" stretched
his hand towards them to take it and they did accordingly. He said: <fWhat do
you say?” They said: “We fear you would die.” Their women cried for their
men’s gathering near the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him". On that the Prophet "peace be upon him" was excited and came
out reclining against both Ali and Al-Fadl, and Al-Abbas was walking ahead of
him. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was
bandaging his head, and dragging his feet on the ground, until he sat on the
stepladder just below the pulpit. The people turned their faces to him and he
then praised Allah and lauded Him, and said: “O people! I was reported that
you fear death for me as if you disapprove death. What do you reject of the
death of your Prophet? Have the news of my death not been announced by me
to you? Have the news of your death not been announced to you? Has any
Prophet to be sent before me survived forever so that I would survive forever
like him? Behold! I am going to join (the presence of) my Lord, and you are
going to joined His presence too. I enjoin upon you to be good to the early
Muhajirs, for Allah Almighty says: “By (the Token of) Time (through the Ages),
Verily Man is in loss, Except such as have Faith, and do righteous deeds, and
(join together) in the mutual teaching of Truth, and of Patience and
Constancy.” (Al-Asr 1-3)
^

i^i;

Ji ^lj

<jJ

o!

}

He "peace be upon him" also enjoined upon the Muhajirs to be kind and
good to the Ansar who preceded them in faith and residence, and divided their
things equally with them. He also enjoined upon the people to follow the Quraish
in the matter of ruling. Then, he said: “O people! No doubt sins change favors: If

The quarter of the saviors
660
the people are righteous, their rulers would be righteous with them, and if they
are wicked, their rulers would be wicked with diem. In confLrmadon of that,
Allah Almighty said: “Thus do We make the wrongdoers turn to each other,
because of what they earn.” (Al-An’am 129)

It is narrated on die authority of Abdullah Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased with
him" that the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" said
to Abu Bakr: “Ask what you like to ask O Abu Bakr.” He said: “Is the appointed
term about to come?” He "peace be upon him" said: “Yes, the appointed term is
about to come.” He said: “Blessed be you, O Prophet of Allah, in what is with
Allah Almighty! What about our turning?” He said: “To Allah and to the Farthest
Lote-Tree, and then to the Garden of shelter, the highest Paradise, the fully
satisfying cup, the highest companion, the best fortune and blissful living.” He
asked: “O Prophet of Allah! Who should undertake washing your dead body?”
He said: “Men from among my household, beginning from the closest to me in
kinship and then the next of kin.” He asked: “O Prophet of Allah! In which thing
should we shroud you?” He said: “In this garment of mine, along with a
Yemenite suite and white Egyptian-made cotton dress.” He asked: “O Prophet of
Allah! How should we offer prayer on you?” then he went on weeping and so we
did. He "peace be upon him" said: “Keep quiet, may Allah forgive for you and
reward you on behalf of your Prophet. Once you washed and shrouded my dead
body, place me on this bed of mine, on the verge of my grave, and leave me for
an hour. The first to invoke prayer on me is Allah Almighty: it is He Who
invokes prayer on you, and so do His angels. Then, He gives permission to the
angels to offer prayer on me, and the first of them to enter and offer prayer upon
me is Gabriel, then Michael, then Israfil, and then the angel of death in the
company of a lot of angels, followed by all the angels "peace be upon them".
Then, enter O you and offer prayer upon me in groups. Let my household be the
first to offer prayer on me, beginning from the closest to me and then the next of
kin. Then the groups of women and then the groups of children.” He further
asked him: “Then, who should get you into the grave?” he said: “Men from
among my household, beginning from the closest to me and then the next of kin,
along with a lot of angels whom you do not see, although they see you well. Get
up and convey the message, on my behalf, to those to come after me.” (Ibn Sa’d
in his Tabaqat on the authority of Al-Waqidi from Ibn Mas’ud).
It is narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Zam’ah that he said: Bilal
came in the beginning of the month of Rabie the First and pronounced Adhan
for prayer, thereupon the Prophet "peace be upon him" (being fatally ill) said:
“Order Abu Bakr to lead the prayer.” I came out and found none at the gate of
the mosque other than Umar "Allah be pleased with him" with some men but
Abu Bakr was not among them. I said to him: “Get up O Umar and lead the
prayer.” He did accordingly, and as he was a loud-voiced man, his voice reached
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" who said
angrily: “Where is Abu Bakr? Allah rejects, and so do the Muslims (that Abu
Bakr is not the imam).” He said it thrice, adding: “Order Abu Bakr to lead the

Book temremembrance of Death and hereafter life

661

prayer.” A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her" said: “O Messenger of Allah! Abu
Bakr is a softhearted man, and once he stands in your place, he could not help
weeping.” On that he said: ££You (women) are but like the female companions
of Joseph. Order Abu Bakr to lead the prayer.” Then, Abu Bakr "Allah be
pleased with him" led the prayer beginning from that which followed the prayer
which Umar led. Afterwards, Umar used to say to Abdullah Ibn ZanTah: £CWoe
to you! What have you done with me? By Allah, had I not thought that it was
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" who ordered
you to do so, I would not have done it.” Abdullah replied to him: “But I did
not see anyone (at that time) worthier of that than you.” (Abu Dawud and both
Sahihs).
It is narrated on the authority of A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her" that she
said: When it was the day on which the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" died, the people felt he recovered a bit in the beginning of
the day, thereupon the men dispersed to their houses and needs cheerfully, and
left him with the women. Such being the case, as we became more hopeful and
joyful than we had ever been before, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" ordered us to come out and leave him for the angel (of
death) asked his permission to be admitted. All who were present in the house
came out except for me, and his head was in my lap. He sat and I moved away to
one side of the house. He had a private long conversation with the angel after
which he invited me and placed his head in my lap once again. He ordered the
other women to enter. I said to him: “That is not the voice of Gabriel.” The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “Yes, O
A’ishah. That is the angel of death. He came to me and said: “Indeed, Allah sent
me and ordered me not to enter upon you except by your permission: if you give
me permission, that is good, and if you do not give me permission, I would
return. He also ordered me not to take up your soul until you order me.” I said to
him: “Then, leave me until Gabriel comes to me, for it is time for Gabriel to
come.
A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her" resumed: We received a matter for which
we had no response. We became gloomy as if a calamity afflicted us. Then,
Gabriel "peace be upon him" came in his due time and greeted with peace, and I
knew his voice. The women left the house. He entered and said to him: “Allah
Almighty greets you with peace and asks you about your suffering, although He
knows well to what extent you are suffering. But indeed, He liked to advance you
in honor and raise you in dignity, and make you an example and a pattern for
your people.” He said: “I am severely ached.” He said: “Receive then the glad
tidings for Allah Almighty wanted to let you attain what He has prepared for
you.” He related to him the news of the angel of death, thereupon Gabriel said to
him: “O Muhammad! Your Lord has a great longing for you. Has he not
informed you about what he intended for you? By Allah, the angel of death has
never sought the permission of anyone, nor would he do so once again. The
point is that your Lord is to perfect your honor, and He has a great longing for
you.” He said to him: “Then, do not leave until he comes.”

The quarter of the saviors
Women were admitted, and he said to Fatimah "Allah be pleased with her":
“Bring your head close to me.” She turned over him and he talked to her secredy,
thereupon she raised her head with her eyes shedding tears and unable to speak.
Then, he asked her to bring her head close to him once again, and she turned
over him, and he talked to her privately, thereupon she raised her head cheerfully,
but unable to speak. What we saw from her was really amazing to us. Afterwards
I asked her about it and she said: “At first, he told me that he was going to die on
that day, thereupon I wept. Then he said to me: “I invoked Allah to join you with
me among the first group of my household, and make you in my company.” On
that I smiled.” She then brought her two sons close to him and he smelled them.
A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her" resumed: The angel of death came and
sought permission, and he was admitted. He said: “What do you command us O
Muhammad?” he said: “Join me with my Lord now.” He said: “Nay! Your Lord
has a great longing for you. He has never hesitated to cause anyone to die as He
has done with you, neither has He forbidden me to enter upon anyone but with
his permission except for you. But anyway, your hour is ahead of you.” Then,
Gabriel came and said: “Peace be upon you O Messenger of Allah. That is the
last time for me to descend on earth. The Divine revelation was concluded, and
the world was folded up, and on the earth, I had no need other than you, nor has
anything concerned me but to attend to you.”
She added: Then, I stood to the Prophet "peace be upon him" to place his
head in between my breasts, and took hold of his chest, and then he became
unconscious until he fell down, and his forehead sweated so much as I have
never seen anyone like him. I wiped that sweat off him and I have never seen
more pleasant-smelling than it. I said to him whenever he recovered: “Let my
father and mother, and all of my family and myself be sacrificed for you! What
is that sweat coming out of your forehead?” he "peace be upon him" said: “O
A’ishah! The soul of the believer comes out (when he dies) with sweat, while
that of the disbeliever comes out from between both corners of his mouth like
that of a donkey.”
At that moment, we were scared and sent for our families. The first man to
come to us was my brother, who did not attend his death, and he was sent to
invite my father. But the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" died before anyone came. It is Allah who withheld them from him for he
was in the company of Gabriel and Michael "peace be upon them". Whenever he
recovered from unconsciousness, he would say: “No, let it be with the highest
companion” as if he were given the freedom of choice. But whenever he had the
power to speak, he would say: “Adhere to prayer! Adhere to prayer! You would
continue to be constandy firm so long as you offer prayer.” He died while saying:
“prayer! Prayer!” (At-Tabarani on the authority of Jabir and Ibn Abbas, with a
slight variation of wording).
It is further reported on the authority of A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her"
that she said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
died just in the glorious forenoon of Monday. (Ibn Abd-Al-Barr).
It is narrated on the authority of A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her" that she
662

Book temremembrance of Death and hereafter life
663
said: When the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
died, the people fell in clutter, and the angels covered his dead body with his
garment. But the people disputed over his death: Some belied the news, others
kept silent, others were given to confusion, others kept their minds, and others
kept motionless. Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him" was among
those who belied the news of his death. Ali "Allah be pleased with him” was
among those who kept silent, and Uthman "Allah be pleased with him" was
among those who kept motionless.
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" came out to the people and said: “Indeed,
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" did not die, and
Allah would return him once again in order to cut off the hands and feet of men
from among the hypocrites who hoped for his death. The point is that Allah
Almighty had an appointment with him like that of Moses "peace be upon him”,
and he is going to come to you.”
According to another version, Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: “O
people! Hold back your tongues from the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" for he did not die. By Allah, I do not like to hear anyone
talking that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
died, otherwise, I would strike him with this sword of mine.” As for Ali "Allah be
pleased with him" he kept silent and did not leave the house. As for Uthman
"Allah be pleased with him" he became motionless, unable to move. But none
among the Muslims were in a better state than both Abu Bakr and Al-Abbas
"Allah be pleased with them" whom Allah Almighty supported with help and
success. The people did not become quiet except by the statement of Abu Bakr
"Allah be pleased with him". Al-Abbas "Allah be pleased with him" came and
said: “By Allah, other than Whom there is no god, the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" tasted death. He recited to you while he
was living among you: “Truly you will die (one day), and truly they (too) will die
(one day). In the End will you (all), on the Day of Judgment, setde your disputes
in the presence of your Lord.” (Az-Zumar 30-31)

4 ((fS

fy

© oyi* (*4]3

^

It is further reported on the authority of A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her"
that she said: The news of his death reached Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with
him" while he was in the dwelling places of Banu Al-Harith Ibn Al-Khazraj,
thereupon he came and entered upon the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him", looked at his dead body, turned over him and kissed
him and said: “Let my father and mother sacrifice their lives for you O
Messenger of Allah! Allah was not to make you taste death twice. By Allah, the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" died.” Then, he
came out to the people and addressed them saying: “O people! Whoever
wo rships Muhammad "peace be upon him" then, let him know that Muhammad
"peace be upon him" died; and whoever worships the lord of Muhammad, then,
it should be known to him that He Almighty is Ever-Living and never dies.”
Then, he recited the following statement of Allah: “Muhammad is no more than
a Messenger: many were the Messengers that passed away before him. If he died

The quarter of the saviors
664
or were slain, will you then turn back on your heels? If any did turn back on his
heels, not the least harm will he do to Allah; but Allah (on the other hand) will
swifdy reward those who (serve him) with gratitude.” (A1 Imran 144) (Al-Bukhari
and Muslim).
Jp

yj

I IJs'

j'

o5^ y;

o3 Jyj J

Lj ^

4
•"** ^ ^ c£_r^i LljJ^ -Uilyyaj jjls
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with them" that
when Abu Bakr entered the house, and then invoked prayer upon the Prophet
and praised him, the household made a high noise, so loud that the people in the
praying place heard it, and the more he remembered anything, the more they
raised their noise. Their noise stopped only when a man greeted them with peace
at the gate of the house and addressed them saying: “Peace be upon you, O
household! (He recited) “Every soul shall have a taste of death: and only on the
Day of Judgment shall you be paid your full recompense. Only he who is saved
far from the Fire and admitted to the Garden will have attained the object (of
Life): for the life of this world is but goods and chattels of deception.” (A! Imran
185)
In Allah Almighty, there is a successor of everyone, an attainment of every
desire, and a salvation from every terror. It is Allah whom you should hope, and
on him you should rely.” They paid attention to him and stopped weeping. But
when they stopped weeping, his voice was lost, and one of them looked to know
who he was, but he saw none. Then, they returned to weeping once again,
thereupon another caller whose voice they did not recognize called them saying:
“O household! Remember Allah Almighty, and praise Him on whichever state
you are in, perchance you would be among the sincere chosen devotees of Allah.
Indeed, in Allah there is condolence for every calamity, and recompense for every
loss. So, it is Allah Whom you should obey, and upon His command you should
act.” Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" said: “Those are but Al-Khadir and
Elisha "peace be upon them”: they have attended the funeral of the Prophet
"peace be upon him".” (Al-Hakim and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of
Anas).
According to Al-Qa’qa’, when the Prophet "peace be upon him" died, Abu
Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" stood and addressed the people saying, after
he had invoked prayer and peace upon the Prophet and praised Allah
Almighty on whichever state they were in: “I testify that there is no god to be
worshipped but Allah Alone, Who was true to His promise, supported His
servant, and Alone defeated the confederates (of disbelievers). All perfect
praise be to Allah Alone. I testify that Muhammad "peace be upon him" is His
servant, Messenger and the last of all the Prophets and Messengers. I also
testify that the Book is just as He revealed, the religion as He prescribed, the
speech and saying as true as he talked and said, and that Allah Almighty is
indeed the Evident Truth.

Book ten.remembrance of Death and hereafter life

665

O Allah! Send upon Muhammad, Your servant, Messenger, Prophet, beloved,
trustworthy, and chosen, the best blessing and peace as You have ever sent upon
anyone of Your creatures. O Allah! Confer Your prayer, wellbeing and mercy
upon the chief of Messengers and the last of the Prophets, and the imam of the
pious, Muhammad, the leader of good and the Messenger of mercy. O Allah!
Make him closer to Your presence, strengthen his proof, honor his station, and
raise him to a position of praise, the like of which all the foremost and the last
aspire for, and benefit us with his position of praise on the Day of Judgement,
and make him attain the access (to intercession) and the high degree in Paradise.
O Allah! Confer prayer and blessing upon Muhammad and upon the family of
Muhammad, just as You conferred prayer and blessing upon Abraham: You are
praiseworthy, glorious.
O people! Whoever worships Muhammad "peace be upon him" then, let him
know that Muhammad "peace be upon him" died; and whoever worships the
lord of Muhammad, then, it should be known to him that He Almighty is EverLiving and never dies. However, Allah has announced to you in advance the news
of his death. So, do not be scared, for Allah Almighty has preferred for His
Prophet "peace be upon him" what is with Him to what is with you. He then
took him unto His reward and left among you His Book and the sunnah of His
Prophet "peace be upon him". Whoever acts upon them has indeed approved the
truth, and whoever separated between them has indeed rejected the truth. O you
who believe! Stand with justice, and let not Satan divert you by the death of your
Prophet "peace be upon him" nor tempt you from your religion. But rather
overpower Satan with good perchance you would debilitate him entirely, and do
not give him respite lest he would catch you and tempt you from the truth.”
It is further reported on the authority of Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with
them" that he said: When Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" finished from
his sermon, he said to Umar: “O Umar! Is it you of whom I was reported that
he said that the Prophet of Allah "peace be upon him" did not die? Do you not
see that the Prophet of Allah "peace be upon him" said such and such words on
such and such a day? Indeed, Allah Almighty said in His Holy Book: “Truly you
will die (one day), and truly they (too) will die (one day). In the End will you
(all), on the Day of Judgment, settle your disputes in the presence of your
Lord.” (Az-Zumar 30-31)
jss-

fji ^5oj
(*r]3 c^4
^
On that Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: “By Allah, it seems as if I
have never heard that Holy Verse in the Book before now due to the severe
calamity that as afflicted us. I testify that the Book is as true as it was revealed, the
speech as he said it, and that Allah Almighty is Ever-Living and never dies. We all
are to Allah, and to Him we shall return. Allah’s blessing and peace be upon His
Messenger and Prophet. We expect the reward for (our patience on losing) His
Messenger "peace be upon him" with Allah Almighty.” Then, he sat beside Abu
Bakr "Allah be pleased with them".
It is reported on the authority of A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her" that she
said: When the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him"

The quarter of the saviors
666
died, they were confused about how they should wash his dead body, and
whether or not they should deprive him of his clothes. However, Allah Almighty
caused them to be overtaken by slumber, and then one of them called, and none
knew who he was: “Wash the dead body of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" with his clothes on.” They awoke and did
accordingly. In this way, the dead body of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" was washed in his shirt, until when they
finished from washing him, he was shrouded.
It is reported on the authority of Ali "Allah be pleased with him" that he said:
We liked to take off his shirt thereupon we were called “Do not take off the shirt
of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him".” We did
accordingly. We then washed his dead body while being in his shirt in the same
way as we wash the dead among us. We were called to be gende to the dead body
of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" in washing,
for we would be sufficed that.
That was the death of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him". His belongings were buried with him. According to Abu Ja’far: “His
wrapper and amaranth were spread out in his grave, over which the clothes he
used to put on were then spread, and then his dead body in the shroud was
placed over that. After his death, he left no property, nor has he ever built a brick
over a brick or a pipe over a pipe during his lifetime. His death is a lesson for the
Muslims to learn, and a good pattern to follow.

The Death Of Abu Bakr As-Siddiq "Allah Be Pleased With Him"
When death approached Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" A’ishah
"Allah be pleased with her" came to him and said the following poetic verse: “By
your life, in no way could wealth avail a young man when it is time for his soul to
be disturbed and the breast constricted with it.” hearing that, he uncovered his
face and said to her: “No, but you’d rather say: “And the stupor of death will
bring Truth (before his eyes): "This was the thing which you was trying to
escape!" (Qaf 19)
J^i

.4 ojS* C* iU’i <j^-b cJy*} I

lc>j ^

Consider those garments of mine and wash them to shroud me in them, for
the living is more needy to the new than the dead.”
During his last breaths, they visited him and said: “Should we invite a
physician to see you?” he said: “My physician (i.e. Allah Almighty) has seen me
and said: ‘I do what I like to do.’”
Salman Al-Farisi "Allah be pleased with him" came to visit him to inquire
about his health and said to him: “O Abu Bakr! Give us your advice.” He said:
“Allah is going to open the world to you. So, take from it only what conveys you
(to the end of your journey to the hereafter), and put in your mind that whoever
offers Morning prayer becomes under the protection of Allah Almighty. So, do
not betray Allah Almighty in His protection, lest He would throw you into the
fire prone on your face.”
When the ailment of Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" became more

Book temremembrance of Death and hereafter life
667
aggravated, and the people liked him to choose a successor for him, he chose
Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him". The people said to him: “You
have chosen your successor over us one who is severe and harsh-hearted. Then,
what would you say to your Lord when He asks you about that?” he said: “I
would say: ‘I have chosen as my successor over your people the best of your
people/”
Then, he sent somebody to invite Umar "Allah be pleased with him" and he
came, to whom Abu Bakr said: “I am going to give you an advice. It should be
known to you that Allah Almighty has a right to be fulfilled during the day, which
He never accepts if it is postponed to the night; and He has a right to be fulfilled
at night, which He never accepts if it is delayed to the coming morning; and that
He never accepts the supererogatory deed until the obligatory deed is offered.
The balance (of good deeds) of anyone becomes heavy on the Day of Judgement
due to his following the truth in this world, no matter how heavy on him it might
be, and it is incumbent upon a balance (of good deeds) in which nothing but
truth is placed to become heavy. Contrastingly, the balance (of good deeds) of
another becomes light on the Day of Judgement due to his following falsehood
in this world, which seems light on him; and it is incumbent upon a balance (of
good deeds) in which nothing but falsehood is placed to become light.
It is true that Allah Almighty remembered the inhabitants of Paradise with
the best of their deeds, and forgave for them their misdeeds. Nevertheless, (the
people are divided into two): One says: “I am less in rank than those, and in no
way could I attain the degree of their righteous deeds.” The other says: “I am
better than those in rank.” No doubt, Allah mentioned the sign of mercy and
that of punishment, in order for the faithful believer to be desirous (for the
mercy) and fearful (of the punishment), and do not contribute in his
destruction, nor wish from Allah but the truth. If you keep in mind this advice
of mine, no absent would become dearer to you than death, which should
inevitably afflict you; and if you waste it, then, no absent would become more
hateful to you than death, which should inevitably strike you, and in no way
could you escape it.”
Sa’id Ibn Al-Musayyab said: When death approached Abu Bakr "Allah be
pleased with him" the companions came to visit him and said to him: “O
successor of the Messenger of Allah! Provide us (from your knowledge), for we
see you are going to leave us.” Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" said:
‘"Whoever says the following words and then dies, Allah Almighty raises his soul
up to the evident horizon.” They asked: “What is the evident horizon?” he said:
“A hall in front of the Throne (of Majesty), in which there are the gardens of
Allah, along with rivers and trees, and everyday one hundred parts of mercy
frequent it. I mean: "You created the people without any need for them, and
divided them into two parties: one for bliss and another for the blazing fire. So,
please, make me among the inhabitants of the bliss, and not among the denizens
of the blazing fire. O Allah! You created the creation and made them divisions
an d parties, and before You created them, You singled out, from among them,
some for happiness and others for wretchedness. O Allah! Make not me

The quarter of the saviors
668
wretched because of my disobedience. O Allah! You learnt what every soul
would earn (of deeds) before You created it, and there is no flee for it from
Your knowledge. So, please, make me among those whom You subjugated to
Your obedience. O Allah! None could will until Your will should come first. So,
please, make Your will that I should will only what brings me close to You. O
Allah! You decreed the movements of Your servants and none could move but
by Your permission. So, please, make my movement be only in service of my
fear of You. O Allah! You created both good and evil, and doomed to each one
what to do therefrom. So, please, make me in the better section. O Allah! You
created both Paradise and fire and specified for each its inhabitants. So, please,
make me from among the dwellers of Your Paradise. O Allah! You intended
error for a people, and constricted their breasts with it. So, please, expand my
breast to faith and make it alluring in my heart. O Allah! You manipulated all
things and made their destiny to You. So, please, send me, after death, to a
good life, and bring me close to You. O Allah! You are my assurance and hope,
and there is neither might nor power but with Allah.” Abu Bakr "Allah be
pleased with him" commented: “All of this is in the Book of Allah Almighty.”
The Death Of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah Be Pleased With Him11
It is narrated on the authority of Amr Ibn Maimun "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: I saw Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him" a few
days before he was stabbed in Medina. He was standing with Hudhaifah Ibn AlYaman and Uthman Ibn Hunaif to whom he said: "What have you done? Do you
think that you have imposed more taxation on the land (of Iraq) than it can
bear?" They replied: "We have imposed on it what it can bear because of its great
yield." Umar again said: "Check whether you have imposed on the land what it
can not bear." They said: "No, (we haven't done).”
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" added: "If Allah keeps me alive I will let
the widows of Iraq need no men to support them after me." But only four days
had elapsed when he was stabbed (to death). On the day he was stabbed, I was
standing and there was nobody between me and him (Umar) except Abdullah Ibn
Abbas. Whenever Umar passed between the two rows, he would say: "Stand in
straight lines.” Whenever he saw no defect (in the rows), he would go forward
and start the prayer with Takbir. He would recite The Surah of Yusuf or The
Surah of An-Nahl or so in the first rak’ah so that the people may have the time to
Join the prayer. As soon as he had said Takbir, I heard him saying: "The dog has
killed or eaten me" at the time he (the murderer) stabbed him. A non-Arab infidel
proceeded on carrying a double-edged knife and stabbing all the persons he
passed by on the right and left (till) he stabbed thirteen persons out of whom
nine or seven died. When one of the Muslims saw that, he threw a cloak on him.
Realizing that he had been captured, the non-Arab infidel killed himself. Umar
held the hand of Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf to lead the prayer.
Those who were standing by the side of Umar saw what I saw, but the people
who were in the other parts of the Mosque did not see anything, except that they
lost the voice of Umar. They were saying: " Glorified be Allah! Glorified be
Allah!" Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Awf led the people in a short prayer. When they

669
Book tenrrcmcmbrance of Death and hereafter life
finished the prayer, Umar said: "O Ibn Abbas! Find out who attacked me." Tbn
Abbas kept on looking here and there for a short time and came to say: "The
slave of Al-Mughirah." On that Umar said: "The craftsman?" Ibn Abbas said:
"Yes." Umar said: "May Allah curse him. I did not treat him unjusdy. All the
Praises be to Allah Who has not caused me to die at the hand of a man who
claims himself to be a Muslim. No doubt, you and your father (Abbas) loved to
have more non-Arab infidels in Medina." Al-Abbas had the greatest number of
slaves. Ibn Abbas said to Umar: "If you wish, we will do." He meant: "If you
wish we will kill them." Umar said: "You are mistaken (for you can't kill them)
after they have spoken your language, prayed towards your Qiblah, and
performed Hajj like yours.”
Then Umar "Allah be pleased with him" was carried to his house, and we
went along with him. The people were as if they had never suffered a calamity
before. Some said: "Do not worry (he will be Alright soon)." Some said: "We
are afraid (that he will die)." Then an infusion of dates was brought to him,
which he drank but it came out (of the wound) of his belly. Then milk was
brought to him, which he drank, and it also came out of his belly. The people
realized that he would die. We went to him, and the people came, praising
him. A young man came saying: "O Commander of The Believers! Receive the
glad tidings from Allah in view of your company with The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and your superiority in Islam, which
you know. Then you became the ruler (Caliph) and you ruled with justice; and
finally you have been martyred." Umar said: "I wish that all these privileges
will counterbalance (my shortcomings) so that I will neither lose nor gain
anything.”
When the young man turned back to leave, his clothes seemed to be touching
the ground. Umar said: "Call the young man back to me." (When he came back)
Umar said: "O son of my brother! Lift your clothes, for this will keep your
clothes clean and save you from the Punishment of your Lord." Umar further
said: "O Abdullah Ibn Umar! See how much I owe others." When the debt was
checked, it amounted to approximately eighty-six thousand. Umar said: "If the
property of Umar's family covers the debt, then pay the debt thereof; otherwise
request it from Banu Adi Ibn Ka’b. But if that too is not sufficient, ask for it
from Quraish tribe, and not from anyone else, and pay this debt on my behalf.”
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" then said (to Abdullah): "Go to A’ishah
and say: "Umar is greeting you. But don't say “The Commander of The
Believers” because today I am not the Commander of The Believers. Say: "Umar
Ibn Al-Khattab asks the permission to be buried with his two companions (The
Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and Abu Bakr)." Abdullah
greeted A’ishah and asked for the permission to enter; and then he entered where
he found her sitting as weeping. He said to her: "Umar Ibn Al-Khattab is greeting
you, and asking The permission to be buried with his two companions." She said:
"I had the idea of having this place for me, but today I prefer Umar to me."
When he returned it was said (to Umar): "Abdullah Ibn Umar has come." Umar
said: "Make me sit up." Somebody supported him against his body and Umar

The quarter of the saviors
670
asked (Abdullah): "What news do you have?" He said: "O Commander of The
Believers! It is as you wish. She has given the permission." Umar said: "Praise be
to Allah, there was nothing more important to me than this. So when I die, take
me, greet A’ishah and say: "Umar Ibn Al-Khattab asks the permission (to be
buried with his two companions, The Prophet and Abu Bakr); and if she gives
the permission, bury me there, and if she refuses, then take me to the graveyard
of Muslims.”
Then Hafsah came with many other women walking with her. When we saw
her, we went away. She went in (to Omar) and wept there for sometime. When
the men asked for permission to enter, she went into another place, and we heard
her weeping inside. The people said (to Umar): "O Commander of The Believers!
Appoint a successor." Umar said: "I do not find anyone more suitable for the job
than the following persons or group with whom The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” had been pleased before he died." Then Umar
mentioned Ali, Uthman, Az-Zubair, Talhah, Sa’d and Abd-Ar-Rahman. He said:
"Abdullah Ibn Umar will be a witness to you, but he will have no share in the
rule. His being a witness will compensate him for not sharing the right of ruling.
If Sa’d becomes the ruler, it will be alright: otherwise, whoever becomes the ruler
should seek his help, as I have not dismissed him because of disability or
dishonesty."
Umar "Allah be pleased with him" added: "I recommend that my successor
has to take care of the early emigrants, to know their rights and protect their
honour and sacred things. I also recommend that he should be kind to the
Ansar who had lived in Medina before the emigrants and Belief had entered
their hearts before them. I recommend that the (ruler) should accept the good
of the righteous among them and excuse their wrongdoers, and I recommend
that he should do good to all the people of the towns (or regions), since they
are the protectors of Islam and the source of wealth as well as the source of
annoyance to the enemy. I also recommend that nothing should be taken from
them except from their surplus with their consent. I also recommend that he
(the successor) should do good to the Arab Bedouins, as they are the origin of
the Arabs and the material of Islam. He should take from what is inferior
amongst their properties and distribute that amongst the poor from them. I also
recommend him concerning those under protection of Allah and His Apostle:
i.e. to fulfill their contracts, to fight for them, and not to overburden them with
what is beyond their ability." So when Umar "Allah be pleased with him"
expired, we carried him out and set out walking. Abdullah Ibn Umar greeted
(A’ishah) and said: "Umar Ibn Al-Khattab asks for the permission." A’ishah
said: "Bring him in." He was brought in and buried beside his two companions.
(Al-Bukhari).
It is further narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas “Allah be pleased with
them” that he said: When (the dead body of) Umar was put on his deathbed, the
people gathered around him to invoke (Allah) and pray for him before the body
was taken away, and I was amongst them. Suddenly I felt somebody taking hold
of my shoulder. I found out that he was Ali Ibn Abu Talib. Ali invoked Allah's

671
Book tenrremembrance of Death and hereafter life
Mercy for Umar and said: "O Umar! You have not left behind you a person
whose deeds he likes to imitate and meet Allah therewith more than your deeds.
By Allah! 1 always thought that Allah would keep you with your two companions,
for very often I used to hear The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” saying: “I, Abu Bakr and Umar went (somewhere); I, Abu Bakr and Umar
entered (somewhere); and I, Abu Bakr and Umar set out. n>> (Al-Bukhari and
Muslim).
The Death Of Uthman Ibn Affan "Allah Be Pleased With Him"
Abdullah Ibn Salam "Allah be pleased with him" said: I visited my brother
Uthman when he was besieged to pay him salutation. He said to me: “Welcome
to my brother. Welcome to my brother. Would I tell you what I saw today in my
dream?” I answered: “yes, if you so like.” He said: “The Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" came to me from this wicket in the
home and said: “did they besiege you?” I answered: “Yes.” He asked: “Did they
cause you to be thirsty?” I answered: “Yes.” He hang to me a bucket full of water
from which I drank until I quenched my thirst to the extent that I still detect its
coldness in between my breasts and shoulders. Then he asked: “would you like to
emerge victorious over them or to break your fast with us?” I said: “I would like
to break my fast with you.”” However, Uthman "Allah be pleased with him" was
killed on that very day.
Abdullah Ibn Salam "Allah be pleased with him" asked those who were
present when Uthman was agitated in his blood after he had been wounded:
“What has Uthman said when he was agitated in his blood?” They said: We heard
him saying: “O Allah! Gather the Ummah of Muhammad "peace be upon him".”
He said: “By Him in Whose Hand is my soul, had he invoked Allah not to gather,
they would have never gathered until the Day of Judgement.”
It is narrated on the authority of Thumamah Ibn Hazn Al-Qushairi that he
said: I was present when Uthman looked at the people from the window of his
house and said: "I beseech you by Allah and Islam: do you know that the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" came to Medina
and there was no sweet water (fitting for drink) barring that of the well of
Rumah, thereupon he said: 'He, who purchases the well of Rumah, and makes his
(portion of it no more than a) bucket in it with the buckets of the Muslims, will
have what is better than it in the Garden? I then purchased it from my own
wealth, and made my (portion in it no more than a) bucket in it with the buckets
of the Muslims; and now, you prevent me from drinking from it, to the extent
that I drink from the water of the (well that is in the house, and it is as salty as the
water of the) sea." They said: "Yes, by Allah (we bear witness to that)." He
further said: "I beseech you by Allah and Islam: do you know that I've prepared
the army of Difficulty from my own wealth?" they said: "Yes, by Allah (we know
that)." He said: "I beseech you by Allah and Islam: do you know that the mosque
became too narrow to imply its visitors, thereupon the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: 'He, who purchases the piece of
land of so and so, therewith to increase the area of the mosque, will have what is
better than it in the Garden? I then purchased it from my own wealth, therewith

The quarter of the saviors
672
I increased the area of the mosque; even though you now prevent me from
offering even a two-rak'ah prayer in it." They said: "Yes, by Allah (we know
that)." He said: "I beseech you by Allah and Islam: do you know that once, the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was on Thabir
mountain of Mecca, in the company of Abu Bakr, Umar and I, and then the
mountain trembled thereupon the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" kicked it and said: 'Be at rest O Thabir! There is none on you other
dian a Prophet, a sincere affirmer and lover of truth and two martyrs'?" They
said: "Yes, by Allah (we testify to that)." On that he said: "Allah is Greater! They
testified to me, by the Lord of the Ka'bah, that I will be a martyr." (At-Tirmidhi
and An-Nasa’i).
The Death Of Ali "Allah Be Pleased With Him"
According to Al-Usbugh Al-Hanbali: When it was the night on which Ali
"Allah be pleased with him" was fatally wounded, Ibn At-Tayyah came when
dawn rose to proclaim Adhan for him, and he was lying in a state of heaviness.
He proclaimed it once again, and he also did not get up. When he proclaimed it
for the third time, he stood up and walked while saying: “Hasten to death for it is
to afflict you, sooner or later, and do not be scared by death when it attacks you.”
When he reached the small gate, Ibn Miljam attacked and struck him. Umm
Kulthum "Allah be pleased with her" came out and said: “What is the matter with
me concerning the Morning prayer? In the Morning prayer, my husband (Umar)
the Commander of Believers was killed, and in the Morning prayer also my father
Ali was killed.”
It is reported on the authority of an old man from Quraish that when Ali
"Allah be pleased with him" was struck by Ibn Miljam, he said: “I have attained
felicity, by the Lord of the Ka’bah.”
It is reported on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Ali that when Ali "Allah be
pleased with him" was struck, he advised his children, and then persisted in
saying “There is none worthy of worship except for Allah” until he died.
When Al-Hassan Ibn Ali "Allah be pleased with them" became fatally ill, AlHussain "Allah be pleased with him" visited him and said: “O my brother! By
which are you scared? You would go to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" and Ali Ibn Abu Talib "Allah be pleased with him", your
fathers, Khadijah Bint Khuwailid and Fatimah "Allah be pleased with them”,
your mothers, and Hamzah and Ja’far "Allah be pleased with them", your
paternal uncles.” He said: “O my brother! The point is that I should come to
something the like of which I have never come before.”

CHAPTER FIVE
THE WORDS OF THE WOULD-BE DEAD FROM AMONG
RULERS AND RIGHTEOUS
When death approached Mu’awiyah Ibn Abu Sufyan, he asked his
companions to make him sit and they did. Then he glorified Allah and
remembered him so much, after which he went on weeping and said: “Do you
remember your Lord, O Mu’awiyah after you have grown very old and weak?

Book tenrremembrance of Death and hereafter life
673
Why have you not done so during your youth and strength?” he persisted in
weeping loudly, and said: “O Lord! Bestow mercy upon the disobedient harshhearted old man! O Allah! Remove the difficulty, forgive the slip, and be
bountiful with Your forbearance on him who does not hope but in You.”
It is reported that the last sermon delivered by Mu’awiyah before his death is
his saying: “O people! Whoever cultivates should necessarily harvest the produce
of his cultivation. I have been the ruler over you, and none would be ruler over
you after me but that he would be worse than me, just as those rulers before me
were better than me. O Yazid (his son)! When it is time for my appointed term,
let one endued with sound mind wash my dead body, for such as endued with
sound mind has a good position in the Sight of Allah Almighty. Let him wash me
perfectly, and raise his voice with Takbir. Then, bring from the store a garment
belonging to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him",
and a remnant of his hair and nails: place that remnant on my mouth, nose, ears
and eyes, and let the garment over my skin before the shrouds. O Yazid! Keep
the bequest of Allah Almighty in your parents. Once you place me in my shrouds
and then inter me into my hole, let Mu’awiyah be alone with Allah, the Most
Merciful of those who are merciful.”
It is reported that when death approached Abd-Al-Malik Ibn Marwan, he saw
a washer in the precincts of Damascus twisting a dress he was washing, and
striking the washing machine with it. on seeing him Abd-Al-Malik said: “Would
that I am like this washer earning my living from the labour of my hand day by
day, and was not in charge of anything in this world.” When the news of that
reached Abu Hazim, he said: “All perfect praise be to Allah that when death
approaches the like of them, they hope to be in the very state in which we are,
unlike us, for when death approaches anyone of us, he does not hope to be in
their state.”
It was said to Abd-Al-Malik Ibn Marwan when he grew fatally ill: “How do
you feel O Commander of Believers?” he said: “I feel I am the same as described
by Allah Almighty in His statement: “And behold! you come to Us bare and
alone as We created you for the first time: you have left behind you all (the
favours) which We bestowed on you: We see not with you your intercessors
whom you thought to be partners in your affairs: so now all relations between
you have been cut off, and your (pet) fancies have left you in the lurch!" (AlAn’am 94)

i©

fa fa ^ W fa f

_„

&

\xJLi.

Then, he died immediately.
Fatimah Bint Abd-Al-Malik, the wife of Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz said: I used
to hear Umar saying during the very illness in which he died: “O Allah! Hide my
death from them for even as short as an hour of the day.” When it was the day
on which he died, I came out from his chamber and sat in another dwelling, and
there was a door between me and him. Then I heard him reciting: “That House
of the Hereafter We shall give to those who intend not high-handedness or

The quarter of the saviors
674
mischief on earth: and the End is (best) for the righteous.” (Al-Qasas 83)
Then, there was silence, and I no longer heard any voice or movement. I said
to a servant belonging to him: “See whether he is sleeping.” When he entered he
cried and I jumped and behold! He died.
It is reported that when he grew fatally ill, a physician was invited to see him
and he said to him: “I see that the man was given poison, and I do not feel safe
from death on him.” On that Umar raised his sight and said to him: “And you
also could not feel safe from death on such as is not given poison.” The
physician asked him: “Then, have you felt it O Commander of Believers?” he
said: “Yes, I knew that when it fell into my abdomen.” He said: “Then, treat
yourself O Commander of Believers.” He said: “No, how best is that to Whom I
would go. By Allah! Were I to know that my remedy would be at my earlobe, I
would not raise my hand to my ear to take it. O Allah! Choose the best for Umar
concerning Your meeting.” It was only a few days after which he died.
It is said that a short time before his death, he ordered his men to make him
sit and they did. Then he said: “O Allah! I am the one whom You commanded,
and he disobeyed Your command, whom You forbade and he did not desist.” He
said it thrice after which he said: “But there is none worthy of worship except for
Allah.” Then, he raised his sight and kept staring. When he was asked about that
he said: “I see green beings who are neither jinn nor men.” Then he died
immediately, may Allah bestow mercy upon him.
It is related that when death approached Harun Ar-Rashid, he chose his
shrouds by himself and recited: "Of no profit to me has been my wealth! My
power has perished from me!" (Al-Haqqah 28-29)

i©

£ & o yt

i

:

iu >

Al-Ma’mun spread out ashes and lay on it and said: “O He Whose dominion
never perishes! Bestow mercy upon him whose kingdom perishes.”
Al-Mu’tasim said during his fatal illness: “Had I known how short my lifetime
is, I would not have such and such things.”
Al-Hajjaj said at his last breaths: “O Allah! Forgive for me, for the people say
that You would never forgive for me.” However, Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz
admired this statement from him, the like of which he aspired for himself. When
Al-Hassan was told about that, he said: “Has he really said it?” the answer was in
the affirmative, thereupon he said: “It may be.”

Explication Of Statements Of A Set Of Righteous From Among The
Companions And Their Followers
When death approached Mu’adh Ibn Jabal "Allah be pleased with him" he
said: “O Allah! Before that, I feared You. But now I have hope in You. O Allah!
You know well that I have not liked survival in this world for its flowing rivers
and trees, but for going to prayer in the mosque when it was very hot, spending
the long hours in worship of You, and sitting in the company of the learned
scholars in the gatherings of remembrance of You.”

;

Book teniremembrance of Death and hereafter Life -------------------------- 675
When death approached Salman "Allah be pleased with him" he went on
weeping. Being asked about that, he said: “I do not weep because of being scared
by losing this world. But the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" advised us that anyone of us should take from this world only the like
of a rider’s provision.” (Ahmad and Al-Hakim). When Salman "Allah be pleased
with him" died, all that he left was over ten Dirhams.
When death approached Bilal "Allah be pleased with him" his wife said:
“How sad am I!” on that he said: “But rather, how elated am I! tomorrow we
would meet the beloved, Muhammad and his companions.”
When death approached Abdullah Ibn Al-Mubarak, he opened his eyes and
said: “It is for the like of this that the workers should work!”
When death approached Ibrahim An-Nakh’i, he wept Having been asked
about the reason, he said: “I expect a messenger from Allah to give me either the
glad ddings of Paradise or the news of the fire of Hell.”
When death approached Ibn Al-Munkadir he wept Being asked about that he
said: “By Allah, I do not weep for a sin I knew I had committed (intentionally),
but I weep for fear I might have committed a thing which I regarded
insignificant, even though it is grievous in the Sight of Allah.”
When death approached Amir Ibn Abd-Al-Qais, he wept. Being asked about
that he said: “I do not weep for I am scared by death, nor because I am greedy
for this world. But I weep for what would escape me of going to prayer in the
mosque whenever it is very hot by day, and standing at night for prayer whenever
it is very cold in winter.”
When death approached Ibn Al-Mubarak, he asked Nasr, his freed slave, to
place his head over dust. He wept and Ibn Al-Mubarak asked him about the
reason for his weeping, thereupon he said: “I remembered the blissful life which
you had led, and the state of poverty and destitution in which you die now.” He
said to him: “Keep silent! I asked Allah Almighty to make me live the living of
the rich and wealthy, and cause me to die the death of the poor and destitute.”
Then, he said to him: “Dictate the testimony of faith to me, and do not repeat it
to me so long as I do not utter anything else.”
It is related that one of the righteous wept at his death, and when he was
asked about the reason he told that he did so because of the following Qur’anic
Verse: "Surely," said the former, "Allah does accept of the sacrifice of those who
are righteous.” (Al-Ma’idah 27)
It was said to Al-Junaid at his last breaths: “Say There is none worthy of
worship except for Allah’.” He said: “I have never forgotten Him in order to
remember Him.”
It is further reported that Ja’far Ibn Nusair asked the servant of Ash-Shibli
about what he had seen from him when death approached him, thereupon he
said: “He said: “I owe somebody a Dirham from whom I took unjusdy, and
although I have given thousands of Dirhams in charity on behalf of its owner,
nothing concerns me more than it.” then, he told me to help him perform
ablution for prayer. I did accordingly, and forgot to make the water enter in

;

The quarter of the saviors
676
between the hair of his beard, thereupon, being unable to speak, he caught hold
of my hand and got it into his beard. Then he died.” On that Ja’far wept and said:
“What do you say about a man whom nothing of the etiquettes of Sharia has ever
escaped him even during his last breaths?”
It was said to Bishr Ibn Al-Harith when death approached him, and it was
heavy on him: “It seems as if you like life.” On that eh said: “The coming to the
presence of Allah Almighty is very difficult.”
It was said to Salih Ibn Mismar: “Would you not entrust your children to
anyone to look after their affairs?” on that eh said: “I feel shy of Allah Almighty
to entrust them to anyone other than Him.”
When death approached Abu Sulaiman Ad-Darani, his companions came to
visit him and said to him: “Receive the glad tidings for you are going to the Lord,
Who is Most Merciful, Oft-Forgiving.” On that he said: “And why do you not
tell me to be careful since I am going to the Lord Who accounts one for the
trivial misdeed, and punishes him for the major misdeed?”
When death approached Abu Bakr Al-Wasiti, his companions asked him to
advise them, thereupon he said: “Preserve what is intended from you by (Allah)
the Truth.”
One of the righteous came to his last breaths thereupon his wife wept for
him. He asked her: “What causes you to weep?” She said: “I weep for (the loss
of) you.” On that he said: “If you are to weep, then, weep for yourself, because I
have been weeping in expectation for that day for forty years.”
It was said to Al-Kinani when death approached him: <fWhat was your deed
in this life?” he said: “Had it not been for the fact that it is time for my appointed
term, I would not have told you. However, I have been standing at the gate of my
heart for forty years, to prevent anything other than Allah Almighty from
entering into it.”
It is reported that Al-Muzni entered upon Ash-Shafi’i to visit him during his
fatal illness in which he died and asked him: “How have you been O Abu
Abdullah?” he said: “I have been on the way of departure from that world,
leaving my companions, facing the evil of my deed, drinking the cup of death,
and coming to Allah Almighty, and I do not know whether my soul would go to
Paradise so that I would congratulate it, or to the fire of Hell so that I would
console it.”
Those are samples of their statements. They differed by their different states:
Some were possessed by fear, others by hope, and others by longing and love;
and each of them spoke in accordance with his particular state. Each of them is
true and valid in comparison with his own state.

CHAPTER SK
OPINIONS OF THE LEARNED ABOUT FUNERALS AND GRAVES;
AND RULING ON VISITING GRAVES
It should be known to you that funeral processions are a lesson for the
insightful to consider, and a notification and remembrance for the heedless to
take. But unfortunately, in those days, seeing them does but increases the
heedless in harshness and severity, for they think that they would never come to

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
677
the day on which their dead bodies would be carried like others, or even if they
think so, they could hardly imagine it to occur within a short time. For this
reason, no servant sees a funeral procession but that he imagines he would be laid
as such on a similar bier; And it would be very close in dme, say tomorrow,
within a week, a month, a year, or so, although he might know not.
It is narrated that whenever Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him" saw a
funeral procession, he would say: “Proceed on, for we are going to join you (O
deceased) sooner.”
It is reported that whenever Makhul Ad-Dimashqi saw a funeral procession,
he would say: “Go on, for we are going to join you (O deceased) later: it is but an
instructive admonition, and a quick heedlessness. The first goes, while the last
remains mindless.”
According to Usaid Ibn Hudair "Allah be pleased with him": “I have never
witnessed a funeral procession but that my self talked to me about the destiny the
deceased was going to, and what would happen to him.”
When the brother of Malik Ibn Dinar died, Malik attended his funeral
procession and went on weeping and saying: “By Allah, I would not get
comforted until I know to which destiny you are going, and of course, I would
never know that so long as I am living.”
According to Al-A’mash: “We attended the funeral procession and did not
know whom we should console for the state of grief that overwhelmed all.”
As such the righteous predecessors feared of death. But nowadays, most of
those who attend the funeral processions are involved in laughter and chat with
each other, and do not talk but about the legacy of the deceased. But none of
them thinks about his own funeral and the day on which he would be laid on a
bier. There is no reason for such heedlessness other than the harshness of hearts
because of the numerous sins committed by the majority of people, to the extent
that we forgot Allah Almighty and the Last day.
We ask Allah Almighty to rescue us from that heedlessness. The attendants of
funeral processions, in those days, at their best state, weep for the deceased, and
were they to consider the matter more accurately, they should then weep for
themselves more than for the dead. Once Ibrahim Az-Zayyat looked at a people
invoking mercy upon a deceased, thereupon he said to them: “Were you to
invoke mercy upon themselves, it would be better for you. As for him, he has
been saved from three terrors: The face of the angel of death, and he has indeed
seen it, the bitterness of death, and he has really tasted it, and the fear of the
conclusion, and he has become secure from it.”
Among the etiquettes of attending funeral processions is to engage in
reflection and meditation, to take heed (of the matter of death), to get ready for
death, to walk ahead of it with humbleness, to the end of this series of its related
etiquettes and ways we have already mentioned in the science of jurisprudence.
One of its etiquettes too is to have good assumption of the deceased even if he
seems wicked, and have bad assumption of yourself even if you seem righteous.
That is because the conclusion is very risky, and its reality is unpredictable.
It is related that a neighbour of Umar Ibn Dharr died, and he used to

i

The quarter of the saviors
678
transgress against himself, thereupon most people disdained to attend his funeral
procession. But Umar attended it and offered funeral prayer on him and when he
was interred in the grave he stood at its gate and said: “May Allah bestow mercy
upon you O so and so. You have occupied your lifetime in monotheism
(affirming the oneness of Allah), and engaged yourself in prostration (i.e. offered
much prayers); and if they describe you as a sinful, then, who among us does not
err or commit sins?”
It is reported that a man who was involved in wickedness in Basra died and
his wife found none to help her prepare his funeral, for none among his
neighbours knew about it due to his extreme dissoluteness. She then hired
porters to carry his dead body laid on a bier to the praying place in order for
funeral prayer to be offered on him, but none offered funeral prayer on him. She
then carried his dead body on the bier to the desert in order to be buried there.
On a near mountain, there was a great famous ascetic, whom she saw as if he
were expecting for the dead body on the bier. He descended from the mountain
to offer prayer on the dead. Soon, the news became in circulation in the city that
so and so, the famous ascetic descended to offer prayer on so and so of men.
Consequendy, the inhabitants of the town came out and offered funeral prayer
on the man along with the ascetic. The people then wondered about how the
ascetic should offer prayer on such a wicked man. On that he said to them: “It
was said to me in a dream: T)escend to such and such a place, where you would
find a dead body on a bier and none with it other than a woman, and then offer
funeral prayer on him, for his sins would be forgiven for him.’” The people
became more astonished. The ascetic invited the wife and asked her about the
state and conduct of her husband. She said: “He was as it was known of him:
Spending the whole day in the brothel drinking wine.” He asked her: “Well. Do
you know anything good he used to do?” She said: “He used to do three good
things: In the morning of everyday, he used to awake from his intoxication,
change his garment, perform ablution and offer Morning prayer in congregation
in the mosque, after which he would return to the brothel to resume drinking.
The second is that his house always had one or two orphans to whom he was
more kind than he was to his children. The third is that he used to awake from
his intoxication during the darkness of night and weep and say: “O Lord! Which
comer of the comers of Hell do You like to fill with such a wicked?” He meant
himself. Thus, the ascetic went away after he had found a solution for that
problematic dilemma.

Explication Of The State Of The Dead In The Grave,
And Their Statements At The Graves
It is reported on the authority of Ad-Dahhak that a man asked the Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him": “O Messenger of Allah! Who
is the most abstinent among the people?” he said: “He, who never forgets the
grave and disaster, leaves the surplus adornment and ornament of this world,
prefers what is enduring to what is perishable, does not regard the next day one
of his days, and rather considers himself from among the dwellers of the graves.”
It was said to Ali "Allah be pleased with him": ‘"What is the matter with you

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
679
that you live in the neighbourhood of the graves?” He said: “I find the dead good
neighbours, and they are neighbours of truth: They always hold back their
tongues (from evil talk),and remember the hereafter.”
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “I
have never seen a terrible scene but that the grave is more horrible than it”
It is reported on the authority of Umar "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: “One day, we set out in the company of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" until we came to a grave and he sat and I was
the nearest of men to him. He wept and I and they wept subsequendy. He asked
them: “What causes you to weep?” We said: “We wept for your weeping.” On
that he said: “That is the grave of my mother Aminah Bint Wahb, and I sought
the permission of my Lord to visit it, and He gave me permission, and when I
sought His permission to invoke forgiveness for her, he rejected, thereupon I was
overpowered by sympathy like a child for his mother.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and
Ibn Majah).
It was the habit of Uthman "Allah be pleased with him" that whenever he
stood at a grave, he would weep so much until his beard would be wetted. He
was asked about the reason and it was said to him: <fWhenever a mention is
made of Paradise and fire, you would not weep, and whenever you stand at a
grave, you would weep.” On that he said: No doubt, I heard the Messenger of
AlJah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" saying: “The grave is the first
station of the hereafter: If man is saved from it, then, what is beyond it would be
easier; and if he is not saved from it, then, what is beyond it would be more
difficult.” (At-Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah and Al-Hakim).
It is reported that when Amr Ibn Al-As saw a grave, he dismounted and
offered a two-rak’ah prayer. It was said to him: “You did a thing which you have
never done before.” On that he said: “I remembered the dwellers of the graves,
and the barrier that is between him and them, thereupon I liked to come closer to
Allah Almighty through them.”
Abu Dharr "Allah be pleased with him" said: “Should I not tell you about the
day of my poverty? It is the day on which I would be in the grave.”
It was the habit of Abu Ad-Darda’ "Allah be pleased with him" to sit near the
graves. When he was asked about that he said: CT sit with a people who always
remind me of my place of return (in the hereafter), and whenever I stand and
leave them, they never backbite me.”
According to Hatim Al-Assamm: “Whoever comes upon the graves, and does
not contemplate his state, nor invoke good for the inhabitants of the graves, he
indeed has betrayed both them and his own self.”
Yahya Ibn Mu’adh used to say: “O son of Adam! Your Lord has invited you
to the abode of peace. So, consider from where you would answer His invitation:
If you answer His invitation from your world, and engage in your journey to
Him, you surely would enter that abode; and if you answer His invitation starting
only from your being in the grave, of a surety, you would be prevented from it.”
Whenever Al-Hassan Ibn Salih saw a graveyard he would say: “How good is
your outside, and how grievous is your inside/

The quarter of the saviors
According to Sufyan: “Whoever remembers the grave more often, would find
it one of the gardens of Paradise; and whoever is heedless of remembering it
would find it one of the holes of the fire of Hell.”
Ar-Rabie Ibn Khaithamah dug a grave in his house. Whenever eh felt a bit
harsh-hearted, he would go and lie in it as long as Allah willed him to lie, and
then recite: "O my Lord! send me back (to life), In order that I may work
righteousness in the things I neglected." (Al-Mu'minun 99-100)
680

Then, he would stand and say: "O Rabie! You have been given what you
asked for. Then, do righteous works before you ask for return and are given
no answer."
Maimun Ibn Muhran said: I set out in the company of Umar Ibn Abd-AlAziz to the graveyard and when he looked at the graves he wept so much. Then
he said to me: “O Maimun! Those are the graves of my forefathers from the
Umayyads. They seem now as if they did not share the inhabitants of this world
its delights and pleasures. Do you not see them lying, with their bodies mutilated
and devoured by insects?” Then he wept and said: “By Allah, I do not know that
anyone of those who went to the graves and were safe from the punishment of
Allah Almighty has ever been blessed.”
According to Thabit Al-Bunani: “I entered the graveyards and when I
intended to come out a voice said to me: “O Thabit! Do not be deceived by the
silence of those, for how many a soul that is distressed here.”
It is reported that when Fatimah Bint Al-Hussain saw the dead body of her
husband Al-Hassan Ibn Al-Hassan, she covered her face and said: “They were
hopeful (in this life), and now they have been stricken with disaster. How great
and heinous are those disasters.” It is said that she pitched a tent near his grave in
which she stayed in seclusion for a year, and when the year elapsed, they put off
the tent and she returned to Medina. Once she entered Medina, they heard a
voice coming from one side of Al-Baqi’ saying: “Have they found what they had
lost?” They heard a response from the other side saying: “Nay! They have
despaired and thus returned.”
It is then the insightful who looks at his place among the inhabitants of the
graves, and gets ready for the day on which he is going to join them, putting in
mind that if a single day of his lifetime which he is wasting in vain is offered to
them, it would be dearer to them than the whole world with what it contains, for
they knew the value of the lifetime, and the real nature of things were revealed to
them. They grieve for a single day of the lifetime in order for the negligent among
them to mend his negligence, and thus get rid of punishment; and for the
successful among them to elevate his rank high and high, and thus multiply his
reward. But unfortunately, they knew the value of the lifetime after its
termination. That is why they grieve for even a single hour of it. But although this
hour and many times the like of it besides is available to you so long as you are
living, you waste it in vain. So, habituate yourself to grieve for wasting it before
the matter comes out of the sphere of your choice, if you do not hasten to take
your share from your hour.

■

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
681
One of the righteous said: I saw in a dream one of my deceased brothers and
I said: <CAJ1 perfect praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.” He said: ‘To be
able to say it now is dearer to me than the entire world and all that it contains.”
Then he said to me: “Do you not see where they buried me? There, so and so
stood and offered a two-rak’ah prayer. Indeed, to be able to do the same now is
dearer to me than the endre world and all that it contains.”
Explication of their statements at the death of one’s child
It is incumbent upon such as whose child or relative dies to regard him ahead
of him in a journey and sooner or later, he is going to join him there. So, he
should not grieve for him, for he knows well that he is going to join him, and that
there is nothing between them other than the time. If one has such a belief, his
fright and grief would decrees, given that there is a lot of narrations confirming a
great reward for the death of one’s child so much that it consoles everyone for
his calamity.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “To
lose a little babe because of miscarriage is dearer to me than to leave behind me
one hundred horsemen all of whom fighting in the Cause of Allah.” (Ibn Majah
on the authority of Abu Hurairah with a slight variation of wording). Miscarriage
is intended here to show, with the lesser, the value of the greater, otherwise, the
reward is determined by the position of the child from the heart.
Zaid Ibn Aslam said: A child belonging to David "peace be upon him" died
for whom he grieved so much. It was said to him: “What is his value in your
sight?” he said: “As much gold as to fill the whole earth.” It was said to him:
“Then, you would get in the hereafter a reward like that.”
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“None among the Muslims loses three of his children by death, and he expects
the reward for their death from Allah Almighty but that they would be a
protective shield to veil him from the fire (of Hell).” A woman who was present
in the house of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “Or even two?” He said: “Or even two.”
On the other hand, a parent should be sincere in his invocation for his child
at his death, because it is the most rewardable invocation, for which answer is
expected most. On that occasion, Muhammad Ibn Sulaiman stood at the grave of
his child and said: “O Allah! I now come to have hope in You for him, and fear
You on him. So, please, realize my hope and secure my fear.”
Abu Sinan stood at the grave of his child and said: “O Allah! I have excused
him for what is due on him to me. So, please, O AJlah, forgive for him what is
due on him to You, for You are most Generous and Most Bounteous.”
A Bedouin stood at the grave of his child and said: “O Allah! I have
granted to him my share of the dutifulness of which he ran short towards me.
So, please, O Allah, grant to him Your share of obedience of which he ran
short towards You.”
When Dharr Ibn Umar Ibn Dharr died, his father Umar Ibn Dharr said after
he had placed him in the grave: “O Dharr! Our grief for your sake has diverted us
from our grief on you. What have you said, and what has been said to you in the

The quarter of the saviors
682
grave?” then he said by way of supplication: “O Allah! That is Dharr, of whom
You have enjoyed me as much as You willed, and fulfilled for him his appointed
term and sustenance with justice. O Allah! You have enjoined upon him to obey
You and me. O Allah! I grant to him The reward You have promised me for my
calamity concerning his death: so, please, grant to me his punishment and punish
him not.” He thus caused the attendants to weep. When he turned away he said:
“We have nothing to do now O Dharr, and we have no need from anyone other
than Allah. So, we are going to leave you, and were we to stay any longer, we
would not avail you in the least.”
A man saw a woman in Basrah and said: “I have never seen the like of that
cheerful woman.” He referred to the absence of grief from her face. But she said:
“O so and so! I have of grief and sorrow what none else shares me in.” He said
to hen “How is that?” She said: “My husband slaughtered a sheep in the feast,
and I had two young good-looking boys. While they were playing the eldest said
to the youngest: ”Do you like me to show you how our father slaughtered that
sheep?” He said: “Yes, show me.” He took hold of the knife and slaughtered
him, and none knew about that until he was seen being agitated in his blood.
When the cries were loud, his brother fled away to a near mountain, where a wolf
snatched and ate him. His father came out in search for him and he died out of
thirsty because of the scorching heat. Do you see then how the time has ruined
me?”.
At the death of children, the like of those calamities should be remembered in
order to console the parents for their severe anxiety. There is no calamity but that
a greater one could be imagined, and the majority are averted by Allah Almighty
in whichever state one might be.

Explication Of Visiting The Graves And Supplication
For The Deceased
Visiting the graves in general is favorable in order for people to remember
and take consideration therefrom; and visiting the graves of the righteous in
particular is favorable to seek blessing therewith, along with admonition. It is
known that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" had
first forbidden visiting the graves. But afterwards, he gave permission for visiting
them that cancelled his forbiddance.
In this respect, it is narrated on the authority of Ali "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: <CI had already forbidden you to visit graves. But now you may visit
them (if you so like), for it reminds you of the hereafter, provided that you
should avoid obscenity in word.” (Ahmad).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" himself
visited the grave of his mother Aminah in the company of one thousand of his
companions, and on that day, none was seen more weeping than him. (Ibn Abu
Ad-Dunya). On that day he said: “I was given permission to visit (her grave), but
not to pray forgiveness (for her).”
Ibn Abu Mulaikah said: One day, A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her"
returned from the graveyard, and I said to her: “O Mother of Believers! From

Book tenrremembrance of Death and hereafter life
683
where have you returned now?” She said: “From the grave of my brother AbdAr-Rahman.” I asked her: “Is it not that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" forbade visiting the graves?” She said: “Yes, but later on,
he commanded us to visit them.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
But we should not depend on that Hadith in giving permission to women to
visit the graves, for they more often utter obscenity there. So, no good lies in
their visiting them, let alone the probability of the unlawful display of their
adornment and beauty on the way. To visit a grave is an act of sunnah, but if it is
to lead to the woman’s unlawful display of her adornment and beauty on the way,
it should be prevented. However, there is no harm on the woman to come out
wearing untidy clothes that avert the eyes of men from her, provided that she
should limit herself to supplication and avoid obscenity.
It is reported on the authority of Abu Dharr "Allah be pleased with him" that
he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“Visit the graves perchance you would remember therewith the hereafter, and
wash the dead bodies, for seeing an empty body is an instructive admonition, and
offer funeral prayer on the dead, perchance that would aggrieve you, for the sad
remains in the shade of Allah Almighty.”
It is reported on the authority of Ibn Abu Mulaikah that he said: The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “Visit your
dead (in their graves) and greet them with peace, for in them you have a lesson to
learn.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
It is reported on the authority of NafT that never Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased
with them" passed by a grave, but that he would stand at it and greet with peace
its dwellers.
It is further narrated on the authority of Ja’far Ibn Muhammad from his
father that Fatimah, the daughter of the Prophet "peace be upon him" used to
visit the grave of her paternal uncle Hamzah and pray and weep at it
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “Whoever visits the grave of his parents or at least one of them once every
Friday, his sins are forgiven for him, and he is written as dutiful.” (At-Tabarani
on the authority of Abu Hurairah; and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority of
Muhammad Ibn An-Nu’man).
It is reported on the authority of Ibn Sirin that he said: The Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “One’s parents might die
and he is disobedient to them in this world, but when he supplicates Allah to
good for them after their death, he is written by Allah among the dutiful.” (Ibn
Abu Ad-Dunya; and Ibn Adi on the authority of Anas).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “Whoever visits a grave, then, my intercession is assured to him.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“Whoever visits me in Medina, expecting the reward of that from Allah, I would
be an intercessor and a witness to him on the Day of Judgement.
According to Ka’b Al-Ahbar "Allah be pleased with him": <fNo dawn rises
but that seventy thousand angels descend and surround the grave (of the

The quarter of the saviors
684
Prophet),and flirt with their wings, and invoke blessing and peace upon the
Prophet "peace be upon him" until when it is evening they ascend and others like
them descend and do the same, until when the earth would split open (on the
Day of Judgment), he "peace be upon him" would come out surrounded by
seventy thousand angels out of veneration and reverence for him.”
It is favorable, in visiting the grave, to turn one's back to the Qiblah and face
the dead, and greet him with peace, but neither pass his hand over the grave, nor
touch nor kiss it. NafT said: I saw Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with them" more
than one hundred times, having come to the grave (of the Prophet) and said:
“Peace be upon the Prophet! Peace be upon Abu Bakr! Peace be upon my
father!” then, he would turn away immediately.
It is reported on the authority of A'ishah "Allah be pleased with her" that she
said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “No
man visits the grave of his brother and sits at his grave for some time but that he
becomes affable with him and responds to him until he leaves.” (Ibn Abu AdDunya; and Ibn Abd-Al-Barr on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
Sulaiman Ibn Suhaim said: I saw the Messenger of AJlah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" in a dream and asked him: “O Messenger of Allah! As for
those who come to visit your grave and pay you salutation: Do you learn their
greeting?” He "peace be upon him" said: “Yes, and I also return the greeting to
them.”
According to Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him": “If a man comes
upon the grave of another man whom he knows and pays him salutation, he (the
deceased) would return the greeting to him; and if he comes upon the grave of a
man whom he does not know, and pays him salutation, he would also return the
greeting to him.”
It is reported that Muhammad Ibn Wasi’ used to visit the graves every Friday.
It was said to him: “Would that you delay it to Monday!” On that he said: “I was
informed that the inhabitants of the graves know about their visitors on Friday,
and a day before and a day after it.”
According to Ad-Dahhak: ‘"Whoever visits a grave before sunrise on
Saturday, the deceased would know about his visit.” It was said to him: “How is
that?” He said: “That is due to the high position of Friday.”
According to Bishr Ibn Mansur: When it was the time of plague, there was a
man who used to frequent the graveyard and offer funeral prayer on the dead
there, and when it was evening, he would stand at the gate of the graveyard
saying (by way of invocation): “May Allah remove your loneliness, eliminate
your alienation, excuse your misdeeds and accept your good deeds.” He used to
say no more than those words. The man himself said: One night I returned
home and did not go to the graveyard and supplicate as I used to do. While I
was sleeping, I saw in a dream as if a lot of people came to me. I asked them:
“Who are you and what is your need from me?” They said: “We are the
dwellers of the graves.” I asked them: “Then, why have you come?” they said:
“You have accustomed us to a gift from you whenever you return home in the
evening.” I said: “What is that?” They said: “The supplication therewith you

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
685
used to supplicate for us.” I said: “Then, I would return to do so.” I then have
never left it from that night.”
Bashshar Ibn Ghalib An-Najrani said: I saw in my dream Rabi’ah AlAdawiyyah and I used to supplicate Allah for her more often. She said to me: “O
Bashshar Ibn Ghalib! Your gifts come to us on plates of light covered with
handkerchiefs of silk.” I asked her: “How is that?” She said: “As such is the
supplicadon of the living believers when they invoke good upon the dead: if their
supplicadons receive answer, they would be placed on plates of light covered with
silk handkerchiefs, and then brought to the dead and said to him: “That is the gift
of so and so to you.”
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“The dead in his grave is but like a drowned seeking relief, in expectadon for a
supplication to attach himself to, from his father, brother, friend, or so. Once
he gets attached to it, it becomes dearer to him than the enure world and all
that it contains. Furthermore, the gifts of the living to the dead are supplication
and prayer of forgiveness for them.” (Abu Mansur Ad-Dailami on the authority
of Ibn Abbas).
It is favorable to dictate good words to the deceased after his burial. It is
narrated on the authority of Sa’id Ibn Abdullah Al-Azdi that he said: I was
present when Abu Umamah Al-Bahili "Allah be pleased with him" came to his
last breaths. He said to me: “O Sa’id! If I die, then, do with me the same as the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" commanded us to
do. He "peace be upon him" said: “If anyone of you dies and you finish from his
burial and level the earth over his dead body, then, let anyone of you stand at the
head of his grave and say: “O so and so, son of such and such a woman!” he
indeed does not answer. Then let him say for the second time: “O so and so, son
of such and such a woman!” by that he stands up straighdy. Then, let him say
for the third time: “O so and so, son of such and such a woman!” the deceased
then says: “Guide us may Allah bestow mercy upon you.” But you hear him
not. Then, let him say: “Remember the very state on which you have come out
of this world, i.e. the testimony that there is none worthy of worship except for
Allah, and that Muhammad "peace be upon him" is the Messenger of Allah; and
that you have approved Allah as your Lord, Islam as your religion, Muhammad
"peace be upon him" as your Prophet, and the Holy Qur’an as your leading
guide.” By saying so, both Munkar and Nakir move backward and say to each
other: “Let’s go. What makes us sit with one who is dictated his proof?” Thus,
Allah Almighty becomes his defender against them.” A man asked: “O
Messenger of Allah! If he does not know the name of his mother (what should
he do?)” on that he said: “He then should attribute him to Eve.” (At-Tabarani).
There is no harm to recite the Holy Qur’an on the graves. In this issue, it is
reported on the authority of Ali Ibn Musa Al-Hada that he said: I was with
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal in a funeral procession, and Muhammad Ibn Qudamah was
with us. When the dead was buried, a blind man came and recited Qur’an on the
grave. Ahmad Ibn Hanbal said to him: “O man! Recitation of the Qur’an at the
grave is a religious innovation.” But when we came out of the graveyard,

The quarter of the saviors
686
Muhammad Ibn Qudamah said to Ahmad Ibn Hanbal: “O Abu Abdullah! What
do you say about Mubashshir Ibn Isma’il Al-Halabi?” He said: “A reliable.” He
asked him once again: “Have you transmitted anything from him?” Ahmad
answered in the affirmative. On that Muhammad said: “Mubashshir Ibn Isma’il
told me from Abd-Ar-Rahman Ibn Al-Ala’ that his father bequeathed the
opening and concluding Verses of Al-Baqarah to be recited at the head of his
grave if he was buried, reporting that he heard Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with
them" giving the same bequest.” Ahmad said to him: “Then, return to the blind
man and tell him to recite (if he so likes).”
According to Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Al-Marwazi: I heard Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal recommending that “If you enter the graveyard, recite Al-Fatihah (1) and
Al-Mu’awwidhatain (113-114) along with “Say, He is Allah, the One and Only”
(112), and grant the reward of that to the inhabitants of the graves, for it indeed
reaches them.”
Visiting the graves then is intended, for the visitor to take consideration
thereby, and for the dead to benefit from his supplication. This is why the visitor
should not be heedless of invocation of good for himself and for the dead, nor of
taking consideration and learning lessons thereby. He takes consideration when
he imagines how the dead has turned into bones decomposed, exposed to insects
and larva, and how those scattered parts of his body would be gathered together
in order for the dead to be raised once again in the hereafter, and how he would
join him sooner or later.
In this respect, it is reported on the authority of Mutarrif Ibn Abu Bakr AlHudhali that he said: There was a good worshipping old lady: whenever it was
night, she would straighten her garments over her body and go to her praying
place to perform prayer for the whole night; and whenever it was day, she would
go to the graves. She was blamed for her frequenting the graves so much. In her
reply to that she said: “It should be known that when the harsh heart becomes
hard, nothing softens it other than the image of decomposed bones in the graves.
I come to the graves and imagine as if the dead have come from the layers of the
graves and I look at those faces covered with dust, and at these changing bodies.”
Furthermore, it is favorable to praise the dead and mention him only with
good words. It is reported on the authority of A’ishah "Allah be pleased with
her" that she said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: <cWhen anyone of you dies, then, leave his (evil deeds), and do not
abuse him.” (Abu Dawud).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “Abuse not the dead, for (when they die), they come to what they have sent
forward ( of their deeds, be they good or evil).” (Al-Bukhari on the authority of
A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her").
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said too:
“Mention your dead only with good words: if they are from among the
inhabitants of Paradise, you then would be sinful (if you abuse them), and if they
are from among the denizens of the fire (of Hell), then, it would be sufficient for
them the very state in which they are.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and An-Nasa’i on the
authority of A’ishah).
It is narrated on the authority of Anas Ibn Malik "Allah be pleased with him"

Book tenrremembrance of Death and hereafter life
687
that he said: A funeral procession passed and the people praised the deceased.
The Prophet Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “It has been
affirmed to him. Then another funeral procession passed and the people spoke
badly of the deceased. The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: “It has been affirmed to him." Umar Ibn Al-Khattab asked him: "What has
been affirmed? He replied: “You praised this, so Paradise has been affirmed to
him, and you spoke badly of this, so Hell has been affirmed to him. You people
are Allah’s witnesses on earth." (Al-Bukhari and Muslim)
It is further narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with
him that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “A servant dies and the people praise him with good praise, and
although otherwise Allah Almighty knows about him, He says to His angels: “I
make you witnesses that I have accepted the testimony given by My (living)
servant in favor of My (dead) servant, and closed My eyes to what I know about
My servant.” (Ahmad).

CHAPTER SEVEN
REAL NATURE OF DEATH; AND WHAT A DEAD RECEIVES IN THE
GRAVE UNTIL THE SOUNDING OF THE TRUMPET
Explication Of Real Nature Of Death
It should be known to you that the people have different false assumptions
about the real nature of death: some think it is nonexistence after which there
would be no resurrection nor mustering, nor would there be consequences for
good or evil, under pretext that the death of man is like that of animals and
plants. That is indeed the opinion of the atheists and those who have no faith in
Allah and the Last day. Others are of the opinion that one becomes nonexistent
by death in a way that he receives neither harm nor reward so long as he is in the
grave, until he is raised at the time of resurrection. A third group adopt the
argument that souls never become nonexistent by death, for it is the souls which
receive reward and punishment, and bodies would not be raised.
All of those are but false and invalid assumptions, that deviate from the truth.
What is confirmed by the different signs, narrations and minds is that death is
only a change in the state, and that the soul survives after its departure from the
body, either in punishment or in bliss. That a soul leaves the body is to separate
from it, and have no control or power of disposal of it. The organs and parts of
the body are but instruments used by the soul: It strikes with the hand, hears with
the ear, sees with the eye, and knows the real nature of things with the heart; and
the heart is the place of the soul, and the soul learns things by itself, with no need
of the assistance of any instrument. The soul then preserves its built-in attributes
it has by itself after it departs from the body, and all that it gains by means of the
organs and parts of body cease to function by the death of the body until it is
restored to the body. However, it is unlikely that the soul might be restored to
the body in the grave, and it is also not unlikely that it would be restored to it on
the Day of Resurrection. Allah Almighty knows best what He dooms for each of
His servants.

f 4

The quarter of the saviors
By soul, I mean that part in the man that perceives knowledge, senses
pain, anxieties, pleasures and delights. If it loses its disposal and control over
the organs of the body, its power of perception and sense does not cease to
function. Man, in general, is that being that perceives knowledge, and senses
pleasures and pains, and that meaning never dies, i.e. never becomes
nonexistent by death. Death then is the cessation of his disposal and control
over the organs and parts of his body. The reality of man is his own self and
soul, which survives forever. But even, it is true that his state changes from
two perspectives:
One is that he is deprived of his eye, ear, tongue, hand, foot, and all his
organs and parts of body; of his family, relatives and acquaintances; and of his
property, wealth and worldly benefits. The meaning of death then is that man is
deprived of all his belongings and things in this world, and leaves for another
world, that is quite difference from this world in which he lives. If he has in this
world what he gets affable, comforted and concerned with, of course, he would
grieve so much for leaving it after death, which he feels difficult on himself. But
if he does not rejoice nor get affable but with the remembrance of Allah
Almighty, of course, he would grow happier and more pleased once he is let
alone with his beloved by death, and all obstacles and occupations are cut off
from him, since all worldly means divert one from the remembrance of Allah
Almighty. That is the first perspective of difference between the state of death
and the state of life.
The other perspective is that in death, things are revealed to him which have
never been disclosed to him during his life, in the same way as things might be
revealed to the wakeful which are not disclosed to him during his sleep. All
people are asleep, and once they die, they awake. The first to be revealed to the
dead is what benefits or harms him of his good deeds and misdeeds, which are
recorded in the depth of his heart, from which he is diverted by the worldly
occupations, and if those occupations are cut off, all his deeds are revealed to
him. He does not look at his misdeeds but that he grieves for them so much that
he prefers to plunge into the fire if it is to deliver him from it. To such a servant,
it would be said: "Read your (own) record; sufficient is your soul this day to make
out an account against you." (Al-Isra’ 14)

688

^ (^)
vi-Llp
I
'{J&
l^$l ^
All of this is revealed to him once his breaths cease and before he is buried.
In this period, the yearning of departure from what he has left in this perishable
world, from which he has not got provision for the end of the journey, is kindled
within himself, unlike him, who has got from this world provision to convey
hymn to the end of the journey: Once he arrives at the end of the journey, he
would grow happy, and leave, with gladness and pleasure, the remaining
provision, no matter much or less it might be. That is the state of him who takes
from this world only the necessary requirements that are hardly enough to convey
him to the hereafter. He suffers all those passions and pains in the period
between the extermination of life and burial. At burial, his soul might probably be
restored to his body, for another kind of punishment; and he might be pardoned,
as Allah Almighty wills.

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
689
That is but a quick reference to the states of the dead after death, which have
been revealed to the men endued with deep insights with internal contemplation,
which is more powerful than the vision of the eye, and confirmed also by
evidences from the Book and the sunnah. Nevertheless, the real nature of death
could not be uncovered entirely, for none knows death who does not know life,
and to know the real nature of life requires one to know the real nature of the
soul in itself. But no permission was given to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" to talk about it, nor to say more than “The soul
is of the affair of my Lord.” (Al-Isra’ 85)
(Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Ibn Mas’ud). So, it is not
fitting for anyone of the religious scholars to disclose the mystery of the soul
even if he knows it. what is permitted is only to talk about the state of the
soul after death.
There are a lot of Holy Qur’anic Verses and Prophet narrations that give
evidence for the fact that death is not nonexistence of soul, nor of its
perception. From among the Holy Verses, a mention may be made of the
statement of Allah Almighty: “Think not of those who are slain in Allah's Way
as dead. Nay, they live, finding their sustenance in the Presence of their Lord;
They rejoice in the Bounty provided by Allah:. And with regard to those left
behind, who have not yet joined them (in their bliss), the (Martyrs) glory in
the fact that on them is no fear, nor have they (cause to) grieve.” (A1 Imran
169-170)

From among the Prophetic narrations, it is reported that on the day of Badr,
The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” ordered that the corpses
of twenty four leaders of Quraish should be thrown into one of the dirty dry
wells of Badr. He ordered that his she-camel be saddled, then he set out, and his
companions followed him. When he halted at the edge of the well, he addressed
the corpses of the Quraish infidels by their names and their fathers' names, "O
so-and-so, son of so-and-so and O so-and-so, son of so-and-so! We have found
true what our Lord promised us. Have you too found true what your Lord
promised you?" Umar said: “O Allah's Apostle! You are speaking to bodies that
have no souls!" The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: “By Him in Whose Hand Mohammad's soul is, you do not hear, what
I say better than they do, except that they could not answer.” (Muslim on the
authority of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab).
The Prophetic narration confirms that the soul of a wicked survives in the
state of wretchedness which it suffers extremely, whereas the Holy Qur’anic
Verse proves that the soul of a martyr, who is a faithful believer, continues to be
in the state of happiness and bliss, which it enjoys so much after death. Man
could not but be in one of both states of happiness and wretchedness.

The quarter of the saviors
In confirmation of that, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" said: “The grave is either one of the holes of the fire (of Hell), or
one of the gardens of Paradise.” (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu Sa’id AlKhudri). This is a clear statement that death is only a change in state, and the
would-be happiness and wretchedness of the deceased are hastened on to him at
his death with no delay, and what is postponed is only some kinds of punishment
and reward, and not punishment and reward in principle.
It is reported on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him” from the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" that he said:
“Death is resurrecdon: so, whoever dies, his resurrection has been established.”
(Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “If anyone of
you dies, then, his sitting place is shown to him every morning and evening, in
Paradise if he is from among the inhabitants of Paradise, or in the fire (of Hell) if
he is from among the denizens of the fire (of Hell), and it is said to him: ‘That is
your sitting place (and it awaits you) until you are raised on the Day of
Judgement.’” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Ibn Umar).
It is reported on the authority of Abu Qais that he said: We were in the
company of Alqamah in a funeral procession when he said: “As for that
(deceased), his resurrection has been established.”
Ali "Allah be pleased with him" said: “It is forbidden to a soul to come out of
this world until it knows whether from among the inhabitants of Paradise or
from among the denizens of the fire (of Hell) it would be.”
It is reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “Whoever dies as alien (from his homeland) would die as a martyr,
according to which he would be safeguarded from the afflictions of the grave,
and his sustenance from Paradise would be brought to him every morning and
evening.” (Ibn Majah and Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
It is reported on the authority of Abu Ya’li Ibn Al-Walid that he said: I was
walking one day in the company of Abu Ad-Darda’ "Allah be pleased with him"
when I asked him: “Which thing do you like for whomever you love?” He said:
“Death.” I further asked: “Then, if he does not die (what is next)?” He said: “The
reduction of his property and children.”
Indeed, he liked death for him because none likes death but a faithful
believer, and death is to release one from his prison (in this world). Furthermore,
he liked reduction of property and children for they are a source of temptation
and a means to get affable with this world; and to get affable with such as you
should inevitably leave is the farthest wretchedness. One should necessarily leave
at death all other than Allah and His remembrance.
That is the significance of the statement of Abdullah Ibn Amr "Allah be
pleased with him": “The state of a faithful believer, when his soul comes out
from his body by death, is like the state of him who is released from prison after
a long period of imprisonment, thereupon he tours and turns in the land
wherever and however he likes.”

690

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
691
That is the state of him who has desertion from this world, and is not
affable but with the remembrance of Allah Almighty, and since the worldly
occupations detain him from his beloved, and the suffering of desires and
pleasures harms him, his salvation from all harmful evils lies in death, which
enables him to be alone with his beloved. That is, indeed, the utmost of bliss.
That the martyrs are given their pleasures and delights while being in the
presence of their Lord Almighty goes back to the fact that when they set out
in fighting, they cut off all their worldly pleasures and delights, out of longing
for the meeting with Allah Almighty, and good pleasure with being killed in
His Cause. If one in such a state looks at this world, he would sell it
voluntarily for the hereafter, and the price does not concern him at all; and if
he looks at the hereafter, he purchases it out of longing for it. how joyful is he
of what he purchases once he sees it, and how careless is he of what he sells
once he leaves it.
The meaning of bliss is that man obtains what he likes and desires for; and
that is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty: “And they have
therein what they desire for.” (An-Nahl 57)

That is the most comprehensive statement indicative of the pleasures and
delights of Paradise. Contrastingly, the greatest punishment is that a man is
prevented from that which he wishes for, as confirmed by Allah Almighty in his
statement: “And between them and their desires, is placed a barrier.” (Saba’ 54)

i I'SJ oy,iii £

Jrf-3 >

That is the most comprehensive expression pinpointing to the punishment
received by the denizens of the fire of Hell. That is perceived by those endued
with deep insights, by virtue of the light of certainty of faith. If you like an
evidence for it from the transmitted narrations, below is a set of those:
It is narrated on the authority of Talhah Ibn Khirash: I heard Jabir Ibn
Abdullah "Allah be pleased with them" having said: When Abdullah Ibn Amr Ibn
Haram (Jabir’s father) was killed on the day of (the holy battle of) Uhud, the
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” met me and said:
“O Jabir! Would I not tell you with what Allah met your father?” I said: “Yes, O
Messenger of Allah (tell me): May Allah give you glad tidings (of Paradise)!” He
said: “Never has Allah spoken to anyone (in the world) but from behind a screen;
and He spoke direct to your father. He brought him to life once again, made him
sit in front of Him and said: “O my servant! Ask for (whatever you like) so that I
would give it to you.” He said: “O Lord! By the right of my worship of You
during my lifetime, send me back to life so that I would fight and be killed in
Your Cause once again.” The Lord Almighty said: “It has been decreed earlier by
Me that to it (the life of world) those (who die) never return.” (Ibn Abu AdDunya on the authority of A’ishah; At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah on the authority
of Jabir).
Ka’b "Allah be pleased with him" said: “In Paradise, there is a man who is
weeping, to whom it was said: “Why are you weeping and you are in Paradise?”

The quarter of the saviors
692
he said: “I am weeping for I was killed in the Cause of Allah only once, and I
desire to be sent back to life in order to be killed in His Cause many times.”
Furthermore, it should be known to you that after death, it is revealed to the
faithful believer of the immensity and extensiveness of the glory and majesty of
Allah that which, if the entire world is compared with it, it would seem as narrow
as a dark prison. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" set forth an example for that when he said about a man who died: “This
man has departed from this world, and left it for its people. If he is pleased, then,
he would not rejoice to return to this world once again, just as anyone of you
never rejoices to return to his mother’s womb once again.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya
on the authority of Amr Ibn Dinar).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: tcVerily, the example of a faithful believer in this world is like a fetus in its
mother’s womb: Whenever it comes out of her womb as a newborn child , it
weeps for its exit until when it sees the light and is placed on the bed, it never
likes to return to its first place once again.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya on the authority
of Sulaim Ibn Amir Al-Jana’izi). Similarly, the faithful believer is scared by death
until when he comes to his Lord Almighty, he never likes to return to this world
once again, just as a child never likes to return to its mother’s womb once again.
It is reported that it was said to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him": “So and so died.” On that he said: “He has been relieved (of
this world if he is good), otherwise (people have been) relieved of him (i.e. of his
evil).” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Abu Qatadah). By the relieved
one he referred to the faithful believer, and by such as of whom people are
relieved to the wicked.
It is reported on the authority of Abu Umar, the lord of Suqya that he said:
Once, Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with them" came upon us while we were still
boys and looked at a grave and behold! He saw a protuberant skull thereupon he
ordered a man to cover it with dust. Then he said: “No doubt, those dead bodies
are not harmed by dust: it is the souls which receive punishment and reward until
the Day of Judgement.”
It is reported on the authority of Amr Ibn Dinar that he said: “No dead dies
but that eh knows what happens among his family after his death, and while they
are washing and shrouding him, he looks at them.”
According to Malik Ibn Anas: “I was reported that the souls of the faithful
believers are free, and they go wherever they like.”
It is reported on the authority of An-Nu’man Ibn Bashix "Allah be pleased
with him" that he said: I heard the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" having said while being on the pulpit: “No doubt, nothing remains
of this world but as little as is equal to flies hovering in its air. So, please, (observe
the commandments of) Allah! (Observe the commandments of) Allah concerning
your brothers from among the inhabitants of the graves, for your deeds are
shown to them.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).
It is reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"

Book temremembrance of Death and hereafter life
693
said: Put not your dead to shame by your misdeeds, for your deeds are shown to
your allies from among the inhabitants of the graves.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya; and
Ahmad on the authority of Anas with a slight change of wording).
For this reason, Abu Ad-Darda’ "Allah be pleased with him" said (by way of
supplication): “O Allah! I seek refuge with You from doing a deed therewith to
put myself to shame with Abdullah Ibn Rawahah.” Abdullah Ibn Rawahah "Allah
be pleased with him", his maternal uncle, had died when he said so.
Abdullah Ibn Amr Ibn Al-As "Allah be pleased with him" was asked about
the souls of the faithful believers: where they are after death, thereupon he said:
“Inside white birds under the shade of the Throne (of Majesty), whereas the souls
of the disbelievers in the seventh earth.”
It is reported on the authority of Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: I heard the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" having said: “Indeed, the dead knows who washes (and shrouds) his
body, who carries him (on the bier), and who places him in his grave.” (Ahmad).
According to Salih Al-Murri: “I was reported that the souls meet together at
death and say to that which comes out to them: “What was your residence? In
which of both bodies were you? Were you in a good or in a wicked body?”
According to Ubaid Ibn Umair: “The inhabitants of the graves expect for the
news from this world. When the soul of a new deceased comes to them, they ask:
“What has so and so done?” He says: “Has he not come to you?” they say:
“Then, we all are to Allah and to Him we shall return. Of a surety, he has been
taken to a way different from ours.”
According to Ja’far Ibn Sa’id: “If one dies, his deceased child receives him in
the same way as an absent is received.”
According to Mujahid: “A man in his grave is given the glad tidings of his
child’s righteousness .”
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Ayyub Al-Ansari "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “When the believer’s soul is taken up, these of mercy receive it from
Allah just as a giver of glad ddings is received in this world. They say: “Give
respite to your brother until he takes rest, for he was indeed in severe distress.”
Then they ask him: “What has so and so of men done? What has so and so of
women done? Has she got married?” If they ask him about a man who died
before him, and he told them that he had died before him, they say to him: “We
all are to Allah and to Him we shall return. He has been taken to his home in a
(bottomless) Pit.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and At-Tabarani).

Explication Of The Grave's Speech To The Dead, And The Dead's
Speech, Either In Word Or In State, Which Is More Expressive To
Reach The Dead Than The Word To The Living
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “The
grave says to the dead once his body is placed in it: ^Woe to you son of Adam!
What has deceived you about me? Do you not know that I am the house of
darkness, affliction, loneliness and insects and larva? What has deceived you
about me when you passed by me hesitantly?’ if he is a righteous man the

The quarter of the saviors
694
answerer of the grave then would say on his behalf: Tell me what to do if he
used to enjoin right and forbid evil?' the grave then says: “In this case, I turn into
greenery on him.’ Then, his body turns into light, and his soul ascends to Allah
Almighty.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya, At-Tabarani and Al-Hakim on the authority of
Abu Al-Hajjaj At-Tamali).
According to Ubaid Ibn Umair Al-Laithi: “No dead dies but that the hole in
which he is buried calls him: “I am the house of insects, darkness and loneliness.
If you were obedient to Allah in your life, now, I would be a source of mercy for
you; and if you were disobedient to Him, now, I would be a means of
punishment against you. Whoever enters me as obedient, would come out as
happy and pleased, and whoever enters me as disobedient would come out as
displeased and ruined.”
According to Ka’b "Allah be pleased with him": “If the dead is placed in the
grave, he is surrounded by his righteous deeds of prayer, fasting, , Hajj, Jihad
and charity. When the angels of punishment come to him from his feet, the
prayer says to them: “Leave him, for you have no way over him. He indeed
used to offer long standing on them in prayer for Allah Almighty.” Then, they
come to him from his head, thereupon fasting says: “You have no way over
him. He used to spend his day in long thirsty as fasting for Allah Almighty in
this world. So, you have no way over him.” When they come to him from his
body, both Hajj and Jihad say: “Leave him for he troubled himself and
consumed his power in Hajj and Jihad in the Way of Allah Almighty. So, you
have no way over him.” When they come to him from his hands, the charity
says: “Leave my lord! How many an object of charity that came out through
those hands until it fell into the Hand of Allah Almighty, seeking His
Countenance. So, you have no way over him.” Then, it is said to him: “Blessed
be you! Let you be good as living and good as dead.” Then, the angels of mercy
come and spread his grave with a bed and a wrapper from Paradise, and his
grave extends on him as far as his sight could reach, and a chandelier from
Paradise is brought to him which illuminates his grave until he is raised by Allah
Almighty from his grave.”
Abdullah Ibn Ubaid Ibn Umair said while he was in a funeral procession: I
was reported that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “The deceased sits while hearing the footsteps of those who escort
him to his final place, and nothing talks to him but his grave saying: <cWoe to you
son of Adam! Have you not been warned of me and of my narrowness, stink,
terrors and worms? Then, what have you prepared for me?” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya
and Ibn Al-Mubarak).

Explication Of Punishment Of Grave; And Interrogation
Of Munkar And Nakir.
It is narrated on the authority of Al-Bara’ Ibn Azib "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: Once, we set out in the company of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" to attend the funeral procession of a
man from amongst the Ansar, and when we arrived at the grave, the ditch had
not been dug yet. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
695
him” sat down and we sat around him (as motionless and silent) as if there
were birds above our heads. In his hand, there was a stick, with which he was
scratching the ground. Then he raised his head (towards the sky) and said:
Seek refuge with Allah from the punishment of the grave!” he said it twice or
thrice. Then he said: “When a believing servant dies (and is buried), Allah
Almighty would send angels whose faces are as bright as the sun, having his
shroud and perfume. They sit as far from him as his sight could reach, and
when his soul comes out, all the angels in the heavens and the earth invoke
blessing on him, and the gates of the heavens would be opened to him, and all
of them like to receive him. If his soul is carried to ascend, it would be said: “O
Lord! That is Your servant so and so.” He would say: “Return him and show to
him the honor that I have prepared for him. I have indeed promised him: From
it ( the earth) We created you, and to it We shall return you, and from it We
shall raise you once again.” He indeed hears their footsteps when they turn
away from him. Then, two angels will come to him, and make him sit down and
ask him: “Who is your Lord?” he will say: “My Lord is Allah.” They will ask:
“What is your religion?” He will say: “My religion is Islam.” They will say:
“What about this man who was sent unto you (as a Messenger)?” He will say:
“He is the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him".” They
will ask him: “How have you come to know that?” He will say: “I recited
Allah’s Book (of Qur’an), in which I believed and trusted.” This is the
confirmadon of Allah’s statement: “Allah will establish in strength those who
believe, with the Word that stands firm, in this world and in the Hereafter.”
(Abraham 27)

Then, a Caller from the heaven will call: “My servant has told the truth. Make
his bed from the (beds of the) Garden, dress him from the (dresses of the)
Garden, and open to him a gate leading to the Garden.” Then, there will come to
him from its good odor and sweetness (as much as he pleases), and his grave will
grow spacious for him (as far) as his sight could reach.
On the other hand, if the unbelieving servant dies and is buried, stem hardy
angels would descend to him having dresses of fire and trousers from tar. When
his soul comes out, he would be cursed by all the inhabitants of the heavens and
the earth, and all the gates of the heavens would be closed against him. When his
soul is carried to ascend, it would be discarded, and it would be said: O Lord!
Your servant so and so is rejected by all the heavens and the earth.” Allah
Almighty would say: “Return him and show to him the evil that I have prepared
for him. I have indeed promised him: From it (the earth) We created you, and to
it We shall return you, and from it We shall raise you once again.” He indeed
hears their footsteps when they turn away from him. Then, his soul will be
returned to his body (in the grave), where two angels will come and make him sit
and ask him: “Who is your Lord?” He will say: “Ha! Ha!! Ha! I do not know.”
They will ask him: “What is your religion?” He will say: “Ha! Ha! I do not know.”
They will ask him: “What about the man who was sent unto you (as a
Messenger)?” he will say: “Ha! Ha! I do not know.” Then, a caller from the

The quarter of the saviors
696
heaven will call: “He has told a lie! Make his bed from (the beds of) the fire (of
Hell), and open for him a gate leading to the fire (of Hell).” He will suffer its
scorching heat and his grave will be tightened unto him so much that his ribs will
be displaced. “Then, a blind, deaf, dumb person will be assigned to him (the
unbeliever), having a sledgehammer in his hand, and (it is so much heavy that) if
a mountain is struck with it, it will turn into dust. He will strike him (the
unbeliever) with it and he will turn into dust. But Allah Almighty will bring him
to life once again, and (such a blind) man will give him a further strike as a result
of which he will cry (so much loudly) that all barring men and jinn will hear it.”
(Abu Dawud and Al-Hakim).
According to Muhammad Ibn Ali: “No dead dies but that at death his good
deeds and misdeeds are embodied to him, thereupon he devotes himself to his
good deeds and turns his back to the misdeeds.”
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “When the believer comes to his last breaths, angels come to him with a
piece of silk having musk and bouquets of basil, and his soul is taken smoothly
as a hair is taken stealthily from the dough. Then, it is said to it: "O (you) soul,
in (complete) rest and satisfaction! Come back you to your Lord, well pleased
(yourself), and well-pleasing unto Him: Come out to the rest and sadsfaction of
Allah Almighty, and the honor that is prepared and kept by Him for you.”
Once his soul is taken out, it is placed on that musk and basil and folded up in
the piece of silk, and then sent up to Illiyyin. But when death approaches a
disbeliever, angels come to him with a rough cloth of coarse wool having a
piece of fire. His soul then is pulled out forcefully and it said to it: “O wicked
soul! Come out as displeased (yourself) and displeasing (to your Lord): come
out to the humiliadon and punishment prepared for you by Allah Almighty.”
Once his soul is taken out, it is placed on that piece of fire, and folded up with
the rough cloth of coarse wool, and then sent to Sijjin.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya
and Ibn Hibban).
It is reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “The believer in his grave is in a green garden: his grave is made spacious
upon him as much as seventy cubits, and it illuminates for him like the moon on
the night when it is full. Do you know in which context the following statement
of Allah was revealed? "But whosoever turns away from My Message, verily for
him is a life narrowed down, and We shall raise him up blind on the Day of
Judgment." (Ta Ha 124)
4

..oyui-j

->4 Op (JO*

0*5 ^

They said: “Allah and His Messenger know best.” On that he said: “It was
revealed in connection with the disbeliever’s punishment in his grave: Ninety
nine female dragons are vested with authority over him. Do you know what a
female dragon here is? It is a nine-head serpent: they continue to lacerate, lick
and blow poison into his body until the day they would be raised.” (Ibn
Hibban).

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life ---------------------697
The number of those serpents is in proportion to the number of bad manners
and blameworthy attributes, and of course, they differ in strength and weakness
by the difference of those characteristics. Those serpents, in this concept, are
themselves the destructive attributes (referred to in the third quarter of that
book), which turn into such serpents and scorpions one finds in the grave. The
masters of hearts witness, by the light of insight, those destructives. Those
narrations have mysteries and secrets, although, in the sight of the masters of
hearts and insights, are evident and clear. But as for him to whom their realities
are not revealed, he should not deny them entirely. Faith, at the least, is to give
trust and submit to that fact.
You may say: “we see the disbeliever in his grave for a long time and do not
see along with him such serpents and scorpions: then, how should we give trust
to that which contradicts our vision?”.
In reply to that, it should be known to you that you have three degrees of
trust in this issue:
One of them, which is the most evident and the most authentic, is to believe
that there are really serpents and scorpions that bite the wicked dead in the grave,
but you do not see them. That is because this eye is not qualified to see what
belongs to the dominion of the invisibles; and all that pertains to the hereafter
belongs to the dominion of the invisibles. Do you not see how the companions
"Allah be pleased with them" believed in the descent of Gabriel (with the Divine
revelation) and although they never saw him, they believed that the Messenger of
Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" saw him? Anyway, the serpents
and scorpions that bite the dead in the grave do not belong to our world of
visibles, which means that they are imperceptible by the same senses of
perception unique to our world. They are perceived by another sense (which we
do not have in this world of ours).
The second is to remember the sleeping person who might see in his
dreams a serpent biting him, for which he feels pain, to the extent that he might
be disturbed and his forehead sweat during his sleep. But even, as for you, you
see him motionless and still, and do not see any serpents or scorpions to bite
him. Although he sees the serpent and suffers the pain of biting, you neither see
nor suffer anything.
The third is to know that it is not the serpent itself that pains you, but what
pains you is only the poison you receive from it. pain also does not lie in the
poison, but your torture results from its trace on your body. If that trace afflicts
you without the perception of poison, it would realize although too difficult to
recognize unless it is attributed to the cause that leads to it. If the pleasure of
sexual relation is created within a man who has not experienced nor perceived its
image, then, it would be too difficult to recognize unless it is ascribed to the
cause that leads to it in practice. In this way, the effect of the cause realizes
without the perception of the cause itself, which is intended for its effect and not
for itself. Those destructive attributes turn into harmful and painful things at
death, and their pains become like those of serpents and scorpions although there
are no serpents nor scorpions.

The quarter of the saviors
698
That die bad attribute turns into a harmful thing is like the state in which the
love turns into pain when the beloved dies. In this way, the pleasure of love
becomes painful, to the extent diat one wishes he has never tasted that pleasure
at all. That, namely, is a kind of punishment which a dead receives in the grave.
When he is in the world, he is possessed by the love for worldly benefits. If all of
this is taken from him even in his life and it becomes impossible for him to
restore it once again, what do you diink his state of destructive grief and sorrow
might be? Would he not be more wretched, distressed and anxious? Would he
not wish he has never had anything of what was taken from him?
Similarly, death is to leave die worldly benefits all at once, what do you think
his sadness and misery might be? Besides that misery, he regrets for the bliss of
the hereafter which he has lost due to his greediness for the world, and his being
veiled from the light of Allah Almighty. That is the very punishment therewith he
is punished, for nothing follows the fire of departure other than the fire of Hell
as confirmed by the statement of Allah Almighty: “Verily, from (the Light of)
their Lord, that Day, will they be veiled. Further, they will enter the Fire of Hell.”
(Al-Mutaffiffin 15-16)

4©

1 ^ LoJ

p {£§>

^-yy

rrj ^ }

On the contrary is the one who is not affable with this world, nor loves but
Allah Almighty, and has a great longing for meeting Him: By death, he has indeed
got rid of the prison of this world and suffering of desires and pleasures therein,
and devoted himself wholeheartedly to his beloved, after all worldly obstacles and
hindrances had been removed from his way, and only the bliss has become ahead
of him, which is guaranteed to be never-ending: It is for the like of this that the
workers should work.
The point is that a man loves his female horse to the extent that if he is given
the freedom to choose to be deprived of it or bitten by a scorpion, of course, he
would prefer to be bitten. Thus, the pain he receives from the loss of his female
horse is more severe on him than that he receives from the bite of the scorpion;
and it is his love for the female horse that indeed bites him: if it is taken from
him, let him then get ready for those bites. That is because death takes from him
all his things he possesses and loves in this world: if he loves them only, and they
have been taken from him by death, then, his pain for losing them would be
more severe on him than the bite of scorpions and serpents he might receive.
As well as if those things are taken from him while he is still living, his pain
for that would be so much great, the same is true when he is dead. We have
already shown that the essence which perceives and senses pains and pleasures
never dies by the death of the body: On the contrary, his punishment after death
is more severe, because during life, he amuses himself with things that occupy his
senses, consoles himself with the hope of restoring his lost things, or the hope of
compensation for it, whereas after death, there is no amusement nor consolation.
Henceforth, everything, say a shirt or a handkerchief, or any such like, he loves in
this world so much that it would be difficult on him to lose it, he remains
regretful for it and is punished because of it. If he leaves this world and he is free
from its things, he would be safe, unlike him who leaves it while fastened by its

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
699
things. As well as the grief of the one from whom only a Dinar is stolen is less
than him from whom ten Dinars are stolen, similarly, the owner of a single
Dirham is better in state than the owner of two Dirhams. To that the Messenger
of Allah Allah s blessing and peace be upon him" referred by his statement:
The owner of a single Dirham would receive reckoning easier than the owner of
two Dirhams.”
There is nothing in this world that you leave behind at death but that it
becomes a source of grief upon you after death. So, get more thereof if you so
like, or little thereof if you so like. If you get more, you indeed increase your grief,
and if you get little, you indeed reduce your grief. That is why the serpents and
scorpions are numerous in the graves of the rich and wealthy, who love the life of
this world and prefer it to the hereafter.
Those are the three degrees of faith concerning the serpents and scorpions,
and all kinds of punishment of the grave.
Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri "Allah be pleased with him" saw in his dream a son of
him who died and he said to him: “O my son! Admonish me.“ he said: “Do not
oppose Allah Almighty in what He wills.” He said: “O my son! Give me more.”
He said: “O my father! You would not endure it.” he said: “No, say.” He said:
“Do not make a shirt between you and Allah Almighty.” Henceforth, he never
put on a shirt for thirty years.
If you ask me about the most valid of those three degrees of faith, let me tell
you that the people are different in their inclination to and disinclination from
any of them; .and the truth in which there is no doubt is that all of them are
possible to realize; and to reject any of them goes back to ignorance of the
extensive power and will of Allah Almighty. As those three ways of punishment
in the grave are possible, then, to give trust to them all is obligatory. A servant
might be punished by only one and another by all the three together: we seek
refuge with Allah from the punishment of Allah.
On the other hand, one should give trust to that by way of imitation, since
verification here is impossible. What I advise you to do in this respect is not to
engage yourself so much about the details of that, nor in the knowledge of it: But
you’d rather engage in how to avert from yourself the punishment in general,
whatever it might be. It is learnt that after death, a servant should be either in
painful punishment or in enduring bliss; and it is for the like of this that he
should get ready. But to search for the details of punishment and reward is
indeed to waste time in what is useless.

Explication Of Interrogation Of Munkar And Nakir And Their
Image; And Embracing Of The Grave
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “If a servant dies, two black and blue-complexioned angels would come to
him, one called Munkar and the other Nakir, and ask him: “What did you say
about the Prophet?” if he is a faithful believer, he would say: “He is the servant
and Messenger of Allah. I testify that there is none worthy of worship except for
Allah, and that Muhammad "peace be upon him" is the Messenger of Allah.”

The quarter of the saviors
700
They then would say to him: “We have indeed learnt that you said (and believed
in) that.” Then, his grave would be extended for him as much as seventy in
seventy cubits, and illuminated and he would be asked to sleep. But he would say:
“Let me return to my family to tell them (about my bliss).” But he would be
asked to sleep and he really sleeps like a bridegroom whom nothing awakens but
the dearest of his family to him, until Allah Almighty raises him from his lying
place.
But if he, on the other hand, is a hypocrite, he would say in reply to them: “I
do not know. I heard the people saying something and I repeated it after them.”
They would say to him: “We have indeed learnt that you said (and believed in)
that.” Then, the earth would be asked to be welded on him, and it would do
accordingly so violendy that his ribs would dislocate; and he would remain in
punishment until Allah Almighty raises him from his lying place.” (At-Tirmidhi
and Ibn Hibban).
It is further reported on the authority of Ata’ Ibn Yasar that he said: The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said to Umar Ibn
Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him": “O Umar! What do you do if you die
and your people go and dig a hole three cubits long and a cubit and a span wide,
and then return to wash your body, shroud and embalm you and then carry your
dead body on the bier until they place you in the grave, and then fill it with dust
over you and bury you; and once they turn away from you, the two grave
tempters come to you, i.e. Munkar and Nakir, whose voice is like loud thunder,
and sight like swift lightning, dragging their hair and digging the grave with their
canine teeth, and then shake and move you violently? What do you do in that
very state O Umar?” Umar said: “Would I have the same mind as I have now?”
He said: £CYes.” Umar said: “Then, I would suffice you against them.” (Ibn Abu
Ad-Dunya and Al-Baihaqi).
That is a clear statement that mind never changes by death. What changes is
only the body and the organs and parts of body. This means that the dead
continues to preserve his perception, sense of pains and pleasures. By the
perceiving mind, I do not mean that very physical organ, but I mean that internal
essence that has no definite place nor form in the body. It is that which is
indivisible in itself. If all the parts of the body scatter about on earth, and nothing
remains but the perceiving indivisible part, the rational man then remains
standing. He continues to be as such after death.
According to Muhammad Ibn Al-Munkadir: “I was reported that concerning
the disbeliever, a blind deaf animal is invested with authority over him in his
grave, having a headed lash of iron in its hand, therewith it persists in striking him
until the Day of Judgement: It neither sees him in order to avoid him, nor hears
his voice in order to be merciful towards him.”
It is reported on the authority of Hudhaifah "Allah be pleased with him" that
he said: We were in the company of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" in a funeral procession when he sat at the head of the grave,
looked at it and then said: “The believer is pressed violently in that (grave) so
much violently that his sides dislocate from him.” (Ahmad).

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
701
It is reported on the authority of A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her" that
she said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “No doubt, the grave has violent embracing (of the dead body), and
were anyone to be saved from it, surely, Sa’d Ibn Mu’adh would have been
saved from it.” (Ahmad).
It is further narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: Zainab "Allah be pleased with her" the daughter of the Messenger
of Allah Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" died, and she was sick. The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" attended her
funeral procession, and his state of anxiety aggrieved us. When we reached the
grave and he entered it, the colour of his face turned yellow. But when he came
out of it, he was cheerful. We said: “O Messenger of Allah! We have seen your
state (that aggrieved us): What is the reason for that?” he said: “I remembered
the earth’s violent embracing of my daughter, and the severe punishment of the
grave, thereupon I was told that Allah Almighty alleviated the severity from her,
and that she received an embracing so violent that its voice was audible to all
that is living in between the heavens and the earth.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya).

CHAPTER EIGHT
WHAT IS KNOWN FROM THE STATES OF THE DEAD BY MEANS OF
REVELATION IN DREAMS
It should be known to you that we know, by the lights of insight obtained
from the Book of Allah Almighty, and the sunnah of His Messenger "peace be
upon him", along with the different methods and ways of consideration show to
us the states of the dead in general, and their division into happy and wretched.
But as for the state of a particular person, it could not be revealed in principle. If
we rely on the apparent faith and rectitude of a particular person, it should be
known then that piety lies in the heart, and we do not know in which state does
anyone whom we know really dies. That is because it is abstruse and hidden even
from the man himself, then, how would it be for anyone else? There is no
judgement to be built only on the apparent righteousness without the internal
piety. Allah Almighty says: "Allah does accept only from those who are
righteous.” (Al-Ma’idah 27)
i @)

erf ^

^j >

Once the dead moves from the world of the visibles into the dominion of the
invisibles, his state then could not be seen by the human ordinary eye, but by
another eye that is created in the heart of everyone, but covered with a thick veil
of his desires and lusts, along with his worldly occupations, to the extent that he
no longer sees or is imagined to see by it anything of the dominion of the
invisibles unless that veil is removed from the eye of his heart.
But since that veil was removed from the hearts of the Prophets "peace be
upon them" they were able to see the dominion of the invisibles and witnessed its
wonders, and the dead in it. When they witnessed that, they told about it.
For this reason, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" saw the grave embracing of his daughter Zainab Allah be pleased with her

The quarter of the saviors
and of Sa’d Ibn Mu’adh, and saw the state of the father of Jabir "Allah be pleased
with them" when he was martyred on the batde of Uhud, and told him (Jabir)
that Allah Almighty made him sit in front of Him with no partition between
them, and so on. But such witnesses are not available to anyone other than the
Prophets and Messengers "peace be upon them", and the allies and friends of
Allah whose degree is close to theirs. What is available to the like of us is another
weak witness, though Prophetic, i.e. the vision, since the true vision is a part of
many parts of Prophethood.
In confirmation of that, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" said: “The good vision (one sees in a dream) is one of forty-six
parts of Prophethood.”
But that revelation also requires the removal of the veil from the eye of the
heart. For this reason, it is only the righteous faithful man whose vision is
reliable. That is why the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" commanded to get purified and perform ablution on going to bed, in order
for one to sleep as pure and clean. (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of
Al-Bara*). It is a reference to the purification of the inside, which is the origin,
whereas the purification of the appearance supplementary.
Once the inside of a man becomes pure and clean, it is revealed, in the eye of
the heart, what would come to be in the future, just as the conquest of Mecca was
revealed to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" in
his dream, as confirmed by the following statement which was later revealed by
Allah Almighty: “Truly did Allah fulfill the vision for His Messenger: You shall
enter the Sacred Mosque, if Allah wills, with minds secure, heads shaved, hair cut
short, and without fear. For He knew what you knew not, and He granted,
besides this, a speedy victory.” (Al-Fath 27)

702

j

\\ auI t lL (jj

I

U

Jl dy*'j

t3-W=> jjl) ^

'u '

4 (Js bjA

0_J*>

\pi b ^1*3

"5 ^Jyva-a-4j

(Ibn Abu Hatim in his Tafsir on the authority of Mujahid).
The vision and knowledge of the unseen in dreams are among the wonders
and mysteries of the making of Allah Almighty, and the clearest evidences for the
existence of the dominion of the invisibles. But even, the mysteries of visions and
dreams are more relevant to the science of Revelation (Mukashafah) apart from
the science of practical religion (Mu’amalah). It is unfitting for us to talk about it
here. What is allowed by the context is to give you an example to make it
understandable to you.
The heart is like a mirror on which images and pictures are reflected. All that
has been preordained and decreed by Allah from the beginning until the end of
creation is recorded in something created by Allah Almighty, referred to once as
the Preserved Tablet, once as the Evident Book, and once as the Clear Guide.
Although all of this is inscribed on that thing, it is beyond the capacity of the eye
to see it. Think not that this Tablet is made of wood, iron, bone, or so, or that the
Book of papers or so: On the contrary, you should understand that the Tablet of
Allah does not resemble any tablet, and the Book of Allah is not similar to any

Book temremembrance of Death and hereafter life
703
book of the creatures, in the same way as His Essence and attributes are not like
the essence and attributes of His creatures.
If you like an illustrative example, you should learn that the inscription of the
decrees and fates on the Tablet is like the inscription of the words of the Holy
Qur an on the minds of those who memorize it by heart: they are lined in the
mind in such a way as whenever he recites it, it seems to him as if he sees it with
his eye, although if you inspect his mind, you would find no letter thereof.
The Tablet is like a nurror on which the realities of all things created are
reflected. If another mirror is placed opposite to it, the images of those realities
might be reflected on it too, unless there is a partition between both. Thus, the
heart is a mirror on which the image of knowledge is reflected, whereas the
Tablet is a mirror on which the realities of the whole knowledge are reflected.
The engagement of the heart with its sensual desires and lusts stands as a
partition between it and the Tablet that belongs to the dominion of the invisibles.
If some wind blows and removes a part of that partition from the heart,
something of the dominion of the invisibles might appear in its mirror, like the
swift lightning, which is apt either to continue for some time or to vanish quickly,
and that is more frequent.
During wakefulness, it is always engaged in what it receives from the senses
of the occupations that belong to the world of visibles, which stands, to be sure,
as a partition that veils it from the dominion of the invisibles. In sleep, the senses
close on that world, and cease to bring anything to the heart; and once the heart
gets rid of it along with imagination,, and is pure in its essence, the partition that
is between it and the Preserved Tablet is raised, allowing for something of what it
contains to be reflected on it, just as the image is reflected from a certain mirror
on another mirror opposite to it so long as there is no partition between them.
But sleep prevents only the five senses to work, and not the imagination. For
this reason, what is reflected on the heart from the other mirror becomes subject
to the imagination which imitates it with a similar picture. Such being the case,
the imagined pictures made by imagination is more enduring in the memory than
the real images. So, when one awakes, he remembers nothing other than the
fancies. The interpreter of dreams then needs to see to which of the real images
such and such a fancy goes back, depending on the relevance that is between
both. This work is evident and well known to those involved in interpretation of
dreams.
It suffices you for example that a man said to Ibn Sirin: “I saw in a dream as
if I had a seal in my hand therewith I seal the mouths of men and the genitals of
women. ” In his interpretation of it, he said to him: “You are a Mu’adhdhin who
proclaim Adhan before Morning prayer in the month of Ramadan.” The man
said to him: “You have told the truth.” Consider here that the essence of sealing
is prevention for which it is intended. The state of a certain person is revealed to
the heart from the Preserved Tablet, as it is, i.e. that he prevents the people from
food and drink. But imagination related the prevention in sealing with the seal,
and represented it with the imagined picture that implies the essence of the
meaning; and it is only that imagined picture that endures in the memory after

The quarter of the saviors
704 --------------------getting up from sleep.
That is a brief synopsis of the vision. But even, what do you think it to be
compared with death itself therewith the veils are penetrated and the world of the
unseen revealed? The sleep is a simple example of death, and at death, the
realities of things are uncovered to the sight after veils are removed as confirmed
by Allah Almighty in His statement: "You was heedless of this, now have We
removed your veil, and sharp is your sight this Day!" (Qaf 22)
feJT

Ui.lSo IdjJfc

QoS'

ulj ^

And: "Is this then a fake, or is it you that do not see? Burn you therein: The
same is it to you whether you bear it with patience, or not: You but receive the
recompense of your (own) deeds." (At-Tur 15-16)

4
To those Allah Almighty refers in His statement: “but something will
confront them from Allah, which they could never have counted upon!” (AzZumar 47)

Wonder at us and we are fronted with all those wonders and marvels from
Allah AJmighty, of which we are heedless, and rather engaged in our worldly
benefits, pleasures and delights, although we are going to inevitably leave it
entirely. But where is he from among us to whom the Holy Spirit might say the
same as he said to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him": “Love whomever you like for you would inevitably leave him, and live as
you like, for you would necessarily die, and work as you please, for you would be
rewarded for it.” No doubt, when this fact was revealed to him by the certainty of
faith, he was like a wayfarer in this world: He neither placed a rick over another,
nor a pipe over another (in building), nor left a Dinar nor a Dirham after him,
nor took a beloved, nor an intimate friend. It is true that he "peace be upon him"
said: “Were I to take an intimate friend, I would have taken Abu Bakr as my
intimate friend, but your companion (i.e. himself) is the intimate of (Allah) the
Most Gracious.” He thus showed that the intimate friendship with Allah, the
Most Gracious filled his heart and left in it no place for any other relation.
He further said to his Ummah (as commanded by Allah to tell them): "If you
do love Allah, follow me: Allah will love you and forgive you your sins; for Allah
is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful." (A1 Imran 31)

His Ummah consists of those who follow him, and none follows him but
such as turns away from this world with its benefits and delights, and rather
devotes himself wholeheartedly to the hereafter. He never called but to Allah and
the Last Day, nor diverted but from the world and its transitory fortunes. As
much as you turn away from this world and devote yourself to the hereafter, you
then follow his way; and as much as you follow his way, you imitate him; and as

Book teniremembrance of Death and hereafter life
705
much as you imitate him, you then become a member of his Ummah, and vice
versa: as much as you devote yourself to this world and turn away from the
hereafter, you deviate from his way, and does not imitate him, and rather join
those in whom Allah Almighty said: “Then, for such as had transgressed all
bounds, And had preferred the life of this world, the Abode will be Hen-Fire.”
(An-Nazi’at 37-39)

:«

jLjT^^Toii >
And: “Shall We then treat the People of Faith like the People of Sin? What is
the matter with you? How judge you?” (Al-Qalam 35-36)

II
I

4 Cjp) o1 ^
Now let’s return to our topic, i.e. the role of vision in revealing the states of
the dead in their graves. Indeed, Prophethood was over, and nothing remained
thereof but the news givers, i.e. the visions. Now, we are going to make a
mention of some visions that reveal the states of the dead.
Explication Of Visions That Uncover The States Of The Dead And
The Deeds That Benefit In The Hereafter
A mention may be made here of the vision of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" who said: “Whoever sees me in his dream has
really seen me, for Satan could not seem in my form.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim
on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him" said: I saw the Messenger
of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" in a dream and he did not look
at me. I asked him: “O Messenger of Allah! What is wrong with me?” He "peace
be upon him" turned to me and said: “Are you not the one who kissed (your
wife) while you were fasting?” He then said: <fBy Him in Whose Hand is my soul,
I would never kiss any woman while I am fasting.”
Al-Abbas "Allah be pleased with him" said: I wished to see Umar Ibn AlKhattab in my dream (after his death), and I saw him just at the end of the year. I
saw him wiping sweat off his forehead and saying: “It is time for my finishing
(from reckoning). My throne was about to be ruined had I not found Him (Allah)
Most Kind, Oft-Merciful.”
Al-Hassan Ibn Ali "Allah be pleased with them" said: Ali said to me: Tonight,
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" appeared to me
in a dream and I said to him: “O Messenger of Allah! I have received from your
Ummah such and such (trouble).” He said to me: ‘Then, invoke evil upon them.”
I said: “O Allah! Recompense me with people better for me than they, and
recompense them with one worse for them than I.” He then came out in the
morning following that night and Ibn NIiljam struck him.
An old man said: I saw the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" in a dream and said to him: “O Messenger of Allah! Pray forgiveness
for me.” But he turned away from me. I said to him: “O Messenger of Allah! It is
reported to us from Sufyan Ibn Uyainah from Muhammad Ibn Al-Munkadir
from Jabir Ibn Abdullah "Allah be pleased with them" that you never said no

:

*
»

The quarter of the saviors
706
about anything you were asked.” On that he turned his face to me and said: “May
Allah forgive for you.” (Muslim).
It is reported on the authority of Al-Abbas Ibn Abd-Al-Muttalib "Allah be
pleased with him" that he said: Abu Lahab is my brother. When he died and
Allah Almighty told about him what He had told, I grieved for him, and his
matter concerned me so much. I kept asking Allah Almighty for a year to let me
see him in a dream. Then, I saw him in flames. I asked him about his state and he
told me: ccl was led to punishment in the fire, which is not alleviated from me
except on the night of every Monday.” I asked him about the reason for that and
he said: “On that night, Muhammad "peace be upon him" was born, and
Umaimah came and gave me the glad tidings of his birth, thereupon, out of my
joyfulness and cheerfulness of him, I emancipated a slave-girl belonging to me.
Allah then rewarded me for that by alleviating from me the punishment on the
night of every Monday.”
Abd-Al-Wahid Ibn Zaid said: I set out as a pilgrim in the company of an old
man who used not to do anything but that he would invoke prayer upon the
Prophet "peace be upon him". I asked him about that and he said: “Let me tell
you about the reason for that. I set out to Mecca in the company of my father
and when we went to spend the night in a certain place, I fell asleep. While I was
sleeping, somebody came to me (in a dream) and said to me: “Get up: Allah has
caused your father to die and blackened his face.” I got up as scared and removed
the dress from the face of my father and behold! He was dead with his face black.
I was frightened because of that. Being in such anxiety, slumber overtook me and
while I was sleeping I saw (in a dream) by the head of my father four black men
having pillars of iron. Then, a good-looking man putting on two green garments
came and asked them to move away, and then wiped his face with his hand. Then
he came to me and said: “Get up, for Allah has whitened the face of your father.”
I asked him: “Who are you, let my father and mother be sacrificed for you?” he
said: “I am Muhammad.” Then, I got up and removed the dress from the face of
my father and behold! It was white. From that time on, I have never left invoking
prayer upon the Messenger of AJlah "AJlah's blessing and peace be upon him".”
Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz said: I saw the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him", and Abu Bakr and Umar "Allah be pleased with them"
were sitting with him. I greeted them with peace and sat with them. Then, while I
was sitting, both Ali and Mu’awiyah were brought and admitted to a house and
the door was closed on them. Very soon, Ali "AJlah be pleased with him" came
out saying: “He gave his judgement in my favor, by the Lord of the Ka’bah.” A
short while later, Mu’awiyah came out saying: “He has pardoned me, by the Lord
of the Ka’bah. >»>
One day, Ibn Abbas "AJlah be pleased with them" got up from his sleep and
said: “We all belong to AJlah, and to Him we shall return. Al-Hussain has been
killed.” That was before his killing. But his companions disapproved that
statement from him. On that he said: “I saw (in a dream) the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" having a botde of blood and
said to me: “Do you not know what those of my Ummah have done after me?

Book temremembrance of Death and hereafter life
707
They killed my son Al-Hussain, and that is his blood and the blood of his
companions (who were killed with him), and I raise it to Allah Almighty.”
Twenty-four days later, the news reached that Al-Hussain was killed on the very
day he (Ibn Abbas) saw him.
Abu Ja’far As-Saidalani said: I saw the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" in a dream surrounded by a group of poor persons.
While we were as such, the sky split open and two angels descended, one having
a tube and the other a jug. The tube was placed in front of the Messenger of
Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and he washed his hand from it.
then, he ordered that his companions should wash theirs. Then, the tube was
placed in front of me and one of them (the angels) said to the other: “Do not
pour water over his hand, for he does not belong to them.” I said: “O Messenger
of Allah! Is it not reported from you that you said: ‘The man would be gathered
in the company of whomever he loves?” He answered in the affirmative,
thereupon I said: “O Messenger of Allah! I then love you and love those poor
persons.” On that he "peace be upon him" said (to the angel): “Pour water over
his hand, for he belongs to them.”
Once Mujammi was seen in a dream and asked: “How have you seen the
matter?” He said: “I have seen that the abstinent from this world have taken away
(apart from the rich and wealthy) the good of the world and the hereafter.”
!

According to Muhammad Ibn Wasi’: “The vision pleases and deceives not the
faithful believer.”
Zurarah Ibn Abu Awfa was asked in a dream: “Which deed is the best with
you?” he said: “Both contentment and short hope.”
According to Sufyan Ibn Uyainah: I saw my brother in a dream and asked
him: “What has Allah Almighty done with you?” He said: “He forgave for me
every sin I asked Him to forgive it for me, and did not forgive for me any sin I
did not ask Him to forgive it for me.”
According to Ali At-Talhi: I saw in a dream a woman that does not resemble
the women of this world. I asked her: “Who are you?” She said: “A houn.” I said
to her: “I like to marry you.” She said: “Demand my hand first from my master,
and then give my dower.” I asked her: “What is your dower?” she said: ‘To
prevent the self from its evils.”
According to Al-Kittani: I saw Al-Junaid in a dream and asked him: “What
has Allah Almighty done with you?” He said: “All those euphoric words and
short phrases vanished, and we got only the reward of two rak’ahs we used to
pray at night.”
Zubaidah (the wife of Haron Ar-Rashid) was seen in a dream and asked:
“What has Allah done with you?” She said: “He has forgiven for me by virtue of
those four expressions: There is none worthy of worship except for Allah,
therewith I consume my lifetime; There is none worthy of worship except for
Allah, therewith I enter my grave; There is none worthy of worship except for
Allah, therewith I become in seclusion; There is none worthy of worship except
for Allah, therewith I meet my Lord Almighty/”

The quarter of the saviors

708

Part two:
STATES OF THE DEAD FROM THE SOUNDING OF THE TRUMPET
TO THE ABIDANCE EITHER IN PARADISE OR IN HELL; AND ITS
RELATED TERRORS AND RISKS
It contains the following chapters:
Explication of the sounding of the trumpet
Account of the mustering land and its inhabitants
Account of the duration of the Day of Resurrection
Account of the Day of Judgement, its terrors and names
Account of interrogation about sins
Account of the balance of deeds
Account of foes and opponents
Account of Sirat (bridge held over Hell)
Account of intercession
Account of the Fountain
Account of Hell, its denizens, terrors, chains, and serpents
Account of Paradise, its bliss, number of its gardens, gates, mansions, walls,
rivers, trees, clothes and thrones of its inhabitants
Account of houris and youth
Account of looking at the Countenance of Allah Almighty
A chapter on the extensive mercy of Allah Almighty, therewith the book is
concluded, Allah willing

CHAPTER ONE
EXPLICATION OF THE SOUNDING OF THE TRUMPET
You have already learnt the great terrors and risks a dead receives after death.
But the greatest and the most severe of them all is the sounding of the trumpet,
resurrection on the Day of Judgement, presentation before the Lord Almighty for
reckoning, questioning about deeds, be they significant or insignificant, the
establishment of the balance of deeds, crossing the path that is held over the
Hell, and expectation for the call when cases are decided, either for happiness or
for wretchedness. You have to know all of those states, and have faith in them
entirely, and engage in long meditation in them in order to stimulate within your
heart the necessary motives to get ready for them.
But unfortunately, most people do not have faith in the Last Day from the
depth of their hearts. That is confirmed evidently by their seriousness in getting
ready for the hot summer and cold winter, and negligence of the scorching heat
of Hell, along with the related difficulties and terrors. More amazing, if they are
asked about the Last Day, they would talk about it only with their tongue, while
their hearts remain heedless of it. However, to belie a thing with the deed is more
effective than to belie it with the tongue.
In confirmation of that, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" said: Allah Almighty says: “The son of Adam abuses Me, and it is
not fitting for him to abuse Me; and he further belies Me, and it is not fitting for

?

\

I

Book tenrremembrance of Death and hereafter life
709
him to belie Me at all. As for his abuse, it is his statement that I have a child. As
for his belying, it is his statement that I would not recreate him once again as I
created him at first.” (Al-Bukhari on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
However, man’s weak faith and absence of certainty in the Last day and
resurrection goes back to his lack of understanding of those things that are
beyond the reach of his mind on the one hand, and inability to imagine that such
a thing would come on the other hand. If man does not witness with his own eye
how animals are born from each other in a reproductive operation and, at the
same time, it is said to him that from a sperm-drop a human rational speaking
discerning being is produced, of a surety, he would not be able to give trust, and
even imagine that. For this reason, Allah Almighty says: “Does not man see that
it is We Who created him from sperm? Yet behold! he (stands forth) as an open
adversary!” (Ya Sin 77)
ok-*

{

li

jjji ^

And: “Does Man think that he will be left uncontrolled, (without purpose)?
Was he not a drop of sperm emitted (in lowly form)? Then did he become a
clinging clot; then did (Allah) make and fashion (him) in due proportion. And of
him He made two sexes, male and female. Has not He, (the same), the power to
give life to the dead?” (Al-Qiyamah 36-40)
I

|J|'pi

^^J— iljo o'

^

i o up*

jPm vUJ’S jj'f 0
J3The wonders of creation for the first time are more excellent than those in
the recreation once again. Then, how does one deny that resurrection? If your
faith in this fact is weak, then, strengthen your faith by considering the wonders
of the first creation, for the other creation is like, if not easier than it. If your
faith, therefore, is strong enough, then, engage in meditation of the terrors and
risks related to that other creation, in order to deprive of your heart comfort and
calmness, and stimulate you to get ready for the presentation before the Lord
Almighty.
The first thing to meditate in is that which is to hit the ears of the inhabitants
of the graves, i.e. the strong sounding of the trumpet, for it is only a single blast,
by which the graves split open for the dead to come forth in crowds, all at once,
covered with the dust of the earth from the top to the bottom, overwhelmed by
anxiety, worry and terror, in expectation for what would come to be. In this
respect, Allah Almighty says: “The Trumpet will (just) be sounded, when ail that
are in the heavens and on earth will swoon, except such as it will please Allah (to
exempt). Then will a second one be sounded, when, behold, they will be standing
and looking on!” (Az-Zumar 68)

tSji cST ;ii J* *3j

T&3 c/y-^T J o* <3^

J ^3 >

And: “Finally, when the Trumpet is sounded, That will be - that Day - a Day
of Distress, Far from easy for those without Faith.” (Al-Muddaththir 8-10)

1

, I

The quarter of the saviors

710
4

J*

^*y-

[0 jjjlilt £ 'j£i liji ^

And: Further, they say, "When will this promise (come to pass), if what you
say is true?” They will not (have to) wait for aught but a single Blast: it will seize
them while they are yet disputing among themselves! No (chance) will they then
have, by will, to dispose (of their affairs), nor to return to their own people! The
trumpet shall be sounded, when behold! from the sepulchres (men) will rush
forth to their Lord! They will say: "Ah! woe unto us! who has raised us up from
our beds of repose?" (a voice will say:) "This is what (Allah) Most Gracious had
promised, and true was the word of the Messengers!” It will be no more than a
single Blast, when lo! they will all be brought up before Us!” (Ya Sin 48-53)
JJy 13 5 Jj>- '3

j I OjU ^25

Cr? (>-*

({?})

(3

1 wLPj U I JlL

4

1^'-Vl

Oj

* I La [j-»

^

jUfUI l}\ % Kyy Oj^ CjJ Oy*^^'
LiL ^ \SSSy> IjJli ((|j
J

*5j C-jL^=» Oj

jLyj

JJ vt-’l L»- VI
J_»lLr«J I

If there is nothing ahead of the dead but the great terror of that sounding of
the trumpet, it should be sufficient for them to safeguard themselves from its
terrors. It is a sounding and a blast, so strong that because of which all the
inhabitants of the heavens and the earth and what is in between them would
swoon, i.e. die, except for such as Allah Almighty wills, i.e. some angels.
In confirmation of that, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" said: “How should I be blessed and the one to whom the trumpet
is entrusted has picked up the trumpet in his mouth, inclined his forehead, and
paid his attention in expectation for the moment he is commanded to sound it?”
(At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu Sa’id).
According to Muqatil, Israfil "peace be upon him" is placing his mouth on
the trumpet, whose circle-shaped opening is as wide as is the heavens and the
earth, and fixing his sight towards the Throne (of Majesty), in expectation for
the very moment he would be ordered to blow the first blow. Once he blows
it, all in the heavens and the earth and what in between them would swoon
immediately, out of the great terror and horror, except such of angels as Allah
Almighty wills, and I mean here Gabriel, Michael, Israfil and the angel of death
"peace be upon them". Then, He Almighty would command the angel of death
to take up the souls of Gabriel, then Michael, then Israfil, and then order the
angel of death to die.
The creatures would spend forty years in the Barzakh following the first blow,
after which Allah Almighty would bring Israfil "peace be upon him" to life, and
command him to blow the trumpet the second blow, and that is the significance
of His statement: “Then will a second one be sounded, when, behold, they will be
standing and looking on!” (Az-Zumar 68)
I ip C$p-1

pp p -5m ill p. Vj

j Cj*')

J Cr*

J,

>

I

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
711
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
From the time the one to whom the trumpet is entrusted was created, he has
been placing it before his mouth while moving forward a foot and backward
another, in expectation for the very moment he would be commanded to blow it.
behold! Safeguard yourselves from (the terror of) that blow.”
So, meditate in the creatures and how they would be put to humiliation,
submission and meekness at the time they would be raised, for fear of that swoon
and in expectation for what would be decreed upon them of happiness and
wretchedness. If you are in this world from among the rich and wealthy, you
should know that the kings of the earth on that day would be the most
humiliated, the most submissive, and the most despicable from among all the
people. At that time, the wild animals would come forth in crowds from every
direction and mix with the people, in humiliation out of terror of the Day of
Resurrection, with no sin they have committed, except that they would be
gathered out of the severity of the swoon and the terror of the blow. That is the
significance of His statement: “When the wild beasts are herded together (in
human habitations).” (At-Takwir 5)

4^
Then, the devils who were rebellious would come in humiliation and
submission, out of the terror of the presentation before Allah Almighty, in
confirmation of the statement of Allah Almighty: “So, by your Lord, without
doubt, We shall gather them together, and (also) the Evil Ones (with them); then
shall We bring them forth on their knees round about Hell.” (Maryam 68)
4©

cJ>“

^ OiIJ j<lXp's* )

CHAPTER TWO
ACCOUNT OF THE MUSTERING LAND AND ITS INHABITANTS
Consider then how, after resurrection, they would be driven, naked and
barefooted, to the land of mustering, which is plain, soft white, in which there
would be no crookedness nor curving, nor a hill behind which anyone might hide
himself, nor a lowness in which anyone might disappear from the sights of
others: on the contrary, it is a very plain land to which they would be driven in
crowds. Exalted be He Who would gather all the creatures, in their difference,
from all directions and sides of the earth, by both the first and the second blow.
It is then fitting for such hearts, on that day, to be fearful and for those sights to
be submissive.
In this respect, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “On the Day of Judgement, all the people would be mustered together
on a white plain soft land like a pure loaf, in which there would be no building
for anyone to hide himself therein.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of
Sahl Ibn Sa’d).
Think not that this land would be like that of the world: they only share in the
name. in confirmation of that, Allah Almighty says: “One day the Earth will be
changed to a different Earth, and so will be the Heavens, and (men) will be

The quarter of the saviors
712
marshalled forth, before Allah, the One, the Irresistible.” (Ibrahim 48)
4 (@)*5) ijjyj

J J^3 ^ ^

According to Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them" in his comment on
it: “It would change in size and shape, and have no trees nor mountains, nor
valleys nor rivers, and be extended and made spacious: A white soft land like
silver on which no blood has ever been shed, nor a mistake ever been
committed. As for the sky, its sun, stars moon, and all celesdal bodies would
disappear.
Consider, O poor, the terror of that day. If all the people gather together on
that plain land, the stars over them would scatter about, the sun would
disappear, leading to deep darkness. Such being the case, the sky would turn from
over their heads and rent asunder, given its strength and thickness, as much as is
equal to a five-hundred journey, and the angels standing on its edges and sides:
How terrible would the sound of its splitting be on your ear, and how awful is the
day on which the sky would rent asunder, and crumble and go to pieces like
melted silver. On that day, the sky would be like melted brass, people like moths
scattered about, and mountains like carded wool, naked and barefooted. In
confirmation of that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “The people will be gathered barefooted, naked, and uncircumcised,
sunk in their sweat up to their earlobes." Sawdah "Allah be pleased with her" the
narrator of the Hadith said: I said: “O Allah's Aposde! Will the men and the
women look at each other?" He said: “The situation will be too hard for them to
pay attention to that." (Ath-Tha’alibi and Al-Baghawi; and Al-Bukhari and
Muslim on the authority of A’ishah "Allah be pleased with her"). How great is a
day on which people would be raised as naked and barefooted! But even, none of
them would have the power to look at the other.
Furthermore, some of them would be raised walking on their faces, without
being able to turn their faces. In confirmation of that, it is reported on the
authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him" that he said: the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “On the Day
of Judgement, the people would be raised and be of three divisions: Some would
be riding, others walking on foot, and others prone on their faces.” A man said:
“O Messenger of Allah! How should they be able to walk prone on their faces?”
he "peace be upon him" said: “He, Who enabled them to walk on foot has the
power to make them walk prone on their faces.” (At-Tirmidhi; and Al-Bukhari
and Muslim on the authority of Anas).
But mankind, by nature, denies what he sees and imagines not. Had he not
seen the serpent walking on its abdomen, he would not have been able to imagine
there are beings walking on other organs than the feet, and so on. So, beware of
denying anything of the wonders of the Day of Judgement just depending on its
difference and unfamiliarity in comparison with the things of this world. Indeed,
had you not seen the wonders in this world, and they had been offered to you
before you saw them, you would hasten to deny them.

Concerning The Sweat
Remember in this respect the extremely big crowd in the mustering land of

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
713
the creatures from the seven heavens and the earths, and what between them,
from the first to the last generations of creation. Then, the sun would rise upon
them with its scorching heat multiplied many times, and be brought at a distance
of but two bow-lengths or (even) nearer to the heads of the people. There would
be then no shade on the land other than the shade of the Lord of the worlds,
therewith none would shade himself but those made near to Him. Then, the
creatures would thrust each other, forced by throng and scorching heat, and
shyness of being put to scandal and shame, at the time of presentation before the
Compeller of the heavens and the earth. From the combination of the blaze of
sun, the scorching heat of breaths, and the hearts burning with the fire of shyness
and fear, sweat would flood from the root of each hair until it would flow on the
plain ground of resurrection and rise up to their bodies, each according to
his/her posidon and status with Allah Almighty: Some up to their knees, others
to their waists, others to their breasts, and others to their earlobes, and so on.
In confirmation of that, it is reported on the authority of Ibn Umar "Allah be
pleased with them" that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: “It is the Day on which the people would stand to the
Lord of the worlds, until anyone of them would sink in his sweat up to the half
of his earlobes.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim).
It is further reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “On the Day of Judgement, the people would sweat so much that their
perspiration would flow on the ground as much as seventy cubits, in which they
would sink up to their chins.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim).
According to another narration, the Prophet "peace be upon him" said: “They
would keep standing, with their eyes fixedly staring up to the sky as long as forty
years, until they would sink in their sweat out of their severe distress.” (Ibn Adi
on the authority of Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased with him").
It is reported on the authority of Uqbah Ibn Amir "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: The Prophet "peace be upon him", said: “On the Day of
Judgement, the sun would come close to the earth so much that the people
would sweat (each according to his status): Some up to their heels, others up to
the half of their legs, others up to their knees, others up to their thighs, others up
to their waists, others up to their mouths where (beckoning with his hand) it
would rein them, and others would be entirely covered by sweat.” He struck with
his hand over his head as such. (Ahmad).
Think, O poor, about that severe sweat and hard suffering of the people
of resurrection to the extent that one might invoke: “O Lord! Relieve me of
that distress and waiting even if it is to lead me to the fire of Hell!” so far, the
reckoning has not started yet. You would be one of those and you do not
know to which extent you would sink in sweat. You should know that every
sweat you have not sweated because of your trouble in the Cause of Allah
Almighty, through Hajj, Jihad, prayer, fasting, standing (at night for
supererogatory prayer), fulfilling the needs of Muslims, enduring the difficulty
of enjoining what is right and forbidding what is evil, you would sweat it

f

f

!

The quarter of the saviors
714
because of shyness and fear on the Day of Judgement. Were mankind to be
safe from ignorance and haughtiness, he would know that the sweat of trouble
he receives in the acts of worship in this world is very easier and shorter than
the sweat of distress and suffering from the long waiting he would receive in
the hereafter.

CHAPTER THREE

ACCOUNT OF THE DURATION OF THE DAY OF RESURRECTION
Allah Almighty says: “A Day when (all) mankind will stand before the Lord of
the Worlds.” (Al-Mutaffiffin 6)

i0

$

In their comment on that, Ka’b and Qatadah said: “They would keep
standing for three hundred years.”
It is reported on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with
them" that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" recited: “A Day when (all) mankind will stand before the Lord of the
Worlds” and then said: “What do you think if you are gathered by Allah Almighty
in the same way as arrows are gathered in a quiver for fifty thousand years, during
which He would not look at you?” [At-Tabarani).
According to Al-Hassan: “What do you think of a day on which people
would keep standing on their feet for fifty thousand years, during which they
would neither eat nor drink, until when they would be given to severe hunger
and thirst , they would be taken to the fire of Hell to drink from its boiling
hot spring?”
They will suffer such distress and trouble to the extent that they will not be
able to bear or stand. Then the people will say: “Don’t you see what state you
have reached? Won't you look for someone who can intercede for you with your
Lord?” Some people will say to others: “Go to Adam.” So they will go to Adam
and say to him: 4CYou are the father of mankind; Allah created you with His Own
Hand, and breathed into you from His Spirit; and ordered the angels to prostrate
before you; so (please) intercede for us with your Lord. Don't you see in what
state we are? Don't you see what condition we have reached?” Adam will say:
“Today my Lord has become angry as He has never become before, nor will ever
become thereafter. He forbade me (to eat of the fruit of) the tree, but I disobeyed
Him. Myself] Myself] Myself] Go to someone else; go to Noah.” So they will go
to Noah and say (to him): “O Noah! You are the first Messenger sent by Allah to
the people of the earth, and Allah has named you a thankful slave; (please)
intercede for us with your Lord. Don't you see in what state we are? Don’t you
see what condition we have reached?” He will say: “Today my Lord has become
angry as He has never become before, nor will ever become thereafter. I had (in
the world) the right to make one definitely accepted invocation, and I made it
against my nation. Myself] Myself] Myself] Go to someone else; go to Abraham.”
They will go to Abraham and say: “O Abraham! You are Allah's Aposde and His
bosom friend from among the people of the earth; so (please) intercede for us
with your Lord. Don't you see in what state we are? don’t you see what condition

Book tenrremembrance of Death and hereafter life
715
we have reached? He will say to them: “My Lord has today become angry as He
has never become before, nor will ever become thereafter. I had told three lies (in
the world). Myself! Myself! Myself! Go to someone else; go to Moses.” The
people will then go to Moses and say: “O Moses! You are Allah's Aposde and
Allah gave you superiority above the others with this message and with His direct
Talk to you; (please) intercede for us with your Lord. Don't you see in what state
we are? Don’t you see what condition we have reached?” Moses will say: £CMy
Lord has today become angry as He has never become before, nor will ever
become thereafter. 1 killed a person whom I had not been ordered to kill. Myself!
Myself! Myself! Go to someone else; go to Jesus.” So they will go to Jesus and
say: “O Jesus! You are Allah's Aposde and His Word, which He sent to Mary,
and a superior soul created by Him, and you talked to the people while still young
in the cradle. (Please) intercede for us with your Lord. Don't you see in what state
we are? don’t you see what condidon we have reached?” Jesus will say: “My Lord
has today become angry as He has never become before nor will ever become
thereafter.” Jesus will not mention any sin, but will say: “Myself! Myself. Myself.
Go to someone else; go to Muhammad.” So they will come to me and say: “O
Muhammad! You are Allah's Aposde and the last of The Prophets, and Allah
forgave your earlier and later sins. (Please) intercede for us with your Lord. Don't
you see in what state we are? Don’t you see what condition we have reached?"”
The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" added: "Then I will go
beneath Allah's Throne and fall in prostration before my Lord. Then Allah will
guide me to such praises and glorifications to Him as He has never guided
anybody else before me. Then it will be said: “O Muhammad! Raise your head.
Ask, and you will be granted. Intercede and it (your intercession) will be
accepted.”” (Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with
him").
It should be known to you that the more one’s wait in this world for death
out of patience on leaving pleasures and delights, the short his waiting would be
on that day in particular.
In confirmation of that, when the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" was asked about the duration of that day, he said: “By Him
in Whose Hand is my soul, it would be alleviated on the faithful believer (no
matter how long it might be) until it would seem to him easier than the obligatory
written prayer he performs in this world.” (Abu Ya’li and Al-Baihaqi on the
authority of Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri).
So, strive your utmost to be of those faithful believers on whom its
difficulties would be alleviated. As long as you still are living, it is up to you to get
rea dy for that. Work in short days for long ones, if you keep patient for the whole
of your lifetime, say one hundred years on average, in order to rescue yourself
from the trouble of suffering of a day whose duration would be as long as fifty
thousand years, of a surety, you would be a great winner.

CHAPTER FOUR
ACCOUNT OF THE DAY OF JUDGEMENT, ITS TERRORS AND NAMES
Get ready, O poor, with the utmost of your power and capacity, for that Day

:

i

:

t

;

;

'

The quarter of the saviors
716
of Resurrection, that would be very long, and its time has become very close,
although people feel not. It is the day When the Sky is cleft asunder, the Stars are
scattered, the Oceans are suffered to burst forth, the Graves are turned upside
down: (Then) shall each soul know what it has sent forward and (what it has)
kept back. It is the day When the Sky is rent asunder, And hearkens to (the
Command of) its Lord, and it must needs (do so), and the Earth is flattened out,
And casts forth what is within it and becomes (clean) empty, And hearkens to
(the Command of) its Lord, and it must (needs do so): (then will come home the
full Reality). It is a day When the sun (with its spacious light) is folded up, die
stars fall, losing their luster, the mountains vanish (like a mirage), the she-camels,
ten months with young, are left untended, the wild beasts are herded together (in
human habitations), the oceans boil over with a swell, the souls are sorted out,
(being joined, like with like), the female (infant), buried alive, is questioned, For
what crime she was killed, the Scrolls are laid open, the World on High is
unveiled, the Blazing Fire is kindled to fierce heat, And the Garden is brought
near: (Then) shall each soul know what it has put forward.
It is the day When the Earth is shaken to its (utmost) convulsion, And the
Earth throws up her burdens (from within), On that Day will it declare its
tidings: For that your Lord will have given her inspiration. On that Day will
men proceed in companies sorted out, to be shown the Deeds that they (had
done). Then shall anyone who has done an atom's weight of good, see it! And
anyone who has done an atom's weight of evil, shall see it. It is the day when
the earth is moved, and its mountains, and they are crushed to powder at one
stroke, On that Day shall the (Great) Event come to pass, And the sky will be
rent asunder, for it will that Day be flimsy, And the angels will be on its sides,
and eight will, that Day, bear the Throne of your Lord above them. That Day
shall you be brought to Judgment: not an act of yours that you hide will be
hidden. On that day, the mountains would be removed, and you will see the
earth as a level stretch, and all of them shall be gathered , all together, and
none of them will be left.
It is the day when the earth shall be shaken to its depths, And the mountains
shall be crumbled to atoms, Becoming dust scattered abroad. It is a day when
men will be like moths scattered about, And the mountains will be like carded
wool. On that day, every mother giving suck shall forget her suckling babe, and
every pregnant female shall drop her load (unformed): you shall see mankind as
in a drunken riot, yet not drunk: But dreadful will be the Wrath of Allah
Almighty. On that day the Earth will be changed to a different Earth, and so will
be the Heavens, and (men) will be marshalled forth, before Allah, the One, the
Irresistible.
On that day the Mountains will be uprooted and scatter as dust, and be left as
plains smooth and level. Nothing crooked or curved will you see in their place.
On that Day will they follow the Caller (straight): No crookedness (can they
show) him: All sounds shall humble themselves in the Presence of (Allah) Most
Gracious: Nothing shall you hear but the tramp of their feet (as they march). On
that Day shall no intercession avail except for those for whom permission has

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
717
been granted by (Allah) Most Gracious and whose word is acceptable to Him.
On that day, you see the mountains and think them firmly fixed: but they shall
pass away as the clouds pass away. On that day, the sky is rent asunder, and it
becomes red like ointment, whereas no question will be asked of man or Jinn as
to his sin. On that day, every soul will be confronted with all the good it has
done, and all the evil it has done, it will wish there were a great distance between
it and its evil.
It is the day whose mention made hoary the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" when Abu Bakr As-Siddiq "Allah be pleased
with him" asked him: “I see that you have grown hoary O Messenger of Allah
(what is the matter)?” He said: “The (Surah of) Hud and its sisters (in which the
Day of Judgement is mentioned with its terrors) have made me hoary.” (AtTirmidhi and Al-Hakim and rendered Hassan and Sahih).
The Day of Judgement is mentioned in the Quran with different names. But
the lots of names should not divert us from their meanings, since the purpose of
this chapter is just to open the minds to the mysteries and secrets of each one of
them. So, you should be eager to know well their meanings.
It is the Day of judgement, the Day of grief, the Day of regret, the Day of
reckoning, the Day of questioning, the Day of race (to good), the Day of calling
to account, the Day of competition, the Day of earthquake, the Day of
obliteration, the Day of swoon, the Day of reality, the Day of calamity, the Day
of violent commotion, the Day of Overwhelming (Event), the day of resurrection
to come very near, the day of the great event, the day of the devastating (event),
the day of the Deafening Noise, the day of meeting together, the day of
departure, the day of being brought together (to Allah), the day of exacting
retribution, the day of calling each other, the day of punishment, the day of
return (to Allah), the day of deciding the cases, the day of recompense, the day of
flight, the day of abidance, the day of trial, the day of weeping, the day of
mustering, the day of threat, the day of presentation (before the Lord Almighty),
the day of balance, the day of truth, the day of gathering, the day of raising (the
dead), the day of conquest, the day of disgrace. It is also a great day, a difficult
day, a terrible day. It is the day of retribution, the day of certainty, the day of
resurrection, the day of destiny, the day of sounding the trumpet, the day of the
blast, the day of tremble, the day of deterrence, the day of intoxication, the day of
terror, the day of the end of the journey, the day of the fright, the day of shelter,
the day of appointment, the day of the place of return, the day of watching, the
day of anxiety, the day of perspiration, the day of neediness (to Allah), the day of
denial (of each other), the day of splitting, the day of standing, the day of coming
out, the day of eternity, the day of mutual gain and loss.. .to the end of this series
of names.
Woe to all the people in general, and to us, Muslims, from among them in
particular: it is to us, apart from the people, that the chief of Messengers and
Prophets "peace be upon him" was sent, and on him the Holy Book was
revealed, in which Allah Almighty tells us about all those attributes of the Day of
Recompense, and then informs us about our heedlessness saying: Closer and

t

f

t

?

;

;

The quarter of the saviors
718
closer to mankind comes their Reckoning: yet they heed not and they turn away.
Never comes (aught) to them of a renewed Message from their Lord, but they
listen to it as in jest.” (Al-Anbiya 1-2)
X!

£r?

Cr? p$*5^ ^ O &J**j**
^

cj p*J pS-?1-^

^

f*—I

Then, He informs us about the nearness of the Day of Judgement saying:
“The Hour (of Judgment) is nigh, and the moon is cleft asunder. But if they
see a Sign, they turn away, and say, "This is (but) transient magic."” (AlQamar 1-2)

<0 5^

,1 p,

-

Ij*-i oi;

ojj 0, j*jS\

f

The best thing we do is to recite that Qur’an which does not go beyond
our throats, without considering its meanings and warnings. We seek refuge
with Allah form that heedlessness, and ask him to deliver us with His
extensive mercy.

CHAPTER FIVE
ACCOUNT OF INTERROGATION
Think, O poor, after those terrors and frights, about the moment you would
be questioned direcdy by Allah Almighty with no interpreter between you and
Him, about all of your deeds, their significant and insignificant, much and little,
major and minor. While you are in the thick of the distresses and calamities of the
resurrection, behold! Angels of formidable bodies and huge persons would
descend from the openings of the sky, with the command to take hold the
sinners and criminals by their forelocks and drive them to be presented before
Allah the Compeller to question them about their sins.
In this respect, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “Allah Almighty has an angel (whose body is so much huge that) the
distance in between his eyelids is as long as a one hundred-year journey.”
What do you think then about yourself, if you see those angels coming to take
you by your forelock to the standing of presentation? But in spite of their
hugeness, they would be submissive to the terror of that day, feeling the wrath
and anger of Allah Almighty on (the sinners and criminals among) His servants.
When they descend, there would be no Prophet, nor a sincere lover and affirmer
of truth, nor a righteous but that he would fall in prostration to his chin, for fear
he might be intended. That would be the state of the closest among the creatures
to Allah Almighty. Then, what to you think about the disobedient sinners? At
that time, out of the severe terror, some people would hasten to ask those angels:
“Is our Lord among you?” but the angels would be scared by their question, out
of deeming their Creator Almighty far beyond being among them. They would
call: “Exalted be our Lord! It is not consonant with His Majesty to be among us.
But He is going to come after us.”
Then, the angels would stand in a row surrounding the creatures from all
sides, and all of them would have the mark of submission, fear and humiliation.
At that time, Allah Almighty fulfills His statement: “Then shall We question
those to whom Our Message was sent and those by whom We sent it. And verily

Book tenrremembrance of Death and hereafter life
719
We shall recount their whole story with knowledge, for We were never absent (at
any time or place).” (Al-A’raf 6-7)

iO

^^

0

jrjlzJj

J

Jf

>

And: Therefore, by your Lord, We will, of a surety, call them to account, For
all their deeds.” (Al-Hijr 92-93)
4 £|5) Oj^-i iy if iSf- ^

dLjy }>

Then, He Almighty would start with the Messengers and Prophets "peace be
upon them" in confirmation of His statement: “One day will Allah gather the
Messengers together, and ask: "What was the response you received (from men
to your teaching)?" They will say: "We have no knowledge: it is You who know in
full all that is hidden.” (Al-Ma’idah 109)
Jum

^

4 qv£\\Tu'jUp *51Jii

lie.

Jlj)TST♦ >

Then, Noah "peace be upon him" would be invited and asked: “Have you
reported the message?” He would answered in the affirmative. His people would
be invited and asked:”FIas he conveyed to you the message?” they would say:
“No warner has ever come to us.”
Then, Jesus "peace be upon him" would be brought and asked: "O Jesus the
son of Mary! did you say unto men, 'Worship me and my mother as gods in
derogadon of Allah'?" He will say: "Glory to You! never could I say what I had
no right (to say). Had I said such a thing, You wouldst indeed have known it.
You know what is in my heart, though I know not what is in Your. For You
know in full all that is hidden. Never said I to them aught except what You did
command me to say, to wit, 'Worship Allah, my Lord and your Lord'; and I was a
witness over them whilst I dwelt amongst them; when you did take me up you
was the Watcher over them, and You are a witness to all things. If You do punish
them, they are Your servants: if You do forgive them, You are the Exalted in
power, the Wise." (Al-Ma’idah 116-118)
L

Jii 4&T
j ll JLLpI

4$ Jti 3J3 ^
L piu j'uTlc- j_oj

'U’i r&>5 J3 ^^
oJdS^r-

1

oj

^(^^^©V-^TjUlpc-iivib) vIL^L

JZ
f

^

*

<

<J JrJ ^ cJ^ o' jj

^ larr* rP*

^

^3** o)3

J

After long years of waiting and suffering, the angels would come and call the
people one by one to come to be presented before their Lord Almighty. All of
them would tremble in awe of the moment, and some people would wish to be
taken to the fire in order for their evils deeds not to be presented before the
Compeller, and their shame not exposed in front of all the people. Before
questioning, the Light of the Throne (of Majesty) would rise and the whole earth
would then shine by the Light of the Lord Almighty, and every servant would
become certain of the coming of the Compeller to question him, and everyone

The quarter of the saviors
720
would think that it is he alone who would be taken by question.
Then, Allah Almighty would say to Gabriel ’’peace be upon him": “O Gabriel!
Bring the fire of Hell.” He would go to Hell and say to it: “O Hell! Answer the
invitation of your Lord and Creator Almighty.” Then, its keepers would jump and
rush out of anger on the sinners who disobeyed Allah Almighty. That would be
after it has blown out for the first time. When it blows out for the second time,
the people would grow more fearful and scared, thinking they would be seized
and taken to it. Then, when it blows out for the third time, they would fall down
prone on their faces, with their eyes fixedly staring, in expectation for what would
occur to them.
Then, Allah Almighty would turn to the Messengers "peace be upon them"
and ask them: ‘What answer have you received (from your nations)?” At that
moment, the people in general, and the disobedient among them in particular,
would be given to a great terror, to the extent that the parent would flee away
from his child, the brother from his brother, the husband from his wife, and so
on. Then, one by one would be taken and questioned by Allah Almighty about
his deeds, and about what he has done in public and secret.
In this respect, it is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be
pleased with him" that they (the Companions) said: “O Messenger of Allah, will
we be able to see our Lord on the Day of Judgment?” He said: “Do you feel any
difficulty in seeing the sun at noon when there is no cloud over it?” They said:
“No.” He said: “Do you feel any difficulty in seeing the moon on the fourteenth
night when there is no cloud over it?” They said: “No.” Thereupon he said: “By
Allah Who is One in Whose Hand is my life, you will not face any difficulty in
seeing your Lord but only as much as you feel in seeing one of them. Then Allah
would sit in judgment upon the servant and would say: ‘O, so and so, did I not
honour you and make you the chief and provide you the spouse and subdue for
you horses, camels, and afforded you an opportunity to rule over your subjects?’
He would say: Yes.’ It would be said: ‘Did you not think that you would meet
Us?’ He would say: ‘No.’ He (Allah) would say: Well, We forget you as you
forgot Us.’” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim, and the addition is reported by Muslim

only).
Think, O poor, about yourself when you would be questioned as such, and if
you deny, your organs would bear witness against you:
It is narrated on the authority of Anas Ibn Malik "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: We were in the company of The Messenger of Allah "peace
be upon him" when he smiled and said: “Do you know why I have laughed?”
We said: “Allah and His Messenger know best.” Thereupon he said: “It is
because of the (fact that I remembered the) talk which the servant would have
with his Lord (on the Day of judgment). He would say: ‘O My Lord, have you
not guaranteed me protection against injustice?’ He would say: "Yes.’ Then the
servant would say: ‘I do not deem valid any witness against me but my own
self.’ He would say: Well, enough would be the witness of your self against you
and that of the two angels who had been appointed to record your deeds.’ Then
the seal would be set upon his mouth and it would be said to his hands and feet
to speak and they would speak of his deeds. Then the mouth would be made
free to talk, and he would say (to the hands and feet): ‘Be away, let there be

I

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
721
curse of Allah upon you. It was for your safety that I have contended.’”
(Muslim).
We seek refuge with Allah Almighty from being given to disgrace in front of
the people by the witness of our organs against us. But, on the other hand, Allah
Almighty promised to conceal the misdeeds of the faithful believers and
safeguard him from being put to that shame in front of anyone.
In this respect, it is narrated on the authority of Safwan Ibn Muhriz that a
person said to Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with both": How did you hear The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” as saying
something about the private conversation (to be between a servant and his
Lord)?” He said: I heard him say: A believer will be brought to his Lord “Exalted
and Glorified be He ’ on the Day of Resurrecdon and He would place upon him
His veil (of Light) and make him confess his faults and say: ‘Do you recognize
(your faults)?’ He would say: ‘O my Lord, I do recognize (them).’ He (the Lord)
would say: ‘I concealed them for you in the world, and today I forgive them for
you.’ He would then be given the Book containing (the account of his) good
deeds. As far as the non-believers and hypocrites are concerned, there would be
general announcement about them before all creation telling them that these
(people, i.e. non-believers and hypocrites) told a lie about Allah Almighty.”
(Muslim).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “Whoever conceals a defect of a believer on him (in this world), Allah
Almighty would conceal his defect on the Day of Judgement.”
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “There is no servant of you but that he would be questioned by Allah
Almighty with no interpreter nor a veil between them.” (Ibn Adi).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" also said:
“When anyone of you would meet Allah, he will meet Him without an interpreter
between him and Allah to interpret for him, and Allah will say to him: “Didn't I
send a messenger to teach you?” He will say: “Yes.” Allah will say: “Didn't I give
you wealth and do you favors?” He will say: “Yes.” Then he will look to his right
and see nothing but Hell, and look to his left and see nothing but Hell. So, Save
yourself from the (Hell) Fire even with half a date (to be given in charity) and if
you do not find half a date, then with a good pleasant word." (Al-Bukhari on the
authority of Adi Ibn Hatim).
Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased with him" said: “There would be none of you
but that Allah Almighty would meet him alone, in the same way as anyone of you
becomes alone with the moon on the night when it is full. Then He would say to
him: “O mankind! What has deceived you about me? O son of Adam! What have
you done in what you have learnt? O mankind! What answer have you given to
the Messengers? O mankind! Have I not been a watcher over your eyes while
looking therewith at what was unlawful for you? Have I not been a watcher over
your ears..and so on until he counted all his organs.
According to Mujahid: “No foot of a servant would ever move from the
presence of Allah Almighty until he is questioned about four things: His lifetime:
In which thing he has consumed it; his knowledge: what he has done with it; his
property: from which sources he has earned it, and in which things he has spent

<=
<-

F
<_

'<=

r=
✓

i!

?

Ir*.
.
*

!

722
The quarter of the saviors
it; and his body: In which he has udlized it”; (and according to another version
“and about his youth: in which he has exhausted it”).

CHAPTER SIX
ACCOUNT OF THE BALANCE (OF DEEDS)
While you are in meditation, do not be heedless of the balance of deeds and
acts, and how the records would scatter about in order for the people to receive,
some in their right hands and others in their left hands. That is because after
reckoning, the people would be divided into three: Some would have no good
deeds at all: Then, a black neck would come out of the fire and pick them up in
the same way as a bird picks up grains and then throw them into the fire, which
would swallow them, and they would be addressed: “Let you be in wretchedness
after which you would receive no happiness.”
The second division are those who would have no misdeeds, thereupon they
would be addressed: “Let those who praise Allah in whichever state they are
stand!” they would stand and be driven to Paradise; and the same would be done
to those who stand at night (for supererogatory prayers), and then with those
whom neither trade nor transaction in this world divert from the remembrance of
Allah Almighty. They would be addressed: “Let you be in happiness after which
you would experience no wretchedness.”
The third division, which constitutes the majority of people, stands for those
who mix a good deed with a misdeed. Although it is perfectly known to Allah
Almighty which of their good deeds or misdeeds prevail over the other, but He
Almighty would like to let them know that, in order that they would learn His
great favor upon them should He forgive for them, and His justice should He
punish them. At that time, the records would scatter about, containing both good
deeds and misdeeds, and the balance would be set up. The sights would remain
fixedly staring at the records, as to whom of them would receive his own record
with his right hand, and who with his left hand, and then to the balance beam, as
to the side of the misdeeds or to that of the good deeds it would incline. That is a
state in which people would become reckless and lose their minds.
It is narrated on the authority of Al-Hassan from A’ishah "Allah be pleased
with her" that once the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" placed his head in her lap and then fell asleep. Then, she remembered the
hereafter thereupon she went on weeping so much that her tears flowed and
dropped on his cheek. The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" got up and asked her: “What does cause you to weep O A’ishah?” She
said: “I remembered the hereafter thereupon I went on weeping: will you
remember your families on the Day of Judgement?” The Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “There are three positions, at
which no one of the people will remember but himself: when the weighing scale
of deeds are set up until he knows whether his balance of good deeds will be light
or heavy; on receiving the record (of deeds), when one will say: "Ah here! Read ye
my Record!” until he knows the place of his record, and whether he will receive it
with his right or left hand, or from his back; and on Sirat (placing the bridge over
Hell).” (Abu Dawud).

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
723
ItJs reported on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said. On the Day of Judgement, the son of Adam would be brought and made
to stand between both weighing scales, and an angel would be entrusted to him.
If the scale of his good deeds is too heavy to overweigh, the angel would call so
loudly that all the people would hear him: “So and so, son of Adam has become
haPPy> a^ter which he would receive no wretchedness.” But if it is too light to
overweigh, he would call so loudly that all the people would hear him: “So and
so, son of Adam has become wretched, after which he would receive no
happiness, when scales of good deeds are light, the angels of punishment would
come having rods of iron and wearing dresses of fire, and take the portion
doomed to the fire into the fire of Hell.”
It is further narrated on the authority of Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri "Allah be
pleased with him" that he said: The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: "Allah will say (on the Day of Judgement): “O Adam!” Adam will
reply: “Yes, I am responding to your call, and all goodness be in Your Hand.”
Allah will say: “Bring out the people of the fire.” Adam will say: “O Allah! How
many are the people of the Fire?” Allah will reply: “From every one thousand,
take out nine-hundred-and ninety-nine.” At that time children will become hoaryheaded, every pregnant female will have a miscarriage, and one will see mankind
as drunken, yet they will not be drunken, but dreadful will be the Wrath of
Allah.” The companions of The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" asked: "O Allah's Aposde! Who is that (excluded) one?" He said: "Rejoice
with glad tidings; one person will be (selected to enter Paradise) from you and
one-thousand will be (selected to enter the Hell fire) from Gog and Magog.”
The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further said: "By
Him, in Whose Hands my life is, I hope that you will be one-fourth of the
people of Paradise.” We praised and magnified Allah. He added: "By Him, in
Whose hand my life is! I hope that you will be one-third of the people of
Paradise.” We praised and magnified Allah. He said: "By Him, in Whose hand
my life is! I hope that you will be half the people of Paradise.” We praised and
magnified Allah. He further said: "The example of you (Muslims compared in
number) with the other nations (of non-Muslims) is like a white hair in the
skin of a black ox, or like a round hairless spot on the foreleg of a donkey.”
(Al-Bukhari and Muslim).

CHAPTER SEVEN
ACCOUNT OF FOES AND REMOVAL OF INJUSTICES
Now, you have come to know the terror and danger of the balance, and how
the eyes would keep fixedly staring to the balance beam in order to see to which
direction it would incline: Then, he whose balance (of good deeds) will be
(found) heavy, Will be in a Life of good pleasure and satisfaction, But he whose
balance (of good deeds) will be (found) light, Will have his home in a bottomless
Pit, which is a Fire blazing fiercely.
It should be known to you that none would be saved from the balance of
deeds but he who accounted himself in this world, and weighed his acts and
deeds on the measure of Sharia. Umar "Allah be pleased with him" said: “Reckon

The quarter of the saviors
724
yourself (in this world) before you would be reckoned (in the hereafter), and
weigh your deeds before they would be weighed.”
To reckon oneself is to turn to Allah in sincere repentance before death and
give up all sins and crimes he did, to complete what he indulged in concerning
the obligatory deeds, to give back all injustices he committed, and seek clearance
from everyone whom he harmed or abused, until when he dies, there would
remain no injustice nor an obligato^ duty due on him: such would enter Paradise
without reckoning, unlike him who dies before giving back the injustices: in
which case he would be encircled by his foes who would demand their rights
from him. Such being the case, and you are unable to avert them from yourself,
as you used to do in this world, behold! Allah the Compeller would call
publicly: “Today, every soul would be recompensed with that which it earned,
and there would be no injustice.” At that time, you would get so much
frightened, and recall what Allah Almighty said to you on the tongue of His
Messenger "peace be upon him": “Think not that Allah does not heed the deeds
of those who do wrong. He but gives them respite against a Day when the eyes
will fixedly stare in horror. They are running forward with necks outstretched,
their heads uplifted, their gaze returning not towards them, and their hearts a
(gaping) void! So warn mankind of the Day when the Wrath will reach them:
then will the wrong-doers say: "Our Lord! respite us (if only) for a short Term:
We will answer Your Call, and follow the Messengers!" "What! were you not
wont to swear aforetime that you should suffer no decline?”” (Ibrahim 42-44)

JljJo*
Then, your deeds which you troubled yourself and strove your utmost to do
along your lifetime would be taken from you and given to your foes in
recompense for their rights they have on you.
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: The Messenger of Allah "peace be upon him" said: "Do you know
who is the bankrupt?” They said: "The bankrupt among us is one who has
neither money with him nor any property." He said: "The real bankrupt of my
Ummah would be he who would come on the Day of Resurrection with prayer,
fasting and charity, (but he will find himself bankrupt on that day as he will have
exhausted the good deeds) because he reviled others, brought calumny against
others, unlawfully devoured the wealth of others, shed die blood of others and
beat others; so his good deeds would be credited to the account of those (who
suffered at his hand). If his good deeds fall short to clear the account, their sins
would be entered in his account and he would be thrown in the (Hell) Fire.”

("(Muslim).
Consider then your situation on that day. You could hardly find a good deed
to remain pure for you from the evil of showing off, and even if you could find it,
your foes would hasten to take it in fulfillment of their rights on you. How
should you hope for salvation from all injustices you have committed during your
entire life only on one day on which even the hornless would exact retribution

Book temremembrance of Death and hereafter life
725
from the horned of sheep?
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Dharr "Allah be pleased with him" that
once the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” saw two
sheep goring each other, thereupon he said: “O Abu Dharr! Do you know for
which reason those are goring each other?” I said: “No.” on that he said: “But
Allah Almighty knows well and He will judge between them on the Day of
Judgement.” (Ahmad).
In his comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: “There is not
an animal (that lives) on the earth, nor a being that flies on its wings, but (forms
part of) communities like you. Nothing have We omitted from the Book, and
they (all) shall be gathered to their Lord in the end” (Al-An’am 38)

r-

*

r

t

4©

Jl

Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him" said: “All creatures would be
mustered, all together on the Day of Judgement, and it would be out of perfect
justice of Allah Almighty that the hornless would be enabled to exact retribution
from the horned one, after which He would command all to turn into dust. That
would be at the very moment the disbeliever would say: “Would that I become
dust!”
So, beware, O poor, of the day on which you would find your good deeds
omitted from your record, and when you ask about that, you would be told that
they have gone to your foes whom you wronged in this world. You would also
find in your record misdeeds which you have never committed, and others which
you strove your utmost to avoid and avert from yourself, and when you ask about
them, you would be told that those belong to your foes whom you oppressed in
the world, and since your good deeds fall short of recompense, their misdeeds
have been transferred to your account.
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased with him" that
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “Indeed,
Satan has despaired that idols be worshipped in the Arab Peninsula. But
meanwhile, he has been satisfied from you with what is less than that, i.e. only the
trivial sins, which are destructives. So, safeguard yourselves from injustice as
much as you could. Indeed, the servant might come on the Day of Judgement
with acts of worship as much as mountains, thinking they would deliver him
(from punishment). But the servants continue to come upon him in succession:
One saying: ‘O Lord! So and so has committed an injustice against me’,
thereupon Allah would say: “Omit from his good deeds’, and so on until nothing
of his good deeds would remain for him. The example of such is like a group of
travelers who descended in a desert, and they had no fire wood with them. They
scattered about and collected fire wood and then kindled a great fire, and did
what they liked to do.” (Ahmad and Al-Baihaqi for the last portion; and Muslim
on the authority of Jabir for the first portion).
It is further reported that when the following was revealed: “Truly you will
die (one day), and truly they (too) will die (one day). In die End will you (all), on

i

j

i

1

S'

.

'

The quarter of the saviors
726
the Day of Judgment, setde your disputes in the presence of your Lord.” (AzZumar 30-31)
Az-Zubair "Allah be pleased with him" said: “O Messenger of Allah! Would
our disputes in this world be repeated on us once again in the hereafter?” the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: <fYes, your
disputes would be repeated on you until everyone would take his right that is due
to him.” (Ahmad and At-Tirmidhi).
It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: I heard the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
having said: “On the Day of Judgement, the servants would be mustered by Allah
Almighty as naked and covered with dust, and they would have such and such.”
We asked: tfWhat is such and such?” he "peace be upon him" said: “They would
have nothing. Then, their Lord Almighty would call them with a voice audible to
all of them, be they far or near, saying: “I am the Sovereign! I am the One to
Whom all the creatures owe favor! It is not fitting for anyone among the
inhabitants of Paradise to enter Paradise, nor for anyone among the denizens of
the fire upon whom an injustice is due until I take the legal retribution from him;
and it is not fitting for anyone among the denizens of the fire to enter the fire (of
Hell) nor for anyone among the inhabitants of Paradise, on whom an injustice is
due until I take legal retribution from him.”” We said: “How is that given that we
would come to Allah Almighty as naked and covered with dust?” he "peace be
upon him" said: <cYou would have good deeds and misdeeds.” (Ahmad on the
authority of Ubaidullah Ibn Unais).
So, fear Allah, O servants of Allah, and safeguard yourselves from
committing injustices against the people, by usurpation of their property with no
just cause, dishonoring them, harming them, or ill-treating them. If one has
committed a lot of injustices against others from which he liked to repent, and it
is difficult on him to take clearance from those whom he wronged, let him
increase his good deeds for the day of legal retribution, and do some good deeds
in secret, i.e. between him and Allah Almighty, perchance he would come close to
Allah Almighty, and obtain His kindness and favor which He keeps for such as
forgive others.
It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that while
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" was sitting he
smiled so much that his front teeth were visible. Umar asked him: “What causes
you to weep O Messenger of Allah? Let my father and mother be sacrificed for
you.” He "peace be upon him" said: “Two men of my Ummah knelt in front of
Allah, the Lord of Honor, and one of them said to Him: “O my Lord! Take back
my injustice from my brother.” Allah Almighty said: “Give back your brother his
injustice.” He said: “O Lord! Nothing of his good deeds has remained with him.”
Allah Almighty said to the petitioner: “Then, what do you do and nothing of his
good deeds has remained with him?” he said: “O Lord! Then, let him take some
of my sins.” On that the eyes of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" shed tears and said: “That would be a great day, on which

I

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
727
the people would need that others should take from their sins.” Then, he
resumed: Allah Almighty said to the petitioner: “Raise your head and look at
those gardens. He raised his head and said: “O Lord! 1 see lofty towers of silver
and palaces of gold decked with pearl. For any of the Prophets, affirmers and
lovers of truth or martyrs have those been kept?” Allah said: “For him who
would give Me the price.” The man said: “O Lord! Who could afford for that?”
Allah said: “You have the price of that.” he said: “What is that?” He said: ‘Tour
forgiveness of your brother.” He said: “O Lord! I have forgiven him.” Allah said:
Then, take hold of the hand of your brother and admit him to Paradise.” Then
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “Fear
Allah and mend what is between you, for Allah mends what is between the
believers.” (Ibn Abu Ad-Dunya and Al-Hakim).

l

l

>

CHAPTER EIGHT: ACCOUNT OF SIRAT
Having meditated in all of those terrors and risks, move with your reflection
to the Sirat (the bridge to be held over Hell), in connection with which Allah
Almighty said: “The day We shall gather the righteous to (Allah) Most Gracious,
like a band presented before a king for honours. And We shall drive the sinners
to hell, like thirsty cattle driven down to water, None shall have the power of
intercession, but such a one as has received permission (or promise) from (Allah)
Most Gracious.” (Maryam 85-87)

JJ

©1

JJ

i

1

5

fjH ^

i©
And: "Bring you up," it shall be said, "The wrong-doers and their wives, and
the things they worshipped, Besides Allah, and lead them to the Way to the
(Fierce) Fire! But stop them, for they must be asked.” (As-Saffat 22-24)

i

\
■

’!

i©

,4j

©

Following those terrors, the people would be driven to the bridge that would
be held over Hell, it is a path, sharper than a sword and thinner than a hair. Thus,
whoever stands upright on the straight path in this world, would move easily and
lightly on the bridge that is over Hell in the hereafter; and whoever swerves from
the truth in this world, and overburdens himself with sins and crimes, would
surely stumble with the first step he would take on the bridge of the hereafter.
Consider then your state while being over that bridge, seeing how many
people would fall before and after you down to Hell. What would you do if your
foot slips and your regret profits you not? Of a surety, you would wish you were
not born in this world at all. If you do not believe in that, then, receive the news
of your long stay in the company of the disbelievers in the deepest bottoms of
Hell. If you believe in it, but are heedless of and indulgent in it, and do not get
ready enough for it, then, what a great loss you would have. How should your
faith avail you unless it stimulates you to seek the good pleasure of Allah
Almighty by obeying Him and refraining from disobeying Him? Should you have

I

.
s

The quarter of the saviors
728
ahead of you no risk but that of the Sirat, then, it would suffice you for terror and
horror.
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “The
Sirat (a bridge) will be laid across Hell and I (Muhammad) shall be the first
amongst die Aposdes to cross it with my followers. Nobody except the Aposdes
will then be able to speak and their speech then would be: “O Allah! Save us. O
Allah Save us.” There will be hooks like the thorns of Sa'dan in Hell. Have you
seen the thorns of Sa'dan?” The people said: “Yes." He said: “These hooks will
be like the thorns of Sa'dan, but nobody except Allah knows their greatness in
size and these will entangle the people according to their deeds.” (Al-Bukhari and
Muslim).
It is further narrated on the authority of Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri "Allah be
pleased with him" that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said: “The bridge will be laid across Hell. It is a slippery on
which there are clamps and (Hooks like) a thorny seed that is wide at one side
and narrow at the other and has thorns with bent ends. Such a thorny seed is
found in Najd and is called As-Sa'dan. Some of the believers will cross the bridge
as quickly as the wink of an eye, some others as quick as lightning, a strong wind,
fast horses or she-camels; and some will pass walking, others crawling. So some
will be safe without any harm; some will be safe after receiving some scratches,
and some will fall down into Hell (Fire). The last person will cross by being
dragged (over the bridge). As for the inhabitants of the fire who are doomed to
abide therein forever: They would neither die nor live. Others (from among the
Muslims) would be punished by their sins and mistakes, and burn until they
would turn into coal before permission is given for intercession.” (Al-Bukhari
and Muslim).
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased with him" that
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “Allah
would gather the foremost and the last generations of people for the
appointment on a well-known day. They would keep standing for forty years,
during which their sights would remain fixedly staring towards the sky, in
expectation for the decision of cases...” and he mentioned the Hadith up to the
time the believers would fall in prostration and then said: “Then, He would say to
the believers: ‘Raise your heads.’ They would do accordingly, thereupon He
would give them their light each according to his deeds: One of them would be
given his light as much as a mountain running ahead of him, one would be given
his light less than that, one would be given his light like a date-palm, and one
would be given his light less than that, until the last of them would be given his
light as little as is in proportion to his big toe, which illuminates once and
vanishes once, and whenever it illuminates, he would walk, and whenever it
darkens, he would stop from walking.
They would pass on the bridge according to their light: Some as quickly as the
wink of an eye, some others as quick as lightning, a strong wind, fast horses or
she-camels; and some will pass walking, until the one whose light is as little as in

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
729
proportion to his big toe would pass crawling on his face, legs and hands,
dragging them hardly and with great difficulty, and during his walk, fire would
affect his sides. He would continue as such until he is delivered and once he is
delivered he would stand and say: ‘All perfect praise be to Allah, Who has given
me what He has given none other than me, as He has saved me from it after He
had let me see it. Then, he would be taken to a stream at the gate of Paradise in
order to take bath.” (Ibn Adi and Al-Hakim).
It is further narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: I heard the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" saying: “The Sirat is as sharp as a sword or a hair. Verily, the angels would
rescue believing men and women; and Gabriel "peace be upon him" would keep
taking hold of me while I would be saying: “O Lord! Save us! Save us!” on that
day, these who would slip, from among men and women, would be a lot.” (AlBaihaqi and Ahmad).
The longer and deeper one meditates in the terrors of that Sirat in this world,
the closer he would be to salvation in the hereafter. To be sure, Allah never
combines two fears over a servant: whoever fears those terrors in this world
would be safe from them in the hereafter. By fear, I do not mean to weep once
you hear about it and soon forget it. But whoever fears a thing should necessarily
flee away from it, and whoever wishes for a thing should petition it. so, nothing
saves you but the fear that prevents you from disobedience of Allah Almighty,
and stimulates you to obey Him as much as is within your capacity.
If you fail to be sincere in your fear, then, at least, be sincere in your love for
the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him", eagerness to
honor his Sunan, longing for observing the hearts of the righteous among his
Ummah, and seeking blessing with their invocations, perchance you would get a
share of his or their intercession and be saved by its virtue.

CHAPTER NINE: ACCOUNT OF INTERCESSION
It should be known to you that if fire has become due on some people, from
among Muslims, Allah Almighty might accept intercession for them from the
Prophets and sincere lovers and affirmers of truth, and even the intercession of
the righteous and religious scholars among their people. Whoever has a fortune
of good with Allah Almighty in this world shall have a due share of intercession
with Him in the hereafter for his family, friends, companions and acquaintances.
So, be eager to obtain for yourself the rank of their intercession. This requires
you not to look down upon anyone of mankind, whatever he might be, for Allah
Almighty has hidden His alliance among His servants, and it may be that
whomever you despise is an ally and friend of Allah Almighty, nor regard with
slightness any sin, no matter how trivial it might be, for Allah Almighty has
hidden His wrath and anger in those sins, and it may be that the wrath of Allah
lies in the sin you render insignificant, nor underestimate any act of worship, for
Allah Almighty has hidden His good pleasure in the acts of worship, and it may
be that His good pleasure lies in the act of worship which you take too lighdy.
There are many Qur’anic Holy Verses and Prophetic narrations in support of
intercession. Allah Almighty said: “And soon will your Guardian-Lord give you

b
A

t
<

r

V

k

<
>r

i

i

i

*

r

1

The quarter of the saviors
730
(that wherewith) you shall be well-pleased.” (Ad-Duha 5)
It is narrated on die authority of Amr Ibn Al-As "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
recited the statement of Allah on the tongue of Abraham "peace be upon him":
"O my Lord! they have indeed led astray many among mankind; he then who
follows my (ways) is of me, and he that disobeys me, but You are indeed OftForgiving, Most Merciful.” (Ibrahim 36)
4
LS?
(Jfp Cr**
c^li» I
}
And the statement of Allah on the tongue of Jesus "peace be upon him": "If
You do punish them, they are Your servants: if You do forgive them, You are the
Exalted in power, the Wise." (Al-Ma’idah 118)

i ©^^ ’r«J 3^ o]3

^ rf'jJ* oj >

Then, he raised his hands towards the sky and said: “My Ummah! My
Ummah!” Then, he went on weeping.” Allah Almighty said to Gabriel "peace be
upon him": “O Gabriel! Go and ask Muhammad what causes him to weep.”
Gabriel asked him and he told him, and Allah has better knowledge of him,
thereupon He Almighty said to Gabriel: “O Gabriel! Go to Muhammad and tell
him that *We would please you concerning your Ummah, and never would we
aggrieve you concerning them/ (Muslim on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr
Ibn Al-As, and not Amr Ibn Al-As himself).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “I
have been given five (things) which were not given to anyone before me: Every
Prophet was sent to his own people in particular, and I have been sent to all
people, red and black; the war booty has been made lawful for me, and it was
never made lawful for anyone before me; the earth has been made sacred, pure
and place of prayer for me, so whenever the time of the Prayer comes upon
anyone of you, he should pray wherever he is; I have been given victory by terror,
(cast in the hearts of the enemy) from a distance (as long as covered in) a month;
and I have been given intercession (in the hereafter).” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim
on the authority of Jabir "Allah be pleased with him").
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: <cWhen it is the Day of Judgement, I would be the imam and spokesman of
Prophets, and the master of their intercession, and I do not (say that in order to)
boast.” (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu Hurairah; and Ibn Majah on the
authority of Ubai Ibn Ka’b).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “I
would be the chief of mankind, of which I never boast; and I would be the first
for whom the earth would split open to come out. I also would be the first
intercessor and the first one whose intercession would be accepted. I would have
the flag of praise in my hand, beneath which Adam and those behind him would
be.” (At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah on the authority of Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri "Allah
be pleased with him").

Book temremembrance of Death and hereafter life
731
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
Every Prophet has an invocation that should receive answer (from Allah
Almighty) and (all the Prophets barring me utilized theirs, and) I like to keep my
invocation in the form of intercession for my Ummah on the Day of
Judgement. (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Anas; and Muslim alone
on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them" that
he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
Pulpits of gold would be set up for the Prophets (on the Day of Judgement) to
sit on, and mine would remain empty and I would not sit on it for I would keep
standing erect in front of my Lord, for fear I would be sent to Paradise and my
Ummah would remain behind after me. Then, I would say: “O Lord! My
Ummah!” Allah Almighty would say: “O Muhammad! What do you like Me to do
with your Ummah?” I would say: “O Lord! Hasten on their reckoning.” I would
then keep interceding for them until I would be given written deeds to take out
men who have already been sent to the fire (of Hell), (and they would be so much
numerous) that Malik, the fire keeper would say to me: “O Muhammad! You
have left none of your Ummah for the fire that is kindled out of wrath of your
Lord.” (At-Tabarani).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “ON the Day of Judgement, I would intercede for people more numerous
than the stones and pebbles on the surface of the earth.” (Ahmad and AtTabarani on the authority of Buraidah).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: Some (cooked) meat was brought to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" and the meat of a forearm was presented to him
as he used to like it. He took a morsel of it and said: “I will be the chief of all the
people on the Day of Resurrection. Do you know the reason for it? Allah will
gather all the human beings of early generations as well as late generations on one
plain so that the announcer will be able to make them all hear his voice and the
watcher will be able to see all of them. The sun will come so close to the people
that they will suffer such distress and trouble as they will not be able to bear or
stand.
Then the people will say: “Don't you see to what state you have reached?
Won't you look for someone who can intercede for you with your Lord?” They
will say to each other: “Go to Adam "peace be upon him . So they will go to
Adam and say to him: <fYou are the father of mankind; Allah created you with
His Own Hand, and breathed into you of His Spirit (meaning the spirit which he
created for you); and ordered the angels to prostrate before you, so (please)
intercede for us with your Lord. Don't you see in what state we are? Don’t you
see what condition we have reached?” Adam will say: Today my Lord has
become angry as He has never become before, nor will ever become thereafter.
He forbade me (to eat of the fruit of) the tree, but I disobeyed Him. Myself!
Myself] Myself] (I am mainly concerned with my own problems). Go to someone
else; go to Noah "peace be upon him".”

&

2

I

^4

>

y

3<

>

!

5-

*

?:
:

3

!

§

-

!

L

1

The quarter of the saviors
So they will go to Noah and say (to him): “O Noah! You are the first (of
Allah’s Messengers) to the people of the earth, and Allah has named you a
thankful slave; please intercede for us with your Lord. Don't you see in what state
we are?” He will say: ’Today my Lord has become angry as He has never become
nor wall ever become thereafter. I had (in the world) the right to make one
definitely accepted invocation, and I made it against my nation. Myself! Myself!
Myself! Go to someone else; go to Abraham "peace be upon him".”
They will go to Abraham and say: “O Abraham! You are The Messenger of
Allah and His intimate friend from among the people of the earth; so please
intercede for us with your Lord. Don't you see in what state we are?” He will say
to them: “My Lord has today become angry as He has never become before, nor
will ever become thereafter. I had told three lies (Abu Hayyan (the sub-narrator)
mentioned them in the Hadith) Myself! Myself! Myself. Go to someone else; go
to Moses "peace be upon him".”
The people will then go to Moses and say: “O Moses! You are The Messenger
of Allah and Allah gave you superiority above the others with this message and
with His direct Talk to you; (please) intercede for us with your Lord. Don't you
see in what state we are?” Moses will say: “My Lord has today become angry as
He has never become before, nor will become thereafter. I killed a person whom
I had not been ordered to kill. Myself Myself Myself. Go to someone else; go to
Jesus "peace be upon him".”
So they will go to Jesus and say: “O Jesus! You are The Messenger of Allah
and His Word which He sent to Mary, and a superior soul created by Him, and
you talked to the people while still young in the cradle. Please intercede for us
with your Lord. Don't you see in what state we are?” Jesus will say: “My Lord has
today become angry as He has never become before nor will ever become
thereafter.” Jesus will not mention any sin, but will say: “Myself Myself Myself
Go to someone else; go to Muhammad "peace be upon him".”
So they will come to me and say: “O Muhammad ! You are The Messenger of
Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” and the last of The Prophets, and
Allah forgave your earlier and later sins. (Please) intercede for us with your Lord.
Don't you see in what state we are?"
The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” added: “Then I will
go beneath Allah's Throne and fall in prostration before my Lord. And then
Allah will guide me to such praises and glorifications to Him as He has never
guided anybody else before me. Then it will be said: “O Muhammad! Raise your
head. Ask, and you will be granted (what you ask for). Intercede and It (your
intercession) will be accepted.” So I will raise my head and Say: “My Ummah, O
my Lord! My Ummah, O my Lord.” It will be said: “O Muhammad! Let those of
your Ummah, who have no reckoning, enter through such a gate of the gates of
Paradise as lies on the right; and they will share the other gates with the people."
The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: “By Him in
Whose Hand my soul is, the distance between every two gate-posts of Paradise is
like the distance between Mecca and Himyar (in Yemen) or Mecca and Busra (in
Sham).” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim).
732

i

i

r<

%

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life--------------------------- 733
That is the intercession of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and p___
eace
be upon him . The righteous and religious scholars among his Ummah also will
have their pordon of intercession, of which the Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: “The intercession of a man from among
my Ummah would admit people to Paradise more numerous than (the tribes of)
Rabie ah and Mudar. (Al-Iraqi on the authority of Abu Umamah, and the people
thought the man intended is Uthman Ibn Affan "Allah be pleased with him"; and
Ibn Majah and Al-Hakim on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Abu Al-Jud’a, in
which both tribes are replaced with Tamim).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: (On the Day of Judgement) it would be said to a man (from among my
Ummah): “O so and so! Stand and intercede (for your people).” He would stand
and intercede: (one for as much as) his tribe, (another for) his household,
(another for) only one or two men, and so on, each according to his deed.” (AtTirmidhi on the authority of Abu Sa’id "Allah be pleased with him").
It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “On
the Day of Judgement, a man from among the inhabitants of Paradise would look
at the denizens of fire, and a man from among the denizens of fire would call
him: “O so and so! Do you recognize me?” He would say: “No, by Allah, I do
not recognize you. Who are you?” He would say: “I am the one upon whom you
came one day, when you were in the world, and asked for a sip of water, and I
watered you.” He would say: “Ah! I have recognized you.” He would say: “Then,
intercede, by it, for me with your Lord Almighty.” He then would say to Allah
Almighty: “I have indeed looked at the denizens of fire, and a man from among
the denizens of fire called me: “O so and so! Do you recognize me?” I said: <cNo,
by Allah, I do not recognize you. Who are you?” He said: “I am the one whom
you asked for a sip of water in the world one day, and I watered you.” I said:
“Ah! I have recognized you.” He said: “Then, intercede, by it, for me with your
Lord Almighty.” So, please, accept my intercession for him.” Allah would accept
his intercession for him, and he would be ordered to come out of the fire.” (Abu
Mansur Ad-Dailami).
It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “I
would be the first of people to come out (of the grave) when they are raised; their
spokesman when they come (to their Lord); who would give them glad tidings
when they despair. On that day, the flag of praise would be in my hand; and I
would be the most honored, from among the offspring of Adam, in the Sight of
my Lord and I do not (say so in order to) boast.” (At-Tirmidhi)
^
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him said. I
would stand in front of my Lord Almighty (on the Day of Judgement), thereupon
I would be dressed in one of the dresses of Paradise. Then, I would stand on the
right side of the Throne (of Majesty), and none of the creatures would ever be in
that standing other than me.” (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Abu Hurairah

-<
%
>•

l

■i

§

1

I

i

"Allah be pleased with him").
i__

The quarter of the saviors
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them" that
he said: Some people from among the companions of the Messenger of Allah
"Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" sat in expectation for him. Then, he
came out and when he was close to them he heard them speaking. He heard their
talk. One of them said: <£Wonder! Allah Almighty has taken one of His creatures
as an intimate friend. He Almighty has taken Abraham "peace be upon him" as
an intimate friend.” Another said: “More amazing is His direct talk to Moses
"peace be upon him".” A third said: “Jesus "peace be upon him" is the Word and
Spirit of Allah Almighty.” A fourth said: “Adam "peace be upon him" was also
chosen by Allah.” The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" came out to them and greeted them with peace and said: “I have heard your
speech. You admire the fact that Abraham is the intimate friend of Allah, and
that is true; that Moses is the one to whom Allah spoke directly, and that is true;
that Jesus is the Spirit and Word of Allah Almighty, and that is true; and that
Adam was chosen by Allah Almighty, and that is true. Behold! I am the beloved
of Allah Almighty, because of which I never boast; and I would be the carrier of
the flag of praise on the Day of Judgement, because of which I never boast; and I
would be the first intercessor and the first one whose intercession would be
accepted on the Day of Judgement, because of which I never boast; and I would
be the first to move the ring of the gate of Paradise, and it would be opened to
me by Allah to enter along with the poor from among the believers, because of
which I never boast; and I am the most honored of the foremost and last
generations, because of which I never boast.” (At-Tirmidhi).

734

CHAPTER TEN
ACCOUNT OF THE FOUNTAIN
It should be known to you that the Fountain (Hawd) is a great privilege
therewith the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" is
favored from among all the Prophets and Messengers. There are a lot of
narrations in its description. We hope that Allah should endow us with its
knowledge in this world, and taste in the hereafter. Characteristic of it is that
whoever drinks of it would never become thirsty.
It is narrated on the authority of Anas Ibn Malik "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: One day The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” was sitting among us when he slumbered (for a while) after which he
then raised his head while smiling. We asked: “What does cause you to smile, O
Messenger of Allah?” He said: “A Surah has just been revealed to me.” He then
recited: “In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. Verily We
have given you the Fount of Abundance. Therefore turn to your Lord for the
Prayer and offer sacrifice, and surely your enemy is cut off (from goodness).” (AlKawthar 1-3)

Then he (the Prophet) asked: “Do you know what the Fount of Abundance
is?” We said: “Allah and His Messenger know best.” The Prophet “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: “It is a river, my Lord “Exalted and

!

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
735
Glorified be He has promised me, in which there is an abundance of goodness.
It is a fount, to which my followers would come on the Day of Judgement. Its
utensils would be as numerous as the stars. A certain slave (of my followers)
would be turned away from it, and I would say: “O My Lord! He is one of my
followers! He (Allah) would reply: “You don’t know what he innovated (of bad
things in religion) after you.”” (Muslim).
It is further narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: While I was walking in Paradise behold! I saw a river whose edges are of
hollow pearl domes. I said: “What is that O Gabriel?” he said: “That is (the river
of) Kawthar which your Lord has given you.” The angel then struck with his
hand and behold! Its mud was of yellow musk.” (At-Tirmidhi).
It is further narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
used to say: “(The distance) between both banks of my Fountain is (as long as)
what is between Medina and San’a, (or what is between Medina and Amman).”
(Muslim).
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Umar "Allah be pleased with them" that
he said: When it was revealed: “Verily We have given you the Fount of
Abundance”, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “It is a river in Paradise, whose edges are of gold, and drink whiter than
milk, sweeter than honey and more pleasant than musk, flowing on rocks of pearl
and coral.” (At-Tirmidhi and Ad-Darimi).
It is narrated on the authority of Thawban "Allah be pleased with him", the
freed slave of the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
that the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “(The
width of) my Fountain will be (as long as the distance) between Aden and Ailah,
(whose water is) whiter than milk and sweeter than honey, and whose cups are (as
numerous) as the number of the stars. Whoever has even a sip of it will never
become thirsty. The first to come upon me will be the poor Emigrants.” Umar
Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him" said: <fWho are those O Messenger
of Allah?” He said: “Those are of untidy garments and unkempt hair, who never
marry the blissful women, nor the closed gates (of rulers and chiefs) are opened
to them.” On that Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz went on weeping until his beard was
wetted, and then he said: “But, I’ve married the blissful women (i.e. Fatimah Bint
Abd-Al-Malik), and the dosed gates (of the rulers and chiefs) are opened to me.
Anyway, I do not wash my garment which is on my body until it becomes dirty,
nor do I oil (and comb) my hair until it becomes unkempt.” (At-Tirmidhi and Ibn
Majah).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Dharr Allah be pleased with him
that he said: I said: “O Messenger of Allah! What about the utensils of the
Fountain?” He said: “By Him in Whose Hand is the life of Muhammad! Its
utensils would be more numerous than the stars in the sky, with its planets
shining on a dark cloudless night. They would be the utensils of Paradise.
Whoever drinks from this (Fount) would never feel thirsty. Two spouts from

%

£

£

3c
v=

I
s

s

l

s

\

\

'

The quarter of the saviors
736
Paradise would flow in it and whoever drinks from it would never feel thirsty.
Moreover, its breadth is equal to its length (and it is as large as) the distance
between Amman and Ailah. Its water is whiter than milk and sweeter than
honey.” (Muslim).
It is narrated on the authority of Samurah "Allah be pleased with him” that he
said: The Prophet "peace be upon him" said: “Each Prophet will have a fount (in
the hereafter), and they will vie in glory with each other, as to which of them will
have the greatest number of followers come to drink from his fountain, and I
hope to have the greatest number of followers come to drink from mine.” (AtTirmidhi).
That is the expectation of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him". So, let every servant hope to be among these who will come upon
his Fountain, and beware of being deceived by his hope without doing the
necessary work that helps him realize it. Of a surety, to hope for the harvest, you
should first do the cultivation and strive your best to look after it. but
unfortunately, most people, out of haughtiness and conceit, hope for the harvest
even without doing the necessary measures they should do for their plants to
grow in the land. We seek refuge with Allah Almighty from haughtiness and
conceit. Allah Almighty said: “O men! certainly the promise of Allah is true. Let
not then this present life deceive you, nor let the Chief Deceiver deceive you
about Allah.” (Fatir 5)
i (J|5

V3

iyp-S\ p5o^*j

c3>-

upJ oj £rbjt

^

CHAPTER ELEVEN
ACCOUNT OF HELL, ITS TERRORS AND CHAINS
O one who is heedless of his own self, and deceived by the worldly benefits
which are going to vanish, no matter how long they endure! Refrain from
engagement in that which you are going to leave, and rather meditate in that
which you should imperatively come to, i.e. the fire of Hell, upon which all the
creatures would inevitably come in realization of the statement of Allah Almighty:
"Not one of you there is, but he shall go down to it: That for your lord is a thing
decreed, determined. Then we shall deliver those that were god-fearing: and the
evil doers we shall leave there, hobbling on their knees." (Maryam 71:72)
I j JJj \yl3\

(jjj)

L*-L>- iX/j J-P Q ^

Ij ^j

0 [3 ^

You are certain of coming upon Hell, and uncertain of salvation from it. so,
bring in your heart the terror of that coming, perchance you would get ready for
salvation from it.
Furthermore, meditate your state in the hereafter, while standing in
expectation of your destiny after being reckoned and questioned, then, the
sinners would be encircled by Hell, with its darkness of many layers, and
overwhelmed by fire of fierce blaze, and overtaken by its heaving of sighs and
sobs, out of extreme fury and rage. At that time, the sinners would come to
know that their portion is destruction and perdition. Then the angel would

Book teniremembrance of Death and hereafter life
737
come to call them one by one, and drive him to be thrown, while chained in
fetters and bonds, into the fire, saying to him: "Taste you (this)! truly was you
mighty, full of honour! Truly this is what you used to doubt!" (Ad-Dukhan
49-50)
V

L<

&
fv

*ZA

Their abode therein would be narrow and dark, their drink boiling fetid water.
Such being the case, they would call from its different sides and parts: "O Malik!
would that your Lord put an end to us!" He will say, "Nay, but you shall abide!"
(Az-Zukhruf 77)
J&r* £>\

dbj

vi-ll'^-lJ ijSbj ^

At that point, they would despair and lose all hope to come out of the fire of
Hell, or to receive a portion of the mercy of Allah Almighty. They would regret
for what they wasted in this world concerning the rights of Allah Almighty. But
of no profit would it be to them to regret. In no way could regret save or even
avail them in the least: on the contrary, they would be turned over their faces
with fire above them, fire beneath them, fire on their right and fire on their left.
They indeed would be sunk in fire: Their food would be fire, their drink fire, their
clothing fire, and their beds also fire. Add to all of that their being bound in
fetters and chains of heavy and strong iron: In addition there will be maces of
iron (to punish) them. Every time they wish to get away therefrom, from anguish,
they will be forced back therein, and (it will be said), "Taste you the Penalty of
Burning!" every time their skin would be roasted through, it would be replaced
with fresh skin in order for the torment of burning to start once gain,
furthermore, the tree of Zaqqum will be the food of the Sinful, Like molten
brass; it will boil in their insides, Like the boiling of scalding water. They would
hope for death, but they would taste no death in order for their punishment to
continue everlastingly
That is a brief illustration of the state of the disbelievers who would abide in
the fire of Hell forever. Consider now the Hell and its immense valleys and
bottomless defiles. The Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “In Hell, there are seventy thousand valleys, each of which contains
seventy thousand defiles, each of which has seventy thousand snakes and
scorpions, and there would be neither a disbeliever nor a hypocrite but that he
would be confronted with all of those.”
It is narrated on the authority of Ali "Allah be pleased with him" that he said:
the Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" said: “Seek
refuge with Allah from the spring or valley of grief.” They asked: “O Messenger
of Allah! What is the valley of grief?” he said: “It is a valley in Hell from which
the Hell itself seeks refuge with Allah Almighty seventy times everyday: it is
prepared by Allah Almighty for the showy reciters (who recite Qur’an only in
order to be seen of men).” (Ibn Adi, Abu Na’im, At-Tirmidhi; and Ibn Majah on
the authority of Abu Hurairah).
The valleys and defiles of Hell are as much as is equal to the number of
worldly desires, and its seven gates are equal to the seven organs therewith the

e<

£?
&
&

e>
3

a
T

B

1
V

3

?

!

The quarter of the saviors
738
servant disobeys Allah and commits sins. The highest of them is Hell, and the
lowest is the bottomless pit. It is as bottomless as are the desires and delights
of this world. As well as no desire in this world ends but to another one that
is stronger, similarly, no pit in Hell ends but to another which is more
bottomless.
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him”
that he said: We were in the company of The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” when we heard a terrible sound. Thereupon
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “Do you
know what (sound) is this?” We said: “Allah and His Messenger know best.” He
"peace be upon him" said: “That is a stone, which was thrown in Hell seventy
years ago and it has been constandy slipping down and now it has reached its
base.” (Muslim).
Then, reflect on its different grades: As well as the people differ in their
devotion to this world, each according to his portion thereof, the punishment
they would receive in the fire of Hell also would be different accordingly. That is
because Allah Almighty never deals unjustly with anyone even in the least. The
fire would not affect all of them equally: each would have his punishment
according to his disobedience. But the one who would receive the least
punishment would be so much suffering that were the world with all what it
contains to be offered to him, he would ransom himself for it.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" said: “The
one who would receive the least punishment from among the people on the Day
of Judgement would put on a pair of sandals of fire, from whose heat his brain
would be boiling.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of An-Nu’man Ibn
Bashir "Allah be pleased with him").
On the other hand, compare not the fire of this world with that of the
hereafter. It is reported that the fire of this world ahs been diluted with the water
of mercy seventy times in order for the inhabitants of this world to endure. (Ibn
Abd-Al-Barr on the authority of Ibn Abbas).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “Allah Almighty ordered that fire be kindled for one thousand years until it
turned red. Then, He commanded that it be kindled for further one thousand
years until it turned white. Then, He commanded that it be kindled for one
thousand years until it turned black. It is then black and dark.”
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “The
fire of Hell complained to its Lord saying: “O Lord! My parts are eating
(destroying) one another.” So Allah allowed it to take two breaths, one in the
winter and the other in the summer. The breath in the summer is at the time
when you feel the severest heat and the breath in the winter is at the time when
you feel the severest cold." (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Abu
Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him”).
It is reported on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: “(On the Day of Judgement) the most comforted among the disbelievers in
this world would be brought and ordered that he be dipped only once in the fire.

I

LBook ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
739
Then it would be said to him: “Have you ever experienced any bliss?” He would
answered in the negative. Similarly, the one who received the severest hardship in
this world would be brought and ordered that he be dipped only once in
Paradise. Then he would be asked: “Have you ever experienced any hardship?”
he would answer in the negative.”
Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him" said: “if there are as many as one
hundred thousand people in the mosque, an then, one from among the denizens
of the fire takes only one breath, all of them would die immediately.”
After that, consider the stench of the pus that would flow from their bodies
until they would sink in it. That is the dark, murky, intensely cold fluid. In this
respect, it is narrated on the authority of Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri "Allah be pleased
with him" that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him" said: “Were only a single bucket of the dark, murky, intensely cold
fluid of Hell to be poured over this world, it would make stinking all the
inhabitants of the earth.” (At-Tirmidhi).
That would be their drink whenever the thirsty among them asks for drink:
“for the wrong-doers We have prepared a Fire whose (smoke and flames), like
the wall and roof of a tent, will hem them in: If they implore relief they will be
granted water like melted brass, that will scald their faces: How dreadful the
drink! how uncomfortable a couch to recline on!” (Al-Kahf 29)

£

£

%

T

>■

i:

r>-

&

>>

£
3

V

^ (c|^
ilj
^
oY\
*■ k*-? iy
o!3 ^
Then, think about their food, which would be of Zaqqum tree as confirmed
by the statement of Allah Almighty: "You will surely taste of the Tree of
Zaqqum. Then will you fill your insides therewith, And drink Boiling Water on
top of it: Indeed you shall drink like diseased camels raging with thirst!" (AlWaqi’ah 52-55)

3

.>■-

:■

=

?•

N

i
And: “Is that the better entertainment or the Tree of Zaqqum? For We have
truly made it (as) a trial for the wrong-doers. For it is a tree that springs out of the
bottom of Hell-fire: The shoots of its fruit-stalks are like the heads of devils:
Truly they will eat thereof and fill their bellies therewith. Then on top of that they
will be given a mixture made of boiling water. Then shall their return be to the
(Blazing) Fire.” (As-Saffat 62-68)
1

oj

*ii3

*yr^ k^jJ ©

0

i^L. oyikli k,L* oy&$

bj

0

*y*-~

VJj Jy>- dAJ’51 ^

<~r^ 0 & I*
i

?-

1

jy
oj
ki>iJ kjUp^J
And: “The while they enter the Blazing Fire, The while they are given to
drink, of a boiling hot spring, No food will there be for them but a bitter Dari
Which will neither nourish nor satisfy hunger.” (Al-Ghashiyah 4-7)

V O p/*

i

Cr? IA15 0

I.

■

)

Oi
i

The quarter of the saviors
And: “With Us are Fetters (to bind them), and a Fire (to burn them), And a
Food that chokes, and a Penalty Grievous.” (Al-Muzzammil 12-13)

740

^ (c®5) G-J! IjI j_pj a

c 13 Ll_xL>j

Hju] (jl

It is reported on the authority of Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them"
that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “Were only a single drop of Zaqqum tree to fall on the oceans of the earth,
it would putrefy the living of all the inhabitants of the earth.” (At-Tirmidhi and
Ibn Majah). That is the effect of only a single drop: then, what do you think of
him whose entire food consists of that tree, and drink of the stinking pus and
dark murky rotten fluid?
It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“Have longing for that to which Allah Almighty exhorted you (i.e. Paradise), and
beware and fear of that of which He Almighty frightened you, i.e. of His torment
and punishment and of Hell: For indeed, were only a single drop of Paradise to
be with you in this world in which you are, it would have made it pleasant for
you; and were only a single drop of the fire (of Hell) to be with you in this world
in which you are, it would have putrefied it for you.”
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Ad-Darda’ "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “The denizens of fire (of Hell) would be given to severe hunger equal to the
torment which they would suffer from fire, thereupon they would ask for food,
thereupon they would be served with food from Dari which neither nourishes
nor satisfies their hunger. They would then ask for another kind of food and they
would be served with food that chokes. They would remember how they used to
remove the choke in the world with drink over it. they would then ask for drink,
thereupon they would be served with drink of fetid boiling water raised to them
on hooks of iron: Whenever it becomes close to their faces, it would roast them,
and whenever it enters into their bellies, it would cut their bowels. They would
say: “Invite the keepers of Hell.” Those in the Fire will say to the Keepers of
Hell: "Pray to your Lord to lighten us the Penalty for a Day (at least)!” They will
say: "Did there not come to you your Messengers with Clear Signs?" They will
say: "Yes." They will reply, "Then pray (as you like)! but the Prayer of those
without Faith is nothing but (futile wandering) in (mazes of) error!" (Ghafir 49-

50)
^Jj! fyJli

&y, Lp

jlllT ^ Cf-P

^

Then, they would talk to each other to invite Malik to whom they would say:
"O Malik! would that your Lord put an end to us!" he will say, "Nay, but you shall
abide!" (Az-Zukhruf 77)

(At-Tirmidhi and Ad-Darimi).
It is said that the period between their calling of Malik and his response to

r

*

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter Life
741
them would be one thousand years. They then would say: “Invoke your Lord
Almighty. There is none better for you than your Lord.” They will say: "Our
Lord! our misfortune overwhelmed us, and we became a people astray! Our Lord!
bring us out of this: If ever we return (to evil), then shall we be wrong-doers
indeed! He will say: Be you driven into it (with ignominy)! and speak you not to
Me!” (Al-Mu’minun 106-108)
+

bji Lip (jji

lL>-jt

^3) T'-'

V,
v.
'/

L^=>j lljyi-Z, UJLp c-Hp Ujj i^Jli ^

7i.-*i

£

At that time, they would despair and lose hope for every kind of good.
It is reported on the authority of Abu Umamah "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said in comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: “and he is given
for drink, boiling fedd water, In gulps will he sip it, but never will he be near
swallowing it down his throat” (Ibrahim 15-16)

v.

&

i S&S
A* o?
3 f&r
cr? ©
^
“Such would be brought near him, but he would detest it. once it is brought
near him, it roasts his face, and his scalp falls down,. If he drinks it, it would cut
his bowels and come out of his anus. In confirmation of that, Allah Almighty
says: “They would be given, to drink, boiling water, so that it cuts up their bowels
(to pieces)” (Muhammad 15)

r

*4

^

f bL* I « L

\ L* I jJL+mj ^

He Almighty further says: “if they implore relief they will be granted water
like melted brass, that will scald their faces: How dreadful the drink!” (AlKahf 29)

^ (<jp)

S'

1

v

1

oJ3 ^

That would be their food and drink whenever they would grow hungry and
thirsty.” (At-Tirmidhi).
Then, consider the Hell’s female-snakes, serpents, scorpions, and their like,
which would not cease to bite even for a single moment:
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said: “Whoever is made wealthy by Allah and does not pay the
Zakat that is due on his wealth, then on the Day of Resurrection his wealth
will be made like a baldheaded poisonous male snake with two black spots
over the eyes. The snake will encircle his neck and bite his cheeks and say: “I
am your wealth, I am your treasure.” "Then The Prophet Allah s blessing and
peace be upon him” recited: “And let not those who covetously withhold of
the gifts which Allah has given them of His Grace, think that it is good for
them: nay, it will be the worse for them; soon shall the things which they
covetously withheld be tied to their necks like a twisted collar, on the Day of
Judgment.” (A1 Imran 180)

TT

>■<

3r

s.
r

>.<

yx

The quarter of the saviors

742
!£>■

i

^-AivaJ

& *-4-J

l* £)j3j\o:+m

jL y&

(Al-Bukhari; and Muslim on the authority of Jabir).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “In the fire (of Hell) there would be female-snakes as huge as the necks of
Bukht camels: if they bite anyone, he would continue to feel its harmful effect for
as long as forty years. There would be also scorpions as huge as mules: if they
bite anyone, he would continue to feel its harmful effect for as long as forty years.
Those serpents and scorpions would be directed over such as possessed in this
world by niggardliness, bad manners and harming people. Whoever is saved from
those evils, would be saved from those serpents and scorpions.” (Ahmad on the
authority of Abdullah Ibn Al-Harith).
Then, consider after that how Allah Almighty would increase the size of the
bodies of the denizens of fire, in length and breadth, in order for their
punishment to multiply for them, and the pain they receive from the taste of fire
and the bites of serpents and scorpions to become more severe.
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “The molar tooth of the disbeliever in the fire (of Hell) would be as huge as
(the mountain of) Uhud, and the thickness of his skin as long as is equal to a
three-day journey.” (Muslim).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “His (the disbeliever’s) lower lip would be falling, (as huge as to coat) on his
breast, and his upper lip raised (as huge as to) cover his face.” (At-Tirmidhi on
the authority of Abu Sa’id).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “Indeed, on the Day of Judgement, the disbeliever would be dragging his
tongue (which would be so long) that the people would trample it (with their
feet).” (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Ibn Umar).
In his comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: “as often as
their skins are roasted through, We shall change them for fresh skins, that they
may taste the Penalty” (An-Nisa’ 56)

4^5 Ol 13Tiji/iJ li> ISlliT >
Al-Hassan said: “They would be devoured by the fire seventy thousand times
everyday, and every time it eats them, it would be said to them: “Return”, and
they would return to their original state in which they were.”
Then, consider the state of weeping, wailing, sighs and sobs of the denizens
of Hell once they would be throne into the fire, and their invocation of woes and
perdition on themselves:
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “(On
the Day of Judgement) Hell would be brought, having seventy thousand reins,
each of which would be held by seventy thousand angels.” (Muslim on the
authority of Abdullah Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased with him").

f
Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
743
It is narrated on the authority of Anas Ibn Malik "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”
said: “The weeping for the denizens of the fire (of Hell) will be set, thereupon
they will go on weeping until tears cease; and then they will go on weeping blood
until it becomes like furrows on their faces that if ships are made to run in them,
it would run. As long as they are permitted to weep in sighs and sobs, and invoke
woes and perdition upon themselves, they would find relief in it but even this
would be forbidden to them.” (Ibn Majah).
According to Muhammad Ibn Ka’b: “The denizens of fire will have five
invocations, four of which would receive answer from Allah Almighty , and when
it is the fifth, they would be prevented from speech. They will say: "Our Lord!
twice have You made us without life, and twice have You given us Life! now have
we recognized our sins: is there any way out (of this)?” (The answer will be:)
"This is because, when Allah was invoked as the Only (object of worship), you
did reject Faith, but when partners were joined to Him, you believed! the
Command is with Allah, Most High, Most Great!" (Ghafir 11-12)
JJ iSv

Ulbj-1j

V,<

pz<

V.•3

llL.1 UjJ ijJii ^

4 CfSojj
jaOo-j *U\
They will say: "Our Lord! respite us (if only) for a short Term: We will answer
Your Call, and follow the Messengers!" "What! were you not wont to swear
aforetime that you should suffer no decline?" (Ibrahim 44)

4<^ Jill ot

V?

^

They will say: "Our Lord! bring us out: we shall work righteousness, not the
(deeds) we used to do!", (The answer will be) "Did we not give you long enough
life so that he that would should receive admonition? And (moreover) the wamer
came to you. So taste you (the fruits of your deeds): for the Wrong-doers there is
no helper." (Fatir 37)

Vs

36
>,
*3

>

4
They will say: "Our Lord! our misfortune overwhelmed us, and we became a
people astray! Our Lord! bring us out of this: if ever we return (to evil), then shall
we be wrong-doers indeed!” He will say: "Be you driven into it (with ignominy)!
and speak you not to Me!” (Al-Mu’minun 106-108)

e

fr'v

3

After that, they will never speak.
In comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: “to us it makes no
difference (now) whether we rage, or bear (these torments) with patience: for
ourselves there is no way of escape" (Ibrahim 21)

4

o* ^ ^

f1

t

~

^

**

Zaid Ibn Aslam saicf: “They would keep patient for one hundred years, after

P

The quarter of the saviors
744
which they would remain in rage for one hundred years. Then, they would keep
patient for one hundred years. Then, they would say: “To us it makes no
difference (now) whether we rage, or bear (these torments) with patience.”
The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “On
the Day of Resurrection, Deadi will be brought forward in the shape of a black
and white ram. Then a call maker will call: ‘O people of Paradise!1 Thereupon
they will stretch their necks and look carefully. The caller will say: ‘Do you know
this?’ They will say: ‘Yes, this is Death.’ By then all of them will have seen it.
Then it will be announced again: ‘O people of Hell!' They will stretch their necks
and look carefully. The caller will say: ‘Do you know this?’ They will say: ‘Yes,
this is Death.’ And by then all of them will have seen it. Then it (that ram) will be
slaughtered and the caller will say: “O people of Paradise! Let it be eternity for
you and no death! O people of Hell! Let it be eternity for you and no death!’" (AlBukhari on the authority of Abu Sa’id).
According to Al-Hassan: “A man will come out of the fire after one thousand
years, and would that I be this man!” on another occasion, he was seen weeping,
and when he was asked about the reason for that he said: “I fear I would be
thrown into the fire and left with no care.”
Those are the terrors and horrors of the fire of Hell. The most severe thing
its denizens would receive, along with their punishment and torment, is their
great regret in sigh for what they have wasted of the bliss of Paradise, and of the
meeting with Allah Almighty, and His good pleasure, given that they have sold all
of this for a little price, no more than worldly despicable and perishable short­
lived desires, which were, anyway, not pure for them in so much as contaminated
with evil and harm. Their regret would increase when they witness Paradise with
its pleasures and bliss: Were they not to see it, surely, their grief in sigh for losing
it would not be much more as it would really be for it would be shown to them.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “On
the Day of Judgement, a people from among the denizens of fire would be
brought to Paradise until when they come near it, detect its smell, and see its
palaces and the bliss prepared by Allah Almighty for its inhabitants, it would be
called: “Turn them away from it, for they have no portion in it.” They would
return with sigh the like of which neither the foremost nor the last generations
have ever experienced. They would say: “O our Lord! Had You admitted us to
the fire (of Hell) before You have shown to us Your reward and the good things
You have prepared for Your allies, surely, it would have been easier on us.” He
Almighty would say to them: “But it is that which I have intended for you. (When
you were in the world) whenever you were alone, you would contend Me, and
whenever you met people, you would seem devoutly pious, in order to be seen of
men, while your hearts had enmity towards Me. You feared the people and
feared Me not, venerated the people and venerated Me not, left evil for the sake
of people, and left nothing for My Sake. Today, I would let you taste the painful
punishment, along with the enduring reward I have forbidden to you.” (Al-Iraqi
on the authority of Anas).
According to Ahmad Ibn Harb: “Should anyone of us prefer shade to sun (in
this world) and would not prefer Paradise to the fire (in the hereafter)?”
It should be known to you that Allah Almighty created the fire with its

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life-----------------745
terrors and horrors, and created men for it who would neither increase nor
decrease: that has been decreed and decided by Allah as confirmed in His
statement: But warn them of the Day of Distress, when the matter will be
determined: for (behold,) they are negligent and they do not believe!”
(Maryam 39)
i©

y J^3 3J OjL&A

Vv

X

H-

jlj }

In order to know that you are on the right, given the preordained fate, you
should know that there is a sign indicative of that, which represents in the deeds
you do in the world, on the basis of the fact that everyone is made to find it easy
that for which he is created.
It is narrated on the authority of All Ibn Abu Talib "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: We were accompanying a funeral procession in Baqi Gharqad.
The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" came to us and sat and we
sat around him. He had a small stick in his hand. Then he bent his head and
started scraping the ground with it. He then said: "There is none among you, and
not a created soul, but has a place either in Paradise or in Hell assigned for him.
It is also determined for him whether he will be among the blessed or wretched."
A man said: "O Allah's Apostle! Should we not depend on what has been written
for us and leave the deeds as whoever amongst us is blessed will do the deeds of
a blessed person and whoever amongst us will be wretched, will do the deeds of a
wretched person?" The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"The blessed is to be directed to the good deeds, and the wretched is to be
guided to the bad deeds." Then he recited the Verses: “So he who gives (in
Charity) and fears (Allah), And (in all sincerity) testifies to the Best, We will
indeed make smooth for him the path to Bliss. But he who is a greedy miser and
thinks himself Self-Sufficient, And gives the lie to the Best, We will indeed make
smooth for him the Path to Misery.” (Al-Lail 5:10) (Al-Bukhari)

%<

P

9
9^'
Sfv
-2

a
3

i © cs^h

o &&U v^3

If the way to good has been made easy for you, receive then the glad
tidings that you would be far from the fire of Hell. But if you do not intend
good but that obstacles stand in the way to avert you from it, and you do not
intend evil but that it is made easy on you to do, then, you should know then
that you are given to destruction. The signification of that to the consequence
is like the signification of the rain to the plants. Allah Almighty' said: “As for
the Righteous, they will be in Bliss; And the Wicked; they will be in the Fire.”
(Al-Infitar 13-14)

4

(J.J 5o!5 ©

e

a
e-

r--

a
e
p:

o\ ^

So, measure your states and deeds on those Two Holy Verses, perchance you
would know your residence in either of both abodes; and Allah knows best.

CHAPTER TWELVE
ACCOUNT OF PARADISE AND ITS BUSS
It should be known to you that in opposition to the abode whose terrors,

5

I

The quarter of the saviors
746
horrors, distresses and anxieties you have learnt, i.e. the fire of Hell, there is
another one, full of bliss, pleasures and delights, i.e. Paradise. Of a surety, if one
is kept far from one of them, he should, necessarily and inevitably, reside in the
other. So, stimulate fear in your heart by long meditation in the terrors and
horrors of fire, and stimulate the hope in your heart by long meditation in the
pleasures and delights of Paradise. Drive yourself with the lash of fear, and, at the
same time, lead it with the rein of hope to the straight path, perchance you would
attain the great felicity and be saved from the painful torment.
Think about the inhabitants of Paradise, in whose faces there would be the
beaming brightness of bliss, and they would be given their drink from sealed
nectar, while sitting on pulpits of rubies in pavilions of tender white pearl, having
carpets of green rich brocade. They would be reclining on green Cushions on
banks of rivers filled with wine and honey, surrounded by beautiful youth and
decked with pretty houris of big lustrious eyes, as beautiful as if they were rubies
and coral, whom neither a man nor a jinn has ever approached, walking across
the different sides of the gardens of Paradise: if anyone of them struts in her
walk, the sides of her dress would be carried by seventy thousand of beautiful
youth. They would have of kinds of good rich white silk what amazes eyes and
astounds sights. They would be adorned with crowns, decked with pearl and
coral. They would be far from old age and trouble, restrained in pavilions, in
palaces of rubies, built in the middle of the gardens of Paradise. They would also
be restraining their glances (to their men), And round about them will (serve)
youths of perpetual (freshness): If you see them, you would think them scattered
Pearls; And when you look, it is there you will see a Bliss and a Realm
Magnificent. They would serve them With goblets, (shining) beakers, and cups
(filled) out of Clear-flowing fountains: a source of pleasure for those who drink.
That would be in reward for what they used to do. They would be in wellguarded standing, in gardens and springs of inexhaustible drink, in gardens and
rivers, an Assembly of Truth, in the Presence of a Sovereign Omnipotent. In
them, they would look at the Countenance of the Bounteous Sovereign, with
their faces rising and shining by virtue of the beaming brightness of bliss: Neither
suffering nor humiliation would then fatigue them, for they would be honored
servants. They would be given all kinds of gifts from their Lord Almighty. They
would abide forever in that which their souls desire, in which they would neither
fear nor grieve, safe from the evils of death. They would be blessed in it, eating of
its food and fruits, drinking of its rivers and springs, wine, honey and milk. Its
rivers would have their floor of silver, gravel of coral, and dust of yellow musk;
and its plant would be of saffron. And amongst them will be passed round
vessels of silver and goblets of crystal, Crystal-clear, made of silver: They will
determine the measure thereof (according to their wishes). And they will be given
to drink there of a Cup (of Wine) mixed with Zanjabil, A fountain there, called
Salsabil. They would be also served And with fruits, any that they may select; And
the flesh of fowls, any that they may desire. And (there will be) Companions with
beautiful, big, and lustrous eyes, Like unto Pearls well-guarded. A Reward for the
Deeds of their past (Life). No frivolity will they hear therein, nor any taint of ill,
Only the saying, "Peace! Peace."
Wonder at him who believes in an abode of such characteristics, in which

■
Book teniremembrance of Death and hereafter life
747
there would ever be no death, nor change to befall its inhabitants, and then gets
affable with a perishable abode in which he is exposed to evil, harm, vicissitudes
of fate and in the end death would snatch him! By Allah, if there would be in that
abode of eternity nothing more than the soundness of bodies along with the
safety from death, hunger and drink, it would be worthy to make one leave the
world with all its benefits for it. Why not, given that its inhabitants would be safe
kings, enjoy of all kinds of pleasures and delights, and have all they desire for,
attending everyday to the courtyard of the Throne of Majesty, in order to look at
the Countenance of Allah, the Most Bounteous?
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Sa'id Al-Khudn and Abu Hurairah
"Allah be pleased with both” that they said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” said: “There would be an announcer (in
Paradise) who would make this announcement: Werily, there is in store for you to
be in (everlasting) health after which you should never fall ill, to live (forever)
after which you should not die, to remain youth after which you should never
grow old, And to live in affluent circumstances after which you would never
become destitute.” That is the significance of the statement of Allah Almighty:
“Behold! the Garden before you! you have been made its inheritors, for your
deeds (of righteousness)." (Al-A’raf 43) (Muslim).

If you like to know the description of Paradise, you should then recite the
Qur’an, for there is no speech more eloquent, more expressive than it recite both
Surahs of Ar-Rahman and Al-Waqi’ah, and the other Surahs which tell about
that. But if you like to know its characteristics and attributes in detail from the
narrations and traditions, below is a set of them:
It is narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Qais that eh said: The
Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" said: "Two gardens,
the utensils and the contents of which are of silver, and two other gardens, the
utensils and contents of which are of gold. Nothing will prevent the people who
will be in the Garden of Eden from seeing their Lord except the curtain of
Majesty over His Face." (Al-Bukhari and Muslim).
Consider then the gates of Paradise: They are as numerous as the acts of
worship, just as the gates of Hell are so in proportion to the number of sins.
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah Allah be pleased with
him” that he said: Allah's Apostle "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: "Whoever gives a pair (of things or property) in charity for Allah's Cause,
will be called from the gates of Paradise, and Paradise has eight gates. He will
be addressed: “O servant of Allah! That (gate) is better (for you, so come and
enter through it).” So, whoever was amongst the people who used to offer
their prayers, will be called from the gate of the prayer; whoever was amongst
the people who used to participate in Jihad, will be called from the gate of
Jihad; whoever was amongst those who used to give in charity, will be called
from the gate of charity; and whoever was amongst those who used to
observe fasts, will be called from the gate of Ar-Rayyan." Abu Bakr said: "Let
my parents be sacrificed for you, O Allah s Aposde! No distress or need will
befall him who will be called from those gates. Will there be any one who will

SS,

c
€
c

7'
%

\r.

S'
^3

7*

V

r

>-

x_

>-

xz

The quarter of the saviors
748
be called from all these gates?" The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" replied: "Yes, and I hope you will be one of them." (Al-Bukhari
and Muslim).
It is narrated on the authority of Asim Ibn Damrah from Ali "Allah be
pleased with him" that he made a mention of the fire (of Hell), and aggravated its
matter but I do not remember what he said. Then he said: “And those who
feared their Lord will be led to the Garden in crowds: until behold, they arrive at
one of its gates, they would find a tree with two springs flowing from underneath
its base. They would go to one of them, as they would be commanded, and drink
thereof, thereupon it would remove the harm and trouble they have in their
bellies. Then, they would go to the other and get purified from it, thereupon the
beaming brightness of bliss would be visible on their bodies, after which their
complexion would never change, nor would their heads ever get unkempt as if
they oiled them with the best oil.
Then, they would arrive at Paradise, and its keepers would greet them with
peace saying: "Peace be upon you! well have you done! enter you here, to dwell
therein." Then, they would be received by the youth, going round them just as
the youth of this world go round their masters with milk after return from a long
absence, saying to each of them: “Receive the glad tidings of the honor and
dignity prepared for you by Allah Almighty.”
Then one of those youth would whisper into the ear of one of his (the
newcomer’s) wives (from the houris): “So and so has come.” He would mention
him by his name he used to be called by in the world. She would ask him: “Have
you really seen him with your eyes?” He would answer in the affirmative. She
would rejoice so much that she would stand up and run towards the gate of her
pavilion. Once he arrives at his house, he would look at the base of its structure
made of rocks of pearl different in kind and colour. When he raises his head and
looks at its ceiling, behold! It would be as shining as lightning. Had Allah
Almighty not doomed it to him, his sight would have been taken away due to its
severe glitter.
Then, he would turn his face and behold! He would find his wives from
among the houris on thrones (of dignity), raised on high, Goblets placed (ready),
And Cushions set in rows, And rich carpets (all) spread out. Then, he would
recline on the cushion and say: "Praise be to Allah, Who has truly fulfilled His
promise to us, and has given us (this) land in heritage: we can dwell in the Garden
as we will: how excellent a reward for those who work (righteousness)!" (AzZumar 74)

ilzJT T

I j?i j ^9j *)j I Ujj Ij jO wLpy Li

(_£ .jj I

I IjJ 1-3J

Then, a caller would make a public announcement: “You would live forever
after which you would never die, abide forever after which you would never
leave, and remain healthy after which you would never fall ill.”
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “I
would come to the gate of Paradise on the Day of Judgement, and ask that it be
opened, and the keeper would ask: “Who are you?” I would say: “Muhammad.”

■ II.

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life

749
wou^ say: ^ have keen commanded not to open it to anyone before
you.”” (Muslim on the authority of Anas).
As well as there is disparity between the people in this world in the acts of
worship and obedience, they would be different in the hereafter in ranks and
degrees of loftiness. If you seek the highest degree, strive your utmost not to let
anyone precede you. Allah Almighty indeed commanded you to take part in that
race and competition saying: “Race towards forgiveness from your Lord, and a
Garden (of Bliss), the width whereof is as the width of heaven and earth,
prepared for those who believe in Allah and His Messengers.” (Al-Hadid 21)

<
/*

■

<

c

c
€

<

•*

And: “and for this let those aspire, who have aspirations.” (Al-Mutaffiffin
26)
Wonder at you that if anyone in this world excels you in property or position,
you would be filled with rage out of envy of him: Then, why should you not have
the same interest and care concerning the hereafter, given that the place wherein
you abide forever would not be free from others higher than you in rank and
standing?
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Sa'id Al-Khudri "Allah be pleased with
him” that he said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him” said: “The inmates of Paradise would see the inmates of the apartments
over them just as you see the shining planets which remain in the eastern and the
western horizon because of the superiority some would have over others.” They
said: “O Messenger of Allah, these would be the abodes of Prophets which none
besides them would attain.” He "peace be upon him" said: “By Him, in Whose
hand is my life, those who believe in Allah and acknowledge the Truth, would
attain them.” (Muslim).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Sa'id: The Messenger of Allah “Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him” said: “Verily, the men of the highest degrees (in
the Garden) will be seen by such as below them in the same way as a shining star
in one of the horizons of the sky is seen (by the inhabitants of the earth); and
indeed, Abu Bakr and Umar belong to those (of the highest degrees); and they
are more fitting for that!” (At-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah).
It is narrated on the authority of Jabir "Allah be pleased with him that he
said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“Should I not tell you about the mansions of Paradise?” I said: “Yes, O
Messenger of Allah "peace be upon you': let our fathers and mothers be
sacrificed for you.” He "peace be upon him" said: “In Paradise, there are
mansions of all kinds of diamonds, (so much pure and transparent that) whose
inside is seen from outside, and outside from inside. They have of pleasures and
delights that which no eye has ever seen, no ear has ever heard of, and no human
mind has ever thought of.” I asked: “O Messenger of Allah! Whose would be
those mansions?” he "peace be upon him" said: “They would be for such as
spreads peace, serves others with food, fasts perpetually, and prays at night while
people are asleep.” He said: we said: “O Messenger of Allah! Who could endure

■' -\

€

c

c
c

<<:

c

€

cIs

c
<

c
V

V

4*

V
0-

V

4-

V-

The quarter of the saviors
750
that?” He "peace be upon him" said: “My Ummah could endure that. Let me tell
you about that: Whoever meets his brother and greets him with peace or returns
his greeting to him has indeed spread peace; and whoever feeds his family and
dependents until he satisfies them from food has indeed served others with food;
and whoever fasts the month of Ramadan along with three fasts monthly has
indeed fasted perpetually; and whoever offers Isha’ and Fajr in congregation has
prayed at night while people are asleep.” (Abu Na’im).
Account Of Walls, Floors, Trees And Rivers Of Paradise
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “The wall of Paradise is made from bricks, one of gold and one of silver, its
dust of saffron, and its mud of musk.” (At-Tirmidhi).
It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" was asked about the earth of Paradise thereupon he said: “It is of good
white pure musk.” (Muslim on the authority of Abu Sa’id).
It is further narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “Whoever is pleased that Allah Almighty should provide him with
wine in the hereafter, let him leave it in this world; and whoever is pleased that
Allah Almighty should dress him in silk in the hereafter, let him leave it in this
world.” (At-Tabarani and An-Nasa’i).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “The rivers of Paradise would gush forth from underneath hills or
mountains of musk.” (Al-Aqili on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" also said:
“If the least ornament given to anyone from among the inhabitants of Paradise is
equaled with all ornaments of this world, then, the ornament given by Allah
Almighty in the hereafter would be better than all ornaments on earth.” (AtTabarani on the authority of Abu Hurairah).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “Verily, in Paradise, there is a tree (so much huge) that the rider would
proceed as long as one hundred years in its shade without being able to come to
its end. If you so like, recite (in confirmation of that), the statement of Allah: “In
shade long-extended.” (Al-Waqi’ah) (Al-Bukhari and Muslim).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Umamah "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: The companions of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" used to say: “Allah Almighty benefits us with the Bedouins
and their questions (about religious matters).” Then, a Bedouin came to the
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" and said: “O
Messenger of Allah! Allah Almighty mentioned a harmful tree in the Qur’an, and
I have never thought that Paradise has a tree that harms its owner.” The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" asked him: “What
is that?” He said: ‘The lote-tree, for it has thorns.” On that he "peace be upon
him" said: “No doubt, Allah Almighty says: “(They will be) among Lote-trees
without thorns.” (Al-Waqi’ah 28)

5-f '

"NO*

Book ten.remembrance of Death and hereafter life

i

751

(J ^

Its thorns would be removed by Allah and each one would be replaced by a
big fruit, which would break open to seventy-two kinds of food, different from
each other (in form and colour).” (Ibn Al-Mubarak).
Account Of The Clothes, Thrones And Cushions
Of The Inhabitants Of Paradise
Allah Almighty said: For them will be Gardens of Eternity; beneath them
rivers will flow; they will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold, and they will
wear green garments of fine silk and heavy brocade; they will recline therein on
raised thrones. Flow good the recompense! Flow beautiful a couch to recline on!”
(Al-Kahf 31)

i
r*?
cr
There are a lot of Qur’anic Floly Verses about that. But the details are
mentioned more in the Prophedc narrations.
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “Whoever enters Paradise would be blessed forever, after which he would
never suffer: Neither his dress would ever be worn out, nor would his youth ever
get exhausted. In Paradise, there would be (of pleasures and delights) that which
no eye has ever seen, no ear has ever heard of, and no human mind has ever
thought of.” (Muslim).
It is further narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr "Allah be pleased
with him" that a man said to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him": “O Messenger of Allah! Tell us about the clothing of the
inhabitants of Paradise: Would it be something created or woven (from fabric)?”
Fie "peace be upon him" kept silent for a short while during which some of the
people present there laughed. On that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing
and peace be upon him" said: “Why are you laughing? Do you laugh from
somebody who asked about an item of knowledge of which he was ignorant?”
then the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“Nay! The fruits of Paradise would split open for it to come out twice.” (AnNasa’i).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him
that he said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him”
said: “The first group (of people) who will enter Paradise will be (glittering) like
the moon when it is full. They will not spit nor blow their noses nor relieve
nature. Their utensils will be of gold and their combs of gold and silver; in their
censers the aloe wood will be used, and their sweat will smell like musk. Everyone
of them will have two wives; the marrow of the bones of the wives' legs will be
seen through the flesh out of excessive beauty. They (the people of Paradise) wih
neither have differences nor hatred amongst themselves; their hearts will be as if
one heart and they will be glorifying Allah in the morning and in the evening."
(Al-Bukhari and Muslim).

c
<

re

c

€
<

C

A;<

€
€

c
c
c
c
.'<

*■

-.5

V3

The quarter of the saviors
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said, in
comment on the statement of Allah Almighty: “as to those who believe and work
righteousness verily we shall not suffer to perish the reward of any who do a
single righteous deed ” (Al-Kahf 30)

752

4

' y* yr' {^9-* ^ bj

1* ya )T

*1

1*

Oj ^

“They will have crowns decked with pearl, the least of which will shine the
whole space between the East and the West.” (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of
Abu Sa’id "Allah be pleased with him").
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “The pavilion in Paradise will be of hollow pearl, as high in the sky as sixty
miles, in each one of whose corner there will be a wife for the faithful believer
unseen by others.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of Abu Musa AlAsh’ari "Allah be pleased with him").
According to Ibn Abbas "Allah be pleased with them": “The pavilion (in
Paradise) will be of hollow pearl, of a square area of Farsakh in Farsakh, having
four thousand gateposts of gold.”
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said in comment on the following statement of Allah Almighty: “And on
Thrones (of Dignity), raised high” (Al-Waqi’ah 34)

i (®) &&

>

“The distance between each pair of thrones is like the distance between the
heaven and the earth.” (At-Tirmidhi).
Account Of The Food Of The Inhabitants Of Paradise
The food of the inhabitants of Paradise is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an, like
fruits, flesh of fat birds, milk, honey, quails, manna, etc. in confirmadon of that,
Allah Almighty said: “But if ye cannot and of surety ye cannot then fear the fire
whose fuel is men and stones which is prepared for those who reject faith .” (AlBaqarah 24)
4 sj)

^UT Iajyj jjt j\lf\ tyajli ty&u qJj

^

As for the drink of Paradise, it is mentioned many times in the Holy Qur’an.
It is narrated on the authority of Thawban, the freed slave of The Messenger
of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” narrated: I was standing
beside the Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” when a
Jewish rabbi came and said: “Peace be upon you O Muhammad.” I pushed him
so violently that I was about to knock him down. He asked me: “Why did you
push me?” I said to him: “Wouldn’t you call (The Prophet): O Messenger of
Allah?” He said: “I call him with the name his family named him.” The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “My name is
Muhammad, which is the name my family named me with.” The Jew said: “I
came to ask you (about something) .” The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” said: “If I talked to you (with what you wanted) would it
benefit you?” He said: “Let me (first) hear with my ear (so as to decide whether it

K

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
753
would benefit me). The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him scraped a stick he had (in the land) and said: “Ask about whatever you
liked. The Jew asked: ‘Where would the people be on the day when the earth
would be changed with another earth and so would be the heavens?” He (The
Prophet) said: “They would be in the darkness, before the bridge.” He asked:
Who of the people would cross first?” He (The Prophet) said: “The poor people
of the Emigrants.” The Jew asked: “What would they be gifted (to eat) just after
they enter into Paradise?” He (The Prophet) replied: “The extra lope of a fish’s
liver. He asked: “Then, what would their food (or lunch) be following that?” He
said: “An ox of Paradise, which used to eat from its quarters, would be
slaughtered for them.” He (the Jew) asked: <fWhat would their drink on it be?”
He (The Prophet) said: “They would drink from a well in it (Paradise) called
Salsabil.” He (the Jew) commented: “You have told the truth.” (Muslim).
It is narrated on the authority of Zaid Ibn Arqam "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: A Jew came to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" and said: “O Abu Al-Qasim! Do you not pretend that the
inhabitants of Paradise will eat and drink?” He had previously said to his
companions: “If he (the Prophet) answered in the affirmative, I would argue
with him.” The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him"
said: “Yes, by Him in Whose Hand is my soul, anyone of them would be given
the power of one hundred men in eating, drinking and sexual intercourse.” The
Jew said: “Then, who eats and drinks necessarily needs to relieve himself.” On
that the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“Their need would be fulfilled in the form of sweat like musk flowing from
their skin and behold! Their bellies would then become lean (empty from food
and drink).” (An-Nasa’i).
It is reported on the authority of Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be pleased with him" that
he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“Once you look at a bird in Paradise and have desire for it, it would fall down as
roasted in front of you.” (Al-Bazzar).
It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him that he
said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“Verily, the birds of Paradise are like the Bukht (camels), eating from the trees of
Paradise.” Abu Bakr "Allah be pleased with him" said: “O Messenger of Allah!
How blessed are those!” On that the Messenger of Allah Allah s blessing and
peace be upon him" said: “More blessed is the one who would eat thereof (he
said it thrice); and I hope you would eat thereof.” (Ahmad).
It is narrated on the authority of Ibn Umar Allah be pleased with them
that he said in comment on the statement of Allah Almighty: To them will be
passed round, dishes and goblets of gold: there will be there all that the souls
could desire, all that the eyes could delight in: and you shall abide therein (for
aye).” (Az-Zukhruf 71)

K

<

<

*5

<:

<

Cl
<?
C
V
V

c

' i'1
V■
JK 1

vJ
^£a'y<—

>T—

“They would be served with seventy goblets of gold, each having a kind of
•"V—

7TT

W

w

xT*7

V

-

The quarter of the saviors
754 -------------------------------food that is not in the others.”
It is further reported on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Mas’ud "Allah be
pleased with him" that he said in comment on the statement of Allah Almighty:
“With it will be (given) a mixture of Tasnim” (Al-Mutaffiffin 27)
>>

)y

“It will be mixed for the companions of the right hand while the nearest to
Allah would drink thereof as pure. Were a man from the inhabitants of this world
to dip his hand therein and then take it out, the pleasant smell would overwhelm
all living beings on earth.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
ACCOUNT OF HOURIS OF BIG LUSTROUS EYES
It should be known to you that the Qur’an made a mention of the houris
(heavenly beautiful women of big lustrous eyes) many times, and the Prophetic
narrations talked about them in more detail.
It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “A single
endeavor (of fighting) in Allah's Cause in the afternoon or in the forenoon is
better than all the world and whatever is in it. A place in Paradise as small as the
bow or lash of one of you is better than all the world and whatever is in it. And if
a houri from Paradise appeared to the people of the earth, she would fill the
space between Heaven and the Earth with light and pleasant scent and her head
cover is better than the world and whatever is in it." (Al-Bukhari).
It is further narrated on the authority of Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri "Allah be
pleased with him" that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" said in comment on the statement of Allah Almighty: “In
them will be (Maidens), chaste, restraining their glances, whom no man or Jinn
before them has touched... Like unto rubies and coral” (Ax-Rahman 58)

i C|5

}

“If you look at her cheek in her tent you would find it purer than a mirror;
and the smallest pearl on her is (as shining as) to illuminate what is between the
East and the West. She will have seventy dresses, so transparent that the marrow
of her leg would be seen from behind them.” (Abu Ya’li and Ahmad).
It is narrated on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “On
the night I was made to set out on a night journey to the heaven, I entered a
place in Paradise called Baydakh, in which there were tents of pearl, green
aquamarine and rubies. Women said: “Peace be upon you O Messenger of
Allah.” I asked: “O Gabriel! What is that call?” He said: “Those are the (houris)
restrained (to their glances) in pavilions. They have sought the permission of their
Lord to salute you, and He gave them permission.” Then they said: “We are the
ever-contented, who never become displeased; and we are the eternal ones, who
never leave.” Then, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" recited the statement of Allah: “Companions restrained (as to their glances),
in (goodly) pavilions.” (Ar-Rahman 72)

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
^

ci

755

>

«

'jy** 2 •* j>>- ^

It is narrated that a man said: “O Messenger of Allah! Should the inhabitants
of Paradise have sexual intercourse (with women)?” the Messenger of Allah
Allah s blessing and peace be upon him" said: “A man of them would be given
on one day the power of seventy from among you.” (At-Tirmidhi and Ibn
Hibban on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him").
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “The
man from among the inhabitants of Paradise will marry five hundred houris, four
thousand virgins, and eight thousand previously married women, and will
embrace each of them as long as is equal to the whole of his lifetime in this
world.” (Abu Ash-Shaykh on the authority of Ibn Abu Awfa).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “In
Paradise, there will be a market in which no transaction is practiced. But it will
have only faces of men and women: if a man has a desire for the face of any
woman, he will enter into it. It will have the gathering of the houris of big
lustrous eyes, raising their voices, the like of which the creatures have never heard
: “We are ever eternal who never leave. We are ever blissful who never suffer. We
are ever contented who never become displeased. Blessed be he who will be for
us and we for him.” (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Ali).
It is reported on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him" that he
said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“Verily, the houris of big lustrious eyes are singing in Paradise: *We are the good
beautiful houris kept for honored husbands/ (At-Tabarani).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Umamah Al-Bahili "Allah be pleased
with him" that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" said: “No man enters Paradise but that two houris of big lustrous eyes
sit by his head and feet, singing to him with the best voice men and jinn have
ever heard, not like the musical instruments of devil, but praising and exalting
Allah Almighty.” (At-Tabarani).

A Set Of Various Attributes Of The Inhabitants Of Paradise
It is narrated on the authority of Usamah Ibn Zaid that he said: The
Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said one day to his
companions: “Let’s us seek earnestly for the Garden! Verily, the Garden has no
rival: it is, by the Lord of the Ka’bah, a shining light, a moving basU, a wellestablished palace, a flowing river, ripe fruits in abundance, a beautiful good
looking wife, a lot of ornaments in a permanent station in affluence and
brightness, in high wonderful faultless houses.” They said: AVe are seeking
earnestly for it O Messenger of Allah.” He said: “You should say (by way of
restriction): “Allah Willing.” Then, he made a mention of Jihad and exhorted
them to do it. (Ibn Majah and Ibn Hibban).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Hurairah: The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: "The first group of people, who
will enter Paradise, will be glittering like the full moon; and those who will follow
them, will glitter like the most brilliant star in the sky. They will neither urinate,
nor relieve nature, nor spit, nor have any nasal secretions. Their combs will be of
gold, and their sweat will smell like musk. The aloe wood will be used in their

X

X

K

<

<

<

<
<;

<

%

€

€
c

c

< .3=

C
V

4*—

Vzr

i-r*

!

The quarter of the saviors
756
censers. Their wives will be so much beautiful with big and lustrous eyes. All of
them will look alike and will resemble their father Adam (in stature), as tall as
sixty cubits." (Ibn Majah).
It is narrated that a man came to the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" and said: “O Messenger of Allah! Would there be horses in
Paradise? Indeed I like them very much.” The Messenger of Allah "Allah's
blessing and peace be upon him" said: “If you so like, you will have a ruby-made
horse to fly with you wherever you want in Paradise.” Another man asked him:
“Would there be camels in Paradise?” He said: “O servant of Allah! If you are
admitted to Paradise, you would have therein what your soul desires and pleases
your eye.” (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Buraidah).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" said: “Verily, a man from the inhabitants of Paradise will beget the child just
as he likes, with his pregnancy, birth, weaning and growth being only in one
hour.” (Ibn Majah and At-Tirmidhi).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “The inhabitants of Paradise would be hairless, beardless, soft and white complexioned, of thirty-three years of age, in the form of Adam, sixty cubits high
and seven cubits broad.” (At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Mu’adh).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “The one who will have the least position in Paradise will have eighty
thousand servants and seventy-two wives, to whom a dome of pearl, aquamarine
and rubies will be set up, as wide as is the distance from Al-Jabiyah to San’a. they
will have crowns over their heads, the smallest pearl of which will (be as shining
as to) illuminate what is between the East and the West.” (At-Tirmidhi on the
authority of Abu Sa’id "Allah be pleased with him").
It is reported on the authority of Abu Hurairah that he said: The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: Allah
Almighty says: “I have prepared for My servants (in Paradise) that which no
eye has ever seen, no ear has ever heard of, and no human mind has ever
thought of.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim).
Al-Hassan Al-Basri mentioned the attributes of Paradise in brief saying:
“Its pomegranates are as huge as buckets; and its rivers are incorruptible;
rivers of milk of which the taste never changes; rivers of wine, which neither
befogs the minds, nor troubles thinking: But a joy to those who drink; and
rivers of honey pure and clear. In it there are for them all kinds of fruits; and
Grace from their Lord, in it, there is neither fatigue, nor trouble, nor pain at
all. It has what no eye has ever seen, no ear has ever heard of, and no human
mind has ever thought of. Its inhabitants will be blissful kings of thirty-three
years of age, sixty cubits long, and seven cubits broad, hairless, beardless,
white-complexioned. They will be safe from punishment, reassured and free
from anxiety. Its rivers flow over rocks of rubies and aquamarines. Its trees,
palms and vine are of pearls, and its fruits are unknown to anyone other than
Allah Almighty. Its pleasant smell is detectable from as far as a five hundredyear journey. They will have horses and camels therein, whose saddles and
bridals are of rubies.

Book ten.remembrance of Death and hereafter life
757
They will visit each other therein. Their wives will be from the houris of big
lustrous eyes, as pure as well-guarded pearls. Any woman of them would put on
seventy dresses over her body, and even, out of her beauty, the marrow of her
legs would be visible from behind all of them. In it, Allah Almighty will purify
characters from evil and bodies from death. In it they will neither spit, nor
expectorate, nor urinate, nor defecate: But it will be just sweat as pleasant as
musk. Their sustenance will be brought to them every morning and evening.
The last of people to enter Paradise will be made to stretch his sight to see his
kingdom across one hundred years of palaces, houses and tents of gold, silver
and pearl, and it will be too spacious for him to enable him to see his kingdom
from one end to the other. It will be passed round them with seventy thousand
goblets of gold every morning and evening, each having a definite kind of food
that is not in the others. In Paradise, there is a ruby, having seventy thousand
houses, each of which has seventy thousand dwellings, in which there is neither
flaw nor a hole.”
According to Mujahid: “The one who will have the least position from
among the inhabitants of Paradise will walk one thousand years along his
kingdom, seeing it from one end to the other. But the one who will have the
highest rank is he who will look at the Countenance of his Lord every
morning and evening.”
According to Sa’id Ibn Al-Musayyab: “There is none from among the
inhabitants of Paradise but that he will have three bracelets: One of gold, another
of silver and a third of pearl.”
According to Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him": “In Paradise, there
is a houri called Al-Ayna’ (lady of large beaudfiil attractive eye): Whenever she
walks, seventy thousand chambermaids walk on her right and left. She will be
saying: “Where are those who used to enjoin right and forbid evil?”
According to Yahya Ibn Mu’adh: “It is difficult to leave this world; and
more difficult is to miss Paradise. But even, to leave this world is the dower of
Paradise.” He said on another occasion: “Humiliation lies in the pursuit of
this world, whereas honor lies in pursuit of the hereafter. Wonder at him who
prefers humiliation in pursuit of what is perishable to the honor in pursuit of
what is enduring.”

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
ACCOUNT OF VISION AND LOOKING AT THE COUNTENANCE OF ALLAH
Allah Almighty said: “To those who do right is a goodly (reward) yea, more
(than in measure)!” (Yunus 26)

i 0 sXjj

Iri-TfodiJ * »

This more is the vision and looking at the Countenance of Allah Almighty. It
is the greatest pleasure, which causes the beholder to forget all delights of
Paradise. There are witnesses to it from the Book and sunnah, unlike what some
religious innovators might falsely think.
It is narrated on the authority of Jarir Ibn Abdullah Al-Bajali "Allah be
pleased with him" that he said: We were with The Prophet “Allah’s blessing
and peace be upon him” and he looked at the moon, and it was full, and then

;x
x

X
X

X
x
x
x.
7r\
x
>

<<

X
X
X
.

•'

■

X
'1

C
<5

<<

c
€
c
c
V-

The quarter of the saviors
758
said: “Certainly you will see your Lord as you see this moon and you will have
no trouble in seeing Him. So if you can avoid missing (through sleep or
business, etc.) a prayer before the sunrise (Fajr) and a prayer before sunset
(Asr), you must do so.” He then recited Allah's Statement: “And celebrate the
praises Of your Lord before the rising of the sun and before (its) setting."
(Qaf 39)
(Al-Bukhari and Muslim).
It is narrated on the authority of Suhaib "Allah be pleased with him" that The
Prophet “Allah's blessing and peace be upon him” said: “When the people of
Paradise enter into Paradise, Allah would address them saying: “Do you want me
to give you anything more?” They would reply: “Did you (O Lord) not make
heavy our balances (of good deeds)? Did You not make our faces bright? Did you
not admit us in Paradise and save us from the (Hell) fire?” Then, he (Allah)
would remove the veil (of light), and they would look at the Countenance of
Allah Almighty. In this way, they would not be given anything dearer to them
than their seeing their Lord the Exalted.” (Muslim).
Indeed, it is with that pleasure that all other delights of Paradise are forgotten
and regarded with slightness. The happiness of the people of Paradise in that
vision is infinite. The pleasure of meeting Allah Almighty is incomparable to any
pleasure else. The servant should not be concerned with anything from Paradise
other than the meeting of Allah Almighty, for the remaining pleasures of
Paradise are shared between him and the animals.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
EXTENSIVE MERCY OF ALLAH ALMIGHTY
Let's conclude our book with a brief talk about the extensive mercy of Allah
Almighty, by way of optimism, since the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and
peace be upon him" used to love the good omen and the good pleasant word. We
have but to imitate the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon
him" in all that he loved.
Allah Almighty said: “Allah forgives not that partners should be set up with
Him; but He forgives anything else, to whom He pleases; to set up partners with
Allah is to devise a sin most heinous indeed.” (An-Nisa’ 48)

And: “Say: "O my Servants who have transgressed against their souls! despair
not of the Mercy of Allah: for Allah forgives all sins: for He is Oft-Forgiving,
Most Merciful.” (Az-Zumar 53)
0j

\I

4 £|3

V ’•> jj * ~J'

Is

> i><3\

And: “If anyone does evil or wrongs his own soul but afterwards seeks Allah's
forgiveness, he will find Allah Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful. (An-Nisa' 110)

Book tenrremembrance of Death and hereafter life

>

759
J1

cr*3 ^

First of all, we seek forgiveness of Allah for any foot slip or pen transgression
m this book; we seek His forgiveness for our statements that might contradict
our deeds; we seek Flis forgiveness for the knowledge we have shown in the
rehgion of Allah Almighty, and then indulged in or fallen short of it; and we seek
His forgiveness for every deed or act thereby we intended His Countenance, and
en it was mixed with anything else; and we seek His forgiveness for every
promise we made and failed to fulfill; and we seek His forgiveness for every favor
He conferred upon us and we utilized in disobedience of Him; and we seek His
forgiveness for every kind of shortage deficiency or indulgence; and we seek His
forgiveness for every idea that invited us to ostentadon that seemed in what we
said or wrote to people.
Then, we hope, after that seeking for forgiveness, for everyone who has read
or heard of this book of ours, to be granted forgiveness, mercy and excuse of all
sins, be they apparent or hidden: Indeed, Allah’s generosity is encompassing, and
His mercy fill-embracing.
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “The
mercy of Allah Almighty consists of one hundred parts, and He sent only one on
earth and distributed among men, jinn, animals and insects, therewith they show
mercy towards each other, and have affection for each other; and kept with Him
ninety-nine parts of mercy to bestow upon His servants on the Day of
Judgement.” (Muslim on the authority of Abu Hurairah and Salman).
It is further reported that when it is the Day of Judgement, Allah Almighty
would bring out a book from underneath the Throne (of Majesty), having the
following phrase: “My mercy has preceded (and overpowered) My anger.” It is
with this phrase that as much as is the number of the inhabitants of Paradise
would be taken out of the fire (of Hell).” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the
authority of Abu Hurairah "Allah be pleased with him").
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “On
the Day of Judgement, Allah Almighty would rise with His Glory to us and say
cheerfully: “Receive the glad tidings O Muslims! There is none of you but that I
have put in his place in fire a Jew or a Christian.” (Muslim on the authority of
Abu Musa Al-Ash’ari "Allah be pleased with him").
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “On
the Day of Judgement, Allah Almighty would accept the intercession of Adam
for one hundred and ten thousand thousand from among all his offspring. (AtTabarani on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him").
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “Indeed, on the Day of Judgement, Allah would say to the faithful believers:
“Have you liked to meet Me?” they would answer in the affirmative, and He
would ask them: “Why?” They would say: “We have hoped for Your pardon and
forgiveness.” On that He would say: “Then, I have assured My forgiveness to
you.” (Ahmad and At-Tabarani on the authority of Mu’adh).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: Allah Almighty says on the Day of Judgement: “Take out of fire such as
remembered me even on a single day or feared me even on a single standing.”

>r.

:X
....

X
>

<

X
X

x
X
X

X:

>c

K
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
•: <

Mb

The quarter of the saviors
760
(At-Tirmidhi on the authority of Anas "Allah be pleased with him").
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
“When the denizens of fire gather in the fire, along with such as Allah wills from
among the people of Qiblah (i.e. Muslims), the disbelievers would say to the
Muslims: “Have you not been Muslims?” They would answer in the affirmative.
They would say to them: “Then, your faith in Islam has availed you not as you
now are with us in the fire of Hell.” They would say: “Indeed, we committed sins
for which we received punishment.” Allah Almighty would hear their speech, and
command to take out the Muslims from the fire, and when they are taken out, the
disbelievers would say: ‘"Would that we were Muslims to be taken out just as they
have been taken out!” Then, the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" recited: “Again and again will those who disbelieve, wish that they
had bowed (to Allah's Will) in Islam.” (Al-Hijr 2)

(An-Nasa’i on the authority of Jabir "Allah be pleased with him").
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “No doubt, Allah is more merciful towards His believing servant than a
mother towards her newborn child.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim on the authority of
Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased with him").
According to Jabir Ibn Abdullah "Allah be pleased with them": “Whoever
comes on the Day of Judgement with his good deeds more than his misdeeds,
would enter Paradise without reckoning; and whoever has his good deeds equal
to his misdeeds, would be reckoned with easy reckoning and then enter Paradise;
and the intercession of the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be
upon him" would be due to such as destroys himself and overburdens his back
(with sins and misdeeds).”
It is reported that Allah Almighty said to Moses "peace be upon him": “O
Moses! Qarun sought relief of you and you did not relieve him. By My Honor
and Glory! Had he sought relief of Me, I would have relieved him.”
According to Sa’d Ibn Bilal: “On the Day of Judgement, it would be
commanded that two men be taken out of the fire, and Allah Almighty would
say: "This is because of the (unrighteous deeds) which your hands sent on before
you: for Allah never harms those who serve Him." (AI Imran 182)
4 Sjp

^Si\ Ob

villi ^

Then, He would command that they be brought back to the fire. One of
them would rush in his chains until he enters it, and the other would slow down.
Allah would command that they be brought to Him and ask them about their
deed. The one who would rush towards the fire would say: “I was warned of the
evil consequence of disobedience, and I was not to expose myself to Your wrath
once again.” The other who would slow down would say: “My good assumption
of You gave me the impression that You would not bring me back to it once
again after You have taken me out of it.” Then, He Almighty would command
that they enter Paradise.”
The Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: “On

Book tenrremembrance of Death and hereafter life
761
Ju<%ement, a caller would call publicly from underneath the Throne
of Majesty: O Ummah of Muhammad! I have forgiven for you what I have on
you, and there remains on you only the rights you have on each other: then,
excuse each other for them and enter Paradise by virtue of My mercy.”
It is narrated on the authority of As-Sunabihi that he went to visit Ubadah
Ibn As-Samit who was at his last breaths, (the narrator said): I burst into tears.
He said to me: “(Be quiet and) give me some time (so that I may tell you
something). Why do you weep? By Allah, if I am made to be a witness, I would
surely testify for you (that you are a faithful believer). If I am asked to intercede, I
would surely intercede for you. Moreover, if I have the power, I would surely do
good to you. By Allah, I have never heard anything from The Messenger of Allah
Allah s blessing and peace be upon him” which could have been of benefit to
you, but that I reported to you except this narration, which I’m going to narrate
to you now, since I am about to die. I heard The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” saying: “He who testifies that there is no god
but Allah and that Muhammad is The Messenger of Allah, Allah would forbid the
(Hell) fire from him.” (Muslim).
It is narrated on the authority of Abdullah Ibn Amr "Allah be pleased with
him" that he said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: “On the Day of Judgement, a man from my Ummah will be called
loudly in the presence of all the creatures, and ninety-nine scrolls (of his evil
deeds) will be spread for him, each as long as the sight could reach, and Allah
Almighty will say to him: “Do you deny anything of those (misdeeds the scrolls
contain)?” he will say: “No O my Lord!” he (Allah) will say: “Have My keeping
scribes wronged you?” He will answer in the negative, he (Allah) will say: “Do
you have any good deed (to suffice you) against that?” He will feel afraid and
then say: “No.” He (Allah) will say: “Nay! You have a good deed with Us; and
today, you should receive no injustice.” Then, a card having (the testimony that)
“I bear witness that there is No god (to be worshipped) but Allah, and that
Muhammad is Allah’s Messenger and servant” will be brought out for him,
thereupon he will say: “O my Lord! What could this card do with those long
scrolls?” he (Allah) will say: “You will not be wronged (even in the least).” The
scrolls will be placed in one pan, and the card in the other, and then the scrolls
will fly away, and the card will overweigh.” (Ibn Majah).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Sa’id Al-Khudri "Allah be pleased with
him" that eh said: During the lifetime of The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace
be upon him" some people said: “O Allah's Aposde! Shall we see our Lord on the
Day of Judgement?" The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said:
"Yes. Do you have any difficulty in seeing the sun at midday when it is bright and
there is no cloud in the sky? Do you have any difficulty in seeing the moon at a
fall moon night when it is bright and there is no cloud in the sky?" They replied:
"No.” The Prophet "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" said: "(Then) you
will have no difficulty in seeing Allah on the Day of Judgement as you have no
difficulty in seeing both of them. On the Day of Judgement, a call-maker will
announce: "Let every nation follow that which they used to worship people will
come out (of the River of Life) like pearls, wearing necklaces. Then they will
enter into Paradise whereupon the people of Paradise will say: “Those are the

>

x

xx
>

< i

X
X
X;
< <•

K

K

K

<

<

C

€

€
C

The quarter of the saviors
762
people set free by The Most Gracious. He has admitted them into Paradise
though they did no good deeds nor did they sent forth any good (for
themselves)”. Then it will be said to them: “All of what you have seen is For you,
in addition to an amount equal to it as well.” They will say: “O our Lord! You
have given us what you have not given anyone of the worlds”. Allah will reply:
“There remains better than that with me to give you”. They will ask: “O our
Lord! Which thing is better than that?” He will say: “My pleasure (with you), after
which, I would never be angry with you.” Every nation, which used to worship
anything other than Allah such idles, will fall into the (Hell) fire. There will
remain none but those who used to worship Allah, whether they were obedient
(Good) or disobedient (evil) and the remaining party of the people of the
Scripture. Then the Jews will be called upon and it will be said to them: “Whom
did you use to worship?” They will say: “We used to worship Ezra, the son of
Allah.” It will be said to them: “You are liars, for Allah has never taken anyone as
a wife or a son. What do you want now?” They will say: “O our Lord! We are
thirsty, and we want to drink.” They will be directed and addressed thus:
‘Wouldn’t you drink?” whereupon they will be mustered into The Hell, which
will be like a mirage, with each part destroying the other. Then, they will fall into
the (Hell) fire. Afterwards the Christians will be called upon and it will be said to
them: “Whom did you use to worship?” They will say: “We used to worship
Jesus, the son of Allah.” It will be said to them: “You are liars, for Allah has
never taken anyone as a wife or a son.” Then it will be said to them: “What do
you want?” They will say: “O Lord! We are thirsty, and We want to drink.” They
will be directed and addressed: “Wouldn’t you drink?” They will be gathered into
the Hell, which will be like a mirage, with each part destroying the other. Then
they will fall into The (Hell) fire. Then, when there remain (in the gathering) none
but those who used to worship Allah whether they were obedient or disobedient,
The Lord of all the worlds “Exalted be He” will come to them in a shape,
different from that they saw (at first), and he will say to them: “What are you
waiting for? Every nation has followed what they used to worship.” They will
reply: “We left the people in the world when we were in great need of them and
we did not take them as friends. Now we are waiting for our Lord Whom we
used to worship.” He will say: “I am your Lord.” They will say: “We seek refuge
from you! We never associate anything with Allah.” (They will say so twice or
thrice), to the extent that some of them will be about to revert. Then it will be said to
them: “Do you know any sign by which you can recognize Him?” They will say:
“Yes (It is The Shin)
Allah will then uncover the Shin whereupon every
believer, who used to prostrate to Allah out of faith will be allowed to prostrate
before Him, but there is no one, who used to prostrate before Him just for
showing off and getting good reputation but that Allah will make his back as a
vertebra. The more he will try to prostrate the more (his back will be as rigid as a
piece of wood so that) he will fall on his back. When they will raise up their heads
(after the prostration), There, he will change into the shape they saw at the first
time. He will say (to them): “I’m your Lord.” They will confirm: “Indeed, You
are our Lord” Then the bridge will be laid across Hell; and the intercession will
be permitted, and they will say: “O Allah, save us! O Allah, save us!” The Prophet
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” was asked: “O Allah's Apostle! What is

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
763
the bridge? He said: “It is a slippery (bridge) on which there are clamps and
(Hooks like) thorny seeds, which are wide at one side and narrow at the other,
having thorns with bent ends. Such thorny seeds are found in Najd and are called
Sa dan. Some of the believers will cross the bridge as quick as the wink of an eye,
some others as quick as lightning, (others as fast as) a strong wind, (others as
quick as) birds, fast horses or she-camels. Moreover, some will be safe without
any harm; some will be safe after receiving some scratches, and some will fall
down into Hell (Fire). By Him, in Whose hand my soul is! There will be no one
of you (Muslims) more pressing in claiming a right that has been clearly proved to
be yours than the believers in intercession with Allah for their (Muslim) brothers
on The Day of Judgement, when they see themselves safe. They will say: “O
Allah! (Save) our brothers (for they) used to pray with us, fast with us and also
perform pilgrimage with us.” Allah will say (to them): “Go and take out
whomever you recognize.” The fire will be forbidden to burn their (the sinners’)
faces. They will go and take out from the fire a lot of creatures, some of whom,
the fire will burn up to the half of their legs, some up to their knees. Then, they
will say (to Allah): “O our Lord! There remains no one of those whom You
ordered to take out.” Allah will say: “Go back and take out (of Hell) anyone in
whose heart you find goodness equal to the weight of a Dinar.” They will go and
take out a lot of creatures. They will say (to Allah): “O our Lord! We no longer
recognize anyone remaining of those whom You ordered us to take out (of the
fire) .” Allah will say: “Go and take out (of Hell) anyone in whose heart you find
goodness equal to the weight of half a Dinar.” They will take out a lot of
creatures. Then they will say (to Allah): “O our Lord! We no longer find anyone
remaining of those whom You ordered us to take out.” Allah will say: “Go and
take out (of Hell) anyone in whose heart you find goodness equal to the weight
of an atom (or a smallest ant) .” They will take out a lot of creatures. Then, they
will say (to Allah): “O our Lord! We no longer find any (creature having)
goodness.” Abu Sa’id "Allah be pleased with him" said: If you do not believe me
then you can recite: “Allah is never unjust in the least degree: if there is any good
(done), he doubles it, and gives from his own presence a great reward.” (An-Nisa’
40)

i ($i Xix \'j-\XX X Xx dJo jjj pi JuL (LjX ^ XT oj )>
The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” further said: “Allah
Almighty will say: “The Prophets, the Angels, and the believers interceded, and
there remains only (the Intercession of) The Most Merciful. Pie will hold a
handful of the Fire from which He will take out some people who did never do
good (in this world), whose bodies have been burnt. They will be thrown into a
river at the entrance of Paradise, called the water of life. They will grow on its
banks, as a seed carried by the torrent grows. Perhaps you observed how it grows
beside a rock or beside a tree, and how the side facing the sun is usually green,
while the side facing the shade is white.” The companions of The Prophet
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said: “O Messenger of Allah! It seemed
as if you used to shepherd the catde and sheep in the desert.” (Then The Prophet
resumed): “Those people will come out (of the River of Life) like pearls, wearing
necklaces. Then they will enter into Paradise whereupon the people of Paradise

xT

x

X
X
X

x
>

'X

X
X;

‘

.2

X
X
X

,'*

X

c

f=*.

€

•v.
< <.;*=

€

c
c
c
<3

;\*=

v=
V
&

The quarter of the saviors
764
will say: “Those are the people set free by The Most Gracious. He has admitted
them into Paradise though they did no good deeds nor did they sent forth any
good (for diemselves) .” Then it will be said to them: “All of what you have seen
is For you, in addition to an amount equal to it as well.” They will say: “O our
Lord! You have given us what you have not given anyone of the worlds.” Allah
will reply: “There remains better than that with me to give you.” They will ask:
“O our Lord! Which tiling is better than that?” he will say: “My pleasure (with
you), after which, I would never be angry with you.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim).
It is further narrated on the authority of Ibn Abbas: “The Prophet “Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon him” came out to us and said: “The people were
displayed in front of me and I saw one prophet passing by with a large group of
his followers, and another prophet passing by with only a small group of people,
and another prophet passing by with only ten (persons), and another prophet
passing by with only five (persons), and another prophet passed by alone. And
then I looked and saw a large multitude of people, so I asked Gabriel, "Are
these people my followers?” He said: “No, but look towards the horizon.” I
looked and saw a very large multitude of people. Gabriel said. Those are your
followers, and those are seventy thousand (persons) in front of them who will
neither have any reckoning of their accounts nor will receive any punishment.”
I asked: “Why?” He said: “For they used not to treat themselves with branding
(cauterization) nor with Ruqyah (get oneself treated by the recitation of some
Verses of the Qur'an) and not to see evil omen in things, and they used to put
their trust (only) in their Lord." On hearing that, Ukashah Ibn Mihsan got up
and said (to The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”), "Invoke
Allah to make me one of them." The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said: “O Allah, make him one of them." Then another man got up
and said (to The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him”), "Invoke
Allah to make me one of them." The Prophet “Allah’s blessing and peace be
upon him” said: “Ukashah has preceded you." (AJ-Bukhari).
It is narrated on the authority of Amr Ibn Hazm Al-Ansari that he said: The
Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him" withdrew from us
for three days, during which he came out only for an obligatory written prayer
and then he would return home. When it was the fourth day he came out to us
and we said: “O Messenger of Allah! You have withdrawn from us to the extent
that we thought something serious has happened.” He "peace be upon him" said:
“Nothing but good has happened. Allah Almighty promised me to admit to
Paradise seventy thousand of my Ummah without reckoning, and during those
three days (I was absent from you), I kept asking my Lord for more, and found
my Lord Most Generous, Most Glorious, Most Beneficent. He granted to me
with each one of the seventy thousand another seventy thousand (to enter
Paradise without reckoning). I said: “O my Lord! would my Ummah reach that
number?” He said: “I would complete it from the Bedouins.” (Al-Baihaqi,
Ahmad and Abu Ya’li).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Dharr "Allah be pleased with him" that
he said: The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
“Gabriel came to me to the side of this Harrah (of Medina) as a messenger from
my Lord and gave me the news (or good tidings) that if any of my followers dies

Book ten:remembrance of Death and hereafter life
765
worshipping none (in any way) along with Allah, he will enter Paradise." I asked:
Even if he committed adultery and theft?" He replied: “Even if he committed
adultery and theft. I asked again: “Even if he committed adultery and theft?" He
replied: ‘Even if he committed adultery and theft." I asked (for the third time):
Even if he committed adultery and theft?" He replied: “Even if he committed
adultery and theft." (Al-Bukhari).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Ad-Darda’ "Allah be pleased with him"
that he said: The Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him"
recited: But for such as fear the time when they will stand before (the Judgment
Seat of) their Lord, there will be two Gardens.” (Ar-Rahman 46)

I asked: “Even if he committed adultery and theft O Messenger of Allah?" He
recited: “But for such as fear the dme when they will stand before (the Judgment
Seat of) their Lord, there will be two Gardens.” I asked (for the third time):
“Even if he committed adultery and theft O Messenger of Allah?" He said: “Yes,
against the will of Abu Ad-Darda\” (Ahmad).
The Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" further
said: “When it is the day of Judgement, everyone of the believers will be given
one from amongst the non-Muslims , and it will be said to him: £tThat is your
ransom from the fire (of Hell).” (Muslim on the authority of Abu Musa).
It is narrated on the authority of Abu Burdah that he related to Umar Ibn
Abd-Al-Aziz from his father Abu Musa "Allah be pleased with him" that the
Messenger of Allah "Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him" said: “No Muslim
person dies but that Allah admits to the fire in his place a Jew or a Christian.”
Umar Ibn Abd-Al-Aziz beseeched him to take oath by Allah other than Whom
there is no god thrice to confirm to him whether his father related that to him
from the Messenger of Allah "Allah's blessing and peace be upon him", and he
took oath to that. (Muslim).
It is narrated on the authority of Umar Ibn Al-Khattab "Allah be pleased
with him" that some prisoners were brought to The Messenger of Allah
“Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” amongst whom there was a woman,
who was searching (for someone) and when she found a child amongst the
prisoners, she took hold of it, pressed it against her chest and provided it
suck. The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon him” said:
“Do you think this woman would ever afford to throw her child in the Fire?
We said: “By Allah, so far as it lies in her power, she would never throw the
child in Fire.” The Messenger of Allah “Allah’s blessing and peace be upon
him” said: "Allah is more merciful towards His servants than this woman
towards her child.” (Muslim).
Those Hadiths give us the glad tidings of the extensive mercy of Allah
Almighty. So, we hope that Allah Almighty should not deal with us according to
what we deserve, and rather endow us with what is fitting for Him, out of His
great bounty, all-embracing generosity and extensive mercy.

X
:X
v>

<

X
X

x
X
x
x
I >

f ‘

1

vs

K
K
X:
K
K
K
•* •

*€

XT
<

c

<

c
c
c
c

C
v
^—

yx

EXPLICATION OF AN EXAMPLE THAT IS TYPICAL OF THE
FACT THAT THE FAVORS OF ALLAH ALMIGHTY ARE
COUNTLESS................................................... .................... 171
THE FIRST SIDE OF ALLAH'S FAVORS: THE CREATION
OF THE CAUSES OF PERCEPTION ...... ......................... 172
THE SECOND SIDE OF ALLAH'S FAVORS AS REGARDS
THE CREATION OF WILL................................................... 174
THE THIRD SIDE OF ALLAH'S FAVORS OF CREATING
WELL AND INSTRUMENTS OF MOVEMENT................... 175
THE FOURTH SIDE THE FAVORS OF ALLAH ALMIGHTY
AS REGARDS THE SOURCES OF FOOD........................ 181
THE FIFTH SIDE. THE FAVORS OF ALLAH ALMIGHTY
CONCERNING THE MEANS BY WHICH FOOD
REACHES YOU ..,............................ .................................... 184
THE SIXTH SIDE- PREPARATION OF FOOD...................... 184
THE SEVENTH SIDE: PREPARATION OF MAKERS.......... 185
THE EIGHTH SIDE: EXPOSITION OF THE FAVORS OF
ALLAH CONCERNING THE CREATION OF ANGELS
"PEACE BE UPON THEM'.................................................. 187
EXPOSITION OF WHY PEOPLE ARE DIVERTED FROM
GRATITUDE......................................................................... 191
THIRD PILLAR: THAT IN WHICH PATIENCE AND
GRATITUDE SHARE AND ARE RELATED TO
EACH OTHER.......................... ........................................... 196
EXPOSITION OF THE WAY IN WHICH PATIENCE AND
GRATITUDE GATHER ON ONE THING............................ 196
BOOK THREE: FEAR AND HOPE........................................ 216
PART ONE: HOPE................................................................. 216
CHAPTER ONE: EXPOSITION OF ESSENCE
OF HOPE............................. ............................................... 216
CHAPTER TWO: EXPOSITION OF MERIT OF HOPE
AND INCLINATION TOWARDS IT...................................... 220
CHAPTER 3. EXPOSITION OF REMEDY OF HOPE AND
THE WAY IN WHICH THE STATE OF HOPE IS OBTAINED
FROM IT AND BECOMES DOMINANT........................... 222
PART TWO: FEAR................................................................ 234
CHAPTER ONE: EXPOSITION OF ESSENCE
OF
FEAR.................................................................................. 234
CHAPTER 2: EXPOSITION OF DEGREES OF FEAR
AND ITS DIFFERENTIATION INTO POWER AND
WEAKNESS....................................................................... 237
CHAPTER 3: EXPOSITION OF DIVISIONS OF FEAR IN
RELATION TO THE OBJECT WHICH IS FEARED..... .... 239
CHAPTER 4: EXPOSITION OF MERIT OF FEAR AND
INCLINATION TO IT..... ......... ........................................... 243
EXPOSITION THAT THE OPTIMUM IS THE DOMINANCE
OF FEAR OR THE DOMINANCE OF HOPE OR THE
TWO IN EQUILIBRIUM..................................................... 249
CHAPTER 5: EXPOSITION OF REMEDY BY WHICH
STATE OF FEAR IS OBTAINED....................................... 254
CHAPTER 6: EXPOSITION OF MEANING OF EVIL
OF SEAL............................................................................ 265
CHAPTER 7: EXPOSITION OF STATES OF PROPHETS
AND ANGELS IN RESPECT TO FEAR........................... 276
CHAPTER EIGHT: EXPOSITION OF STATES OF
COMPANIONS, THEIR FOLLOWERS AND THE
RIGHTEOUS PREDECESSORS AND THOSE
ENDUED WITH FAITH IN THE GRIP OF FEAR............. 280
BOOK FOUR: POVERTY AND ASCETICISM...................... 290

REVIVAL OF RELIGIOUS SCIENCES................................ 3
QUARTER OF SAVIORS: THE FOURTH QUARTER OF
REVIVAL OF RELIGIOUS SCIENCES............................ 3
BOOK ONE- REPENTANCE................................................. 3
FIRST PILLAR: ON NATURE OF REPENTA
NCE: EXPLICATION OF REPENTANCE AND ITS
DEFINITION........................................................................ 4
EXPLICATION OF OBLIGATION AND EXCELLENCE OF
REPENTANCE....................................... ........................... 6
EXPLICATION THAT PROMPTNESS IS (ESSENTIAL IN
FULFILLING) OBLIGATION OF REPENTANCE............. 11
EXPLICATION OF UNIVERSALITY OF OBLIGATION OF
REPENTANCE FROM WHICH NONE IS FREE............... 13
EXPLICATION OF THE FACT THAT REPENTANCE IS
SURELY ACCEPTED ONCE ITS REQUISITES ARE
AVAILABLE......................................................................... 20
SECOND PILLAR: ON CONTEXT OF REPENTANCE.
SINS: TRIVIAL AND MORTAL.......................................... 24
EXPOSITION OF DIVISIONS OF SIN IN RELATION TO
QUALITIES OF MAN......................................................... 24
EXPLICATION OF HOW HIGHER AND LOWER STATES.
IN THE HEREAFTER ARE DISTRIBUTED ACCORDING
TO GOOD AND EVIL DEEDS IN THIS LIFE.................... 33
EXPLICATION OF HOW MINOR SINS ARE INCREASED ...47
THIRD PILLAR: ON PERFECTION. REQUISITES
AND PERMANENCE OF REPENTANCE..........
50
EXPOSITION OF HOW PEOPLE DIFFER IN THE
PERSEVERANCE OF REPENTANCE...............
65
EXPOSITION OF WHAT MUST THE REPENTANT HASTEN
TO DO IF HE SINS EITHER WITH INTENTION AND
DOMINANT DESIRE OR BY CHANCE..................
70
FOURTH PILLAR: ON REMEDY OF REPENTANCE;
AND THE WAY OF TREATMENT FOR THE DISSOLUTION
OF KNOT OF PERSISTENCE..................
75
BOOK TWO: PATIENCE AND GRATITUDE
91
PART ONE: PATIENCE................................
91
CHAPTER ONE: EXPLICATION OF MERIT OF PATIENCE.91
CHAPTER TWO: EXPLICATION OF REAL NATURE AND
MEANING OF PATIENCE................................................... 94
CHAPTER THREE: EXPLICATION OF THE FACT THAT
PATIENCE CONSTITUTES HALF THE FAITH................. 100
CHAPTER FOUR: EXPLICATION OF THE FACT THAT ITS
NAMES DIFFER BY THE DIFFERENCE OF ITS
APPURTENANCES.............................................................. 101
CHAPTER FIVE: EXPLICATION OF CATEGORIES OF
PATIENCE
IN RELATION TO STRENGTH AND WEAKNESS............ 102
CHAPTER SIX: EXPLICATION OF THE DIRE NEED FOR
PATIENCE; AND THAT ONE COULD NOT DISPENSE
WITH IT............................................... ................................. 105
CHAPTER SEVEN: EXPLICATION OF MEDICINE OF
PATIENCE; AND THAT WHOSE AID IS SOUGHT
TO SUPPORT IT.................................................................. 116
PART TWO: GRATITUDE................................................. ...... 124
FIRST PILLAR: EXCELLENCE. REAL NATURE. DIVISIONS
AND RULINGS OF GRATITUDE......................................... 124
EXCELLENCE OF GRATITUDE............................................. 124
EXPLICATION OF DEFINITION AND REAL NATURE OF
GRATITUDE......................................................................... 127
EXPLICATION OF THE WAY OF GRATITUDE TO ALLAH
ALMIGHTY............................................................................. 133
EXPLICATION OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN WHAT
ALLAH LIKES AND WHAT HE DISLIKES.......................... 140
SECOND PILLAR: THE OBJECT OF GRATITUDE............... 155
EXPLICATION OF REAL NATURE AND DIVISIONS
OF FAVOR............................................................................. 155

PART ONE: POVERTY......................................................... 291
CHAPTER ONE: EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE OF
POVERTY; AND DIFFERENT STATES AND NAMES
OF THE POOR................................................................... 291
CHAPTER TWO: EXPOSITION OF EXCELLENCE OF
POVERTY IN GENERAL................................................... 295

766

'

I

<

CONTENTS
CHAPTER THREE: EXPOSITION OF MERIT OF SOME
PARTICULAR POOR FROM AMONG THE CONTENTED.
SATISFIED AND TRUTHFUL...........................................’ 303
CHAPTER FOUR: EXPOSITION OF SUPERIORITY OF
POVERTY OVER RICHNESS............................................ 306
CHAPTER FIVE: EXPOSITION OF ETIQUETTES OF THE POOR
IN HIS POVERTY.
313
CHAPTER SIX: EXPOSITION OF ETIQUETTES OF THE POOR
IN ACCEPTING GIFTS WHEN GIVEN TO HIM WITHOUT
BEGGING........................................................................ 315
CHAPTER SEVEN: EXPOSITION OF PROHIBITION OF
BEGGING WITH NO NECESSITY; AND ETIQUETTES
THEREIN IF ONE IS FORCED TO DO.......................... 320
CHAPTER EIGHT: EXPOSITION OF THE EXTENT TO
WHICH SELF-SUFFICIENCY MAKES BEGGING
UNLAWFUL.............................................. ........................ 326
CHAPTER NINE: EXPOSITION OF STATES OF
BEGGARS....................................................................... 328
PART TWO: ASCETICISM.................................................. 330
CHAPTER ONE. EXPOSITION OF THE REAL NATURE
OF ASCETICISM........... .................................................. 330
CHAPTER TWO: EXPOSITION OF SUPERIORITY OF
ASCETICISM................................................................... 335
CHAPTER THREE: EXPOSITION OF DEGREES AND
DIVISIONS OF ASCETICISM IN RELATION TO ITSELF.
THE THING ABSTAINED FROM. AND THE THING
DESIRED FOR.................................................................. 344
CHAPTER FOUR: EXPOSITION OF PREFERENCE OF
ASCETICISM IN LIFE NECESSITIES.............................. 351
CHAPTER FIVE: EXPOSITION OF SIGNS OF
ASCETICISM............................................................ ........ 366
BOOK FIVE: MONOTHEISM AND RELIANCE ON ALLAH... 369
INTRODUCTION: EXPOSITION OF VIRTUE OF RELIANCE
ON ALLAH........................................................................ .370
PART ONE: MONOTHEISM............................................... 373
CHAPTER ON EXPOSITION OF THE REAL NATURE OF
MONOTHEISM. WHICH IS THE FOUNDATION OF
RELIANCE........................................................................ 373
PART TWO: STATES AND DEEDS OF RELIANCE
ON ALLAH........................................................................ 388
CHAPTER ONE- EXPOSITION OF STATE OF RELIANCE .. 388
CHAPTER TWO: EXPOSITION OF THE STATEMENTS
OF MANY SHEIKHS ABOUT THE DIFFERENT STATES
393
OF RELIANT
CHAPTER THREE: EXPOSITION OF DEEDS OF RELIANT 395
THE FIRST PURPOSE: TO GET A BENEFIT .................... 395
EXPOSITION OF RELIANCE AS TO EARNING FOR THE
SINGLE AND THE RESPONSIBLE FOR HIS FAMILY.... 405
EXPOSITION OF STATES OF RELIANT IN ATTACHMENT
TO SUSTENANCE THROUGH A SIMILITUDE.................. 410
THE SECOND PURPOSE: TO KEEP A BENEFIT............... 411
EXPOSITION OF RELIANCE AS REGARDS THE
CAUSES OF SAVING AND THE AMOUNT TO BE
SAVED...................... .......................................................... 411
THE THIRD PURPOSE: TO AVERT HARM EXPOSITION
OF SEEKING MEANS THAT AVERT HARM WHICH
LEADS TO FEAR............................................................... 415
EXPOSITION OF ETIQUETTES OF RELIANT WHEN THEIR
LUGGAGE IS STOLEN.................................................... 419
THE FOURTH PURPOSE: TO PREVENT HARM............... 422
EXPOSITION OF SEEKING TO PREVENT HARM LIKE
TREATING AILMENT AND THE LIKE OF IT.................... 422
REFUTATION OF THE CLAIM THAT LEAVING MEDICINE
IS BETTER IN ALL STATES.............................................. 432
EXPOSITION OF STATES OF RELIANT IN DISCLOSING
AND CONCEALING ILLNESS........................................... 435
BOOK SIX: LOVE. LONGING. INTIMACY AND
CONTENTMENT............................................................... 437
PART ONE: LOVE. LONGING AND INTIMACY.................. 437
CHAPTER ONE: EXPOSITION OF THE SHARIA-BASED
QUOTATIONS IN LOVE OF THE SERVANT FOR ALLAH
ALMIGHTY......................................................................... 438

767
CHAPTER TWO. EXPOSITION OF REAL NATURE AND
CAUSES OF LOVE FOR ALLAH; AND VERIFICATION
OF THE SERVANT S LOVE FOR ALLAH ALMIGHTY..... 441
CHAPTER THREE. EXPOSITION OF THE FACT THAT
NONE DESERVES LOVE OTHER THAN ALLAH
ALMIGHTY ALONE.........................................................
447
CHAPTER FOUR: EXPOSITION OF THE FACT THAT THE
NOBLEST AND HIGHEST PLEASURE LIES IN THE
GNOSIS OF ALLAH ALMIGHTY AND LOOKING AT HIS
BOUNTEOUS FACE; AND NO PLEASURE HAS THE
SAME EFFECT UNLESS ONE IS DEPRIVED OF IT........ 457
CHAPTER FIVE: EXPOSITION OF WHY THE PLEASURE
OF LOOKING IN THE HEREAFTER EXCELS THE
PLEASURE OF THE GNOSIS IN THE WORLD....
464
CHAPTER SIX: EXPOSITION OF CAUSES THAT
STRENGTHEN LOVE FOR ALLAH ALMIGHTY....
469
CHAPTER SEVEN EXPOSITION OF WHY PEOPLE
VARY IN LOVE............................................. ........... .
473
CHAPTER EIGHT: EXPOSITION OF WHY PEOPLE’S MINDS
FALL SHORT OF GNOSIS OF ALLAH ALMIGHTY........ 475
CHAPTER NINE: EXPOSITION OF MEANING OF LONGING
FOR ALLAH ALMIGHTY................................................... ..477
CHAPTER TEN. EXPOSITION OF ALLAH’S LOVE FOR
SERVANT. AND ITS MEANING....................................... 484
CHAPTER ELEVEN. EXPOSITION OF SIGNS OF
SERVANTS
LOVE FOR ALLAH ALMIGHTY....... ................................. 489
CHAPTER TWELVE: EXPOSITION OF MEANING
OF INTIMACY WITH ALLAH............................................. 502
CHAPTER THIRTEEN: EXPOSITION OF MEANING OF
ELATION AND PAMPERING PRODUCED BY
OVERWHELMING INTIMACY........................................... . 504
PART TWO: CONTENTMENT.............................................. . 510
CHAPTER ONE: EXPLICATION OF VIRTUE OF
CONTENTMENT..... .......................................................... 510
CHAPTER TWO: EXPLICATION OF REAL NATURE OF
CONTENTMENT AND ITS NOTION WITH WHAT
OPPOSES INCLINATION...................... ........................... 516
CHAPTER THREE: EXPLICATION OF THE FACT THAT
INVOCATION NEVER CONTRADICTS
CONTENTMENT........................................................-...... 521
CHAPTER FOUR: EXPLICATION OF THE FACT THAT
FLIGHT FROM OR CRITICISM OF PLACES OF SINS
AND DISOBEDIENCE DOES NOT DISAPPROVE OF
CONTENTMENT................................................................ 524
CHAPTER FIVE: EXPLICATION OF MANY STATEMENTS
..... 526
OF LOVERS
BOOK SEVEN: INTENTION. SINCERITY AND TRUTH.......531
CHAPTER ONE: INTENTION...............................-................ 532
EXPLICATION OF VIRTUE OF INTENTION......................... 532
EXPLICATION OF REAL NATURE OF INTENTION----------- 536
EXPLICATION OF DEEDS THAT ARE RELATED TO

INTENTION....................................................................... 541
EXPLICATION OF THE FACT THAT INTENTION IS
BEYOND CHOICE................................... -.......................... 548
CHAPTER TWO: SINCERITY ITS VIRTUE. REAL NATURE
.. 552
AND DEGREES...........................................................
552
VIRTUE OF SINCERITY........................-........................
556
EXPLICATION OF REAL NATURE OF SINCERITY....
EXPLICATION OF STATEMENTS OF RIGHTEOUS IN
559
SINCERITY..................................................................
EXPLICATION OF DEGREES OF IMPURITIES AND EVILS
THAT STAIN SINCERITY....................................... .............. 561
EXPLICATION OF THE RULING OF THE DEED IN
CONNECTION WITH WHICH SINCERITY IS STAINED;
563
AND TO WHAT EXTENT IT IS REWARDABLE.....
566
CHAPTER THREE: TRUTH.........................................
.... 566
ITS VIRTUE AND REAL NATURE............................
566
EXPLICATION OF VIRTUE OF TRUTH....................
EXPLICATION OF REAL NATURE. MEANING AND
RANKS OF TRUTH ............................................... ....... 568
575
BOOK EIGHT WATCHING AND RECKONING
CHAPTER ONE: FIRST STATION PUTTING CONDITIONS 577
581
CHAPTER TWO: SECOND STATION: WATCHING

------w

<
•'
<

<
'

■■

<

<

<

<

C
cc

€
€M
3?

w
. 7-

.4 \m

‘K-

V-5
5

S

768
EXPLICATION OF VIRTUE OF WATCHING....................... 581
CHAPTER THREE: THIRD STATION: RECKONING SELF
AFTER DOING THE DEED....................... ....................... 590
VIRTUE OF RECKONING SELF........................................... 590
EXPLICATION OF REAL NATURE OF RECKONING
AFTER DOING THE DEED............................................... 592
CHAPTER FOUR: FOURTH STATION: PUNISHING SELF.. 593
CHAPTER FIVE: FIFTH STATION: SELF-MORTIFICATION 595
CHAPTER SIX: SIXTH STATION: SELF REPROACHING
603
AND BLAMING.............................................................
609
BOOK NINE: MEDITATION............................................
CHAPTER ONE: EXPLICATION OF VIRTUE OF
609
MEDITATION................................................................
CHAPTER TWO: EXPLICATION OF REAL NATURE
612
AND FRUIT OF MEDITATION.....................................
CHAPTER THREE: EXPLICATION OF FIELDS OF
614
MEDITATION................................................................
CHAPTER FOUR: EXPLICATION OF THE WAY OF
MEDITATION IN THE CREATION OF ALLAH
ALMIGHTY....................................................................
620

BOOK TEN:REMEMBRANCE OF DEATH AND
630
HEREAFTER LIFE........................................................
PART ONE: WHAT PRECEDES AND SUCCEEDS
DEATH TO THE SOUNDING OF THE TRUMPET ...
631
CHAPTER ONE: EXCELLENCE OF REMEMBRANCE
OF DEATH AND EXHORTATION TO REMEMBER IT......631
EXPLICATION OF EXCELLENCE OF REMEMBRANCE
632
OF DEATH
EXPLICATION OF THE WAY TO REMEMBER DEATH....... 635
CHAPTER TWO: CONCERNING LONG HOPE; AND
EXCELLENCE OF SHORT HOPE; AND WHY IT IS LONG. AND
635
HOW IT IS REMEDIED..............
635
EXCELLENCE OF SHORT HOPE
EXPLICATION OF WHY HOPE IS LONG, AND ITS REMEDY.. . 640
EXPLICATION OF THE DIFFERENT RANKS OF PEOPLE
CONCERNING LONG AND SHORT HOPES..................... 642
EXPLICATION OF THE NECESSITY TO HASTEN TO
WORK AND CAUTION OF THE EVIL OF DELAY............. 643
CHAPTER THREE: DEATH AGONIES AND DIFFICULTIES;
AND WHAT IS FAVORABLE OF STATES WHENEVER
IT COMES............................................................................ 647
EXPLICATION OF SUCH OF STATES AS FAVORABLE
FOR THE WOULD-BE DEAD AT DEATH.......................... 653
EXPLICATION OF GRIEF AT MEETING THE ANGEL OF
DEATH THROUGH MANY TALES...... .............................. 655
CHAPTER FOUR: CONCERNING THE DEATH OF THE
MESSENGER OF ALLAH 'ALLAH'S BLESSING AND
PEACE BE UPON HIM' AND THE RIGHTLY-GUIDED
CALIPHS AFTER HIM.......................................................... 657
THE DEATH OF THE MESSENGER OF ALLAH 'ALLAH’S
BLESSING AND PEACE BE UPON HIM'........................... 657
THE DEATH OF ABU BAKR AS-SIDDIQ 'ALLAH BE
PLEASED WITH HIM'.......................................................... 666
THE DEATH OF UMAR IBN AL-KHATTAB 'ALLAH BE
PLEASED WITH HIM".......................................................... 668
THE DEATH OF UTHMAN IBN AFFAN 'ALLAH BE PLEASED
WITH HIM*.....................................................................
671
THE DEATH OF ALI 'ALLAH BE PLEASED WITH HIM'...... 672
CHAPTER FIVE; THE WORDS OF THE WOULD-BE DEAD
FROM AMONG RULERS AND RIGHTEOUS
672
EXPLICATION OF STATEMENTS OF A SET OF RIGHTEOUS
FROM AMONG THE COMPANIONS AND THEIR
FOLLOWERS
674

CONTENTS
CHAPTER SIX: OPINIONS OF THE LEARNED ABOUT
FUNERALS AND GRAVES; AND RULING ON VISITING
GRAVES............................................................................. 676
EXPLICATION OF THE STATE OF THE DEAD IN THE
GRAVE, AND THEIR STATEMENTS AT THE GRAVES.. 678
EXPLICATION OF VISITING THE GRAVES AND
SUPPLICATION FOR THE DECEASED.
682
CHAPTER SEVEN: REAL NATURE OF DEATH; AND WHAT A
DEAD RECEIVES IN THE GRAVE UNTIL THE SOUNDING
OF THE TRUMPET........................................
687
EXPLICATION OF REAL NATURE OF DEATH
.687
EXPLICATION OF THE GRAVE’S SPEECH TO THE DEAD
. AND THE DEAD’S SPEECH, EITHER IN WORD OR IN
STATE. WHICH IS MORE EXPRESSIVE TO REACH THE
DEAD THAN THE WORD TO THE LIVING........................ 693
EXPLICATION OF PUNISHMENT OF GRAVE; AND
INTERROGATION OF MUNKAR AND NAKIR ........ ....... 694
CHAPTER EIGHT: WHAT IS KNOWN FROM THE STATES
OF THE DEAD BY MEANS OF REVELATION
IN DREAMS.......................................................................... 701
EXPLICATION OF VISIONS THAT UNCOVER THE STATES OF
THE DEAD AND THE DEEDS THAT BENEFIT IN THE
HEREAFTER
705
PART TWO: STATES OF THE DEAD FROM THE SOUNDING
OF THE TRUMPET TO THE ABIDANCE EITHER IN
PARADISE OR IN HELL. AND ITS RELATED TERRORS
AND RISKS....... ................................. ...........................
708
CHAPTER ONE: EXPLICATION OF THE SOUNDING
OF THE TRUMPET ................................... ..................
708
CHAPTER TWO: ACCOUNT OF THE MUSTERING
711
LAND AND ITS INHABITANTS.....................................
CONCERNING THE SWEAT............................................
712
CHAPTER THREE: ACCOUNT OF THE DURATION OF
THE DAY OF RESURRECTION....... ...........................
714
CHAPTER FOUR: ACCOUNT OF THE DAY OF JUDGEMENT.
ITS TERRORS AND NAMES............................................ . 715
CHAPTER FIVE' ACCOUNT OF INTERROGATION.......... 718
CHAPTER SIX: ACCOUNT OF THE BALANCE
(OF DEEDS)........................................................................ 722
CHAPTER SEVEN: ACCOUNT OF FOES AND REMOVAL
OF INJUSTICES................................................................. 723
CHAPTER EIGHT: ACCOUNT OF SIRAT............................ 727
CHAPTER NINE: ACCOUNT OF INTERCESSION............. 729
CHAPTER TEN: ACCOUNT OF THE FOUNTAIN.............. 734
CHAPTER ELEVEN: ACCOUNT OF HELL, ITS TERRORS
AND CHAINS..................................................................... . 736
CHAPTER TWELVE: ACCOUNT OF PARADISE AND
ITS BLISS........................................................................... 745
ACCOUNT OF WALLS. FLOORS. TREES AND RIVERS
OF PARADISE................................................................... .750
ACCOUNT OF THE CLOTHES. THRONES AND CUSHIONS

OF THE INHABITANTS OF PARADISE . ....................... 751
ACCOUNT OF THE FOOD OF THE INHABITANTS
OF PARADISE.................................................................... 752
CHAPTER THIRTEEN: ACCOUNT OF HOURIS OF BIG
LUSTROUS EYES............................................................... 754
A SET OF VARIOUS ATTRIBUTES OF THE INHABITANTS
OF PARADISE..................................................................... 755
CHAPTER FOURTEEN: ACCOUNT OF VISION AND
LOOKING AT THE COUNTENANCE OF ALLAH.............. 757
CHAPTER FIFTEEN: EXTENSIVE MERCY OF ALLAH
ALMIGHTY........................................................................... 758
CONTENTS............................................................................. 766

I

n

H

*

K

'S

<

'S

<

<

<
<

<

<

<

vt

<
■«-

<€

<:

cc
a

c

c
cJr
.• '

\
.

c

/•>

-i

