Ranks of the Divine Seekers
Volume 2

Islamic Translation Series
Edited by
Ayman Shihadeh

volume 14/2

The titles published in this series are listed at brill.com/its

Ranks of the
Divine Seekers
A Parallel English-Arabic Text
volume 2

By

Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya
Translated, Annotated and Introduced by

Ovamir Anjum

LEIDEN | BOSTON

Cover illustration: cover calligraphy by Nihad Nadam, 2020.
The Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available online at http://catalog.loc.gov
LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2020011419

Typeface for the Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic scripts: “Brill”. See and download: brill.com/brill‑typeface.
ISSN 2666-3759
ISBN 978-90-04-43369-4 (hardback, set)
ISBN 978-90-04-40454-0 (hardback, vol. 1)
ISBN 978-90-04-41338-2 (hardback, vol. 2)
ISBN 978-90-04-41643-7 (hardback, vol. 3)
ISBN 978-90-04-41644-4 (hardback, vol. 4)

ISBN 978-90-04-41341-2 (e-book, vol. 1)
ISBN 978-90-04-41342-9 (e-book, vol. 2)
ISBN 978-90-04-43422-6 (e-book, vol. 3)
ISBN 978-90-04-43423-3 (e-book, vol. 4)

Copyright 2020 by Koninklijke Brill NV, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Koninklijke Brill NV incorporates the imprints Brill, Brill Hes & De Graaf, Brill Nijhoff, Brill Rodopi,
Brill Sense, Hotei Publishing, mentis Verlag, Verlag Ferdinand Schöningh and Wilhelm Fink Verlag.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, translated, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
without prior written permission from the publisher.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use is granted by Koninklijke Brill NV provided
that the appropriate fees are paid directly to The Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive,
Suite 910, Danvers, MA 01923, USA. Fees are subject to change.
This book is printed on acid-free paper and produced in a sustainable manner.

Contents
5

The Station of Oft-Returning
1
Reform 8
2
Fulfillment 8
3
State 14

6

The Station of Remembrance 18
1
Conditions of Benefitting from Admonition 26
2
Contemplating the Qurʾan 40
3
Five Things that Corrupt the Heart 44
4
Endless Desires for Worldly Things 50
5
Attachment to Things Other Than God 52
6
Gluttony 54
7
Sloth 56

7

The Station of Holding Fast 58
1
The Meaning of Holding Fast 62
2
The Holding Fast of the Elite 66

8

The Station of Fleeing 76
1
Fleeing from the Ego 84
2
Fleeing from All Other Than the Truth

88

The Station of Disciplining 90
1
The Disciplining of the Elite of the Elite

94

9

10

2

The Station of Listening 100
1
Against Music 104
2
The Prohibition of Singing and Music 110
3
The Arguments of Those Who Permit Singing 114
4
First Principle: Scripture Is the Judge of Mystical Knowledge 126
5
Second Principle: All Disagreements Are Judged by Scripture 128
6
Third Principle: The Weighing of Harm and Benefit 130
7
Spiritual Taste 132
8
Levels of Audition 136
9
The Audition of the Elite 140
10 The Audition of the Elite of the Elite 142

vi

contents

11

The Station of Grief 146
1
Levels of Grief 150

12

The Station of Fear 158
1
Kinds of Fear 160
2
Fear of Self-deception 166
2
Balancing Fear and Hope 170

13

The Station of Trembling 172

14

The Station of Humility 178
1
Putting Out The Fire of Ego 180
2
Recognizing the Lesions of One’s Soul and Deeds 184
3
The Third Level 184
4
Humility and Attentiveness in Prayers 188
4.1 First View: Prayer without Proper Humility Is Legally
Invalid 190
4.2 Second View: Prayer without Proper Humility Is Legally
Valid 194

15

The Station of Meekness 198
1
Being Blind to People’s Opinions

16

The Station of Renunciation 210
1
Is Renunciation Possible in These Times?
2
Parting from All Longings 220
3
Renunciation of Renunciation 226

17

The Station of Scrupulousness 230
1
Levels of Scrupulousness 234
2
The Web of Divine Stations 244

18

The Station of Devotion

19

The Station of Hope 260
1
The Excellence of Hope
2
Levels of Hope 290

20

208

The Station of Desire

248

298

264

218

vii

contents

21

The Station of Shepherding 306
1
Levels of Shepherding 310
2
Shepherding of Time 314

22

The Station of Watchfulness 316
1
Ranks of Watchfulness 318
2
Watchfulness of the Elite of the Elite

328

23

The Station of Venerating God’s Prohibitions 334
1
Is God Worshipped for Fear of the Fire and Love for the
Garden? 338
2
Conditions of Displaying One’s Good Deeds 354
3
Venerating Scripture on Divine Attributes 356
4
Protecting the Divine Opening 362

24

The Station of Purification 366
1
Levels of Purification 372
2
The Second Level 376
2
Purification and Truthfulness

380

25

The Station of Refinement and Correction
1
Second Level 388
2
Third Level 388

382

26

The Station of Standing Firm 394
1
Exclusivity 398
2
The Soul of All States 398
3
Levels of Steadfastness 400
4
The Second Level 402
5
The Third Level 408

27

The Station of Trusting Reliance 410
1
Meaning of Tawakkul 416
2
Levels of Reliance 420
2.1 First Level of Reliance 422
2.2 Second Level: Reliance and the Case of Proximate
Causation 422
2.3 Third Level 426
2.4 Fourth Level 426
2.5 Fifth Level 428

viii

contents

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

2.6 Sixth Level 428
2.7 Seventh Level 428
The Level of Joyful Contentment 430
Separating Relegation from Inaction and Negligence 432
Relating Reliance in God to the Beautiful Divine Names 434
Limiting Reliance to Unworthy Pursuits 436
Returning to al-Harawī on Trusting Reliance 436
The First Level according to al-Harawī 442
The Blemish of Asking of Creation 444
Third Level 452

28

The Station of Relegation 458
1
Second Level 464
2
Third Level 464

29

The Station of Trust in God 468
1
First Level 468
2
Second Level 470
3
Third Level 472

30

The Station of Submission 474
1
The Defects of Submission 474
2
Second Level 480

31

The Station of Patience 486
1
The Literal Meaning 492
2
Kinds of Patience 494
3
Patience according to al-Harawī 504
4
First Level 508
5
Third Level 512
6
Patience and God 514

32

The Station of Joyful Contentment 522
1
Contentment versus Patience in Suffering 530
2
Contentment and Tranquility 534
3
Three Levels of Contentment 540
4
The Three Conditions of Contentment 544
5
Second Level 546
6
Differentiating Normative and Ontological Commands 552
7
God’s Wisdom in Creating the Devil 566

ix

contents

8
9
10

Sixty-Two Virtues of Contentment and Indifference to Pleasure
and Pain 584
Returning to al-Harawī 620
9.1 Prohibition of Asking the Creation except in Dire Need 626
Third Level 640

Glossary 645
Index 648

Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya, Madārij al-Sālikīn:
Text and Translation

∵

chapter 5

The Station of Oft-Returning
You have learned that whosoever has arrived at the station of repentance and
stood in its garden has indeed entered all the stations of Islam, for total repentance includes all of them and is included in them. Nonetheless, it is necessary
to single each one out for mention and explanation in order to elucidate its
realities, characteristics, and conditions.
When [the seeker’s] step is steady in the station of repentance, he enters the
station of oft-returning (ināba: eagerly returning in contrition and penitence).
The Exalted urges it in His Book and praises His Friend [Abraham] for it, saying,
“And turn to your Lord” [39:54], and, “Indeed, Abraham was truly forbearing,
tender, oft-returning” [11:75]. He further declared that only those given to oftreturning perceive and remember His signs, saying, “Have they not looked at
the heaven above them—how We erected it and adorned it and [how] it has no
rifts? And the earth—We spread it out and cast therein firmly set mountains
and caused to grow therein [something] of every beautiful kind: insight and
reminder for every oft-returning servant” [50:6–8]. The Exalted also said, “He it
is Who shows you His signs and sends down for you sustenance from heaven;
but none accepts admonition except the oft-returning” [40:13]. The Exalted also
said, “So direct your face toward the religion, seeking truth. [Adhere to] the natural disposition upon which God has created humankind. There is no altering
the creation of God. That is the right religion, but most men know not; oftreturning to Him, fear Him” [30:30–31]. “Oft-returning” (munībīn, plural) here is
in adverbial-accusative form due to the hidden pronoun in His words, “So direct
your face,” addressed to [the Prophet] and his community. That is, you and
your community direct your face to Him, oft-returning. A similar case [when
a command addressed to the Prophet includes his community] is, “O Prophet,
when you divorce your women” [61:1]. It may also be that [oft-returning here is
accusative because it is] describing the object in “He has created people,” that
is, He created them oft-returning to Him, and if they were left to their nature, it
would not have strayed from the state of oft-returning to Him, but it has been
changed and altered from its original nature. As he said, God’s peace and blessings be upon him: “No one is born but on this religion (milla) until he learns to
speak.”1
1 The more well-known narrations of this tradition have “fiṭra” instead of “milla.” See Bukhārī
#2658; Muslim #2658.

‫فصل‬
‫قد علمت أن من نزل في منزل التو بة‪ ،‬وقام في مقامها نزل في جميع منازل الإسلام‪ ،‬وأن التو بة الكاملة‬
‫متضمنة لها‪ ،‬وهي مندرجة فيها‪ ،‬ولـكن لابد من إفرادها بالذكر والتفصيل‪ ،‬تبيينا ًلحقائقها وخواصها‬
‫وشروطها‪.‬‬
‫فإذا استقرت قدمه فى منزل التو بة‪ ،‬نزل بعده منزل الإنابة‪ .‬وقد أمر الل ّٰه تعالى بها في كتابه‪،‬‬
‫ب﴾‬
‫وأثنى على خليله به فقال‪﴿ :‬و َ َأن ِيبوُ ا ِإل َى ر َب ِّك ُم﴾ ]الزمر‪ ،[54:‬وقال‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َ ّ‬
‫ن ِإ ب ْراَ ه ِيم َ لَحل َيِ م ٌ َأَّواه ٌ م ُن ِي ٌ‬
‫سم َاء ِ فوَ ْقهَ ُْم‬
‫]هود‪ ،[75:‬وأخبر أن آياته إنما يتبصر بها و يتذكر أهل الإنابة‪ ،‬فقال‪َ ﴿ :‬أف َل َْم ي َن ْظ ُر ُوا ِإل َى ال َ ّ‬
‫ل ز َْوٍج بَه ِيٍج‬
‫ج و َاْلَأْر َ‬
‫كي ْ َ‬
‫َ‬
‫ض م َد َْدناَ هاَ و َ َأل ْق َي ْن َا فيِ ه َا ر َو َاس ِيَ و َ َأنب َت ْن َا فيِ ه َا م ِن ك ُ ّ ِ‬
‫ف ب َن َي ْن َاهاَ و َم َا ل َه َا م ِن فرُ ُو ٍ‬
‫ن‬
‫ل لـ َك ُْم م ِ َ‬
‫ب﴾ ]ق‪ .[8–6:‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬ه ُو َ ال َ ّذ ِي يرُ ِ يك ُْم آياَ ت ِه ِ و َ ي ُنزَ ِّ ُ‬
‫ل ع َب ٍْد ُمّنيِ ٍ‬
‫ت َب ْص ِر َة ً و َذِك ْر َى ل ِك ُ ّ ِ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ال َ ّ ِ‬
‫ت‬
‫حنيِ ف ًا ۚ ف ِْطر َ َ‬
‫ك ل ِلد ِّيِن َ‬
‫جه َ َ‬
‫ب﴾ ]غافر‪ .[13:‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬ف ََأق ِْم و َ ْ‬
‫سم َاء رِْزق ًا و َم َا ي َت َذ َ َك ّر ُ ِإ َلّا م َْن ي ُنيِ ُ‬
‫س ل َا يعَ ْل َموُ نَ م ُن ِيب ِينَ‬
‫كثرَ َ ال َن ّا ِ‬
‫كَّن َأ ْ‬
‫ن ال ْق َي ِّم ُو َل َٰ ِ‬
‫ك الد ِّي ُ‬
‫ق ال َل ّـه ِ ۚ ذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫ل ِلخ َل ْ ِ‬
‫س ع َليَ ْه َا ۚ ل َا ت َب ْدِي َ‬
‫ال َل ّـه ِ ا َل ّت ِي ف َطَر َال َن ّا َ‬
‫صل َاة َ﴾ ]الروم‪» .[31–30:‬فمنيبين« منصوب على الحال من الضمير المستكن‬
‫ِإل َي ْه ِ و َا َت ّق ُوه ُ و َ َأقيِ م ُوا ال َ ّ‬
‫ك﴾‪ ،‬لأن هذا الخطاب له ولأمته‪ ،‬أي أقم وجهك أنت وأمتك منيبين إليه‪.‬‬
‫جه َ َ‬
‫في قوله‪﴿ :‬ف ََأق ِْم و َ ْ‬
‫نظيره‪﴿ :‬ياَ َأُّيه َا ال َن ّب ِ ُيّ ِإذ َا َط َل ّْقت ُم ُ الن ِّسَاء َ﴾ ]الطلاق‪ .[1:‬و يجوز أن يكون حالا ً من المفعول في قوله‪:‬‬
‫س ع َليَ ْه َا﴾ أي فطرهم منيبين إليه‪ ،‬فلو خ ُلوا وفطرهم لما عدلت عن الإنابة إليه‪ ،‬ولـكنها‬
‫﴿ف َطَر َ ال َن ّا َ‬
‫تح َو ّل وٺتغير عما فطرت عليه‪ ،‬كما قال ﷺ‪» :‬ما من مولود إلا يولد على الملة حتى يعرب عن لسانه«‪.‬‬

4

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

[God] has said concerning His prophet David, peace be upon him, “He
sought His Lord’s forgiveness and fell, bowing, and returned [penitently]”
[38:24]. He has declaimed that His reward and Garden are reserved for the fearful and oft-returning: “And the Garden will be brought near to the righteous, not
far, this is what you are promised, every penitent, heedful one, who feared the
most Merciful in secret, and came with an oft-returning heart” [50:31–34]. He
also declares that good tidings are only reserved for the oft-returning, saying:
“And those who have avoided false gods, lest they worship them, and turned
much to God—for them are good tidings” [39:17].
Oft-returning is of two types. [The first kind is] oft-returning to His lordship,
which is the returning of all creation, be it believing or disbelieving, righteous
or wicked. God the Exalted said, “And when harm touches people, they call
unto their Lord, eagerly turning to Him” [30:33]. This is true for every suffering
supplicant, which includes everyone [as everyone is afflicted at some point or
another]. This returning does not even require one’s adherence to Islam, but
occurs with polytheism and disbelief, as the Exalted has said in their regard,
“Then when He lets them taste mercy from Him, at once a party of them associate others with their Lord, so as to deny that which We have given them”
[30:33–34]. This is their state after their penitence.
The second kind of oft-returning is the returning of His allies, which is the
returning to God’s divinity, the returning of worship and love. It comprises four
things: loving Him, humility to Him, standing before Him, and shunning all else
besides Him. The epithet “oft-returning” is not deserved by any but he who has
all of these four, and the exegesis of the Predecessors revolves around these.
The word [ināba] itself means “hurrying, returning, and stepping forward,”
thus, the oft-returning to God is one who hurries to what pleases Him, returns
to Him at all times, and progresses toward His love.
The author of al-Manāzil said, Oft-returning:
is three things. Returning to the Truth in reform just as he turned to Him
in acknowledgment, returning to Him in fulfillment just as he turned to
Him in promise, and returning to Him in state just as he turned to Him in
response.
Just as the repentant servant returns to God with the acknowledgement and
rejection of his sins, the completion of that return requires effort and sincerity in acts of obedience, as the Exalted has said, “Except one who repented, and
believed, and did a good deed” [25:70] and He said, “Except those who repented
and became righteous” [2:160]. Repentance accompanied by sloth has no benefit. One must follow it up with righteous action, giving up what He dislikes,

‫‪5‬‬

‫‪chapter 5‬‬

‫ب﴾ ]ص‪ ،[24:‬وأخبر أن‬
‫وقال عن نبيه داود—عليه السلام—‪﴿ :‬ف َاْستغَ ْف َر َ ر َ َب ّه ُ و َخ َ َرّ ر َا ِ‬
‫كع ًا و َ َأناَ َ‬
‫ب‬
‫ل َأَّوا ٍ‬
‫ثوابه وجنته لأهل الخشية والإنابة‪ ،‬فقال‪﴿ :‬و َُأْزلفِ َ ِ‬
‫ت اْلج َنَ ّة لُ لِ ْم َُت ّق ِينَ غ َي ْر َ بعَ يِ ٍد ه َذ َا م َا توُ ع َد ُونَ ل ِك ُ ّ ِ‬
‫ب اْدخ ُلوُ هاَ ب ِس َل َاٍم﴾ ]ق‪ [34–31:‬وأخبر سبحانه‬
‫ب م ُنيِ ٍ‬
‫ب و َج َاء َ بقِ َل ْ ٍ‬
‫ن باِ ل ْغيَ ْ ِ‬
‫خش ِيَ ال َر ّْحم َ َ‬
‫ظ م َْن َ‬
‫حف ِي ٍ‬
‫َ‬
‫ت َأْن يعَ ْب ُد ُوهاَ و َ َأناَ بوُ ا ِإل َى ال َل ّه ِ‬
‫طاغ ُو َ‬
‫جت َن َبوُ ا ال َ ّ‬
‫نا ْ‬
‫أن البشرى منه إنما هي لأهل الإنابة‪ ،‬فقال‪﴿ :‬و َال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ل َه ُم ُ البْ شُ ْر َى﴾ ]الزمر‪.[17:‬‬
‫و »الإنابة« إنابتان‪:‬‬
‫إنابة لر بو بيته‪ ،‬وهي إنابة المخلوقات كلها‪ ،‬يشترك فيها المؤمن والكافر‪ ،‬والبر والفاجر‪ .‬قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪:‬‬
‫س ض ُر ّ ٌ د َع َو ْا ر ََّبه ُْم م ُن ِيب ِينَ ِإل َي ْه ِ﴾ ]الروم‪ .[33:‬فهذا عام في حق كل داع أصابه ضر‬
‫س ال َن ّا َ‬
‫﴿و َِإذ َا م َ َ ّ‬
‫كما هو الواقع‪ ،‬وهذه »الإنابة« لا تستلزم الإسلام‪ ،‬بل تجامع الشرك والـكفر‪ ،‬كما قال تعالى في حق‬
‫كونَ ل ِي َْكف ُر ُوا ب ِم َا آت َي ْن َاه ُْم﴾ ]الروم‪.[34–33:‬‬
‫ق م ِْنه ُْم برِ َّبِه ِْم ي ُش ْر ِ ُ‬
‫هؤلاء‪﴿ :‬ث ُ َم ِّإذ َا َأذ َاقهَ ُْم م ِن ْه ُر َْحم َة ً ِإذ َا فرَ ِ ي ٌ‬
‫فهذا حالهم بعد إنابتهم‪ .‬والإنابة الثانية إنابة أوليائه‪ ،‬وهي إنابة لإلهيته‪ ،‬إنابة عبودية ومحبة‪.‬‬
‫وهي ٺتضمن أر بعة أمور‪ :‬محبته‪ ،‬والخضوع له‪ ،‬والإقبال عليه‪ ،‬والإعراض عما سواه‪ .‬فلا يستحق‬
‫اسم المنيب إلا من اجتمعت فيه هذه الأر بعة‪ .‬وتفسير السلف لهذه اللفظة يدور على ذلك‪.‬‬
‫وفي اللفظة معنى الإسراع والرجوع والتقدم‪ .‬ف»المنيب« إلى الل ّٰه المسرع إلى مرضاته‪ ،‬الراجع‬
‫إليهكل وقت‪ ،‬المتقدم إلى محابه‪.‬‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل‪» :‬الإنابة ]في اللغة‪ :‬الرجوع‪ ،‬وهي هاهنا الرجوع إلى الحق[‪ .‬وهي ثلاثة أشياء‪:‬‬
‫الرجوع إلى الحق إصلاحا ً كما رجع إليه اعتذارا ً‪ ،‬والرجوع إليه وفاء ً كما رجع إليه عهدا ً‪ ،‬والرجوع‬
‫إليه حالا ًكما رجعت إليه إجابة ً«‪.‬‬
‫لما كان التائب قد رجع إلى الل ّٰه بالاعتذار والإقلاع عن معصيته‪ ،‬كان من تتمة ذلك رجوعه إليه‬
‫صاِلحاً﴾ ]الفرقان‪.[70:‬‬
‫ل عمَ َل ًا َ‬
‫ن و َعمَ ِ َ‬
‫ب و َآم َ َ‬
‫بالاجتهاد والنصح في طاعاتهكما قال تعالى‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َلّا م َْن تاَ َ‬
‫حوا﴾ ]البقرة‪ .[160:‬فلا تنفع تو بة و بطالة‪ ،‬فلا بد من تو بة وعمل صالح‪.‬‬
‫صل َ ُ‬
‫ن تاَ بوُ ا و َ َأ ْ‬
‫وقال‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َلّا ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ترك لما يكره‪ ،‬وفعل لما يحب‪ ،‬تخل عن معصيته‪ ،‬وتحل بطاعته‪.‬‬

6

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

doing what He loves, discarding any act of defiance to Him, and adorning oneself with His obedience. Similarly, he must return to Him in fulfillment of his
promise, just as he returned to Him in making the promise.
You returned to him when entering under His covenant at first; you must
now once again return faithfully to fulfill what you have promised. All of the
religion is promise and fulfillment. God has taken a pledge to His obedience
from all those who are accountable. He took a pledge from His prophets and
messengers through His angels or directly as in the case of Moses, peace be
upon him, and He took a pledge from the communities through their messengers; He took a pledge from those who are not learned through those who
are learned, requiring the one to teach and the other to learn. He has praised
those faithful to His pledge and has informed them of what He has prepared of
reward for them, saying, “And whosoever fulfills what he has promised to God,
He shall surely give him a great reward” [48:10]. He also said, “And fulfill the
covenant; the covenant will surely be asked about” [17:34]. He also said, “And
fulfill the covenant to God when you make a promise” [16:91], and also said
[while praising the righteous], “And the keepers of their promise when they
make a promise” [2:177].
This includes keeping their promises to God with sincerity, faith, and obedience, and also their promises to the creation.
The Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, has declared, “Among the
signs of hypocrisy is treachery after a promise.”2 Whoever breaks his promise
and acts treacherously has not returned to God. He is no different from one
who never repented, never entered into a pledge with God. Thus, returning is
not attained except by keeping the promise and fulfilling it.
[Al-Harawi’s] statement, “and returning to Him in state just as he turned to
Him in response” means He, Glory to Him, called upon you and you responded,
“Here we come, at your pleasure”; now you must respond with your state that
affirms your words. For the state either confirms or gives lie to the words. Every
statement’s truth or falseness is a witness to the state of its author. So, just as
you responded in word, now respond in state.
Al-Ḥasan [al-Baṣrī], God have mercy on him, said, “Son of Adam, you have
word and deed, and your deed is more important than your word; and you have
an inside and an outside, your inside is more truly yours than your outside.”

2 Bukhārī #34; Muslim #58.

‫‪7‬‬

‫‪chapter 5‬‬

‫وكذلك الرجوع إليه بالوفاء بعهده‪ ،‬كما رجعت إليه عند أخذ العهد عليك‪ ،‬فرجعت إليه بالدخول‬
‫تحت عهده أولا‪ ً.‬فعليك الرجوع بالوفاء بما عاهدته عليه ثانيا‪ ً.‬والدين كله عهد ووفاء‪ ،‬فإن الل ّٰه أخذ‬
‫عهده على جميع المكلفين بطاعته‪ ،‬فأخذ عهده على أنبيائه ورسله على لسان ملائكته‪ ،‬أو منه إلى الرسول‬
‫بلا واسطةكما كلم موسى‪ ،‬وأخذ عهده على الأمم بواسطة الرسل‪ ،‬وأخذ عهده على الجهال بواسطة‬
‫العلماء‪ ،‬فأخذ عهده على هؤلاء بالتعليم‪ ،‬وعلى هؤلاء بالتعلم‪ ،‬ومدح الموفين بعهده‪ ،‬وأخبرهم بما لهم‬
‫جر ًا ع َظ ِيم ًا﴾ ]الفتح‪ ،[10:‬وقال‪:‬‬
‫عنده من الأجر فقال‪﴿ :‬و َم َْن َأْوف َى ب ِم َا ع َاه َد َ ع َل َي ْه ُ ال َل ّه َ ف َسَيؤُ ْتيِه ِ َأ ْ‬
‫سئوُ ل ًا﴾ ]الإسراء‪ ،[34:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬و َ َأْوفوُ ا بعِ َْهدِ ال َل ّه ِ ِإذ َا ع َاه َْدت ُم ْ﴾‬
‫ن ال ْع َْهد َ ك َانَ م َ ْ‬
‫﴿و َ َأْوفوُ ا باِ ل ْع َْهدِ ِإ َ ّ‬
‫]النحل‪ ،[91:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬و َال ْموُ فوُ نَ بعِ َْهدِه ِْم ِإذ َا ع َاه َد ُوا﴾ ]البقرة‪.[177:‬‬
‫وهذا يتناول عهودهم مع الل ّٰه بالوفاء له بالإخلاص والإ يمان والطاعة‪ ،‬وعهودهم مع الخلق‪.‬‬
‫وأخبر النبي ﷺ أن ]من[ علامات النفاق الغدر بعد العهد‪ .‬فما أناب إلى الل ّٰه عز وجل من خان‬
‫عهده وغدر به‪ ،‬كما أنه لم ينب إليه من لم يدخل تحت عهده‪ .‬فالإنابة لا تتحقق إلا بالتزام العهد والوفاء‬
‫به‪ ،‬وقوله‪» :‬والرجوع إليه حالا‪ ،‬كما رجعت إليه إجابة«‪.‬‬
‫أي هو سبحانه قد دعاك فأجبته بلبيك وسعديك قولا‪ ً،‬فلا بد من الإجابة حالا تً صدق به المقال‪،‬‬
‫فإن الأحوال تصدق الأقوال أو تكذبها‪ .‬وكل قول فلصدقه وكذبه شاهد من حال قائله‪ .‬فكما رجعت‬
‫إليه إجابة ً بالمقال‪ ،‬فارجع إليه إجابة ً بالحال‪ .‬قال الحسن رحمه الل ّٰه‪» :‬ا بن آدم‪ ،‬لك قول وعمل‪ ،‬وعملك‬
‫أولى بك من قولك‪ ،‬ولك سر يرة وعلانية‪ ،‬وسر يرتك أملك بك من علانيتك«‪.‬‬

8

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

1

Reform

He said,
Returning to God in reform is established through three things: ridding
oneself of liabilities; contrition over sins; and seeking after missed opportunities.
Ridding oneself of liabilities is attained through repentance from the sins that
keep the servant from God the Exalted as well as from fulfilling the rights of
the creation. Contrition over sins could mean two things. One, to feel guilt over
one’s sins, [with such intensity] that one’s heart hurts as if tearing apart, and
this is a sign of one’s return to God, as opposed to someone whose heart feels
no ache or break from his sinfulness. This is the proof of the corruption and
death of the heart. Two, to feel pain for the sinfulness of his believing brother
when the latter sins, as if he himself has committed it, rather than gloating over
it; this is a sign of the softness of his heart and his return.
Seeking after missed opportunities means to try to make up for opportunities of righteousness and devotion that one has missed by doing the likes
of them and better than them, especially in the remaining part of his life,
and when the time of his departure draws near. For the remaining life of the
believer is priceless, he must spend it in making up what he has missed and
giving life to [righteous practices] that [through his previous negligence] have
died.

2

Fulfillment

He said,
Returning to God in fulfillment is established with three things: giving up
both pleasure in sin and contempt for the negligent, instead fearing for
them and hoping for one’s own soul, and doing one’s utmost in detecting
the weakness of one’s service to God.
When one’s return to God is sincere, he rids himself of the pleasure of sinning
and replaces it with ache and hurt upon the memory of [the sin], for so long as
the delight of thinking about it is present in his heart, his return is impure.
If it is asked: Which of the two states is better, the state of one who finds the
pleasure of sinning in his heart and strives against it for God’s sake, repelling it

‫‪9‬‬

‫‪chapter 5‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬وإنما يستقيم الرجوع إليه إصلاحا ً بثلاثة أشياء‪ :‬بالخروج من التبعات‪ ،‬والتوجع للعثرات‪،‬‬
‫واستدراك الفائتات«‪.‬‬
‫الخروج من التبعات هو بالتو بة من الذنوب التي بين العبد و بين الل ّٰه تعالى‪ ،‬وأداء الحقوق التي عليه‬
‫للخلق‪ .‬والتوجع للعثرات يحتمل شيئين‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬أن يتوجع لعثرته إذا عثر‪ ،‬فيتوجع قلبه و ينصدع‪ .‬فهذا دليل على إنابته إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬بخلاف‬
‫من لا يتألم قلبه‪ ،‬ولا ينصدع من عثرته‪ ،‬فإنه دليل فساد قلبه وموته‪.‬‬
‫الثاني‪ :‬أن يتوجع لعثرة أخيه المؤمن إذا عثر‪ ،‬حتى كأنه هو الذي عثر بها‪ ،‬ولا يشمت به‪ ،‬فهو دليل‬
‫على رقة قلبه وإنابته‪.‬‬
‫واستدراك الفائتات‪ :‬هو استدراك ما فاته من طاعة وقر بة بأمثالها أو خير منها‪ ،‬ولا سيما في بقية‬
‫عمره عند قرب رحيله إلى الل ّٰه‪ .‬فبقية عمر المؤمن لا قيمة لها‪ ،‬يستدرك بها ما فات‪ ،‬و يحيي بها ما أمات‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬وإنما يستقيم الرجوع إليه وفاء ً بثلاثة أشياء‪ :‬بالخلاص من لذة الذنب‪ ،‬و بترك الاستهانة بأهل‬
‫الغفلة تخوفا ًعليهم مع الرجاء لنفسك‪ ،‬و بالاستقصاء في رؤ ية علة الخدمة«‪.‬‬
‫إذا صفت له الإنابة إلى ر به تخلص من الفكرة في لذة الذنب‪ ،‬وأعاد مكانها ألما ً وتوجعا ً لذكره‬
‫والفكرة فيه‪ .‬فما دامت لذة الفكر فيه موجودة ً في قلبه فإنابته غير صافية‪.‬‬
‫فإن قيل‪ :‬أي الحالين أعلى‪ ،‬حال من يجد لذة الذنب في قلبه فهو يجاهدها لل ّٰه و يتركها من خوفه‬

10

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

out of His fear, love, and awe, or the state of one in whose heart the delight of
sin has died out and is replaced by tranquility toward His Lord, restfulness in
Him, delight in His love, and refreshment in His remembrance?
It would be said: The state of this [latter] one is higher and more perfect, for
it is the desired goal of the former to exert himself to reach the latter’s station,
so [the former] lags behind [the latter] in station and nearness.
If it is asked: Where is the reward for the exertion of the one who experiences
delight, yet rids himself of it for the love of God and prefers God’s pleasure
over his own desire? It is only by virtue of this that humankind is superior to
the angelic kind and is the best of the creation, according to the school of Ahl
al-Sunna.3 The tranquil one, in contrast, is relieved from this struggle and protected from it, and the difference between them is the difference between a
cured and a suffering person.
It would be said: The soul has three states: the state of commanding sin,
lamenting it, and feeling remorse over it. After then follows the feeling of tranquility toward its Lord and arriving in His presence in totality. This is the highest
state for the sake of which the seeker exerts himself, and whatever comes to him
by way of reward for his exertion and patience is for his effort to attain tranquility with God. He is like the rider who is crossing wildernesses, long distances,
and dreadful places to get to the House [of God] to rest his heart by seeing it
and circling around it. The other is like one who is already there; busy circumambulating it, standing, bowing, and prostrating in prayer, with no worry of
anything else. This one is busy with the ultimate goal, and the other with the
means, and everyone has his reward. However, there is a great distance separating the reward of the ends from that of the means.
What the tranquil servant experiences of states, worship, and faith, is above
what occurs to the one striving with his soul to attain to God the Exalted, even
if he has more deeds, for the value of the deed of the tranquil one, the oftreturning, is greater in its quality, even if the one striving has more deeds. That is
the grace of God; which He gives to whomsoever He wills. [Abū Bakr] al-Ṣiddīq
did not surpass the Companions by the quantity of his deeds, and among them
were those who were more devoted than him in fasting, pilgrimage, recitation,
and prayers, but by something else that settled in his heart, so much so that
the best of the Companions tried to compete with him but always found him
ahead of them.4

3 On the question of superiority between mankind and angels, the Jewish convert and companion, ʿAbdallāh b. Salām, is recorded as having said, “The noblest of God’s creation to Him is
Abū al-Qāsim (i.e. the Prophet)”; when asked about the angels, he said, “O son of my brother,

‫‪11‬‬

‫‪chapter 5‬‬

‫ومحبته وإجلاله‪ ،‬أو حال من ماتت لذة الذنب في قلبه‪ ،‬وصار مكانها ألما ًوتوجعا ًوطمأنينة ً إلى ر به‪،‬‬
‫وسكونا ًإليه‪ ،‬والتذاذا ً بحبه‪ ،‬وتنعما بً ذكره؟‬
‫قيل‪ :‬حال هذا أرفع وأكمل‪ ،‬وغاية صاحب المجاهدة أن يجاهد نفسه حتى يصل إلى مقام هذا‬
‫ومنزلته‪ ،‬ولـكن تاليه في المنزلة والقرب‪ ،‬ومنوط به‪.‬‬
‫فإن قيل‪ :‬فأ ين أجر مجاهدة صاحب اللذة‪ ،‬وتركه محابه لل ّٰه‪ ،‬وإيثاره رضا الل ّٰه على هواه؟ و بهذا كان‬
‫النوع الإنساني أفضل من النوع الملـكي عند أهل السنة‪ ،‬وكانوا خير البر ية‪ .‬والمطمئن قد استراح من‬
‫هذه المجاهدة وعوفي منها‪ ،‬فبينهما من التفاوت ما بين درجة المعافى والمبتلى‪.‬‬
‫قيل‪ :‬النفس لها ثلاثة أحوال‪ :‬الأمر بالذنب‪ ،‬ثم اللوم عليه والندم منه‪ ،‬ثم الطمأنينة إلى ر بها‬
‫والإقبال بكليتها عليه‪ ،‬وهذه الحال أعلى أحوالها وأرفعها‪ ،‬وهي التي يشمر إليها المجاهد‪ ،‬وما يحصل‬
‫له من ثواب مجاهدته وصبره‪ ،‬فهو لتشميره إلى درجة الطمأنينة إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فهو بمنزلة مرتكب القفار‬
‫والمهَ ام ِه والأهوال‪ ،‬ليصل إلى البيت فيطمئن قلبه برؤ يته والطواف به‪ .‬والآخر بمنزلة من هو مشغول‬
‫به طائفا ًوقائما ًوراكعا ًوساجدا ً‪ ،‬ليس له التفات إلى غيره‪ .‬فهذا مشغول بالغاية وذاك بالوسيلة‪ ،‬وكل‬
‫له أجر‪ .‬ولـكن بين أجر الغايات وأجر الوسائل بون‪.‬‬
‫وما يحصل للمطمئن من الأحوال والعبودية والإ يمان فوق ما يحصل لهذا المجاهد نفسه في ذات‬
‫الل ّٰه تعالى‪ ،‬وإن كان أكثر عملا‪ ً،‬فقدر عمل المطمئن المنيب بجملته وكيفيته أعظم‪ ،‬وإن كان هذا‬
‫المجاهد أكثر عملا‪ ً،‬وذلك فضل الل ّٰه يؤتيه من يشاء‪ .‬فما سبق الصديق الصحابة بكثرة عمل‪ ،‬وفيهم من‬
‫هو أكثر صياما ًوحجا ًوقراءة ً وصلاة ً منه‪ ،‬ولـكن بأمر آخر قام بقلبه‪ ،‬حتى إن أفضل الصحابة يسابقه‬
‫ولا يراه إلا أمامه‪.‬‬

‫‪do you know what angels are? They are only a creation like the heavens, the earth, the clouds,‬‬
‫‪and all creation that does not disobey God in anything …” al-Mustadrak li’l-Ḥākim, 4:612–613.‬‬
‫‪Later theologians have disagreed about this; see Madārij(Ṣ), 1126–1128.‬‬
‫‪4 Incidentally, al-Ghazālī also makes this point in his Iḥyāʾ ʿulūm al-dīn, 1:35, but invokes a‬‬
‫‪Hadith that is deemed weak. Ibn al-Qayyim, perhaps aware of this, makes this point on his‬‬
‫‪own without invoking the report.‬‬

12

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The worship of the one who exerts his soul against the delight of sin and
desire may be harder, but its difficulty does not mean its superiority in status.
For the highest act is faith in God, while fighting in jihad is harder than it, but
lesser in rank. The rank of the truth-lovers is higher than that of the strivers
and martyrs. In the Musnad of Imam Aḥmad, God have mercy on him, there
is a report of ʿAbdallāh b. Masʿūd, God be pleased with him, that the Prophet,
God grant him blessing and peace, mentioned to him martyrs and said, “Most
of those martyred in my community are ones [who died] in bed; many a man
killed between [in battle] two armies [may not attain martyrdom, as] only God
knows his intention.”5
Among the indications of having attained the station of ‘oft-returning’ is to
cease to feel contempt for the negligent among the people and instead feel
fear for them, while also opening the door of hope, hoping for yourself mercy
and fearing punishment for the heedless, while also hoping mercy for them
and fearing punishment for yourself. If you cannot avoid feeling contempt and
anger toward them upon discovering their condition and seeing what they do,
then be even more contemptuous toward your own soul and be more hopeful
of God’s mercy for them than for yourself.
A Predecessor once said: “You have not really acquired understanding until
you feel contempt for people for [disobeying] God; then turn to your own ego
and feel even greater contempt for it.” This statement cannot be understood
except by one who truly understands the religion of God the Exalted. For one
who has seen the reality of the creation—their helplessness, weakness, shortcomings, failings, and deficiency in respecting the rights of God, approaching
other than Him for help, selling their portion with God for the lowest of things,
short-lived and perishable, cannot but feel aversion to them. He cannot avoid
it. However, when he turns to his own soul, state, and shortcomings, if endowed
with discernment, would feel even stronger aversion and contempt for himself.
Such is the one who understands.
As for “scrutinizing in depth your worship,” it requires investigation of how
it is adulterated by the desires of one’s soul and separation of what [portion
of the worship] is truly for the Lord from what is for one’s own ego. It is quite
possible that inadvertently most or even all of your devotion goes to pander to
your own ego.

5 Aḥmad 1:397. Hadith scholars disagree about this report: Ibn Ḥajar ranks it sound, while alHaythamī and al-Albānī rank it weak. See al-Albānī, Ḍaʿīf al-Jāmiʿ #1404, #2988.

‫‪13‬‬

‫‪chapter 5‬‬

‫ولـكن عبودية مجاهد نفسه على لذة الذنب والشهوة قد تكون أشق‪ ،‬ولا يلزم من مشقتها تفضيلها‬
‫في الدرجة‪ .‬فأفضل الأعمال الإ يمان بالل ّٰه‪ ،‬والجهاد أشق منه‪ ،‬وهو تاليه في الدرجة‪ ،‬ودرجة الصديقين‬
‫أعلى من درجة المجاهدين والشهداء‪ .‬وفي مسند الإمام أحمد—رحمه الل ّٰه—من حديث عبد الل ّٰه بن‬
‫مسعود رضي الل ّٰه عنه أن النبي ﷺ عنده ذكر الشهداء فقال‪» :‬إن أكثر شهداء أمتي لأصحاب الف ُرش‪،‬‬
‫ورب قتيل بين الصفين الل ّٰه أعلم بنيته«‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫ومن علامات الإنابة ترك الاستهانة بأهل الغفلة والخوف عليهم‪ ،‬مع فتحك باب الرجاء لنفسك‪،‬‬
‫فترجو لنفسك الرحمة‪ ،‬وتخشى على أهل الغفلة النقمة‪ ،‬ولـكن ارج لهم الرحمة‪ ،‬واخش على نفسك‬
‫النقمة‪ .‬فإن كنت لا بد مستهينا ً بهم‪ ،‬ماقتا ً لهم‪ ،‬لانكشاف أحوالهم لك ورؤ ية ما هم عليه‪ ،‬فكن‬
‫لنفسك أشد مقتا ًمنك لهم‪ ،‬وكن لهم أرجى رحمة الل ّٰه منك لنفسك‪.‬‬
‫قال بعض السلف‪ :‬لن تفقهكل الفقه حتى تمقت الخلق في ذات الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ثم تقبل إلى نفسك فتكون‬
‫لها أشد مقتا‪ً.‬‬
‫وهذا الكلام لا يفقه معناه إلا الفقيه في دين الل ّٰه تعالى‪ .‬فإن من شهد حقيقة الخلق وعجزهم‬
‫وضعفهم وتقصيرهم‪ ،‬بل تفر يطهم وإضاعتهم لحق الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وإقبالهم على غيره‪ ،‬و بيعهم حظهم من الل ّٰه‬
‫بأبخس الثمن—من هذا العاجل الفاني—‪ ،‬لم يجد بدا ً من مقتهم‪ ،‬ولم يمكنه غير ذلك البتة‪ ،‬ولـكن‬
‫إذا رجع إلى نفسه وحاله وتقصيره‪ ،‬وكان على بصيرة من ذلك‪ ،‬كان لنفسه أشد مقتا ًواستهانة ً‪ ،‬فهذا‬
‫هو الفقيه‪.‬‬
‫وأما الاستقصاء في رؤ ية علل الخدمة فهو التفتيش عما يشو بها من حظوظ النفس‪ ،‬وتمييز حق‬
‫الرب منها من حظ النفس‪ ،‬ولعل أكثرها—أو كلها—أن تكون حظا لً نفسك وأنت لا تشعر‪.‬‬

14

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

By God, besides whom there is none worthy of worship, how many souls suffer from hidden diseases and desires that prevent their deeds from being purely
and exclusively for God and from ever reaching Him. A man may quite possibly act righteously in seclusion without anyone seeing him, but his act may still
be impure and not exclusively for God, and he may act righteously under the
praiseful gaze of other people, and still it is only for the sake of God exclusively.
The difference between the two is not known except to the people of discernment and the physicians of the heart who know its remedies and diseases.
Between one’s action [of worship] and one’s heart there is a long route, on
which there are brigands who prevent the deed from reaching the heart. There
may be a man whose deeds of righteousness are abundant but no love, fear,
hope, nor abstinence from this world and desire for the Hereafter ever reach his
heart. Were the effect of the deeds to reach his heart, it would illuminate and
brighten it, such that he would see right and wrong and distinguish the allies
of God from His enemies, and many more stations would open up to him.
Then, there is another long route between the heart and God, and on it too
are brigands who prevent the deeds from reaching God, such as arrogance, selfadmiration, boastfulness, conceit, forgetfulness of [God’s or others’] favors, and
other elusive flaws. If one were diligent in looking, he would find wonders. It
is nothing but mercy from God the Exalted that these flaws remain covered for
most. If these flaws were to become apparent, such people would perhaps fall
into something even worse: despair, hopelessness, remorse, and abandonment
of action, loss of heart and determination.
This is why when [the treatise] Vigilance [of the Rights of God] by Abū ʿAbdallāh al-Ḥārith b. Asad al-Muḥāsibī6 appeared and worshippers became engaged
with it, the mosques that they used to occupy with worship became empty. An
experienced physician knows how to heal the souls so as not to destroy a city
to build a palace.

3

State

Al-Harawī said,
The return to Him in state is established by three things: losing hope in
your deeds, contemplating your utter neediness, and catching a glimpse
of His compassion for you.
6 For a detailed account of al-Muḥāsibī, see Gavin Picken, Spiritual Purification in Islam: The
Life and Works of al-Muḥāsibī (New York: Routledge, 2011).

‫‪15‬‬

‫‪chapter 5‬‬

‫فلا إله إلا الل ّٰه‪ ،‬كم فى النفوس من علل وأغراض‪ ،‬وحظوظ تمنع الأعمال أن تكون لل ّٰه خالصة‬
‫وأن تصل إليه‪ .‬وإن العبد ليعمل العمل حيث لا يراه بشر البتة‪ ،‬وهو غير خالص لل ّٰه‪ ،‬و يعمل العمل‬
‫والعيون قد استدارت عليه نطاقا ًوهو خالص لوجه الل ّٰه‪ .‬ولا يميز هذا من هذا إلا أهل البصا ئر‪ ،‬وأطباء‬
‫القلوب العالمون بأدوائها وعللها‪.‬‬
‫فبين العمل و بين القلب مسافة‪ ،‬وفى تلك المسافة قطاع تمنع وصول العمل إلى القلب‪ ،‬فيكون‬
‫الرجل كثير العمل‪ ،‬وما وصل منه إلى قلبه محبة ولا خوف ولا رجاء‪ ،‬ولا زهد في الدنيا ولا رغبة‬
‫في الآخرة‪ ،‬ولا نور يفرق به بين أولياء الل ّٰه وأعدائه و بين الحق والباطل‪ ،‬ولا قوة في أمره‪ .‬فلو وصل‬
‫أ ثر الأعمال إلى قلبه لاستنار وأشرق‪ ،‬ورأى الحق والباطل‪ ،‬وميز بين أولياء الل ّٰه وأعدائه‪ ،‬وأوجب‬
‫له ذلك المز يد من الأحوال‪.‬‬
‫ثم بين القلب و بين الرب مسافة‪ ،‬وعليها قطاع تمنع وصول العمل إليه من كبر وإعجاب وإدلال‪،‬‬
‫ورؤ ية العمل‪ ،‬ونسيان المنة‪ ،‬وعلل خفية لو استقُ صي فى طلبها لرئي العجب‪ .‬ومن رحمة الل ّٰه تعالى سترها‬
‫على أكثر العمال‪ ،‬إذ لو رأوها وعاينوها لوقعوا فيما هو أشد منها من اليأس والقنوط والاستحسار‪،‬‬
‫وترك العمل‪ ،‬وخمود العزم‪ ،‬وفتور الهمة‪.‬‬
‫ولهذا لما ظهرت »رعاية« أبي عبد الل ّٰه الحارث بن أسد المحاسبي واشتغل بها العباد‪ ،‬عطلت منهم‬
‫مساجد كانوا يعمرونها بالعبادة‪ .‬والطبيب الحاذق يعلم كيف يطب النفوس‪ ،‬فلا يعمر قصرا ً‪ ،‬و يهدم‬
‫مصرا ً‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫شي ْم‬
‫قال‪» :‬وإنما يستقيم الرجوع إليه حالا ً بثلاثة أشياء‪ :‬بالإ ياس من عملك‪ ،‬و بمعاينة اضطرارك‪ ،‬و َ‬
‫برق لطفه بك«‪.‬‬

16

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Two things explain the worthlessness of one’s deeds. First, when [the seeker]
sees with the eye of reality to the Real Actor, the Prime Mover, and that were
it not His wish the act would not have issued from him—His will effected your
deed, not your will—he would be left with no deed. Here it is of benefit to experientially witness divine predestination and to annihilate the recognition of
one’s own deeds. Second, to lose hope in salvation based on your deeds and
instead to see salvation in His mercy, forgiveness, pardon, and grace, as it is in
the Ṣaḥīḥ on the authority of the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace:
He said, “No one’s deeds shall save him.” “Not even you, O Messenger of
God?” they asked. He said, “No, not even me, except if God shades me with
His mercy and grace.”7
The first meaning concerns the beginning of the act and the second its consequence and ultimate end.
As for contemplating the utter neediness, when he ceases to attach his hope
to his deeds in the beginning and salvation through it in the end, he witnesses
his utter need for God; moreover, he witnesses in every grain of his being the
utter need for Him. His need for Him is not only from this angle [of salvation],
but from every angle; the angles of his need for Him have no limit and no single cause; he is in utter need of [God] in his being, in the same way that God is
independent of all needs in His being. Independence, therefore, is an essential
attribute of God, and poverty, want, and need are the essential attributes of the
servant.
Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya said,
Poverty is my attribute, essential, inseparable, forever
Just as independence is His essential attribute, eternally
As for “catching the glimpse of His compassion for you,” once a servant has
recognized His power by necessity and loses hope in his own deeds and salvation through them, he looks to God’s bounty and focuses on it, and comes to
know that all one has, one hopes for, and one has sent forth [by way of good
deeds], is the bounty of God and favor from Him, His charity upon him which
He bestowed for no merit of his. For He is the Causer, the One who favors with
causes, the command is His, before and after, He is the First, the Last, none is
worthy of worship but Him, and none is the Provider but Him.

7 Bukhārī #6463; Muslim #2816.

‫‪17‬‬

‫‪chapter 5‬‬

‫الإ ياس من العمل يفسر بشيئين‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬أنه إذا نظر بعين الحقيقة إلى الفاعل الحق والمحرك الأول‪ ،‬وأنه لولا مشيئته لما كان منك‬
‫فعل‪ ،‬فمشيئته أوجبت فعلك لا مشيئتك‪—،‬بقي بلا فعل—‪ .‬فهاهنا تنفع مشاهدة القدر والفناء عن‬
‫رؤ ية الأعمال‪.‬‬
‫والثاني‪ :‬أن تيأس من النجاة بعملك‪ ،‬وترى النجاة إنما هي برحمته تعالى وعفوه وفضله‪ ،‬كما في‬
‫الصحيح عن النبي ﷺ أنه قال‪» :‬لن ينجي أحدا ً منكم عمله«‪ .‬قالوا‪ :‬ولا أنت يا رسول الل ّٰه؟ قال‪» :‬ولا‬
‫أنا إلا أن يتغمدني الل ّٰه برحمة منه وفضل«‪ .‬فالمعنى الأول يتعلق ببداية الفعل‪ ،‬والثاني بغايته ومآله‪.‬‬
‫وأما معاينة الاضطرار‪ ،‬فإنه إذا يئس من عمله بداية ً والنجاة به نهاية ً ]شهد اضطراره إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬بل[‬
‫شهد به فى كل ذرة منه ضرورة ً تامة ً إليه‪ ،‬وليست ضرورته من هذه الجهة وحدها‪ ،‬بل من جميع‬
‫الجهات‪ .‬وجهات ضرورته لا تنحصر بعدد ولا لها سبب‪ ،‬بل هو مضطر إليه بالذات‪ .‬كما أن الل ّٰه عز‬
‫وجل غني بالذات‪ .‬فالغنى وصف ذاتي للرب‪ ،‬والفقر والحاجة والضرورة وصف ذاتي للعبد‪.‬‬
‫قال شيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية—قدس الل ّٰه روحه—‪:‬‬

‫والفقر لي وصف ذات لازم أبدا ً‬

‫كما الغنى أبدا ً وصف له ذاتي‪.‬‬

‫وأما شيم برق لطفه بك‪ ،‬فإنه إذا تحقق له قوة ضرور ية‪ ،‬وأيس من عمله والنجاة به‪ ،‬نظر إلى ألطاف‬
‫الل ّٰه وشام برقها‪ ،‬وعلم أن كل ما هو فيه وما يرجوه وما تقدم له لطف من الل ّٰه به‪ ،‬ومنة من بها عليه‪،‬‬
‫وصدقة تصدق بها عليه بلا سبب منه‪ ،‬إذ هو المحسن بالسبب والمسبب‪ ،‬والأمر له من قبل ومن بعد‪،‬‬
‫وهو الأول والآخر‪ ،‬لا إله غيره‪ ،‬ولا رب سواه‪.‬‬

chapter 6

The Station of Remembrance
The heart now arrives at the station of remembrance, which is a companion to
that of oft-returning. God the Most High says: “And none remembers except he
who returns penitently” [40:13]; and He said, “[God’s signs are] an eye-opener
and a remembrance for any servant who returns penitently” [50:8]; and such a
one is among the elite of the wise, “Only those remember who have wisdom”
[2:269].
Remembrance and contemplation are two stations that give fruition to many
kinds of knowledge, realities of faith, and bliss. The knower returns with [the
fruit of] his contemplation to his remembrance, and with [the fruit of] his
remembrance to his contemplation, until the lock on his heart is opened by
the leave of the Opener, the All-knowing. Al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī said, “The people
of knowledge return with remembrance to contemplation, and with contemplation to remembrance, and talk to their hearts until they begin to respond.”1
The author of al-Manāzil, God have mercy on him, said,
Remembrance is higher in rank than contemplation, for contemplation
is the search, and remembrance is the finding.2
He means that contemplation is to seek what is desired from its basic sources,
as he said, “Contemplation is to seek insight in order to attain the goal.” As for
his saying that “remembrance is the finding,” it means that [remembrance]
involves reclaiming what has been already acquired through contemplation
but has disappeared due to forgetting, and so when he remembers it, he finds
it successfully.
[The Arabic for remembrance, tadhakkur,] is the tafaʿʿul form of the root
dh-k-r, which is the opposite of forgetting, and it connotes recalling into the
heart the image of the knowledge being remembered. The form tafaʿʿul has
been employed because it is attained through time and effort, gradually, like
tabaṣṣur (gaining insight), tafahhum (acquiring understanding), and taʿallum
(acquiring knowledge).
1 This statement of al-Ḥasan is mentioned by al-Ghazālī in Iḥyāʾ 4:425 and Ibn Taymiyya in
al-Istiqāmah 1:210.
2 Ibn al-Qayyim alters the original order here; in al-Harawī’s ordering, Oft-returning is followed
by contemplation, but Ibn al-Qayyim has already mentioned it in the opening stations.

‫فصل‬
‫ثم ينزل القلب منزلة »التذكر«‪.‬‬
‫ب( ]غافر‪ ،[123:‬وقال‪) :‬ت َب ْص ِر َة ً و َذِك ْر َى‬
‫وهو قر ين الإنابة‪ ،‬قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪) :‬و َم َا ي َت َذ َ َك ّر ُ ِإ َلّا م َْن ي ُنيِ ُ‬
‫ب(‬
‫ب( ]ق‪ ،[8:‬وهو من خواص أولي الألباب‪ .‬كما قال تعالى‪ِ) :‬إ َن ّم َا ي َت َذ َ َك ّر ُ ُأولوُ اْلَألبْ َا ِ‬
‫ل ع َب ٍْد م ُنيِ ٍ‬
‫ل ِك ُ ّ ِ‬
‫]الرعد‪.[19:‬‬
‫و« التذكر« و»التفكر« منزلان يثمران أنواع المعارف وحقائق الإ يمان والإحسان‪ .‬فالعارف لا‬
‫يزال يعود بتفكره على تذكره‪ ،‬و بتذكره على تفكره‪ ،‬حتى يفتح قفل قلبه بإذن الفتاح العليم‪ .‬قال الحسن‬
‫البصري رضي الل ّٰه عنه‪ :‬ما زال أهل العلم يعودون بالتذكر على التفكر‪ ،‬و بالتفكر على التذكر‪ ،‬و يناطقون‬
‫القلوب حتى نطقت‪.‬‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل‪» :‬التذكر فوق التفكر‪ ،‬لأن التفكر طلب‪ ،‬والتذكر وجود«‪.‬‬
‫ير يد أن التفكر التماس الغايات من مباديها‪ ،‬كما قال‪» :‬التفكر تلمس البصيرة واستدراك البغية«‪.‬‬
‫وأما قوله‪» :‬التذكر وجود«‪ ،‬لأنه يكون فيما قد حصل بالتفكر‪ ،‬ثم غاب عنه بالنسيان‪ ،‬فإذا تذكره‬
‫وجده فظفر به‪.‬‬
‫و»التذكر« تفعل من الذكر‪ ،‬وهو ضد النسيان‪ ،‬وهو حضور صورة المذكور العلمية فى القلب‪ ،‬واختير‬
‫له بناء التفعل لحصوله بعد مهلة وتدريج‪ ،‬كالتبصر والتفهم والتعلم‪.‬‬

20

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The relation of remembrance to contemplation is like the relation of attaining a thing to searching for it. This is why the signs of God, both the recited and
witnessed ones, are reminders. Of the recited signs, God says, “And we surely
gave Moses the guidance and passed on the Book to the Children of Israel—as
guidance and remembrance for the wise” [40:53–54]. He said referring to the
Qurʾan, “And it is indeed a reminder for the pious” [69:48].
Of the witnessed signs, God said,
Did they not look at the heavens above them, how We created them and
beautified them—there are no faults in them; and the earth that We
spread out and placed thereon mountains standing firm, and produced
therein every kind of beautiful growth in pairs. A spectacle and a reminder
to every oft-returning servant. [50:6–8]
Observation is a function of sight, and reminder a function of memory; the two
are mentioned [in this verse] in parallel, and their benefit is made exclusive for
the penitent oft-returning. For when one returns to God contritely, one begins
to recognize the occasions of signs and lessons and discovers their meanings.
Thus, evasion is removed for him by his penitence, blindness by his seeing of
the signs, and heedlessness by remembrance. Looking [at the signs] ensures for
him the attainment of the image in his heart of what they are pointing to, after
he had become heedless of them. Thus, the three stations have been arranged
in the best way [in this verse], each one extending its previous one, strengthening it, and bringing out its fruit.
As regards the witnessed signs, God says:
But how many generations before them did We destroy (for their sins),
stronger in power than they? Have they, then, wandered through the land:
was there any place of escape (for them)? Verily in this is a reminder for
any who has a heart and understanding, or who gives ear and earnestly
witnesses. [50:37]
There are three kinds of people: one whose heart is dead; this verse does not
serve as remembrance for him. Second, one who has an alive, awakened heart,
but he is not receptive to the recited signs through which [God] points him
toward the witnessed signs. This [lack of receptivity] could be because either
these signs never reached him, or these signs did reach him but his heart was
distracted by other things. His heart, therefore, is absent, not attentive. This
one also does not receive reminder, despite his readiness and possession of a
heart.

‫‪21‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫فمنزلة »التذكر« من »التفكر« منزلة حصول الشيء المطلوب بعد التفتيش عليه‪ ،‬ولهذا كانت آيات‬
‫ل‬
‫الل ّٰه المتلوة والمشهودة ذكرى‪ .‬كما قال في المتلوة‪﴿ :‬و َلقَ َْد آت َي ْن َا م ُوس َى ال ْه ُد َى و َ َأْور َث ْن َا بنَ ِي ِإس ْر َائيِ َ‬
‫ب﴾ ]غافر‪ .[54–53:‬وقال عن القرآن‪﴿ :‬و َِإ َن ّه ُ ل َت َْذك ِرةَ ٌ للِ ْم َُت ّق ِينَ﴾‬
‫ب ه ُدًى و َذِك ْر َى لأِ ُ ول ِي اْلَألبْ َا ِ‬
‫ال ْك ِتاَ َ‬
‫ف ب َن َي ْن َاهاَ و َز َ َي َ ّن ّاهاَ و َم َا ل َه َا‬
‫كي ْ َ‬
‫سم َاء ِ فوَ ْقهَ ُْم َ‬
‫]الحاقة‪ ،[69:‬وقال في آياته المشهودة‪َ ﴿ :‬أف َل َْم ي َن ْظ ُر ُوا ِإل َى ال َ ّ‬
‫ل‬
‫ج و َاْلَأْر َ‬
‫ل ز َْوٍج بَه ِيٍج ت َب ْص ِر َة ً و َذِك ْر َى ل ِك ُ ّ ِ‬
‫ض م َد َْدناَ هاَ و َ َأل ْق َي ْن َا فيِ ه َا ر َو َاس ِيَ و َ َأنبْ َت ْن َا فيِ ه َا م ِْن ك ُ ّ ِ‬
‫م ِْن فرُ ُو ٍ‬
‫ب﴾ ]ق‪.[8–7:‬‬
‫ع َب ٍْد م ُنيِ ٍ‬
‫ف»التبصرة« آلة البصر‪ ،‬و»التذكرة« آلة الذكر‪ ،‬وقرن بينهما وجعلهما لأهل الإنابة‪ ،‬لأنه إذا أناب‬
‫إلى الل ّٰه أبصر مواقع الآيات والعبر‪ ،‬فاستدل بها على ما هي آيات له‪ ،‬فزال عنه الإعراض بالإنابة‪،‬‬
‫والعمى بالتبصرة‪ ،‬والغفلة بالتذكرة‪ ،‬لأن التبصرة توجب له حصول صورة المدلول في القلب بعد غفلته‬
‫عنها‪ .‬فترتب المنازل الثلاثة أحسن ترتب‪ ،‬ثم إن كلا منها يمد صاحبه و يقو يه و يثمره‪.‬‬
‫شُّد م ِْنه ُْم ب َْطشًا ف َنقَ ّبوُ ا ف ِي البْ لِ َادِ‬
‫ن ه ُْم َأ َ‬
‫وقال تعالى في آياته المشهودة‪﴿ :‬و َك َْم َأه ْل َْكناَ ق َب ْلهَ ُْم م ِْن قرَ ْ ٍ‬
‫سْمَع و َه ُو َ ش َه ِيدٌ﴾ ]ق‪.[37–36:‬‬
‫ب َأْو َأل ْقَى ال َ ّ‬
‫ن ف ِي ذ َل ِ َ‬
‫ص ِإ َ ّ‬
‫مح ِي ٍ‬
‫هَ ْ‬
‫ل م ِْن َ‬
‫ك لذَ ِك ْر َى لم ِ َْن ك َانَ ل َه ُق َل ْ ٌ‬
‫والناس ثلاثة‪ :‬رجل قلبه ميت‪ ،‬فذلك الذي لا قلب له‪ ،‬فهذا ليست هذه الآية ذكرى في حقه‪.‬‬
‫الثاني‪ :‬رجل له قلب حي مستعد‪ ،‬لـكنه غير مستمع للآيات المتلوة التي يخـبر بها عن الآيات‬
‫المشهودة‪ ،‬إما لعدم ورودها‪ ،‬أو لوصولها إليه ولـكن قلبه مشغول عنها بغيرها‪ .‬فهو غائب القلب ليس‬
‫حاضرا ً‪ ،‬فهذا أيضا ًلا تحصل له الذكرى مع استعداده ووجود قلبه‪.‬‬

22

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Third, one who has a live and ready heart, and when signs are recited to him,
he heeds them, gives his ear and opens his heart, and does not deal with it
without understanding what he hears; rather, his heart is engaged with it to
the exclusion of anything else. It is this third kind of person with an attentive
heart who benefits from the reminders or signs of both kinds—the recited as
well as the witnessed ones.
The first is like a blind person who cannot see at all. The second one is like
a person with sound eyesight but is looking away. Both of [these two kinds] do
not see it.
The third person is one whose eyesight is sound and who is focused on the
right object, and his sight follows and meets it at just the right distance, neither
too far nor too close; this is the one who sees. Glory be to Him who has made
His words a healing for that which is in the breasts.
If it is said, why has “or” been used with respect to what I have established [as
its meaning]? It would be said: In it there is a subtle secret. We do not say that it
means “and” as do some externalist grammarians. Know that a man might possess an awakened heart, filled with lessons and wisdom. This is a heart that is
likely to chance upon reminders and lessons. When he hears the recited signs,
they become for him light upon light—and such are the most perfect of the
creation of God, greatest in faith and insight, so much so that they almost witness the teachings brought to them by the Messenger without knowing their
details and kinds. It has been said that the likeness of the Truth-lover [Abū Bakr
al-Ṣiddīq] with respect to the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, is
like two men who entered a house. One saw details of things in the house and
their particulars, and the other one did not see these details and particulars,
but knew that there are great things in it. Upon leaving, he asked him what he
saw in the house, and when his companion began to inform him, he confirmed
everything because of the clues he had seen. This is the highest level of affirmation. It is not impossible that God the Bounteous would favor a servant with
such a faith, for God’s grace is beyond any limit or reckoning.
The light of the one who possesses this kind of heart increases as he hears
the signs [recited] with the light of insight in his heart. If, however, one does
not have a heart of this caliber but still pays heed and his heart does not evade
the truth, a reminder occurs to him as well, “And if not a downpour then a drizzle …” [2:265]. This [difference between a] downpour of guidance and a drizzle
can be observed in all deeds, in their causes and effects. This is borne out by
the fact that even the people of the Garden are of two distinct ranks, those
who are the nearest and foremost and [those who are] the people of the right
hand; and the difference between these two is well known. So much so that the
drink of one of them is the pure drink used only to flavor by mixing the drink of

‫‪23‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫والثالث‪ :‬رجل حي القلب مستعد‪ ،‬تليت عليه الآيات فأصغى بسمعه وألقى السمع‪ ،‬وأحضر قلبه‬
‫ولم يشغله بغير فهم ما يسمعه‪ ،‬فهو شاهد القلب‪ ،‬ملق السمع‪ ،‬فهذا القسم هو الذي ينتفع بالآيات‬
‫المتلوة والمشهودة‪.‬‬
‫فالأول بمنزلة الأعمى الذي لا يبصر‪.‬‬
‫والثاني بمنزلة البصير الطامح ببصره إلى غير جهة المنظور إليه‪ ،‬فكلاهما لا يراه‪.‬‬
‫والثالث بمنزلة البصير الذي قد حدق إلى جهة المنظور وأتبعه بصره‪ ،‬وقابله على توسط من البعد‬
‫والقرب‪ ،‬فهذا هو الذي يراه‪ .‬فسبحان من جعل كلامه شفاء ً لما في الصدور‪ .‬فإن قيل‪ :‬فما موقع »أو«‬
‫من هذا النظم على ما قررت؟‬
‫قيل‪ :‬فيها سر لطيف‪ ،‬ولسنا نقول‪ :‬إنها بمعنى الواو كما يقوله ظاهر ية النحاة‪.‬‬
‫فاعلم أن الرجل قد يكون له قلب وقاد مليء باستخراج العبر واستنباط الحكم‪ .‬فهذا قلبه يوقعه على‬
‫التذكر والاعتبار‪ .‬فإذا سمع الآيات كانت له نورا ً على نور‪ .‬وهؤلاء أكمل خلق الل ّٰه وأعظمهم إ يمانا ً‬
‫و بصيرة ً‪ ،‬حتى كأن الذي أخبرهم به الرسول قد كان مشاهدا ًلهم‪ ،‬لـكن لم يشعروا بتفاصيله وأنواعه‪.‬‬
‫حتى قيل‪ :‬إن مثل حال الصديق مع النبي ﷺ كمثل رجلين دخلا دارا ً‪ ،‬فرأى أحدهما تفاصيل ما‬
‫فيها وجزئياته‪ ،‬والآخر وقعت يده على ما في الدار ولم ير تفاصيله ولا جزئياته‪ ،‬لـكن علم أن فيها أمورا ً‬
‫عظيمة ً لم يدرك بصره تفاصيلها‪ ،‬ثم خرجا‪ .‬فسأله عما رأى فى الدار‪ ،‬فجعل كلما أخبره بشيء صدقه‬
‫لما عنده من شواهده‪ .‬وهذه أعلى درجات الصديقية‪ .‬ولا يستبعد أن يمن الل ّٰه المنان على عبد بمثل هذا‬
‫الإ يمان‪ .‬فإن فضل الل ّٰه لا يدخل تحت حصر ولا حسبان‪.‬‬
‫فصاحب هذا القلب إذا سمع الآيات وفي قلبه نور من البصيرة‪ ،‬ازداد بها نورا ً إلى نوره‪ .‬فإن لم‬
‫صْبه َا‬
‫يكن للعبد مثل هذا القلب فألقى السمع وشهد قلبه ولم يغب‪ ،‬حصل له التذكر أيضا‪﴿ ً،‬ف ِ َإن َل ّْم ي ُ ِ‬
‫لٌ﴾ ]البقرة‪ .[265:‬والوابل والطل في جميع الأعمال وآثارها وموجباتهان وأهل الجنة سابقون‬
‫ل ف َطَ ّ‬
‫و َاب ِ ٌ‬
‫مقر بون وأصحاب يمين‪ ،‬و بينهما في درجات التفضيل ما بينهما‪ .‬حتى إن شراب أحد النوعين الصرف‬

24
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
the other kind. God the Exalted has said, “And those given knowledge see that
what is revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, and it guides to the path of
the Almighty, the Praiseworthy” [34:6]. Every believer sees these things, but the
vision of the people of knowledge is of an entirely different quality than that
of the others.
The author of al-Manāzil, God have mercy on him, said,
The building blocks of remembrance are three: seeking benefit from
admonition, watching out for lessons, and reaping the fruit of contemplation.
“Seeking benefit from admonition” requires that fear and hope strike the heart,
motivating it toward action, seeking safety from what is feared and attainment
of what is hoped. Admonition is command and prohibition is associated with
warning and exhortation. Admonition is attained in two ways, through what is
heard and what is witnessed.
Admonition through what is heard is to seek benefit from what one hears
of guidance and righteousness, words of advice that have been sent through
the messengers, and similarly hearing any counselor and guide concerning the
benefits of the religion or this world. Admonition through what is witnessed
is to seek benefit from what one sees and witnesses in this world, the vicissitudes and lessons of life, the judgments of divine decree and predestination,
and what one observes of God’s signs that prove the truth of His messengers.
Watching for lessons is to increase in the insight over and above what one
has already attained in the station of contemplation by recalling it. The station
of remembrance further polishes the meanings acquired through contemplation at the occasions of signs and lessons. Thus, one acquires them through
reflection and they become polished and refined through remembrance. One’s
determination to take up the journey strengthens in accordance with his power
of insight, for that power brings into clear focus that which incites the yearning.
Yearning being a kind of feeling, the more the feeling of the beloved is strengthened, the more the journey of the heart to Him is advanced, and the more one’s
thought is engaged with it, the more the feeling is heightened, insight deepened, and remembrance attained.
As for reaping the fruit of contemplation, this is a fine point. Contemplation
has two kinds of fruit: the achievement of what is desired (i.e., knowledge) to
the extent possible, and action in accordance with it. During contemplation,
the intellect was focused on the attainment of what is desired; when those
meanings [that one is trying to acquire] have been attained and settled in the
heart, the intellect relaxes, and returns to it and remembers and feels joy and

‫‪25‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫ل‬
‫ن ُأوتوُ ا ال ْعلِ ْم َ ال َ ّذ ِي ُأ ن ْز ِ َ‬
‫يطيب به شراب النوع الآخر و يمزج به مزجا‪ ً.‬قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َيرَ َى ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ط ال ْع َزِ يز ِ اْلحم َ ِيدِ﴾ ]سبأ‪ .[6:‬فكل مؤمن يرى هذا‪ ،‬ولـكن‬
‫ك ه ُو َ اْلح ََّق و َيَه ْدِي ِإل َى ص ِر َا ِ‬
‫ك م ِْن ر َب ِّ َ‬
‫ِإل َي ْ َ‬
‫رؤ ية أهل العلم له لون‪ ،‬ورؤ ية غيرهم له لون‪.‬‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل‪» :‬أبنية التذكر ثلاثة‪ :‬الانتفاع بالعظة‪ ،‬والاستبصار للعبرة‪ ،‬والظفر بثمرة‬
‫الفكرة«‪.‬‬
‫الانتفاع بالعظة هو أن يقدح في القلب قادح الخوف والرجاء‪ ،‬فيتحرك للعمل طلبا لً لخلاص من‬
‫الخوف‪ ،‬ورغبة ً في حصول المرجو‪.‬‬
‫والعظة هي الأمر والنهي المقرون بالترغيب والترهيب‪.‬‬
‫والعظة نوعان‪ :‬عظة بالمسموع‪ ،‬وعظة بالمشهود‪.‬‬
‫فالعظة بالمسموع‪ :‬الانتفاع بما يسمعه من الهدى والرشد والنصائح التي جاءت على يد الرسل‪،‬‬
‫وكذلك الانتفاع بالعظة من كل ناصح ومرشد في مصالح الدين والدنيا‪.‬‬
‫والعظة بالمشهود‪ :‬الانتفاع بما يراه و يشهده في العالم من مواقع العبر‪ ،‬وأحكام القدر ومجار يه‪ ،‬وما‬
‫يشاهده من آيات الل ّٰه الدالة على صدق رسله‪.‬‬
‫وأما الاستبصار للعبرة فهو ز يادة البصيرة عما كانت عليه في منزل التفكر بقوة الاستحضار‪ ،‬لأن‬
‫التذكر يصقل المعاني التي حصلت بالتفكر في مواقع الآيات والعبر‪ .‬فهو يظفر بها بالتفكر‪ ،‬وتنصقل له‬
‫وتنجلي بالتذكرن فيقوي العزم على السير بحسب قوة الاستبصار‪ ،‬لأنه يوجب تحديد النظر فيما يحرك‬
‫الطلب‪ ،‬إذ الطلب فرع الشعور‪ .‬وكلما قوي الشعور بالمحبوب اشتد سفر القلب إليه‪ ،‬وكلما اشتغل الفكر‬
‫به ازداد الشعور والبصيرة به والذكر‪.‬‬
‫وأما الظفر بثمرة الفكرة‪ ،‬فهذا موضع لطيف‪.‬‬
‫وللفكرة ثمرتان‪ :‬حصول المطلوب تماما ًبحسب الإمكان‪ ،‬والعمل بموجبه رعاية لحقه‪.‬‬
‫فإن العقل حال التفكر كان قد كل بأعماله في تحصيل المطلوب‪ ،‬فلما حصلت له المعاني وتخمرت‬
‫في القلب واستراح العقل‪ ،‬عاد فتذكر ما كان حصله وطالعه‪ ،‬فابتهج به وفرح به‪ ،‬وصحح في هذا المنزل‬

26

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

rejuvenation, and corrects what it missed at the time of contemplation. For
now he observes it from the station of remembrance, which is higher than it,
and reaps its fruit, which is to act in accordance with it, attending to its rights.
For the righteous deed is the fruit of beneficial knowledge, which is the fruit of
contemplation.
If you wish to understand this with a concrete example, [consider this]: A
seeker of wealth is tired and exhausted when he is hard at work seeking it, traveling long distances. Once he has attained it, he is relieved from the labor of
acquisition, coming back from his trip, he looks over what he has attained, and
perhaps fixes what he sees broken that he may have missed while first acquiring it. When it is all fixed, his acquisition cools his eyes, and he begins to use
that wealth toward the purposes for which he had sought it.

1

Conditions of Benefitting from Admonition

He said,
He benefits from admonition only after attaining three things: a dire sense
of need for it, blindness to the flaws of the preacher, and remembrance of
the promise and the warning.
If one’s remembrance and repentance are deficient, one urgently needs admonition in the form of exhortation and warning. If, on the other hand, one is in
the state of remembrance and frequent returning to God, his need to learn the
commandments and prohibitions is greater.
By exhortation two things are meant: command and prohibition accompanied by exhortation and warning, and exhortation and warning on their own.
What a penitent and mindful person needs most is [the knowledge of] command and prohibition; what a stray and heedless person needs most is exhortation and warning; and what a quarrelsome denier needs most is argument
and debate. These three have been mentioned in His words:
Call to the path of your Lord with wisdom, and beautiful exhortation, and
argue with them in the best manner. [16:125]
He mentioned “wisdom” without any qualification, for it is good in its entirety,
and the attribute of goodness is essential to it. As for exhortation, He qualified
it with the attribute of beauty, for not all exhortation is beautiful. The same is
true of debate; it may be carried out by means that are the best, and it may be

‫‪27‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫ما كان فاته في منزل التفكر‪ ،‬لأنه قد أشرف عليه من مقام التذكر الذي هو أعلى منه‪ ،‬فأخذ حينئذ في‬
‫الثمرة مقصوده‪ ،‬وهي العمل بموجبه مراعاة لحقه‪ .‬فإن العمل الصالح هو ثمرة العلم النافع الذي هو ثمرة‬
‫التفكر‪.‬‬
‫وإذا أردت فهم هذا بمثال حسي‪ ،‬فطالب المال ما دام جادا ًفي طلبه‪ ،‬فهو في كلال وتعب‪ ،‬حتى‬
‫إذا ظفر به استراح من كد الطلب‪ ،‬وقدم من سفر التجارة‪ ،‬وطالع ما حصله وأبصره‪ ،‬وصحح في هذه‬
‫الحال ما عساه غلط فيه في حال اشتغاله بالطلب‪ .‬فإذا صح له و بردت غنيمته له‪ ،‬أخذ في صرف المال‬
‫في وجوه الانتفاع المطلو بة منه‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬وإنما ينتفع بالعظة بعد حصول ثلاثة أشياء‪ :‬شدة الافتقار إليها‪ ،‬والعمى عن عيب الواعظ‪،‬‬
‫وتذكر الوعد والوعيد«‪.‬‬
‫إنما يشتد افتقار العبد إلى العظة—وهي الترغيب والترهيب—إذا ضعف تذكره وإنابته وإلا فمتى‬
‫قو يت إنابته وتذكره لم تشتد حاجته إلى الترغيب والترهيب‪ ،‬ولـكن الحاجة منه شديدة إلى معرفة‬
‫الأمر والنهي‪.‬‬
‫والعظة يراد بها أمران‪ :‬الأمر والنهي المقرون ]بالرغبة والرهبة‪ ،‬ونفس الرغبة والرهبة‪ .‬فالمنيب‬
‫المتذكر شديد الحاجة إلى الأمر والنهي‪ ،‬والمعرض الغافل شديد الحاجة إلى الترغيب والترهيب‪.‬‬
‫والمعارض المنكر شديد الحاجة إلى المجادلة‪ .‬فجاءت هذه الثلاثة في حق هؤلاء الثلاثة في قوله‪﴿ :‬اْدع ُ‬
‫ك باِ ْلح ِ ْ‬
‫ن﴾ ]النحل‪ ،[125:‬وأطلق الحكمة‬
‫حسَ ُ‬
‫كم َة ِ و َال ْموَ ْعِظَة ِ اْلح َسَنةَ ِ و َج َادِل ْه ُْم باِ َل ّت ِي هِي َ َأ ْ‬
‫ل ر َب ّ ِ َ‬
‫ِإل َى َ‬
‫سبيِ ِ‬
‫ولم يقيدها بوصف الحسنة إذ كلها حسنة‪ ،‬ووصف الحسن لها ذاتي‪ .‬وأما الموعظة فقيدها بوصف‬
‫الإحسان‪ ،‬إذ ليس كل موعظة حسنة‪ ،‬وكذلك الجدال‪ ،‬قد يكون بالتي هي أحسن‪ ،‬وقد يكون بغير‬

28

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

carried out otherwise. This also suggests that [the best way to debate] depends
on the state of the debater with respect to his anger, gentleness, sharpness,
and softness. He is commanded to debate in the state that is the best, and that
[his state] should accord with the means that he is arguing with: the best and
clearest proofs, demonstrations and words, soundest evidence of what is being
argued, and most relevant to what is sought. This verse addresses both.
Some later people3 have mentioned concerning this verse that it refers to
the classes of analogies: wisdom being the way of demonstration, good exhortation being the way of rhetoric, and debate in the best way being the way
of dialectics. The first is achieved by mentioning demonstrative premises to
one who does not accept or follow except demonstration, and such are the
elite. The second by mentioning rhetorical premises that arouse emotions of
love and fear for those who are persuaded by rhetoric, and such are the majority. The third by mentioning dialectical premises to the objector who argues
back through dialectics, and such are the opponents. This is interpretation
of the Qurʾan in accordance with the principles and terminology of Greek
logic.
This is false in a number of ways, but this is not the place to mention them.
It has been mentioned here only as an appendix to the mention of admonition,
and that the penitent and mindful person does not need it as urgently as does
the heedless evader. This latter kind is in great need for admonition to remember what he has forgotten and would benefit from a reminder.
As for “blindness to the flaw of the preacher,” if one becomes busy with
[the preacher’s flaws] he is deprived of seeking benefit from his admonition,
because souls are unlikely to accept good advice from someone who does
not practice or benefit from it himself. This is like one to whom a physician
describes a remedy to an ailment from which he himself suffers, but the physician does not take it himself. Rather, such a physician is better still than this
preacher who opposes what he preaches, for it may be that [the physician]
prefers another remedy, or he may be of the opinion that not taking a remedy is more wholesome for him, or he may be content with letting nature do its
work, and so on. [He is] opposed to such a preacher, for what he is preaching
is the one path toward salvation, which cannot be replaced with another. It is
because of this repulsion [that is felt toward such preachers] that Shuʿayb, God
grant him and our Prophet blessings and peace, said to his people, “And I do
not intend to differ from you in that which I have forbidden you” [11:88]. One

3 It is likely that this reference is to Ibn Rushd, Faṣl al-Maqāl.

‫‪29‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫ذلك‪ ،‬وهذا يحتمل أن يرجع إلى حال المجادل من غلظته ولينه وحدته ورفقه‪ ،‬فيكون مأمورا ًبمجادلتهم‬
‫بالحال التي هي أحسن‪ ،‬وأن يكون صفة لما يجادل به من الحجج والبراهين والكلمات التي هي أحسن‬
‫شيء وأبينه وأدله على المقصود وأوصله إلى المطلوب‪ .‬والتحقيق أن الآية ٺتناول النوعين‪.‬‬
‫وأما ما ذكره بعض المتأخر ين أن هذا إشارة إلى أنواع القياسات‪ ،‬فالحكمة هى طر يقة البرهان‪،‬‬
‫والموعظة الحسنة هي طر يقة الخطابة‪ ،‬والمجادلة بالتي هي أحسن طر يقة الجدل‪.‬‬
‫فالأول بذكر المقدمات البرهانية لمن لا يرضى إلا بالبرهان‪ ،‬ولا ينقاد إلا له‪ ،‬وهم خواص الناس‪.‬‬
‫والثاني بذكر المقدمات الخطابية التي ٺثير رغبة ً ورهبة ً لمن يقنع بالخطابة‪ ،‬وهم الجمهور‪.‬‬
‫والثالث بذكر المقدمات الجدلية للمعارض الذي يندفع بالجدل—وهم المخالفون—‪ ،‬فتنز يل القرآن‬
‫على قوانين أهل المنطق اليوناني واصطلاحهم‪ .‬وذلك باطل قطعا ًمن وجوه عديدة‪ ،‬ليس هذا موضع‬
‫ذكرها‪ ،‬وإنما ذكر هذا استطرادا ً لذكر العظة‪ ،‬وأن المنيب المتذكر لا تشتد حاجته إليها كحاجة الغافل‬
‫المعرض‪ ،‬فإنه شديد الحاجة جدا ً إلى العظة‪ ،‬ليتذكر ما قد نسيه‪ ،‬فينتفع بالتذكر‪.‬‬
‫وأما العمى عن عيب الواعظ‪ ،‬فإنه إذا اشتغل به حرم الانتفاع بموعظته‪ ،‬لأن النفوس مجبولة على‬
‫عدم الانتفاع بكلام من لا يعمل بعلمه ولا ينتفع به‪ .‬وهذا بمنزلة من يصف له الطبيب دواء ً لمرض‬
‫به مثله‪ ،‬والطبيب معرض عنه غير ملتفت إليه‪ ،‬بل الطبيب المذكور عندهم أحسن حالا ً من هذا‬
‫الواعظ المخالف لما يعظ به‪ ،‬لأنه قد يقوم عنده دواء آخر مقام هذا الدواء‪ ،‬وقد يرى أن به قوة ً على‬
‫ترك التداوي‪ ،‬وقد يقنع بعمل الطبيعة وغير ذلك‪ ،‬بخلاف هذا الواعظ‪ ،‬فإن ما يعظ به طر يق معين‬
‫للنجاة لا يقوم غيرها مقامها ولا بد منها‪ .‬ولأجل هذه النفرة قال شعيب عليه السلام لقومه‪﴿ :‬و َم َا‬
‫ُأرِ يد ُ َأْن ُأخ َالفِ َك ُْم ِإل َى م َا َأْنه َاك ُْم ع َن ْه ُ﴾ ]هود‪ ،[88:‬وقال بعض السلف‪ :‬إذا أردت أن يقبل منك‬

30

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

of the Predecessors said, “If you wish that your command and prohibition be
accepted, then when you command a thing, be the first one to do it, and when
you forbid a thing, be the first one to desist from it.”4
It has been said,
O preacher! Is this preaching
For everyone but you?
You prescribe medicine for those withered from weakness
While you yourself are afflicted
Do not forbid a thing and then do it
A great shame upon you if you do so
Begin with your ego and forbid it its treachery
Only if you avoid it are you wise
Only then will your words have an effect
Your words followed and your teaching profit
Blindness to the deficiency of the preacher, therefore, is one of the conditions
of benefitting from the admonition.
As for “remembering the promise and the warning,” it causes fear and caution, and none can benefit from exhortation but one who has believed and has
fear and hope.
The Exalted said, “Indeed in that is a sign for those who fear the chastisement
of the Hereafter” [11:103]; and, “He who fears shall remember” [87:10]; and also,
“They ask you about the Hour: when will it come? In what [position] are you
that you should mention it? Its term is your Lord’s [business]. You are only a
warner to him who would fear it” [79:42–45].
Even more direct is the saying of the Exalted,
Remind, then, by the Qurʾan anyone who fears My warning. [50:45]
Thus, belief in the promise and warning and its reminder are conditions for
benefiting from admonition, signs, and lessons; it is impossible to attain that
without these.
[Al-Harawī] said,
Lessons are learned only with three things: life of the intellect, knowledge
of the days, and protection from interests.

4 A similar statement has been reported of al-Hasan al-Baṣrī; see Ḥilya 2:154.

‫‪31‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫الأمر والنهي‪ ،‬فإذا أمرت بشيء فكن أول الفاعلين له المؤتمر ين به‪ ،‬وإذا نهيت عن شيء فكن أول‬
‫المنتهين عنه‪.‬‬
‫وقد قيل‪:‬‬

‫غيره‬

‫هلا لنفسك كان ذا التعليم‪.‬‬

‫تصف الدواء لذي السقام من الضنى‬

‫ومن الضنى تمسي وأنت سقيم‪.‬‬

‫لا تنه عن خلق وتأتي مثله‬

‫عار عليك إذا فعلت عظيم‪.‬‬

‫وابدأ بنفسك فانهها عن غيها‬

‫فإذا انتهت عنه فأنت حكيم‪.‬‬

‫فهناك يقبل ما تقول و يقتدى‬

‫بالقول منك و ينفع التعليم‪.‬‬

‫يا‬

‫أيها‬

‫الرجل‬

‫المعل ِ ّم‬

‫فالعمى عن عيب الواعظ من شروط تمام الانتفاع بموعظته‪.‬‬
‫وأما تذكر الوعد والوعيد‪ ،‬فإن ذلك يوجب خشيته والحذر منه‪ .‬ولا تنفع الموعظة إلا لمن آمن‬
‫خر َة ِ﴾ ]هود‪ ،[103:‬وقال‪:‬‬
‫ب اْلآ ِ‬
‫ك ل َآيةَ ً لم ِ َْن خ َا َ‬
‫ن ف ِي ذ َل ِ َ‬
‫به‪ ،‬وخافه ورجاه‪ .‬قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َ ّ‬
‫ف ع َذ َا َ‬
‫ساهاَ ف ِيم َأَ ن َ‬
‫ساع َة ِ َأ َي ّانَ م ُْر َ‬
‫ن ال َ ّ‬
‫يخ ْش َى﴾ ]الأعلى ‪ ،[10‬وقال‪ ﴿ :‬ي َْس َألوُ ن َ َ‬
‫سي ََّذ َك ّر ُم َْن َ‬
‫﴿ َ‬
‫ك عَ ِ‬
‫ت م ِن ذِك ْر َاهاَ ِإل َى ٰ‬
‫ن‬
‫يخ ْشَاهاَ ﴾ ]النازعات‪ .[45:‬وأصرح من ذلك قوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬ف َذ َك ِّر ْ باِ ل ْق ُر ْآ ِ‬
‫ت م ُن ْذِر ُ م َْن َ‬
‫ك م ُنت َه َاهاَ ِإ َن ّم َا َأن ْ َ‬
‫ر َب ّ ِ َ‬
‫ف و َعِيدِ﴾ ]ق‪ .[45:‬فالإ يمان بالوعد والوعيد وذكره شرط في الانتفاع بالعظات والآيات‬
‫يخ َا ُ‬
‫م َْن َ‬
‫والعبر‪ ،‬يستحيل حصوله بدونه‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وإنما ت ُستبصر العبرة بثلاثة أشياء‪ :‬بحياة العقل‪ ،‬ومعرفة الأيام‪ ،‬والسلامة من الأغراض«‪.‬‬

32

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Lessons can be recognized, witnessed, and brought to benefit only if the
intellect is alive. The [linguistic] meaning of al-ʿibra is “consideration,” and its
reality is crossing over from the judgment of a thing to the judgment of its like.
When one sees someone being afflicted and tested because of something he
committed, he learns that whoever does such a thing is judged in the same way.
The life of the intellect means soundness of perception, strength, and quality of
understanding, and actualization of seeking benefit and harm from something.
It is a light that God reserves for whomever He wills from His creation; people
differ in their intelligence, understanding, and perception, in accordance with
the strength and weakness or presence and absence of that light. It is to the
heart what the physical light is to the eye.
According to some seekers who have experienced and recorded this, whoever adheres to the saying “O Ever-living, O Sustainer, there is no god but Thee,”
He bequeaths to him life of the heart and the intellect.
Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya, may God sanctify his soul, was extremely
devoted to this. One day he said to me, “In these two names, the Ever-living,
the Sustainer, there is great effect in giving life to the heart.” He used to suggest
that these two comprise the Greatest Name [of God]. I heard him say, “Whoever
perseveres upon saying ‘O Ever-living, O Sustainer, there is no god but Thee, I
seek help in Thy mercy’ forty times every day between the two Sunnas and the
obligatory units of the predawn prayer, he shall obtain the life of the heart, and
his heart shall not die.”5
Whoever knows the devotions of the Beautiful Names, the secret of their
connection to [divine] creation and command, and the desired goals and needs
of the servant, and supplicates through them, shall know and obtain [his goal].
Every sought after goal is asked through the Name appropriate to it. Consider
the supplications of the Qurʾan and Prophetic tradition and you shall find them
thus.
As for “knowledge of the days,” it is possible that he means by it the days
[or part thereof] that you set aside [for devotions] and what occurs to him
by way of increase or decrease, and to know how few [his days] are, that his
breaths are numbered and bound to end, and every breath here is worth thousands and thousands of years in the Abode of Eternity. There is no comparison
of these passing days to the days of eternity. The servant passes his time, being
driven either to the Bounties or the Fire. In the view of those who possess intelligence and an alert heart, they are no more than the time one spends in sleep.

5 This part of a hadith is graded ḥasan by Ibn Ḥajar in al-Futūḥāt al-Rabbāniyya. Saying it a
certain number of times is Ibn Taymiyyah’s personal practice.

‫‪33‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫وإنما تميز العبرة وترى وتتحقق بحياة العقل‪ .‬والعبرة هي الاعتبار‪ ،‬وحقيقتها العبور من حكم الشيء‬
‫إلى حكم مثله‪ .‬فإذا رأى من قد أصابته محنة و بلاء لسبب ارتكبه‪ ،‬علم أن حكم من ارتكب ذلك‬
‫السبب كحكمه‪.‬‬
‫وحياة العقل هي صحة الإدراك وقوة الفهم وجودته‪ ،‬وتحقيق الانتفاع بالشيء والتضرر به‪ ،‬وهو‬
‫نور يخص الل ّٰه به من يشاء من خلقه‪ .‬و بحسب تفاوت الناس في قوة ذلك النور وضعفه ووجوده‬
‫وعدمه‪ ،‬يقع تفاوت أذهانهم وأفهامهم وإدراكاتهم‪ ،‬ونسبته إلى القلب كنسبة النور الباصر إلى العين‪.‬‬
‫ومن تجر يبات السالـكين التي جر بوها فألفوها صحيحة أن من أدمن قول‪» :‬يا حي ياقيوم لا إله إلا‬
‫أنت«‪ ،‬أورثه ذلك حياة القلب والعقل‪.‬‬
‫وكان شيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية—قدس الل ّٰه روحه—شديد اللهج بها جدا ً‪ ،‬وقال لي يوما‪ :‬لهذين‬
‫الاسمين وهما‪» :‬الحي القيوم« تأثير عظيم في حياة القلب‪ ،‬وكان يشير إلى أنهما الاسم الأعظم‪ ،‬وسمعته‬
‫يقول‪ :‬من واظب على أر بعين مرةكل يوم بين سنة الفجر وصلاة الفجر »يا حي ياقيوم‪ ،‬لا إله إلا‬
‫أنت‪ ،‬برحمتك أستغيث«‪ ،‬حصلت له حياة القلب‪ ،‬ولم يمت قلبه‪.‬‬
‫ومن علم عبوديات الأسماء الحسنى والدعاء بها وسر ارتباطها بالخلق والأمر و بمطالب العبد‬
‫وحاجاته‪ ،‬عرف ذلك وتحققه‪ .‬فإن كل مطلوب يسأل بالإسم المناسب له‪ .‬فتأمل أدعية القرآن‬
‫والحديث النبوي تجدها كذلك‪.‬‬
‫وأما معرفة الأيام‪ ،‬في ُحتمل أن ير يد به أيامه التى تخصه وما يلحقه فيها من الز يادة والنقصان‪،‬‬
‫و يعلم قصرها‪ ،‬وأنها أنفاس معدودة منصرمة‪ ،‬كل نف َس منها يقابله آلاف آلاف من السنين في دار‬
‫البقاء‪ .‬فليس لهذه الأيام الخالية نسبة قط إلى أيام البقاء‪ ،‬والعبد يساوق زمنه‪ ،‬وفي مدة عمره إلى النعيم‬
‫أو إلى الجحيم‪ .‬وهي كمدة المنام لمن له عقل حي وقلب واع‪ ،‬فما أولاه ألا يصرف منها نفسا إً لا في أحب‬

34

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

It behooves him to not waste a breath except in the most beloved of things to
God. If he spends it in what [God] loves rather than what God loves more, he
should be considered deficient. What, then, if he spends it in what has no benefit? What, then, about things that his Lord dislikes? God alone is sought for
help.
It is also possible that he means by “the days” the days of God that He commanded his Messengers to remind their people of, as He said, “And We certainly
sent Moses with Our signs, [saying]: Bring out your people from the darknesses
into the light and remind them of the days of God” [14:5]. “The days of God”
have been explained as His bounties, and as punishment for disbelievers and
the wicked; the first is the interpretation of Ibn ʿAbbās, Ubayy b. Kaʿb, and
Mujāhid, and the second is the interpretation of Muqātil. The correct opinion is that it means both, for these are the calamities which befall His enemies
and bounties that come to His allies, and these great bounties and chastisements, which are much talked about by the people, have been called “days”
because they contain them (these events). The Arabs say, “Such-and-such is an
expert in the days of the Arabs or the days of the people,” that is, of the great
things that happened in those days. Knowledge of these days brings the servant discernment of the lessons, and his ability to seek lessons and admonition
is proportional to his knowledge of these. God the Exalted said, “There surely
was a lesson in their stories for those who possess intelligence” [12:111]. This cannot obtain except if one is safe from selfish interests,6 which is the following of
desire and obeying the commanding self, for obeying the desire snuffs the light
of intellect, blinds the sight of the heart, obstructs the way of the truth, and
diverts from the straight path. Such a one can never heed lessons, his opinion
and perception are corrupted; his ego shows him what is beautiful as ugly and
what is ugly as beautiful, and he conflates truth with falsehood. How far he is
from heeding lessons, contemplation, or admonition!
He said,
The fruit of contemplation is reaped only with three things: brevity of
hope, reflection on the Qurʾan, and minimizing mingling, wishing, attachment to other-than-God, excessive eating, and sleeping.

6 Some manuscripts have iʿrāḍ, which is “evasion;” aghrāḍ, that is, “selfish ends,” is more appropriate. See Madārij(Ṣ), 1156.

‫‪35‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫الأمور إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فلو صرفه فيما يحبه وترك الأحب لكان مفرطا‪ ً،‬فكيف إذا صرفه فيما لا ينفعه؟‬
‫فكيف فيما يمقته عليه ر به؟ فالل ّٰه المستعان‪.‬‬
‫سلنْ َا‬
‫و يحتمل أن ير يد بالأيام أيام الل ّٰه التي أمر رسله بتذكير أممهم بها‪ ،‬كما قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َلقَ َْد َأْر َ‬
‫ت ِإل َى ال ُن ّورِ و َذ َك ِّر ْه ُْم ب َأِ َي ّاِم ال َل ّه ِ﴾ ]إ براهيم‪ .[5:‬وقد فسرت‬
‫ظل ُم َا ِ‬
‫ن ال ُ ّ‬
‫ك مِ َ‬
‫ج قوَ ْم َ َ‬
‫م ُوس َى ب ِآياَ تنِ َا َأْن َأ ْ‬
‫خر ِ ْ‬
‫»أيام الل ّٰه« بنعمه‪ ،‬وفسرت بنقمة من أهل الـكفر والمعاصي‪ ،‬فالأول تفسير ا بن عباس وأبي بن كعب‬
‫ومجاهد‪ .‬والثاني تفسير مقاتل‪.‬‬
‫والصواب أن أيامه تعم النوعين‪ ،‬وهي وقائعه التي أوقعها بأعدائه‪ ،‬ونعمه التي ساقها إلى أوليائه‪.‬‬
‫وسميت هذه النعم والنقم الكبار المتحدث بها »أياما« لأنها ظرف لها‪ .‬تقول العرب‪ :‬فلان عالم بأيام‬
‫العرب وأيام الناس‪ ،‬أي بالوقائع التي كانت في تلك الأيام‪ .‬فمعرفة هذه الأيام توجب للعبد الاستبصار‬
‫صص ِه ِْم ع ِب ْر َة ٌ لأِ ُ ول ِي‬
‫للعبرة‪ ،‬و بحسب معرفته بها تكون عبرته وعظته‪ .‬قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬لقَ َْد ك َانَ ف ِي ق َ َ‬
‫ب﴾ ]يوسف‪ .[111:‬ولا يتم ذلك إلا بالسلامة من الإعراض‪ ،‬وهي متابعة الهوى والانقياد‬
‫اْلَألبْ َا ِ‬
‫لداعي النفس الأمارة‪ ،‬فإن اتباع الهوى يطمس نور العقل‪ ،‬و يعمي بصيرة القلب و يصد عن اتباع‬
‫الحق‪ ،‬و يضل عن الطر يق المستقيم‪ ،‬فلا تحصل بصيرة العبرة معه البتة‪ .‬والعبد إذا اتبع هواه فسد‬
‫رأيه ونظره‪ ،‬فأرته نفسه الحسن في صورة القبيح‪ ،‬والقبيح—في صورة الحسن‪ ،‬فالتبس عليه الحق‬
‫بالباطل‪ ،‬فأنى له الانتفاع بالتذكر أو التفكر أو بالعظة‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬وإنما تجتنى ثمرة الفكرة بثلاثة أشياء‪ :‬بقصر الأمل‪ ،‬والتأمل في القرآن‪ ،‬وقلة الخلطة‪ ،‬والتمني‪،‬‬
‫والتعلق بغير الل ّٰه‪ ،‬والشبع والمنام«‪.‬‬

36

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

He means that in the station of remembrance, the fruit of contemplation
is reaped, because the former is higher than the latter. For every station’s fruit
is reaped in the one above it, especially according to what he declared in the
opening of his book,
Every station corrects those before it.
Then he mentioned that this fruit is reaped by means of three things: first,
brevity of hope; second, contemplating the Qurʾan; and third, avoiding the five
corrupters of the heart.
As for the brevity of hope, it is the knowledge of the nearness of the time of
departure, the quickness with which the time of life expires. This is the most
beneficial thing for the heart, for it prompts man to seize the days and the
opportunities that are fleeting like the clouds, approaching the time when the
scrolls of deeds will be rolled up. It stirs the unmotivated toward the Abode of
Eternity to gather up his belongings for the journey, to make up for what has
been missed, to think little of this world and turn to the afterlife. There enacts
in his heart—if he adheres to curbing his hopes—a spectacle from spectacles
of certitude which shows him the evanescence of the world, the quickness of
its expiration, the brevity of what is left of it, [as if the world] has left him and
shown him its back already. Nothing is left of it except like the dregs of a drink
when it is finished with,7 or like what is left of the day when the sun is just
above the hills. It shows him the longevity and eternity of the afterlife, and that
its time is near, its conditions and signs have come, and it is as close to meeting
it as a man who set out to meet his friend, who has also left to meet him, and
they may run into each other any moment.
Sufficient for brevity of hope is [to consider the words of God]:
Then have you thought that if We gave them enjoyment for years, and
then there came to them that which they were promised? It will profit
them little that they enjoyed what they were provided. [26:205–207]
And the Day He will gather them together: [It will be] as if they had lived
only an hour of a day—just getting to know each other … [10:45]

7 This statement is from a well-known speech by the Companion, ʿUtba b. Ghazwān (d. 17/638),
who was one of the earliest converts and governor of Basra in the caliphate of ʿUmar, reported
in Muslim #2967.

‫‪37‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫يعني أن في منزل »التذكر« تجتنى ثمرة »الفكرة« لأنه أعلى منها‪ .‬وكل مقام تجتنى ثمرته في الذي هو‬
‫أعلى منه‪ ،‬ولا سيما على ما قرره في خطبةكتابه »كل مقام يصحح ما قبله«‪.‬‬
‫ثم ذكر أن هذه الثمرة تجتنى بثلاثة أشياء‪ :‬أحدها قصر الأمل‪ .‬والثاني تدبر القرآن‪ .‬والثالث تجنب‬
‫مفسدات القلب الخمسة‪.‬‬
‫فأما قصر الأمل فهو العلم بقرب الرحيل‪ ،‬وسرعة انقضاء مدة الحياة‪ ،‬وهو من أنفع الأمور للقلب‪،‬‬
‫فإنه يبعثه على مغافصة الأيام وانتهاز الفرص التي تمر مر السحاب‪ ،‬ومبادرة طي صحائف الأعمال‪،‬‬
‫و يثير ساكن عزماته إلى دار البقاء‪ ،‬و يحثه على قضاء جهاز سفره وتدارك الفارط‪ ،‬و يزهده في الدنيا‪،‬‬
‫و يرغبه في الآخرة‪ ،‬فيقوم بقلبه—إذا داوم مطالعة قصر الأمل—شاهد من شواهد اليقين ير يه فناء‬
‫الدنيا‪ ،‬وسرعة انقضائها‪ ،‬وقلة ما بقي منها‪ ،‬وأنها قد ترحلت مدبرة ً‪ ،‬ولم يبق منها إلا صبابةكصبابة‬
‫الإناء يتصابها صاحبها‪ ،‬وأنها لم يبق منها إلا كما بقي من يوم صارت شمسه على رؤوس الجبال‪ .‬و ير يه‬
‫بقاء الآخرة ودوامها‪ ،‬وأنها قد ترحلت مقبلة ً‪ ،‬وقد جاء أشراطها وعلاماتها‪ ،‬وأنه من لقائها كمسافر‬
‫خرج صاحب له يتلقاه‪ .‬فكل منهما يسير إلى الآخر‪ ،‬فيوشك أن يلتقيا سر يعا‪.‬‬
‫سن ِينَ ث ُ َم ّ ج َاء َه ُْم م َا ك َانوُ ا يوُ ع َد ُونَ م َا‬
‫ت ِإْن م َ َت ّعْن َاه ُْم ِ‬
‫و يكفي فى قصر الأمل قوله تعالى‪َ ﴿ :‬أفرَ َ َأي ْ َ‬
‫يح ْش ُر ُه ُْم ك َ َأْن ل َْم يلَبْ َثوُ ا ِإ َلّا‬
‫َأْغن َى ع َْنه ُْم م َا ك َانوُ ا يمُ ََت ّع ُونَ﴾ ]الشعراء‪ ،[207–205:‬وقوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َ يوَ ْم َ َ‬
‫ش َي ّة ً‬
‫ن ال َنّه َارِ ي َت َعاَ ر َفوُ نَ ب َي ْن َه ُْم﴾ ]يونس‪ ،[45:‬وقوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬ك َ َأَّنه ُْم يوَ ْم َ يرَ َْونَه َا ل َْم يلَبْ َثوُ ا ِإ َلّا ع َ ِ‬
‫ساع َة ً م ِ َ‬
‫َ‬

38

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The day when they see it, it will be as if they had lived but for an evening
or its morning. [79:46]
He will say, “How long did you remain on earth in number of years?” They
will say, “We remained a day or part of a day; ask those who keep count.”
He will say, “You stayed not but a little—if only you had known.” [23:112–
114]
The day when they see that which they are promised [it will seem to
them] as though they had lived for but an hour of daylight. A clear message. Shall any be destroyed save the transgressors? [46:35]
The Day the Horn will be blown. And We will gather the criminals, that
Day, blue-eyed [in terror]. In whispers will they consult each other: You
lived not longer than ten [Days]; We know best what they say, when the
fairest of them in course would say: You lived for not more than a day!
[20:103–104]
Once the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, addressed his
companions when the evening was drawing near and the sun was barely above
the mountains, saying,
What is left of this world compared to what has passed of it is no more
than what has been left of this day compared to what has passed of it.8
The Messenger of God passed by us while we were repairing a hut of ours, so
he said, “What is this?” We said, “It has become feeble, so we are repairing it.”
He said, “But I think that the matter is approaching faster than that.”9
The brevity of hope is built on two things, certainty of the passing and parting of the world, and certainty of the afterlife and its longevity and eternity.
Then the two matters are compared and the one more preferable is preferred.

8 Tirmidhī #2191.
9 Tirmidhī #3333.

‫‪39‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫سن ِينَ ق َالوُ ا ل َب ِث ْن َا يوَ ْم ًا َأْو‬
‫ض ع َد َد َ ِ‬
‫ل ك َْم ل َب ِث ْت ُم ْ ف ِي اْلَأْر ِ‬
‫ضح َاهاَ ﴾ ]النازعات‪ ،[64:‬وقوله تعالى‪ ﴿ :‬ق َا َ‬
‫َأْو ُ‬
‫كن ْت ُم ْ تعَ ْل َموُ نَ﴾ ]المؤمنون‪ ،[114–112:‬وقوله‬
‫ل ِإْن ل َبثِ ْت ُم ْ ِإ َلّا ق َل ِيل ًا لوَ ْ َأ َن ّك ُْم ُ‬
‫ن ق َا َ‬
‫ل ال ْعاَ دِّي َ‬
‫ض يوَ ٍْم ف َاْس َأ ِ‬
‫بعَ ْ َ‬
‫سق ُونَ﴾‬
‫ك ِإ َلّا ال ْق َو ْم ُ ال ْف َا ِ‬
‫ل يُه ْل َ ُ‬
‫ساع َة ً م ِْن نَه َاٍر ب َل َاغٌ فهَ َ ْ‬
‫تعالى‪﴿ :‬ك َ َأَّنه ُْم يوَ ْم َ يرَ َْونَ م َا يوُ ع َد ُونَ ل َْم يلَبْ َثوُ ا ِإ َلّا َ‬
‫نح ْش ُر ُ ال ْم ُْجرِم ِينَ يوَ ْم َئ ٍِذ ز ُْرق ًا ي َتَخ َاف َتوُ نَ ب َي ْن َه ُْم‬
‫صورِ ۚ و َ َ‬
‫خ ف ِي ال ُ ّ‬
‫]الأحقاف‪ ،[35:‬وقوله تعالى‪ ﴿ :‬يوَ ْم َ ي ُنف َ ُ‬
‫ل َأْمث َلهُ ُْم َطرِ يق َة ً ِإْن ل َبثِ ْت ُم ْ ِإ َلّا يوَ ْم ًا﴾ ]طه‪.[104–102:‬‬
‫ن َأع ْل َم ُ ب ِم َا يقَ ُولوُ نَ ِإْذ يقَ ُو ُ‬
‫نح ْ ُ‬
‫ِإْن ل َبثِ ْت ُم ْ ِإ َلّا ع َش ْر ًا َ‬
‫وخطب النبي ﷺ أصحابه يوما ًوالشمس على رؤوس الجبال فقال‪» :‬إنه لم يبق من الدنيا فيما مضى‬
‫صا ً‬
‫خ ّ‬
‫منها إلا كما بقي من يومكم هذا فيما مضى منه«‪ .‬ومر رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ ببعض أصحابه وهم يعالجون ِ‬
‫لهم قد وهى‪ ،‬وهم يصلحونه فقال‪» :‬ما هذا؟« قالوا‪ :‬خص لنا قد وهى فنحن نعالجه‪ ،‬فقال‪» :‬ما أرى‬
‫الأمر إلا أعجل من هذا«‪.‬‬
‫وقصر الأمل بناؤه على أمرين‪ :‬تيقن زوال الدنيا ومفارقتها‪ ،‬وتيقن لقاء الآخرة و بقائها ودوامها‪،‬‬
‫ثم يقايس بين الأمرين‪ ،‬و يؤثر أولاهما بالإ يثار‪.‬‬

40
2

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Contemplating the Qurʾan

As for “contemplating the Qurʾan,” it is attained when the heart concentrates on
its meanings, and the mind becomes focused on thinking about it and understanding it, which means the purpose of its revelation, not mere recitation
without understanding or reflection. God the Exalted has said:
[It is] a Book We have revealed to you abounding in good that they may
ponder over its verses, and that those endowed with understanding may
be mindful. [38:29]
Do they not then reflect on the Qurʾan, or are their hearts locked up?
[47:24]
We have made it an Arabic Qurʾan so that you may understand. [43:3]
Al-Ḥasan said [concerning this last verse], “He has revealed the Qurʾan so that
it may be pondered and reflected on and acted upon.”
There is nothing more beneficial and salvific for a servant of God, in this
life and the next, than pondering the Qurʾan, meditating on it for long periods
of time, concentrating one’s thoughts on the meanings of its verses. For they
enlighten the very depths of one’s being about the essence of good and evil,
the ways that correspond to each of them, their causes, ends, fruits, and the
destination of those who follow each. One acquires keys to treasures of success
and beneficial knowledge; the bases of faith deepen into his heart, its foundations become secure, and its pillars stable. [Its verses] show him the images of
the reality of this world and afterlife, heaven and hell in his heart. They take
him on a tour of the nations [of the past], showing him the days of God10 in
them and the occasions of learning lessons. They make him witness the justice
and grace of God, the being of God and His names, attributes, and deeds, what
He loves and despises, the path that takes to Him, and awaits His seeker upon
his arrival, and the bandits and calamities on the path. They edify him about
his soul and its attributes, the spoilers and corruptors of deeds, the path of the
people of the Garden and the path of the people of hellfire, their states, their
signs, the ranks of the successful as well as those of the condemned, the types
of people and their agreement in what they agree and disagreement in what
they disagree.
10

The reference is to Q. 14:5, where Moses is charged with reminding the Israelites of “the
days of God.”

‫‪41‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫وأما التأمل في القرآن فهو تحديق ناظر القلب إلى معانيه‪ ،‬وجمع الفكر على تدبره وتعقله‪ ،‬وهو المقصود‬
‫بإ نزاله لا مجرد تلاوته بلا تفهم ولا تدبر‪.‬‬
‫ب﴾ ]ص‪ ،[29:‬وقال‬
‫ك م ُب َار َك ٌ ل ِي ََّد َب ّر ُوا آياَ ت ِه ِ و َل ِي َت َذ َ َك ّر َُأولوُ اْلَألبْ َا ِ‬
‫ب َأ ن ْز َلنْ َاه ُ ِإل َي ْ َ‬
‫قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬كتِ اَ ٌ‬
‫ل﴾‬
‫ب َأق ْف َال ُه َا﴾ ]محمد‪ ،[24:‬وقال تعالى‪َ ﴿ :‬أف َل َْم ي ََّد َب ّر ُوا ال ْق َو ْ َ‬
‫تعالى‪َ ﴿ :‬أف َل َا ي َت َد ََب ّر ُونَ ال ْق ُر ْآنَ َأْم ع َلىَ ق ُلوُ ٍ‬
‫جع َلنْ َاه ُ قرُ ْآناً ع َرَب ًيِ ّا لعَ َل َـ ّك ُْم تعَ ْق ِلوُ نَ﴾ ]الزخرف‪ .[3:‬وقال الحسن‪:‬‬
‫]المؤمنون‪ ،[68:‬وقال تعالى‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َن ّا َ‬
‫نزل القرآن ليتدبر و يعمل به‪ ،‬فاتخذوا تلاوته عملا‪ً.‬‬
‫فليس شيء أنفع للعبد في معاشه ومعاده وأقرب إلى نجاته من تدبر القرآن وإطالة التأمل‪ ،‬وجمع‬
‫الفكر على معاني آياته‪ ،‬فإنها تطلع العبد على معالم الخـير والشر بحذافيرهما‪ ،‬وعلى طرقاتهما وأسبابهما‬
‫وغاياتهما وثمراتهم‪ ،‬ومآل أهلهما‪ ،‬وٺتل في يده مفاتيح كنوز السعادة والعلوم النافعة‪ ،‬وٺثبت قواعد‬
‫الإ يمان في قلبه‪ ،‬وتشيد بنيانه‪ ،‬وتوطد أركانه‪ ،‬وتر يه صورة الدنيا والآخرة والجنة والنار في قلبه‪،‬‬
‫وتحضره بين الأمم‪ ،‬وتر يه أيام الل ّٰه فيهم‪ ،‬وتبصره مواقع العبر‪ ،‬وتشهده عدل الل ّٰه وفضله‪ ،‬وتعرفه‬
‫ذاته وأسماءه وصفاته وأفعاله‪ ،‬وما يحبه وما يبغضه‪ ،‬وصراطه الموصل إليه‪ ،‬وما لسالـكيه بعد الوصول‬
‫والقدوم عليه‪ ،‬وقواطع الطر يق وآفاتها‪ ،‬وتعرفه النفس وصفاتها‪ ،‬ومفسدات الأعمال ومصححاتها‪،‬‬
‫وتعرفه طر يق أهل الجنة وأهل النار وأعمالهم وأحوالهم وسيماهم‪ ،‬ومراتب أهل السعادة وأهل‬
‫الشقاوة‪ ،‬وأقسام الخلق واجتماعهم فيما يجتمعون فيه وافتراقهم فيما يفترقون فيه‪.‬‬

42

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

They teach him of the true Lord who is called upon, the way to reach Him,
and the generous reward that awaits him upon arrival. In contrast, they teach
him three other things: what the devil calls to, the path that leads to him, and
the humiliation and chastisement that lies in this ignominious path. It is necessary for the servant to know, witness, and ponder these six matters. [The
Qurʾanic verses] present the afterlife to him as if he were in it, removing him
from the world as if he were not in it anymore, separating for him the truth
from falsehood in everything that is disputed in the world; they show him truth
as truth and falsehood as falsehood, and give him a standard and a light to
separate guidance from error, misguidance from rectitude, and give him in his
heart strength, life, vastness, expansion, blossom, and delight. His conduct with
respect to people becomes different altogether.
The meanings of the Qurʾan turn on the affirmation of divine unicity and its
demonstration, and knowledge of God and what He possesses of the attributes
of perfection, and His being above any attribute of deficiency, and faith in the
messengers, and mention of the proofs of their truth, evidence for the soundness of their prophethood, their rights, and the rights of the One who sent
them. [Its meanings include] belief in God’s angels, who are His messengers in
His creation as well as carriers of His command, and their arranging of affairs
by His leave and will, and what they have been appointed to do in the higher
world and the lower world, and what they do for humankind, from the moment
one is conceived in the womb of his mother to the day his Lord receives him.
[Its meanings include] faith in the Last Day, and what God has prepared for
His allies of the abode of ultimate bounty untouched by pain, annoyance, or
bitterness, and what He has prepared for His enemies of the abode of baneful chastisement untouched by pleasure, relief, happiness, or delight, in details
that are most clear and perfect. [It also includes] commands and prohibitions,
normative commands and decree (qadar), the licit and illicit, admonition and
lessons, stories and parables, causes and judgments, beginnings and ends, in
creation and command.
Its meanings continue to inspire the servant toward His Lord with beautiful
promise, warn and threaten him from a dreadful chastisement, encourage him
to reduce his burden for the meeting of the heavy day, guide him through the
darknesses of human opinions and schools to the one right path, strengthen
him against the paths of innovation and deviation, encourage him to increase
in his blessings through thankfulness to his Exalted Lord, and call his attention
to the licit and the illicit and stop him from transgressing them lest he fall into
the great suffering. It secures his heart against perversion, desertion, deviance
from the truth, and makes difficult matters exceedingly easy for him, and calls
upon him every moment his determination sags and steps slow down: The ride

‫‪43‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫و بالجملة تعرفه الرب المدعو إليه‪ ،‬وطر يق الوصول اليه‪ ،‬وما له من الـكرامة إذا قدم عليه‪.‬‬
‫وتعرفه في مقابل ذلك ثلاثة أخرى‪ :‬ما يدعو إليه الشيطان‪ ،‬والطر يق الموصلة إليه‪ ،‬وما للمستجيب‬
‫لدعوته من الإهانة والعذاب بعد الوصول إليه‪.‬‬
‫فهذه ستة أمور ضرور ية للعبد معرفتها ومشاهدتها ومطالعتها‪ ،‬فتشهده الآخرة حتى كأنه فيها‪،‬‬
‫وتغيبه عن الدنيا حتى كأنه ليس فيها‪ ،‬وتميز له بين الحق والباطل في كل ما اختلف فيه العالم‪ ،‬فتر يه‬
‫الحق حقا ًوالباطل باطلا‪ ً،‬وتعطيه فرقانا ًونورا يً فرق به بين الهدى والضلال‪ ،‬والغي والرشاد‪ ،‬وتعطيه‬
‫قوة ً في قلبه‪ ،‬وحياة ً وسعة‪ ،‬وانشراحا ًو بهجة ً وسرورا ً‪ ،‬فيصير في شأن والناس فى شأن آخر‪.‬‬
‫فإن معاني القرآن دا ئرة على التوحيد و براهينه‪ ،‬والعلم بالل ّٰه وما له من أوصاف الـكمال‪ ،‬وما يتنزه‬
‫عنه من سمات النقص‪ ،‬وعلى الإ يمان بالرسل‪ ،‬وذكر براهين صدقهم‪ ،‬وأدلة صحة نبوتهم‪ ،‬والتعر يف‬
‫بحقوقهم وحقوق مرسلهم‪ ،‬وعلى الإ يمان بملائكته‪ ،‬وهم رسله في خلقه وأمره‪ ،‬وتدبيرهم الأمور‬
‫بإذنه ومشيئته‪ ،‬وما جعلوا عليه من أمر العالم العلوي والسفلي‪ ،‬وما يختص بالنوع الإنساني منهم‪ ،‬من‬
‫حين يستقر في رحم أمه إلى أن يوافي ر به و يقدم عليه‪ ،‬وعلى الإ يمان باليوم الآخر‪ ،‬وما أعد الل ّٰه فيه‬
‫لأوليائه من دار النعيم المطلق التى لايشو بها ألم ولا نكد ولا تنغيص‪ ،‬وما أعد لأعدائه من دار العقاب‬
‫الو بيل التى لا يخالطها سرور ولا رخاء ولا راحة ولا فرح‪ ،‬وتفاصيل ذلك أتم تفصيل وأبينه‪ ،‬وعلى‬
‫تفاصيل الأمر والنهي‪ ،‬والشرع والقدر‪ ،‬والحلال والحرام‪ ،‬والمواعظ والعبر‪ ،‬والقصص والأمثال‪،‬‬
‫والأسباب والحكم‪ ،‬والمباديء والغايات في خلقه وأمره‪.‬‬
‫فلا تزال معانيه تنهض العبد إلى ر به بالوعد الجميل‪ ،‬وتحذره وتخوفه بوعيده من العذاب الو بيل‪،‬‬
‫وتحثه على التضمر والتخفف للقاء اليوم الثقيل‪ ،‬وتهديه في ظلم الآراء والمذاهب إلى سواء السبيل‪،‬‬
‫وتصده عن اقتحام طرق البدع والأضاليل‪ ،‬وتبعثه على الازدياد من النعم بشكر ر به الجليل‪ ،‬وتبصره‬
‫بحدود الحلال والحرام‪ ،‬وتقفه عليها لئلا يتعداها فيقع في العناء الطو يل‪ ،‬وٺثبت قلبه عن الز يغ والميل‬
‫عن الحق والتحو يل‪ ،‬وتسهل عليه الأمور الصعاب والعقبات الشاقة غاية التسهيل‪ ،‬وتناديهكلما فترت‬
‫ق اللحاق‪ ،‬والرحيل الرحيل‪ .‬وتحدو به وتسير أمامه‬
‫عزماته وونى في سيره‪ :‬تقدم الركب وفاتك‪ ،‬فاللحا َ‬

44
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
has moved on and left you! Join, join! Go, go! It shepherds him and calls from
ahead like a guide. Every moment a hidden trap of the enemy or a bandit from
the bandits of the path threatens him it calls him: Beware, beware, hold on to
God, seek His help, and say: “Sufficient for me is God—and He is the best supporter.”
In reflecting on the Quran and pondering it there are many, many times the
benefits and insights we have mentioned. In short, it is the greatest of treasures,
whose key is to dive into its meanings:
Cleanse your heart of all but His meadows
For His meadows are open to all who cleanse
Understanding is the key to the treasures of His knowledge
Seek the key, you shall find His treasure
Fear not their heresies and innovations
So long as you are in the protection of the Book
He who takes the Book as his custodian and his armor
Is safe from the enemy’s dagger and his sting
Fear not their doubts and lift them
With its help and strength, when they assail you
By God, a man never fears their doubts
But for the weakness of his heart, and his incapacity
Woe to a lame goat that seeks to outdo
A magnificent lion with his stride and gallop
The smolder of dung rises to blot out the sun
To shade its brilliance, twisting in conceit
A coward of heart, unarmed, hopes to disarm
A knight whose blade is sharp, by shaking him!

3

Five Things That Corrupt the Heart

As for corruptors of the heart, they are five, and these are the ones he has
alluded to: “mingling, wishful thinking, attachment to other-than-God, excessive eating, and sleeping.”
These five are the biggest corruptors of the heart. We shall mention their
effects, those that are common to them all as well as those that each one possesses distinctively.
Know that the heart journeys to God and the abode of afterlife, discovering the path of truth and its ways, afflictions of the soul and the deeds and the
bandit of the way, by its light, life, strength, health, determination, soundness of

‫‪45‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫سير الدليل‪ ،‬وكلما خرج عليهكمين من كما ئن العدو أو قاطع من قطاع الطر يق نادته‪ :‬الحذر َ الحذر!‬
‫فاعتصم بالل ّٰه واستعن به وقل‪ :‬حسبي الل ّٰه ونعم الوكيل‪.‬‬
‫وفي تأمل القرآن وتدبره وتفهمه أضعاف أضعاف ما ذكرناه من الحكم والفوائد‪.‬‬
‫و بالجملة فهو أعظم الـكنوز‪ ،‬طلسمه الغوص بالفكر إلى قرار معانيه‪:‬‬

‫حل‬

‫نزه فؤادك عن سوى روضاته‬

‫فر ياضه‬

‫والفهم طلسم لـكنز علومه‬

‫فاقصد إلى الطلسم تحظ بكنزه‬

‫لا تخش من بدع لهم وحوادث‬

‫ما دمت فى كنف الكتاب وحرزه‬

‫من كان حارسه الكتاب ودرعه‬

‫لم يخش من طعن العدو ووخزه‬

‫لا تخش من شبهاتهم واحمل إذا‬

‫ما‬

‫و بعزه‬

‫والل ّٰه ما هاب امرؤ شبهاتهم‬

‫إلا لضعف القلب منه وعجزه‬

‫يا ويح تيس ظالع يبغي مسا‬

‫بقة‬

‫و بجمزه‬

‫ودخان ز بل يرتقي للشمس يس‬

‫تر عينها لما سرى فى أزه‬

‫وجبان قلب أعزل قد رام يأس‬

‫ر فارسا ً شاكي السلاح بهزه‬

‫قابلتك‬

‫الهز بر‬

‫لكل‬

‫بنصره‬

‫بعدوه‬

‫منزه‬

‫فصل‬
‫وأما مفسدات القلب الخمسة‪ :‬فهي التي أشار إليها من كثرة الخلطة‪ ،‬والتمني‪ ،‬والتعلق بغير الل ّٰه‪ ،‬والشبع‪،‬‬
‫والمنام‪.‬‬
‫فهذه الخمسة من أكبر مفسدات القلب‪.‬‬
‫فنذكر آثارها التي اشتركت فيها‪ ،‬وما يميز بهكل واحد منها‪.‬‬
‫اعلم أن القلب يسير إلى الل ّٰه عز وجل والدار الآخرة‪ ،‬و يكشف عن طر يق الحق ونهجه‪ ،‬وآفات‬
‫النفس والعمل‪ ،‬وقطاع الطر يق‪ ،‬بنوره وحياته وقوته وصحته وعزمه‪ ،‬وسلامة سمعه و بصره‪ ،‬وغيبة‬

46
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
its/his hearing and sight, and an absence of distractions and obstructions from
it. These five put out its light, blind the eyes of its insight, dampen its hearing
if not render him deaf and mute altogether, weaken all of its faculties, ruin its
health, exhaust its determination, enervate its resolve, make it turn back; and
he who has no awareness of this is of a dead heart: And what wound can hurt
one who is dead?
These things obstruct [the heart] from attaining its perfect state, blocking it
from reaching what it was created for, and attaining sources of its bliss, success,
blossom and delight.
For it has no bliss, no delight, no blossoming, no perfection except in knowing God and loving Him, resting in His remembrance, rejoicing and blooming
in His nearness, yearning His meeting. This is an early taste of his Garden. Just
as he has no bliss in the afterlife, nor success, except in nearness to Him in the
abode of bliss in the later Garden. Thus, he has two gardens: he shall not enter
the second of the two if he does not enter the first one.
I heard Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya, God have mercy on him, say:
Indeed there is a garden in this world, whoever does not enter it, shall not
enter the Garden of the afterlife.
One of the knowers has said,
The heart goes through such times that I say: If the people of the Garden
would experience anything like this, their life would be good indeed.
One of the [divine] lovers said, “The wretched of the world are those who left
it without tasting the best thing in it.” They said, “What is the best thing in it?”
He said, “Love of God, familiarity with Him, yearning to meet Him, turning to
Him and avoiding all else,” or something like these words.
Anyone who has a live heart witnesses this and knows this through taste.
These five things are the ones that obstruct the heart from all this, standing
between the heart and Him, blocking its journey, afflicting it with diseases and
defects which if the patient (i.e., the heart) does not overcome, its life is feared
for.
As for the effects of excessive mingling, it fills the heart with the smoke of the
breaths of sons of Adam, until it turns black and causes it to be dispersed and
split, filled with worries, grief and weakness, having to bear beyond its capacity
of upkeep of bad companions, to waste away its interests from which they distract it, dispersing its thought in the valleys of their demands and their wills.
What remains of it for God and the afterlife?

‫‪47‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫الشواغل والقواطع عنه‪ .‬وهذه الخمسة تطفيء نوره وتغور عين بصيرته‪ ،‬وٺثقل سمعه إن لم تصمه وتبكمه‪،‬‬
‫وتضعف قواهكلها‪ ،‬وتوهن صحته‪ ،‬وتفتر عزيمته‪ ،‬وتوقف همته‪ ،‬وتنكسه إلى وراءه‪ .‬ومن لا شعور له‬
‫بهذا فميت القلب‪ :‬وما لجرح بميت إ يلام‪.‬‬
‫فهي عائقة له عن نبل كماله‪ ،‬قاطعة له عن الوصول الى ما خلق له‪ ،‬وجعل نعيمه وسعادته وابتهاجه‬
‫ولذته في الوصول إليه‪.‬‬
‫فإنه لا نعيم له ولا لذة ولا ابتهاج ولا كمال إلا بمعرفة الل ّٰه ومحبته‪ ،‬والطمأنينة بذكره‪ ،‬والفرح‬
‫والابتهاج بقر به‪ ،‬والشوق إلى لقائه‪ .‬فهذه جنته العاجلة‪ .‬كما أنه لا نعيم له في الآخرة ولا فوز إلا‬
‫بجواره في دار النعيم في الجنة الآجلة فله جنتألا يدخل الثانية منهما إن لم يدخل الأولى‪.‬‬
‫وسمعت شيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية—قدس الل ّٰه روحه—يقول‪ :‬إن في الدنيا جنة ً من لم يدخلها لم‬
‫يدخل جنة الآخرة‪.‬‬
‫وقال بعض العارفين‪ :‬إنه ليمر بالقلب أوقات أقول‪ :‬إن كان أهل الجنة في مثل هذا‪ ،‬إنهم لفي عيش‬
‫طيب‪.‬‬
‫وقال بعض المحبين‪ :‬مساكين أهل الدنيا‪ ،‬خرجوا من الدنيا وما ذاقوا أطيب ما فيها‪ .‬قالوا‪ :‬وما أطيب‬
‫ما فيها؟ قال‪ :‬محبة الل ّٰه‪ ،‬والأنس به‪ ،‬والشوق إلى لقائه‪ ،‬والإقبال عليه‪ ،‬والإعراض عما سواه—أو‬
‫نحو هذا من الكلام‪.‬‬
‫وكل من له قلب حي يشهد هذا و يعرفه ذوقا‪ً.‬‬
‫وهذه الأشياء الخمسة قاطعة عن هذا‪ ،‬حائلة بين القلب و بينه‪ ،‬عائقة له عن سيره‪ ،‬محدثة له أمراضا ً‬
‫وعللا ًإن لم يتداركها المر يض خيف عليه منها‪.‬‬
‫فأما ما تؤثرهكثرة الخلطة فامتلاء القلب من دخان أنفاس بني آدم حتى يسود‪ ،‬و يوجب له تشتتا ً‬
‫وتفرقا ًوهما ًوغما ًوضعفا‪ ً،‬وحملا لً ما يعجز عن حمله من مؤنة قرناء السوء‪ ،‬وإضاعة مصالحه‪ ،‬والاشتغال‬
‫عنها بهم و بأمورهم‪ ،‬وتقسيم فكره في أودية مطالبهم وإراداتهم‪ .‬فماذا يبقى منه لل ّٰه والدار الآخرة؟‬

48

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Furthermore, how many calamities come from mingling with people and
how many blessings are lost, trials and trouble incurred and opportunities lost?
Is the scourge of men anything but men? What was more harmful for Abū Ṭālib
on his deathbed than evil companions?11 They did not leave him until they
obstructed him from saying one word that would have brought him eternal
felicity.
This is the mingling that is built on some kind of love for this world, for men
fulfilling each other’s needs, which turns after their ends are met into animosity, leaving the one who kept that company to bite his hands in remorse, as God
the Exalted said,
And the Day the wrongdoer will bite on his hands [in regret] he will say,
“Oh, I wish I had taken with the Messenger a way. Oh, woe to me! I wish I
had not taken that one as a friend. He led me away from the remembrance
after it had come to me.” And ever is Satan, to man, a deserter. [25:27–29]
The Exalted also said, “Close friends, that Day, will be enemies to each other,
except for the righteous” [43:67].
His friend, Abraham, said to his people,
You have only taken, other than God, idols as [a bond of] affection among
you in worldly life. Then on the Day of Resurrection you will deny one
another and curse one another, and your refuge will be the Fire, and you
will not have any helpers. [29:25]
This will be the case of all those who come together for selfish interest, expressing love for each other so long as they work together to attain it, but when that
interest ends, there follows regret, grief, and pain; that love turns into animosity, curse, and blame, for that interest has turned on them and transformed into
grief and punishment. One will witness in this abode [of the afterlife] that those
who conspired to cause his ruin are caught and punished. All who cooperate
upon falsehood or love for its sake will find their love turned into hatred and
animosity.
A beneficial rule concerning socialization is to only mix with people in
benevolence and goodness, such as the Friday and daily congregations, the two
Feasts, the Pilgrimage, and circles of learning and teaching, jihad, and when

11

The uncle of the Prophet who supported and loved his nephew all his life, but failed to
become Muslim fearing shame in the eyes of his people.

‫‪49‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫هذا‪ ،‬وكم جلبت خلطة الناس من نقمة ودفعت من نعمة‪ ،‬وأ نزلت من محنة‪ ،‬وعطلت من منحة‪،‬‬
‫وأحلت من رز ية‪ ،‬وأوقعت في بلية؟ وهل آفة الناس إلا الناس؟ وهل كان على أبي طالب عند الوفاة‬
‫أضر من قرناء السوء‪ ،‬لم يزالوا به حتى حالوا بينه و بين كلمة واحدة توجب له سعادة الأبد؟‬
‫وهذه الخلطة التي تكون على نوع مودة في الدنيا‪ ،‬وقضاء وطر بعضهم من بعض‪ ،‬تنقلب إذا حقت‬
‫ل ياَ‬
‫ظال ِم ُ ع َلىَ ي َد َي ْه ِ يقَ ُو ُ‬
‫ض ال َ ّ‬
‫الحقائق عداوة‪ ،‬يعض المخالط عليها يديه ندما‪ ً،‬كما قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َ يوَ ْم َ يعَ َ ُ ّ‬
‫ن الذ ِّك ْر ِ بعَ ْد َ ِإْذ ج َاء َن ِي‬
‫سبيِ ل ًا ياَ و َ ي ْل َت َى ل َي ْتنَ ِي ل َْم َأَّتخ ِْذ ف ُل َاناً خ َل ِيل ًا لقَ َْد َأ َ‬
‫ل َ‬
‫سو ِ‬
‫ت م ََع ال َر ّ ُ‬
‫ل َي ْتنَ ِي اَّتخ َْذ ُ‬
‫ض َل ّن ِي ع َ ِ‬
‫ض‬
‫خ َل ّاء ُ يوَ ْم َئ ٍِذ بعَ ْض ُه ُْم ل ِبعَ ْ ٍ‬
‫ن خ َذ ُول ًا﴾ ]الفرقان‪ ،[29–27:‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬اْلَأ ِ‬
‫شي ْطَانُ ل ِل ِْإنس َا ِ‬
‫و َك َانَ ال َ ّ‬
‫ن ال َل ّه ِ‬
‫ع َد ُّو ٌ ِإ َلّا ال ْم َُت ّق ِينَ﴾ ]الزخرف‪ ،[67:‬وقال خليله إ براهيم عليه السلام لقومه‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َن ّم َا اَّتخ َْذت ُم ْ م ِْن د ُو ِ‬
‫ضا و َم َ ْأو َاك ُم ُ‬
‫ضك ُْم بعَ ْ ً‬
‫ن بعَ ْ ُ‬
‫ض و َ يلَ ْع َ ُ‬
‫ضك ُْم ببِ َعْ ٍ‬
‫َأْوثاَ ناً م َو َ َدّة َ ب َي ْن ِك ُْم ف ِي اْلحيَ َاة ِ ال ُد ّن ْي َا ث ُ َم ّ يوَ ْم َ ال ْق ِي َام َة ِ ي َْكف ُر ُبعَ ْ ُ‬
‫ن﴾ ]العنكبوت‪ ،[25:‬وهذا شأن كل مشتركين في غرض‪ ،‬يتوادون ما‬
‫ال َن ّار ُ و َم َا لـ َك ُْم م ِْن ناَ ص ِر ِ ي َ‬
‫داموا متساعدين على حصوله‪ ،‬فإذا انقطع ذلك الغرض أعقب ندامة ً وحزنا ً وألما‪] ً،‬وانقلبت تلك‬
‫المودة بغضا ًولعنة ً وذما ًمن بعضهم لبعض‪ ،‬لما انقلب ذلك الغرض حزنا[ً وعذابا‪ ً،‬كما يشاهد في هذه‬
‫الدار من أحوال المشتركين في خز يه إذا أخذوا وعوقبوا‪ .‬فكل متساعدين على باطل متوادين عليه‪ ،‬لا‬
‫بد أن تنقلب مودتهما بغضا ًوعداوة ً‪.‬‬
‫والضابط النافع في أمر الخلطة أن يخالط الناس في الخـير—كالجمعة والجماعات والأعياد والحج‪،‬‬
‫وتعليم العلم‪ ،‬والجهاد والنصيحة—و يعتزلهم في الشر‪ ،‬وفضول المباحات‪ .‬فإذا دعت الحاجة إلى‬

50

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

giving sincere advice; and to avoid their company in sinful deeds as well as
those that are licit but unnecessary.
If one finds oneself ineluctably in the company of people engaged in some
vice, one must never, ever approve of it, and be patient over their harm for
it, for they will never leave alone one who dissents from their evil ways if he
does not have any power or protector. However, the suffering one bears what
will be followed by honor, love, respect, and praise of the believers, and of the
Lord. Acquiescing to [their misdeeds] will result in humiliation, rancor, and
dispraise from them, the believers, and the Lord of the worlds. Thus, patience
over their harm is better and more praiseworthy in the end. When one is compelled to mingling with them in licit but unnecessary things, he should try to
turn that company toward God’s obedience if possible, strengthening his heart
and avoiding the devil’s snare that would prevent him from that, for he must
fight back the love of showing off his deeds and spiritual state. He must supplicate God for help and do good in such situations as much as possible.
If none of this works, and people persist in their heedlessness, and one is
compelled to stay in their company, one must then remove one’s heart from
that company like a hair is pulled out of dough, so that he is with them present
but absent, near but far, asleep but awake, [such that] one sees them but does
not look at them, one hears them but does not listen to them, for he has
removed his heart from their company and risen with it to the highest company, singing divine hymns around the Throne alongside high and pure souls.
How difficult and arduous such an endeavor is for the egos; it is easy only for
those whom God has made easy. A servant must be true to God within himself, to seek Him perpetually, throwing himself at His door humble and weak.
Nothing can help attain such a state but true love, perpetual remembrance
with heart and tongue, and avoiding the four remaining corruptions that will
be shortly mentioned. This cannot be attained except with righteous preparation, strength from God, and sincere determination, and emptying himself out
of [any] connection with other than God.

4

Endless Desires for Worldly Things

The second corruptor of the heart is riding the ocean of wishes; that ocean
has no end, and in it live the destitute of the world, for wishful thinking is
the best possession of the poor. The provisions of these riders are the devil’s
promises and fantasies. The waves of false hopes and fantasies toss him around
like a cadaver. These false wishes are the assets of every degenerate, worthless soul that lacks the courage to face reality, so its covers it up with mental

‫‪51‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫خلطتهم في الشر ولم يمكنه اعتزالهمن فالحذر الحذر أن يوافقهم‪ ،‬وليصبر على أذاهم‪ ،‬فإنهم لا بد أن‬
‫ى يعقبه عز ومحبة له وتعظيم وثناء عليه منهم‪ ،‬ومن‬
‫يؤذوه إن لم يكن له قوة ولا ناصر‪ ،‬ولـكن أذ ً‬
‫المؤمنين ومن رب العالمين‪ ،‬وموافقتهم يعقبها ذل و بغض له‪ ،‬ومقت وذم منهم ومن المؤمنين ومن‬
‫رب العالمين‪.‬‬
‫فالصبر على أذاهم خير وأحسن عاقبة ً وأحمد مآلا‪ ً،‬وإن دعت الحاجة إلى خلطتهم في فضول‬
‫المباحات‪ ،‬فليجتهد أن يقلب ذلك المجلس طاعة ً لل ّٰه إن أمكنه‪ ،‬و يشجع نفسه و يقوي قلبه‪ ،‬ولا‬
‫يلتفت إلى الوارد الشيطاني القاطع له عن ذلك‪ ،‬بأن هذا ر ياء ومحبة لإظهار علمك وحالك ونحو‬
‫ذلك‪ ،‬فليحار به وليستعن بالل ّٰه‪ ،‬و يؤثر فيهم من الخـير ما أمكنه‪ .‬فإن عجزته المقادير عن ذلك‪ ،‬فليسل‬
‫قلبه من بينهم كسل الشعرة من العجين‪ ،‬وليكن فيهم حاضرا ً غائبا‪ ً،‬قر يبا ً بعيدا ً‪ ،‬نائما ً يقظانا‪ ً،‬ينظر‬
‫إليهم ولا يبصرهم‪ ،‬و يسمع كلامهم ولا يعيه‪ ،‬لأنه قد أخذ قلبه من بينهم‪ ،‬ورقى به إلى الملأ الأعلى‪،‬‬
‫يسبح حول العرش مع الأرواح العلو ية الزكية‪ .‬وما أصعب هذا وأشقه على النفوس! وإنه ليسير على‬
‫من يسره الل ّٰه عليه‪ ،‬فبين العبد و بينه أن يصدق الل ّٰه تبارك وتعالى و يديم اللجأ إليه‪ ،‬و يلقي نفسه على بابه‬
‫طر يحا ًذليلا‪ ً،‬ولا يعين على هذا إلا المحبة الصادقة والذكر الدائم بالقلب واللسان‪ ،‬وتجنب المفسدات‬
‫الأر بع الباقية الآتي ذكرها‪ .‬ولا ينال هذا إلا بعدة صالحة‪ ،‬ومادة قو ية من الل ّٰه عز وجل‪ ،‬وعزيمة‬
‫صادقة‪ ،‬وفراغ من التعلق بغير الل ّٰه تعالى‪.‬‬

‫المفسد الثاني من مفسدات القلب‪ :‬ركو به بحر التمن ِ ّى‪ ،‬وهو بحر لا ساحل له‪ .‬وهو البحر الذي يركبه‬
‫مفاليس العالم‪ ،‬إن المنى رأس أموال المفاليس‪ ،‬و بضاعة ُ ركابه مواعيد ُ الشيطان‪ ،‬وخيالات المحال‬
‫والبهتان‪ .‬فلا تزال أمواج الأماني الكاذبة والخيالات الباطلة ٺتلاعب براكبهكما يتلاعب الكلاب‬
‫بالجيفة‪ ،‬وهي بضاعة كل نفس مهينة‪ ،‬خسيسة سفلية‪ ،‬ليست لها همة تنال بها الحقائق الخارجية‪،‬‬

52

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

fantasies. Everyone is afflicted differently. Some daydream about having power
and authority, others to travel across the earth and roam the cities, others
dream of wealth and precious things, women or boys; the daydreamer assumes
the form of his desired thing and imagines that he has attained it and enjoys his
triumph, until he wakes up and finds his hands empty. He who is truly courageous and who aims high, his wishes turn on knowledge and faith, and deeds
that draw him close to his Lord and bring him into His proximity. His dreams
are of faith, wisdom, and light, whereas their dreams are deception and conceit.
The Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, has praised one who wishes
to do righteous deeds, making his reward equal in some cases to the one who
does it. Like the one who says: If I had wealth, I would fear God and help my
kin and pay charity with my wealth like so-and-so does. He said, “The two are
equal in reward.”12
He, God grant him blessing and peace, expressed his wish at the occasion of
the Last Pilgrimage, after he had already performed Qirān,13 that he had done
Tamattuʿ14 and ended his iḥrām, and not brought the sacrifice with him.15 So
God rewarded him for Qirān for doing it and for Tamattuʿ for intending it, thus
he had two rewards.

5

Attachment to Things Other Than God

The third corruptor of the heart is attachment to anything that is other than
God. There is no greater destroyer of the heart, obstruction to God, and enemy
of his benefit and success. When he is attached to other than God, God hands
him over to the one to whom he is attached, who betrays him, and he fails. He
fails from both directions, attaining his desire neither from God nor from his
false god. The Exalted said, “And they have taken besides God [false] gods that
they would be for them [a source of] honor. No! They will deny their worship
of them and will be against them opponents” [19:81–82]. The Exalted also said,
“But they have taken besides God [false] deities that perhaps they would be
helped. They are not able to help them, and they [themselves] are for them
soldiers in attendance” [36:74–75].

12
13
14
15

Tirmidhī #2325.
The act of performing ʿumra and Hajj with one intention and one iḥrām.
The act of performing ʿumra during the time of Hajj, but with a separate intention and
iḥrām.
As narrated in Bukhārī #1651 and Muslim #1218.

‫‪53‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫ن للقدرة والسلطان‪ ،‬أو للضرب في‬
‫فاعتاضت عنها بالأماني الذهنية وكل بحسب حاله‪ ،‬من متم ّ ٍ‬
‫الأرض والطواف في البلدان‪ ،‬أو للأموال والأثمان أو للنسوان والمردان‪ ،‬فيمثل المتمني صورة مطلو به‬
‫في نفسه وقد فاز بوصلها والتَّذ بالظفر بها‪ .‬فبينما هو على هذه الحال‪ ،‬إذ استيقظ فإذا يده والحصير‪.‬‬
‫وصاحب الهمة العلية أمانيه حائمة حول العلم والإ يمان‪ ،‬والعمل الذي يقر به من ر به و يدنيه من‬
‫جواره‪ .‬فأماني هذا إ يمان ونور‪ ،‬وأماني أولئك خدع وغرور‪ .‬وقد مدح النبي متمني الخـير‪ ،‬ور بما‬
‫جعل أجره في بعض الأشياء كأجر فاعله‪ ،‬كالقائل‪ :‬لو أن لي مالا لعملت بعمل فلان الذي يتقي في‬
‫ماله ر به‪ ،‬و يصل فيه رحمه‪ ،‬و يخرج منه حقه‪ .‬وقال‪» :‬هما في الأجر سواء«‪ .‬وتمنى في حجة الوداع‪ :‬أنه‬
‫ق الهدي وكان قد قرن‪ ،‬فأعطاه الل ّٰه ثواب القران بفعله‪ ،‬وثواب التمتع الذي‬
‫لو كان تمتع وحل ولم ي َس ُ ِ‬
‫تمناه بأمنيته‪ ،‬فجمع له بين الأجر ين‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫المفسد الثالث من مفسدات القلب‪ :‬التعلق بغير الل ّٰه‪ .‬وهذا أعظم مفسداته على الإطلاق‪ .‬فليس عليه‬
‫أضر من ذلك‪ ،‬ولا أقطع ]له عن الل ّٰه وأحجب[ له عن مصالحه وسعادته منه‪ ،‬فإنه إذا تعلق بغير الل ّٰه وكله‬
‫الل ّٰه إلى ما تعلق به‪ ،‬وخذله من جهة ما تعلق به‪ ،‬وفاته تحصيل مقصوده من الل ّٰه بتعلقه بغيره والتفاته‬
‫إلى سواه‪ ،‬فلا على نصيبه من الل ّٰه حصل ولا إلى ما أمله ممن تعلق به وصل‪ .‬قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َاَّتخ َذ ُوا م ِن‬
‫ضًّدا﴾ ]مريم‪ [82–81:‬وقال‬
‫سي َْكف ُر ُونَ بعِ بِ َاد َتِه ِْم و َ ي َكُونوُ نَ ع َليَ ْه ِْم ِ‬
‫ن ال َل ّـه ِ آل ِه َة ً ل ِّي َكُونوُ ا ل َه ُْم عًِّزا ك َلَ ّۚا َ‬
‫د ُو ِ‬
‫جندٌ ُّمح ْض َر ُونَ﴾‬
‫ن ال َل ّـه ِ آل ِه َة ً َل ّع َ َل ّه ُْم ي ُنص َر ُونَ ل َا ي َْست َط ِيع ُونَ ن َص ْر َه ُْم و َه ُْم ل َه ُْم ُ‬
‫تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َاَّتخ َذ ُوا م ِن د ُو ِ‬
‫]يس‪.[75–74:‬‬

54

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The most disgraced of men is he whose attachment is to other than God;
what he has lost of his well-being, bliss, and success is far greater than what
he has gained from others, and the little he has gained is bound to be lost. The
likeness of such a person is one who seeks to take refuge from hot and cold in
the house of a spider, the weakest of shelters.
Overall, the essence of associationism is attachment to other than God and
its foundation is connection to other than God. Those who fall into it are censured and forsaken, as God the Exalted said, “Do not set up with God another
deity, or you shall be disgraced and forsaken” [17:22]. You shall be disgraced,
with no one to admire you, and forsaken, with no one to help. Some people are
oppressed but praised, like he who is wrongly oppressed; and others are dispraised but supported, like he who has overpowered one in the cause of evil;
and others are praised and helped, like he who takes power justly. An associationist attached to other than God is the lowest of these kinds; he has neither
praise nor help.

6

Gluttony

The fourth corruptor of the heart is food. It corrupts in two ways. First, what
corrupts by its essence, such as that which is illicit. Such things are of two further kinds, that which is prohibited in God’s right, such as carrion, blood, pork,
and beasts with fangs and birds with talons,16 and that which is prohibited in
servants’ right, such as stolen, usurped, or robbed property, and whatever is
taken from its owner without his agreement, either due to coercion, modesty,
or [fear of] vilification.
Second, what corrupts by quantity, exceeding of a limit, like extravagance
in what is licit, overeating, for it causes lethargy in obedience, busying one
in maintaining corpulence and all that goes with it, until he is sated. When
he is sated, he gets busy with trying to avoid its harm and the discomfort of
its burden. He is overcome by greed, and the devil’s path is widened, for [the
devil] runs through the son of Adam like the blood, and fasting narrows its path
and blocks its way, whereas gluttony widens it. Whoever eats a lot, drinks a lot,
sleeps a lot, and misses a lot. As in the famous tradition: “A son of Adam fills
nothing worse than his own stomach. It is sufficient for him to eat enough to
support his back. If he must fill, let a third of it be for food, a third for drink,
and a third to breathe.”17
16
17

This prohibition occurs in many well-known traditions, e.g., Muslim #1934.
Tirmidhī #2830.

‫‪55‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫فأعظم الناس خذلانا ً من تعلق بغير الل ّٰه‪ .‬فإن ما فاته من مصالحه وسعادته وفلاحه أعظم مما‬
‫حصل له ممن تعلق به‪ ،‬وهو معرض للزوال والفوات‪ .‬ومثل المتعلق بغير الل ّٰه‪ ،‬كمثل المستظل من الحر‬
‫والبرد ببيت العنكبوت‪ ،‬أوهن البيوت‪.‬‬
‫و بالجملة‪ :‬فأساس الشرك وقاعدته التي بني عليها‪ :‬التعلق بغير الل ّٰه ولصاحبه الذم والخذلان كما قال‬
‫ل م ََع ال َل ّـه ِ ِإل َٰه ًا آخ َر َ ف َتقَ ْ ع ُد َ م َْذم ُوم ًا َّمخ ْذ ُول ًا﴾ ]الإسراء‪] ،[22:‬مذموما ًلا حامد لك‬
‫تج ْع َ ْ‬
‫تعالى‪َ ﴿ :‬لّا َ‬
‫مخذولا[ً لا ناصر لك‪ .‬إذ قد يكون بعض الناس مقهورا ًمحمودا ًكالذي قهر بباطل‪ ،‬وقد يكون مذموما ً‬
‫منصورا ًكالذي قهر وتسلط عليه بباطل‪ ،‬وقد يكون محمودا ًمنصورا ًكالذي تمكن وملك بحق‪ .‬والمشرك‬
‫المتعلق بغير الل ّٰه قسمه أردأ الأقسام الأر بعة‪ ،‬لا محمود ولا منصور‪.‬‬

‫المفسد الرابع من مفسدات القلب‪ :‬الطعام‪ ،‬والمفسد له من ذلك نوعان‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬ما يفسده لعينه وذاتهكالمحرمات‪.‬‬
‫وهي نوعان‪:‬‬
‫محرمات لحق الل ّٰه‪ ،‬كالميتة والدم ولحم الخـنز ير وذي الناب من السباع والمخلب من الطير‪.‬‬
‫ومحرمات لحق العباد‪ ،‬كالمسروق والمغصوب والمنهوب‪ ،‬وما أخذ بغير رضى صاحبه‪ ،‬إما قهرا ً‬
‫وإما حياء ً وتذمما‪ً.‬‬
‫والثاني‪ :‬ما يفسده بقدره وتعدي حده‪ ،‬كالإسراف في الحلال والشبع المفرط‪ ،‬فإنه يثقله عن‬
‫الطاعات و يشغله بمزاولة مؤنة البطنة ومحاولتها حتى يظفر بها‪ .‬فإذا ظفر بها شغله بمزاولة تصرفها ووقاية‬
‫ضررها والتأذى بثقلها‪ .‬وق َو ّى عليه مواد الشهوة‪ ،‬وطرق مجاري الشيطان ووسعها‪ ،‬فإنه يجرى من‬
‫ا بن آدم مجرى الدم‪ .‬فالصوم يضيق مجار يه و يسد عليه طرقه‪ ،‬والشبع يطرقها و يوسعها‪ .‬ومن أكل‬
‫كثيرا شرب كثيرا ً‪ ،‬فنام كثيرا ً‪ ،‬فخسر كثيرا ً‪ .‬وفي الحديث المشهور‪» :‬ما ملأ آدمي وعاء شرا ًمن بطنه‪.‬‬
‫بحسب ا بن آدم لقيمات يقمن صلبه‪ .‬فإن كان لا بد فاعلا ًفثلث لطعامه وثلث لشرابه وثلث لنفسه«‪.‬‬

56

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

It is related that Iblīs came to John, son of Zechariah, God’s peace be on them
both, who said, “Did you get to me in anything?” He said, “No, except that food
was presented to you one night, and I made you desire it until you ate your full,
and you slept through your prayers.” He said, “By God I will never eat my full
again.” He said, “And I, by God, will never counsel a man again.”

7

Sloth

The fifth corrupter of the heart is excessive sleeping, for it dulls the heart, dampens the body, wastes time, and breeds negligence and laziness. Some of it is
disliked and some is harmful for the body.
The most beneficial sleep is to sleep when it is needed. The sleep during the
first part of the night is more commendable and beneficial than during the last
part of the night, while the sleep during the middle part of the day is more beneficial and satisfying than either. The closer it gets to the two ends of the night,
its benefit decreases; especially [unhelpful and harmful is to] sleep in the afternoon and the beginning of the day, except for one who spent the night awake.
[The authorities of the path] also dislike sleeping after the morning prayer
until sunrise, for this time is an opportunity, and to take a walk during this time
has great benefit in the view of the seekers; even if they stayed up all night, they
do not permit missing the walk at that time until sunrise. For the first part of
the day is its key, the time when provisions come down, and one’s sustenance
is apportioned, blessing is received, and the day is built up, and the success of
the whole day depends on that time. Therefore, one must not sleep through
it except if unavoidable. The most beneficial sleep is that of the middle of the
night and its last sixth, which amounts to eight hours; this is the most balanced
period of sleep according to physicians; what is added to or taken from it causes
harm. The kind of sleep that does not help includes sleep during the first part
of the night right after sunset until the darkness of the night appears [after twilight]. The Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, used to dislike [sleeping
during this time], so it is disliked in the law as well as nature.18
Just as too much sleep causes harm, so does fighting it or abandoning it altogether, which bequeaths other major afflictions, such as bad and dry temper,
an unfocused soul, and the drying of fluids that help understanding and work.
It also causes chronic diseases with which neither one’s heart nor one’s body
can do him much good. All existence depends on justice; whoever holds to it
takes his share of the store of good. And God alone is sought for help.
18

Based on the narration in Bukhārī #568.

‫‪57‬‬

‫‪chapter 6‬‬

‫و يحكى أن إ بليس عرض ليحيى بن زكر يا عليهما والسلام فقال له‪ :‬هل نلت مني شيئا ًقط؟ قال‪:‬‬
‫لا‪ ،‬إلا أنه قدم إليك الطعام ليلة ً فشهيته إليك حتى شبعت منه‪ ،‬فنمت عن وردك‪ .‬فقال‪ :‬لل ّٰه عل َيّ ألا‬
‫أشبع من طعام أبدا ً‪ .‬فقال‪ :‬وأنا‪ ،‬لل ّٰه علي ألا أنصح رجلا ًأبدا ً‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫المفسد الخامس‪ :‬كثرة النوم‪ ،‬فإنه يميت القلب و يثقل البدن و يضيع الوقت و يورث كثرة الغفلة‬
‫والـكسل‪ .‬ومنه المكروه جدا‪ ،‬ومنه الضار غير النافع للبدن‪.‬‬
‫وأنفع النوم ما كان عند شدة الحاجة إليه‪ .‬ونوم أول الليل أحمد وأنفع من آخره‪ .‬ونوم وسط النهار‬
‫أنفع من طرفيه‪ .‬وكلما قرب النوم من الطرفين قل نفعه وكثر ضرره ولا سيما نوم العصر‪ .‬والنوم أول‬
‫النهار إلا لسهران‪.‬‬
‫ومن المكروه عندهم النوم بين صلاة الصبح وطلوع الشمس‪ .‬فإنه وقت غنيمة‪ ،‬وللسير ذلك‬
‫الوقت عند السالـكين مزية عظيمة‪ .‬حتى لو ساروا طول ليلهم لم يسمحوا بالقعود عن السير ذلك الوقت‬
‫حتى تطلع الشمس‪ .‬فإنه أول النهار ومفتاحه‪ ،‬ووقت نزول الأرزاق‪ ،‬وحصول القسم‪ ،‬وحلول البركة‪.‬‬
‫ومنه ينشأ النهار‪ ،‬و ينسحب حكم جميعه على حكم تلك الحصة‪ .‬فينبغى أن يكون نومها كنوم المضطر‪.‬‬
‫و بالجملة فأعدل النوم وأنفعه نوم نصف الليل وسدسه الأخير وهو مقدار ثمان ساعات‪ ،‬وهذا أعدل‬
‫النوم عند الأطباء‪ .‬فما زاد عليه أو نقص منه أ ثر عندهم في الطبيعة انحرافا ًبحسبه‪.‬‬
‫ومن النوم الذي لا ينفع أيضا‪ ً:‬النوم أول الليل عقيب غروب الشمس‪ ،‬حتى تذهب فحمة العشاء‪.‬‬
‫وكان نبي الل ّٰه يكرهه‪ .‬فهو مكروه شرعا ًوطبعا‪ً.‬‬
‫وكما أن كثرة النوم مورثة لهذه الآفات‪ ،‬فمدافعته وهجره مطلقا ً مورث لآفات أخرى عظام‪:‬‬
‫من سوء المزاج و يبسه‪ ،‬وانحراف النفس‪ ،‬وجفاف الرطو بات المعينة على الفهم والعمل‪ ،‬و يورث‬
‫أمراضا ًمتلفة ً لا ينتفع صاحبها بقلبه ولا بدنه معها‪ .‬وما قام الوجود إلا بالعدل‪ ،‬فمن اعتصم به فقد‬
‫أخذ بحظه من مجامع الخـير‪ .‬والل ّٰه المستعان‪.‬‬

chapter 7

The Station of Holding Fast
The heart now arrives at the station of holding fast. It is of two types: holding
on to God, and holding on to the rope of God. God says: “And hold on to the
rope of God, all together, and be not divided” [3:103]; “And hold on to God, He
is your protector—and what a good protector and what a good guarantor of
victory” [22:78].
[The Arabic word for holding fast] al-iʿtiṣām is the iftiʿāl form of al-ʿiṣma,
which is to hold on to what protects you and shields you from what is prohibited and feared. ʿIṣma is protection, and al-iʿtiṣām is to seek protection. This is
why fortresses are called ʿawāṣim, since they guard and protect.
Success in this world and the Hereafter depends on adherence to God and
to His rope. There is no salvation without these two. Holding fast to ‘His rope’ is
to be saved from misguidance, and holding fast to Him is to be saved from utter
ruin. A traveler towards God is like any traveler headed toward a destination:
he needs directions for how to get there, as well as security and safety on the
way—no one can reach his destination except by ensuring these two things. He
needs a guide to save him from getting lost on the way and show the way, while
he needs guards or arms to protect him against bandits and other dangers.
Holding on to the rope of God ensures for the seeker the right path and
adherence to the proof, while holding on to God guarantees him strength,
preparation, armament, and what he will need to be safe on the way.
This is why, after pointing to the meanings given above, the Predecessors
interpret the phrase “rope of God” variously. Ibn ʿAbbās said: [it means] hold
on to the religion of God. Ibn Masʿūd said,
[It means] the community. It is the rope of God that He has commanded
to hold on to. What you may dislike about being part of the congregation
and obedience is better than any benefit you may see in separation.
Mujāhid and ʿAṭā said, “The covenant with God,” while Qatāda and as-Suddī
and many other exegetes say it is the Qurʾan.
Ibn Masʿūd, God be pleased with him, said, on the authority of the Prophet,
God grant him blessing and peace, “This Qurʾan is the rope of God, it is the
brilliant light, the salubrious healing, protection for whoever holds on to it, salvation for whoever follows it.”1
1 Recorded by Ibn Abī Shayba in al-Muṣannaf 10:482–483.

‫فصل‬
‫ثم ينزل القلب منزل »الاعتصام«‪ ،‬وهو نوعان‪:‬‬
‫ل ال َل ّـه ِ جَم ِيع ًا و َل َا تفَ َ َر ّقوُ ا﴾ ]آل‬
‫اعتصام بالل ّٰه‪ ،‬واعتصام بحبل الل ّٰه‪ .‬قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َاْعت َ ِ‬
‫صم ُوا ِبح َب ْ ِ‬
‫صير ُ﴾ ]الحج‪.[78:‬‬
‫صم ُوا باِ ل َل ّـه ِ ه ُو َ م َو ْل َاك ُْم ۖ ف َن ِعْم َ ال ْموَ ْل َى ٰ و َنعِ ْم َ ال َن ّ ِ‬
‫عمران‪ ،[103:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬و َاْعت َ ِ‬
‫والاعتصام افتعال من العصمة‪ ،‬وهو التمسك بما يعصمك و يمنعك من المحذور والمخوف‪ ،‬فالعصمة‪:‬‬
‫الحمية‪ ،‬والاعتصام‪ :‬الاحتماء‪ .‬ومنه سميت القلاع‪ :‬العواصم لمنعها وحمايتها‪.‬‬
‫ومدار السعادة الدنيو ية والأخرو ية‪ ،‬على الاعتصام بالل ّٰه والاعتصام بحبله‪ ،‬ولا نجاة إلا لمن‬
‫استمسك بهاتين العصمتين‪.‬‬
‫فأما الاعتصام بحبله فإنه يعصم من الضلالة‪ ،‬والاعتصام به يعصم من الهلـكة‪ .‬فإن السا ئر الى الل ّٰه‬
‫كالسا ئر على طر يق نحو مقصده‪ ،‬فهو محتاج إلى هداية الطر يق‪ .‬والسلامة فيها‪ .‬فلا يصل إلى مقصده‬
‫إلا بعد حصول هذين الأمرين له‪ .‬فالدليل كفيل يعصمه الضلالة‪ ،‬وأن يهديه إلى الطر يق‪ ،‬والعدة‬
‫والقوة والسلاح بها تحصل له السلامة من قطاع الطر يق وآفاتها‪.‬‬
‫والاعتصام بحبل الل ّٰه يوجب له الهداية واتباع الدليل‪ .‬والاعتصام بالل ّٰه يوجب له القوة والعدة‬
‫والسلاح‪ ،‬والمادة التي يسلم بها في طر يقه‪ .‬ولهذا اختلفت عبارات السلف في الاعتصام بحبل الل ّٰه‪،‬‬
‫بعد إشارتهم كلهم إلى هذا المعنى‪.‬‬
‫فقال ا بن عباس‪ :‬تمسكوا بدين الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وقال ا بن مسعود‪ :‬هو الجماعة‪ .‬وقال‪ :‬عليكم بالجماعة‪ ،‬فإنها حبل الل ّٰه الذي أمر به‪ ،‬وإن ما تكرهون في‬
‫الجماعة والطاعة خير مما تحبون في الفرقة‪.‬‬
‫وقال مجاهد وعطاء‪ :‬بعهد الل ّٰه‪ .‬وقال قتادة والسدي وكثير من المفسر ين هو القرآن‪.‬‬
‫قال ا بن مسعود رضي الل ّٰه عنه عن النبي‪ :‬إن هذا القرآن هو حبل الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وهو النور المبين‪ ،‬والشفاء‬
‫النافع‪ ،‬وعصمة من تمسك به‪ ،‬ونجاة من تبعه‪ .‬وقال علي بن أبي طالب عن النبي في القرآن‪» :‬هو حبل‬

60

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib, God be pleased with him, says on the authority of the
Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, concerning the Qurʾan, “It is God’s
strong rope, and it is the wise remembrance, and it is the straight path, and it
is the one with which desires cannot stray, it does not exhaust with repetition,
tongues cannot muddle it, scholars cannot have enough of it.”2
Muqātil said, “[Hold on to God’s rope] through His command and obedience, and differ not like Jews and Christians differed.”
It is reported in the Muwaṭṭaʾ [of Mālik], on the authority of Suhayl b. Abī
Ṣāliḥ, from his father, from Abū Hurayra may God be pleased with him, that the
Messenger of God said:
Surely God loves for you three things: that you worship him and consider
none equal to Him, that you hold on to the rope of God all together, and
you give sincere advice to those whom God has given your affairs. God
dislikes for you three things: gossip, wasting of wealth, and excessive questioning.3
The author of al-Manāzil said,
“Holding on to the rope of God” means persevering in His obedience while
vigilant of His command.
He means by “vigilant of His command” performing acts of obedience because
it is God who commands and loves them, not merely out of habit nor any other
reason but submission to His command. Accordingly, Ṭalq b. Habīb defined
piety as,
Acting in obedience to God, upon light from God, seeking reward from
God, and abandoning disobedience of God, upon light from God, fearing
the punishment of God.4
This is the faith and anticipation that is alluded to in the words of the Prophet,
God grant him blessing and peace, is his saying, “Whoever fasts Ramadan with
faith and anticipation, and whoever stands [praying] the Night of Power with
faith and anticipation, all his sins are forgiven.”5 Here, fasting and standing in
prayer are acts of obedience, faith is obedience to the command, the sincerity

2 Recorded by Ibn Abī Shayba in al-Muṣannaf #10056, weak in this form; Ibn Kathīr considers
it sound as the words of ʿAlī.

‫‪61‬‬

‫‪chapter 7‬‬

‫الل ّٰه المتين‪ ،‬وهو الذكر الحكيم‪ ،‬وهو الصراط المستقيم‪ ،‬وهو الذي لا تز يغ به الأهواء‪ ،‬ولا يخلق على‬
‫كثرة الرد ولا تلتبس به الألسن‪ ،‬ولا يشبع منه العلماء«‪ .‬وقال مقاتل‪ :‬بأمر الل ّٰه وطاعته‪ ،‬ولا تفرقوا‬
‫كما تفرقت اليهود والنصارى‪.‬‬
‫وفي الموطأ من حديث مالك عن سهيل بن صالح عن أبيه عن أبي هر يرة—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—‬
‫أن رسول الل ّٰه قال‪» :‬إن الل ّٰه يرضى لـكم ثلاثا‪ ً،‬و يسخط لـكم ثلاثا‪ ً.‬يرضى لـكم أن تعبدوه ولا تشركوا‬
‫صحوا من ولاه الل ّٰه أمركم‪ ،‬و يسخط لـكم قيل وقال‪،‬‬
‫به شيئا‪ ً،‬وأن تعتصموا بحبل الل ّٰه جميعا‪ ً،‬وأن ت ُنا ِ‬
‫وإضاعة المال‪ ،‬وكثرة السؤال«‪ .‬رواه مسلم في الصحيح‪.‬‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل‪» :‬الاعتصام بحبل الل ّٰه هو المحافظة على طاعته‪ ،‬مراقبا ًلأمره«‪.‬‬
‫و ير يد بمراقبة الأمر القيام بالطاعة لأجل أن الل ّٰه أمر بها وأحبها‪ ،‬لا لمجرد العادة‪ ،‬أو لعلة باعثة‬
‫سوى امتثال الأمر‪ .‬كما قال طلق بن حبيب رضي الل ّٰه عنه في التقوى‪ :‬هي العمل بطاعة الل ّٰه‪ ،‬على نور‬
‫من الل ّٰه ]ترجو ثواب الل ّٰه[‪ ،‬وترك معصية الل ّٰه‪ ،‬على نور من الل ّٰه‪ ،‬تخاف عقاب الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وهذا هو الإ يمان والاحتساب المشار إليه في كلام النبي كقوله‪» :‬من صام رمضان إ يمانا ًواحتسابا‪ً،‬‬
‫ومن قام ليلة القدر إ يمانا ً واحتسابا ً غفر له«‪ .‬فالصيام والقيام هو الطاعة‪ ،‬والإ يمان مراقبة الأمر‪،‬‬

‫‪3 Muslim #1715.‬‬
‫‪4 Ḥilya 3:64.‬‬
‫‪5 Bukhārī #1901; Muslim #760.‬‬

62

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

of the motive is that [the motive] should be faith in the one who commands
and nothing else; and anticipation means hoping for God’s reward. Thus, holding on to God’s rope protects from heretical innovation and other ailments that
afflict acts of worship.

1

The Meaning of Holding Fast

As for holding fast to Him, it means relying upon God and seeking His protection, beseeching Him to protect His servant, guard him and shield him and
repel harm from him. The fruit of holding on to Him is that He becomes the
defense of the servant. And “God defends the believers” that is, when a believer
holds on to God, He protects him against harmful doubts and desires, the plots
of his enemies, open and hidden, and the mischief of his ego. Furthermore, He
protects him from the actualization of an evil even if its causes have come into
existence, in accordance with the strength of how fast the servant holds on to
Him; He repels decree with decree, His will by His will, and protects him from
it.

As for the author of al-Manāzil, God have mercy on him, he said,
Holding fast to God is to rise above all imaginary things.
An imaginary thing, in his view, is anything other than God, and rising above it
is to rise from witnessing the benefit and harm, giving and taking, and the effect
of [the imagined power] to God. This is an allusion to annihilation. He means
to rise above witnessing all that is other than God to witnessing God alone, and
perfection lies in this alone—going above the will of those other than Him to
His will.
The monist (ittiḥādī) explains it as rising above the existence of what is other
than Him to His existence alone, such that one sees that nothing exists other
than Him, and that the existence of every existent is His existence, and the existence of all things other than Him is merely a figment of false imagination.6

6 Ibn al-Qayyim refutes this view repeatedly throughout the treatise. See, for example, volume
one, Translation, 1:340–383.

‫‪63‬‬

‫‪chapter 7‬‬

‫وإخلاص الباعث هو أن يكون الإ يمان الآمر لا شيء سواه‪ ،‬والاحتساب رجاء ثواب الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫فالاعتصام بحبل الل ّٰه يحمي من البدعة وآفات العمل‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫وأما الاعتصام به فهو التوكل عليه والامتناع به والاحتماء به‪ ،‬وسؤاله أن يحمي العبد و يمنعه‪ ،‬و يعصمه‬
‫و يدفع عنه‪ ،‬فإن ثمرة الاعتصام به هو الدفع عن العبد‪ .‬والل ّٰه يدفع عن الذين آمنوا‪ ،‬فيدفع عن عبده‬
‫المؤمن به إذا اعتصم بهكل سبب يفضي إلى العطب‪ ،‬و يحميه منه‪ ،‬فيدفع عنه الشبهات والشهوات‬
‫وكيد عدوه الباطن والظاهر وشر نفسهن و يدفع عنه موجب أسباب الشر بعد انعقادها‪ ،‬بحسب قوة‬
‫الاعتصام به وتمكنه‪ ،‬فينعقد في حقه أسباب العطب‪ ،‬فيدفع عنه موجباتها ومسبباتها‪ ،‬و يدفع عنه‬
‫قد َر َه بقدره‪ ،‬وإرادته بإرادته‪ ،‬و يعيذه به منه‪.‬‬
‫فصل‬
‫وأما صاحب المنازل—رحمه الل ّٰه—فقال‪» :‬الاعتصام بالل ّٰه ال َت ّر َق ِ ّي عن كل م َو ْهوم«‪.‬‬
‫الموهوم عنده ما سوى الل ّٰه‪ .‬والترقي عنه الصعود من شهود نفعه وضره‪ ،‬وعطائه ومنعه وتأثيره إلى‬
‫الل ّٰه‪ .‬وهذا إشارة إلى الفناء‪ .‬ومراده الصعود عن شهود ما سوى الل ّٰه إلى الل ّٰه‪ .‬والـكمال في ذلك‪ ،‬الصعود‬
‫عن إرادة ما سواه إلى إرادته‪.‬‬
‫والاتحادي يفسره بالصعود عن وجود ما سواه إلى وجوده‪ ،‬بحيث لا يرى لغيره وجودا ً البتة‪،‬‬
‫و يرى وجود كل موجود‪ ،‬هو وجوده فلا وجود لغيره إلا في الوهم الكاذب عنده‪.‬‬

64

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

[Al-Harawī] said,
And it has three levels: the holding fast of the commoners is by submitting and attending to the report, affirming the promise and the warning,
upholding the commands and prohibitions, and basing their dealings on
certainty and fairness.
He means that the commoners show adherence by holding on to the message about God that reaches them, with faithful submission and without contention, revering command and prohibition and obeying them, confirming the
promise and the warning, and they base their acts on certainty, not upon conjecture, hesitation, and playing it safe. As someone has said,
The sorcerer and the physician have both claimed
The dead shall not rise again, I say: Hear this
If you both are right, I lose nothing
But if I am right, the loss is upon you
This is the way of the people of doubt and suspicion, who obey command and
prohibition out of caution. This way does not protect from God’s chastisement,
nor does success come to those who choose it, nor does it take them to safety.
As for “fairness” upon which they base their dealings, that is fairness in their
dealings with God and with His creation. Fairness in dealings with God means
that he gives his servitude to God its right and does not compete with his Lord
in His attributes that do not befit a servant such as greatness, majesty, and
grandeur.
Part of his fairness toward his Lord is that he thank none other than God
for His blessings, nor forget them, nor use them to defy Him, nor praise for His
provisions anyone other than Him. As it says in a divine report [in which God
says]:
I and Jinn and Men are in a great tiding: I create but another is worshipped, I provide but another is thanked.7

7 Aḥmad in K. al-Zuhd #107, on the authority of al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī.

‫‪65‬‬

‫‪chapter 7‬‬

‫قال‪» :‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ :‬اعتصام العامة بالخـبر استسلاما ًوإذعانا ًبتصديق الوعد والوعيد‪،‬‬
‫وتعظيم الأمر والنهي‪ ،‬وتأسيس المعاملة على اليقين والانصاف«‪.‬‬
‫يعني أن العامة اعتصموا بالخـبر الوارد عن الل ّٰه‪ ،‬استسلاما ًمن غير منازعة‪ ،‬بل إ يمانا ًواستسلاما‪ً،‬‬
‫وانقادوا إلى تعظيم الأمر والنهي والإذعان لهما‪ ،‬والتصديق بالوعد والوعيد‪ ،‬وأسسوا معاملتهم على‬
‫اليقين لا على الشك والتردد وسلوك طر يق الاحتياط‪ .‬كما قال القائل‪:‬‬

‫جم والطبيب كلاهما‬
‫زعم الم ُن ّ ِ‬

‫لا تبعث الأجساد ُ قلت‪ :‬إليكما‬

‫إن َ‬
‫ت بخاسر‬
‫صح ّ قولـكما فلس ُ‬

‫أو َ‬
‫صح ّ قولي فالخسار ُ عليكما‬

‫فهذه طر يقة أهل ال َر ّيب والشكن يقومون بالأمر والنهي احتياطا‪ ً،‬وهذه الطر يقة لا تنجي من عذاب‬
‫الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ولا يحصل لصاحبها السعادة‪ ،‬ولا توصله إلى الم ْأمن‪ .‬وأما الإنصاف الذي أسسوا معاملتهم عليه‪،‬‬
‫فهو الإنصاف في معاملتهم لل ّٰه ولخلقه‪ .‬فأما الإنصاف في معاملة الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فأن يعطى العبودية حقها‪ ،‬وألا‬
‫ينازع ر به صفات إلهيته التي لا تليق بالعبد ولا تنبغي له من العظمة والـكبر ياء والجـبروت‪.‬‬
‫ومن إنصافه لر به‪ :‬ألا يشكر سواه على نعمه و ينساه‪ ،‬ولا يستعين بها على معاصيه‪ ،‬ولا يحمد على‬
‫رزقه غيره‪ ،‬ولا يعبد سواه‪ .‬كما في الأ ثر الإلهي‪» :‬إني والجن والإنس في نبأ عظيم‪ :‬أخلق و يعبد غيري‬
‫وأرزق و يشكر سواي«‪.‬‬

66

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Another Divine Hadith has it,
O son of Adam, you have not been fair to Me. My blessing descends upon
you, your evil ascends to Me. I give you blessings so you will love Me, and I
have no need of you. You sin so I will be wroth with you and you are nothing without Me. Every moment the noble angel brings back to Me from
you unseemly deeds.8
Another report says,
O son of Adam, there is no new day but that it brings you from Me new
provisions and the angels bring from you to Me ugly deeds. You feed on
My provision and disobey Me. You call upon Me, I respond; you ask, I give.
I call you to My Garden, you refuse. This is not fair.
As for justice in the right of the servants, it is to deal with them like he would
like to be treated by them.
By God, this that [al-Harawī] has mentioned as the holding fast of the commoners, is indeed the holding fast of the elite of the elite. But the Shaykh, God
have mercy on him, was among those to whom the banner of annihilation was
raised and he went for it, and he cares not for anyone’s blame in this mission,
nor sees any station higher than that.9

2

The Holding Fast of the Elite
The holding fast of the elite is the cutting off, which is to protect the will
by way of folding, and extending good manners to the creation by way
of unfolding, and refusing attachments by way of determination. This is
holding fast to the firmest rope.

He means “cutting off” one’s ego in these three ways. [The seeker] protects his
will and closes it off to anyone except God the Glorified. This is like Abū Yazīd
[al-Bisṭāmī], God have mercy on him, who reports about himself when it was
said to him, “What do you want?” He said, “I want to not want.” The second

8 Ḥilya 4:27.
9 This is Ibn al-Qayyim’s gentle but persistent criticism of al-Harawī, who subordinated all
virtues and acts of worship to the goal of annihilation ( fanāʾ).

‫‪67‬‬

‫‪chapter 7‬‬

‫وفي أ ثر آخر‪» :‬ا بن آدم‪ :‬ما أنصفتني‪ ،‬خيري إليك نازل‪ ،‬وش ُرّك إل َيّ صاعد‪ .‬أتحبب إليك بالنعم وأنا‬
‫غني عنك‪ ،‬وٺتبغض إلي بالمعاصي وأنت فقير إلي‪ .‬ولا يزال الملك الـكر يم يعرج إل َيّ منك بعمل قبيح«‪.‬‬
‫وفي أ ثر آخر‪» :‬يا ا بن آدم‪ .‬ما من يوم جديد إلا يأتيك من عندي رزق جديد‪ ،‬وتأتي عنك الملائكة‬
‫بعمل قبيح‪ .‬تأكل رزقي وتعصيني‪ ،‬وتدعوني فأستجيب لك‪ ،‬وتسألني فأعطيك‪ ،‬وأنا أدعوك إلى جنتي‬
‫فتأبى ذلك‪ ،‬وما هذا من الإنصاف«‪.‬‬
‫وأما الإنصاف في حق العبيد‪ :‬فأن يعاملهم مثل ما يحب أن يعاملوه به‪ .‬ولعمر الل ّٰه هذا الدين ولو‬
‫أنه اعتصام العامة‪ ،‬هو اعتصام خاصة الخاصة في الحقيقة‪ .‬ولـكن الشيخ—رحمه الل ّٰه—ممن رفع له‬
‫علم الفناء فشمر إليه‪ .‬فلا تأخذه فيه لومة لائم‪ .‬ولا يرى مقاما ًأجل منه‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫ل الخ َلق عن الخ َلق بسطا‪ ً،‬ورفض‬
‫صو ْنُ الإرادة قبضا‪ ً،‬وإسبا ُ‬
‫»واعتصام الخاصة بالانقطاع‪ .‬وهو َ‬
‫العلائق عزما‪ ً،‬وهو التمسك بالعروة الوثقى«‪.‬‬
‫ير يد انقطاع النفس عن أغراضها من هذه الوجوه الثلاثة‪ .‬فيصون إرادته و يقبضها عما سوى الل ّٰه‬
‫سبحانه‪ ،‬وهذا شبيه بحال أبي يز يد—رحمه الل ّٰه—فيما أخبر به عن نفسه لما قيل له‪ :‬ما تر يد؟ فقال‪:‬‬
‫أر يد ألا أر يد‪.‬‬

68

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

one is extending good manners to the creation by way of unfolding, and this
is the essence of taṣawwuf. It is as one of the knowers has said, “Taṣawwuf
is good character: whoever increases you in good character, increases you in
taṣawwuf.”10 Good character and purification of the soul are the noblest of
manners that show largeness of the heart, nobility of his soul and nature. This
attribute requires one to withhold harm and forebear it, to provide comfort,
to turn his left cheek to the one who slapped your right one, to give his robe
to the one who stole his shirt, to go two miles with one who mocked him for
one mile.11 This is the sign of his cutting off from the wants of his soul and its
desires.
As for “refusing attachments by way of determination,” it means total determination to refuse all attachments, renouncing them inwardly and outwardly.
The essence is to cut off the inwardly attachments, for when he cuts them
off the outwardly attachments do not harm him. When wealth is in your hand
but not in your heart it cannot harm you no matter how much it is. When it is
in your heart it will harm you even if you have none of it in your hand.
It was said to Imam Aḥmad, “Can a man be a renunciant if he possesses one
thousand dinars?” He said, “Yes. But upon the condition that he does not feel
happy if it increases and does not grieve if it decreases.” This is why the companions, God be pleased with them, were the best renunciants of this community,
despite all the wealth in their hands.
{Sufyān al-Thawrī was asked: “Can a wealthy man be a renunciant?” He
said, “Yes, if he is grateful upon its increase and grateful and patient upon its
decrease.”}12
Cutting off outwardly attachments is praiseworthy in two cases: when he
fears they will harm his religion, or when there is no preponderant benefit in
them. The perfection in this respect is to cut off the attachments that become
dogs on the path that prevent him from traversing it, and these are the dogs of
desires and doubts; no attachment after these can harm.
He said,
The holding fast of the elite of the elite is through joining, which is witnessing the truth exclusively, after emulating13 Him in reverence, and
devotion to Him in nearness.

10

Reported in al-Qushayrī, al-Risāla al-Qushayriyya, 242. Note that the modern translation
“Sufism” is avoided because by taṣawwuf here is meant the personal effort of purification
rather than the historical ideology and set of practices that the moderns call Sufism. See
the “Translator’s Introduction,” volume one, for more.

‫‪69‬‬

‫‪chapter 7‬‬

‫الثاني‪ :‬إسبال الخلق على الخلق بسطا‪ ً.‬وهذا حقيقة التصوف‪ .‬فإنهكما قال بعض العارفين‪» :‬التصوف‬
‫خ ُلق‪ ،‬فمن زاد عليك في الخلق زاد عليك في التصوف«‪.‬‬
‫فإن حسن الخلق وتزكية النفس بمكارم الأخلاق‪ ،‬يدل على سعة قلب صاحبه‪ ،‬وكرم نفسه وسجيته‪.‬‬
‫وفي هذا الوصف يكف الأذى و يحمل الأذى و يوجد الراحة و يدير خده الأيسر لمن لطمه على الأيمن‪،‬‬
‫و يعطي رداءه لمن سلبه قميصه‪ ،‬و يمشي ميلين مع من سخره م ِيلا‪ ً،‬وهذا علامة انقطاعه عن حظوظ‬
‫نفسه وأغراضها‪.‬‬
‫وأما رفض العلائق عزما ًفهو العزم التام على رفض العلائق وتركها في ظاهره و باطنه‪.‬‬
‫والأصل هو قطع علائق الباطن‪ ،‬فمتى قطعها لم تضره علائق الظاهر‪ .‬فمتى كان المال في يدك وليس‬
‫في قلبك‪ ،‬لم يضرك ولو كثر‪ ،‬ومتى كان في قلبك ض َر ّ‪ ،‬ولو لم يكن في يديك منه شيء‪.‬‬
‫قيل للإمام أحمد—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪ :‬أيكون الرجل زاهدا ً ومعه ألف دينار؟ قال‪ :‬نعم‪ ،‬على شر يطة‬
‫ألا يفرح إذا زادت ولا يحزن إذا نقصت‪ .‬ولهذا كان الصحابة—رضي الل ّٰه عنهم—أزهد الأمة مع‬
‫ما بأيديهم من الأموال‪.‬‬
‫وإنما يحمد قطع العلائق الظاهرة في موضعين‪ :‬حيث يخاف منها ضررا ً في دينه‪ ،‬أو حيث لا يكون‬
‫فيها مصلحة راجحة‪ .‬والـكمال من ذلك قطع العلائق التي تصير كلاليب على الصراط تمنعه من العبور‪،‬‬
‫وهي كلاليب الشهوات والشبهات‪ ،‬ولا يضره ما تعلق به بعدها‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫صة الخاصة‪ :‬بالاتصال وهو ش ُهود الحق تفر يدا ً بعد الاستحذاء له تعظيما‪ً،‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬واعتصام خا َ ّ‬
‫والاشتغال به قرُ با ً«‪.‬‬

‫‪It is worth mentioning that here the author is alluding to the gospel, Matthew 5:38–41.‬‬
‫‪This addition appears in some of the manuscripts. See Madārij(Ṣ), 1191.‬‬
‫”‪Ibn al-Qayyim reads al-Harawī’s text here as istiḥdhāʾ, which means “seeking to imitate,‬‬
‫‪whereas all extant manuscripts of al-Manāzil read istikhdhāʾ, which is a Sufi term that‬‬
‫”‪means “total submission.‬‬

‫‪11‬‬
‫‪12‬‬
‫‪13‬‬

70

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The cutting off takes him to this joining; that was for the intermediate stage,
this, in [al-Harawī’s] view, is for those who have arrived.
He means by “witnessing the truth exclusively” that he sees the Truth, Glorified is He, alone, nothing else with Him, and this is because of the annihilation
of the witness into the Witnessed, and that transfer takes place upon the unveiling.
As has been explained before, [contrary to what al-Harawī believes] this is
not perfection; perfection, instead, is to annihilate his will into His will. As for
the annihilation of witnessing all else into witnessing Him, this is lower than
that, as explained.
As for his saying, “after emulating Him in reverence”: the Shaykh, God have
mercy on him, due to his fondness of allegories, expressed a great meaning
through [the term] istiḥdhāʾ which is the istifʿāl form of al-muḥādhāʾ (root: ḥdh-w); which is to face something in such a way that nothing is left out, but to
face it with every single part of one’s body. His meaning by it is nearness, and
removal of any medium that prevents it. There should be no doubt [concerning the doctrine] that the servant draws near to his Lord and the Lord draws
near to His servant. As for the nearing of the servant, it is like the saying of the
Exalted, “And bow in prostration, and come close” [96:19]. In a divine report,
God says, “If a servant comes close to Me by an inch, I come close to him by
a yard.”14 Another report has it, “And nothing gets a servant closer to Me than
performance of what I have obligated upon him, and My servant keeps getting closer to Me by performing supererogatory acts until I love him. When I
love him, I become his ears with which he hears, his eyes with which he sees,
his hands with which he holds, and his legs with which he walks. So he hears
through Me, and sees through Me, and holds through Me, and walks through
Me.”15 Another sound tradition has it, “The closest my servant gets to Me is in
the last part of the night.”16 Another narration has it, “My servant is the closest
to Me in the state of prostration.”17
Once when people raised their voices in saying “God is Great” during prayers
with the Prophet God grant him blessing and peace, he said to them, “O people,
keep it quiet. The One you are calling is neither deaf nor absent, rather He is
All-hearing and near—nearer to one of you than the neck of your mount.”18
The Shaykh, God have mercy on him, expressed the quest of nearness to
Him and rejection of any intermediary obstructing him from the desired nearness, without which the eyes of the worshipper and His allies cannot cool, as
14
15

This is part of a longer tradition in Bukhārī #7405 and Muslim #2675.
This is a famous report in Bukhārī #6502 and elsewhere, except the last statement, “So he
hears through me …” which does not appear in any sound report.

‫‪71‬‬

‫‪chapter 7‬‬

‫لما كان ذلك الانقطاع موصلا إً لى هذا الاتصال كان ذلك للمتوسطين‪ .‬وهذا عنده لأهل الوصول‪.‬‬
‫و يعني بشهود الحق تفر يدا ً‪ :‬أن يشهد الحق سبحانه وحده منفردا ًولا شيء معه‪ ،‬وذلك لفناء الشاهد‬
‫في المشهود‪ ،‬والحوالة في ذلك عند القوم على الـكشف‪.‬‬
‫وقد تقدم أن هذا ليس بكمال‪ ،‬وأن الـكمال أن يفنى بمراده عن مراد نفسه‪ ،‬وأما فناؤه بشهوده عن‬
‫شهود ما سواه‪ ،‬فدون هذا الفناء في الرتبةكما تقدم‪.‬‬
‫وأما قوله‪» :‬بعد الاستحذاء له تعظيما ً«‪ ،‬فالشيخ—رحمه الل ّٰه—لـكثرة لهجه بالاستعارات‪ ،‬عبر‬
‫عن معنى ً لطيف عظيم بلفظة »الاستحذاء« التي هي استفعال من المحاذاة‪ ،‬وهي المقابلة التي لا يبقى‬
‫فيها جزء من المحاذي خارجا ً عما حاذاه‪ ،‬بل قد واجهه وقابله بكليته وجميع أجزائه‪ ،‬ومراده بذلك‬
‫القرب‪ ،‬وارتفاع الوسائط المانعة منه‪ ،‬ولا ر يب أن العبد يقرب من ر به‪ ،‬والرب يقرب من عبده‪.‬‬
‫فأما قرب العبد فكقوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َاْسج ُْد و َاقتْ رَ ِب ۩﴾ ]العلق‪ ،[19:‬وقوله في الأ ثر الإلهي‪» :‬من تقرب‬
‫منى شبرا ً تقر بت منه ذراعا ً«‪ ،‬وكقوله‪» :‬وما تقرب إلي عبدي بمثل أداء ما افترضت عليه‪ .‬ولا يزال‬
‫عبدي يتقرب إلي بالنوافل حتى أحبه‪ ،‬فإذا أحببتهكنت سمعه الذي يسمع به‪ ،‬و بصره الذي يبصر‬
‫به‪ ،‬و يده التي يبطش بها‪ ،‬ورجله التي يمشى بها‪ .‬فبي يسمع‪ ،‬و بي يبصر‪ ،‬و بي يبطش‪ ،‬و بي يمشي«‪ .‬وفي‬
‫الحديث الصحيح‪» :‬أقرب ما يكون الرب من عبده في جوف الليل الأخير«‪] .‬وفي الحديث أيضا‪ً:‬‬
‫»أقرب ما يكون العبد من ر به وهو ساجد«[‪ .‬وفي الحديث الصحيح—لما ارتفعت أصواتهم بالتكبير‬
‫مع النبي في السفر فقال‪» :‬يا أيها الناس‪ ،‬ار بعوا على أنفسكم‪ ،‬إنكم لا تدعون أصم ولا غائبا‪ ً،‬إن الذي‬
‫تدعونه سميع قر يب‪ ،‬أقرب إلى أحدكم من عنق راحلته«‪.‬‬
‫فعبر الشيخ—رحمه الل ّٰه—عن طلب القرب منه‪ ،‬ورفض الوسائط الحائلة بينه و بين القرب‬
‫المطلوب الذي لا تقر عيون عابديه وأوليائه إلا به—بالاستحذاء—‪ ،‬وحقيقتهُ موافاة العبد إلى‬

‫‪Tirmidhī #3579, graded it ḥasan-gharīb; al-Ḥākim #1162 and others graded it ṣaḥīḥ. See‬‬
‫‪Madārij(Ṣ), 1198.‬‬
‫‪Muslim #482.‬‬
‫‪Bukhārī #6610; Muslim #2704.‬‬

‫‪16‬‬
‫‪17‬‬
‫‪18‬‬

72

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

istiḥdhāʾ, whose reality is the submission of the servant in His presence, in front
of Him, in total contrast to those who turn their back to Him, evade Him, or seek
to avoid Him.
The meaning of this matter cannot be encompassed except with presence
and taste, and the best it can be expressed is through the prophetic, Muhammadan expressions. The closest expression of the people [of taṣawwuf ] is that
it is “nearness” with the lifting of veils, by which the servant comes upon the
reality of reverence. This is why he said, “submission to Him reverently.”
Whoever wishes to understand this as it should be understood, he must
understand the name of the Exalted “the Hidden” and “the Near” in a state that
his heart is filled with His love and the tongue fond of His remembrance. From
here, the servant is taken toward the annihilation to which he has rolled up his
sleeves and dedicated his effort.
If he is dedicated to the intermediate annihilation, which is annihilation of
witnessing another [except God], his heart witnesses none other altogether;
forms disappear, allusions vanish: that which was not is annihilated, that which
always was remains.
In this station, he responds to the call of annihilation out of love and longing,
not coercion. For in this station, love has fused with reverence and nearness,
and this is the end of the journey for those seeking annihilation.
However, if he had intended the higher annihilation, the annihilation of the
will of another, there remains no will in his heart that resists the normative,
legal, prophetic, Qurʾanic will: but the two wills are united, and what is willed by
the Lord becomes the same as what is willed by the servant. This is the essence
of pure love. This is the correct union, the union of the object of will, not of the
one willing, nor of the will [itself].19
Contemplate this distinction at this point in the journey, for many a seeker’s
steps have slipped and attainer’s understanding confounded.
At this station, what was once non-existent is annihilated in will, preference,
love, reverence, fear, hope, and reliance: only that which is eternal remains. In
it all media between the Lord and the servant vanish, and total submission,
accompanied by love and reverence, is attained.

19

There appears to be some inconsistency in Ibn al-Qayyim’s expression here, but the meaning is clear: The annihilation and union he considers the highest is that the servant should
will what God has willed, but he does not become fused with God, nor does his will
become lost in God’s: he remains the author of and responsible for his moral actions, but
annihilates the object of his will into what God wills. See Chapter 9 §1 on the discussion
of annihilation and its three kinds below.

‫‪73‬‬

‫‪chapter 7‬‬

‫حضرته وقدامه و بين يديه‪ ،‬عكس حال من نبذه وراءه ظهر يا ًوأعرض عنه ونأى بجانبه‪ ،‬بمنزلة من‬
‫ولى المطاع ظهره ومال بشقه عنه‪.‬‬
‫وهذا الأمر لا يدرك معناه إلا بوجوده وذوقه‪ .‬وأحسن ما يعبر عنه بالعبارة النبو ية المحمدية‪،‬‬
‫وأقرب عبارات القوم عنه أنه التقرب برفع الوسائط التي بارتفاعها يحصل للعبد حقيقة التعظيم‪.‬‬
‫فلذلك قال »الاستحذاء له تعظيما ً«‪.‬‬
‫ومن أراد فهم هذا—كما ينبغي—فعليه بفهم اسمه تعالى »الباطن« وفهم اسمه »القر يب« مع‬
‫امتلاء القلب بحبه‪ ،‬ولهج اللسان بذكره‪ .‬ومن هاهنا يؤخذ العبد إلى الفناء الذي كان مشمرا ًإليه عاملا ً‬
‫سوى‪ ،‬لم يبق في قلبه شهود لغيره‬
‫عليه‪ .‬فإن كان مشمرا ً إلى الفناء المتوسط‪ ،‬وهو الفناء عن شهود ال ِّ‬
‫البتة‪ ،‬بل تضمحل الرسوم وتفنى الإشارات‪ ،‬و يفنى من لم يكن‪ ،‬و يبقى من لم يزل‪ .‬وفى هذا المقام‬
‫يجيب داعي الفناء طوعا ًورغبة ً لا كرها‪ ً،‬لأن هذا المقام امتزج فيه الحب بالتعظيم مع القرب‪ ،‬وهو‬
‫منتهى سفر الطالبين لمقام الفناء‪.‬‬
‫وإن كان العبد مشمرا ً للفناء العالي وهو الفناء عن إرادة السوى‪ ،‬لم يبق في قلبه مراد يزاحم‬
‫مراده الديني الشرعي النبوي القرآني‪ ،‬بل يتحد المرادان فيصير عين مراد الرب هو عين مراد العبد‪.‬‬
‫وهذا حقيقة المحبة الخالصة‪ .‬وفيها يكون الاتحاد الصحيح‪ ،‬وهو الاتحاد في المراد‪ ،‬لا في المر يد ولا في‬
‫الإرادة‪.‬‬
‫فتدبر هذا الفرقان في هذا الموضع الذي طالما زلت فيه أقدام السالـكين‪ ،‬وضلت فيه أفهام‬
‫الواجدين‪.‬‬
‫وفي هذا المقام حقيقة يفنى من لم يكن إرادة ً وإيثارا ً‪ ،‬ومحبة ً وتعظيما ًوخوفا ًورجاء ً وتوكلا‪ ً،‬و يبقى‬
‫من لم يزل‪ .‬وفيه ترتفع الوسائط بين الرب والعبد حقيقة‪ ،‬و يحصل له الاستحذاء المذكور مقرونا بً غاية‬
‫الحب وغاية التعظيم‪.‬‬

74

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

At this station, the seeker of annihilation responds out of love, obedience
and choice, not coercively, but the lover whose heart’s love has filled such that
no part of him is void of it, his heart and soul gravitate toward Him who is the
most perfect of beloved, the most beautiful, and most deserving. This is caused
by total love fused with reverence and nearness and erasure of all other than the
Beloved; nothing remains in the heart except the Beloved and what He loves.
This is the reality of holding fast to Him and to His rope. And God alone can
help.
As for his words, “and devotion to Him due to nearness,” they mean that
nearness to the Truth so busies him that nothing else commands his attention,
which is the true meaning of nearness. Do you not see that the closest attendant of a sultan, who attends to him and speaks for him, is not distracted by
anything else? Thus, a servant’s exclusive engagement with his Lord is proportional to his nearness to Him.

‫‪75‬‬

‫‪chapter 7‬‬

‫وفي هذا المقام يجيب داعي الفناء في المحبة طوعا ًواختيارا ًلا كرها‪ ً،‬بل ينجذب إليه انجذاب قلب‬
‫المحب وروحه‪ ،‬الذي قد ملأت المحبة قلبه‪ .‬بحيث لم يبق فيه جزء فارغ منها‪ ،‬إلى محبو به الذي هو أكمل‬
‫محبوب وأجمله وأحقه بالحب‪.‬‬
‫وهذا أوجبه الحب الكامل الممتزج بالتعظيم والإجلال والقرب‪ ،‬ومحو ما سوى مراد المحبوب‬
‫من القلب‪ ،‬بحيث لم يبق في القلب إلا المحبوب ومراده‪ ،‬وهذا حقيقة الاعتصام به و بحبله‪ ،‬والل ّٰه‬
‫المستعان‪.‬‬
‫وأما قوله‪» :‬والاشتغال به قر با ً« أي يشغله قرب الحق عن كل ما سواه‪ ،‬وهذا حقيقة القرب‪.‬‬
‫ألا ترى أن القر يب من السلطان جدا ً‪ ،‬المقبل عليه‪ ،‬المكلم له‪ ،‬لا يشتغل بشيء سواه البتة؟ فعلى قدر‬
‫القرب من الل ّٰه يكون اشتغال العبد به‪.‬‬

chapter 8

The Station of Fleeing
Among the stations of “You we worship and You alone we supplicate for help”
is the station of fleeing.
God the Exalted said, “Flee unto God” [51:50]. Linguistically, al-firār is to flee
or take flight from one thing to another. It is of two types: the fleeing of the
successful and the fleeing of the damned. The fleeing of the successful is fleeing to God the Exalted, and that of the damned is fleeing from Him rather than
to Him. As for the fleeing from Him to Him, that is the fleeing of the allies of
God. Ibn ʿAbbās, God be pleased with them both, said concerning God’s saying,
“Flee unto God”: “Flee from Him to Him, and act in obedience to Him.” Sahl
b. ʿAbdallāh [al-Tustarī] said, “Flee from other than God to God.” Others have
said, “Flee from the chastisement of God toward His reward through faith and
obedience.”1
The author of al-Manāzil, God have mercy on him, said,
It is fleeing from all that was once naught to Him who always has been. It
has three levels. The fleeing of the commoners from ignorance to knowledge in intention and effort, from sloth to readiness in determination and
sincerity, and from constriction to expansion in trust and hope.
He means by “all that was once naught” all of the creation, and by “Him who
has always been” the Truth (i.e., God). His words “the fleeing of the commoners
from ignorance to knowledge in intention and effort” [are explained as follows].
Ignorance is of two types, lack of beneficial knowledge, and failure to act upon
its requisites and effects. Both are “ignorance” in the language, custom, Law, and
Reality.2 [To appreciate the second meaning, consider the following.] Moses
said, “I seek refuge from God from being among the ignorant” [2:67] when his
people said to him, “Do you take us in ridicule?” that is, make fun of us. Joseph
the Truthful said, “And if You do not avert from me their plan, I might incline
toward them and [thus] be among the ignorant” [12:33].3

1 These statements are found in the exegesis of the said verse in Tafsīr al-Ṭabarī and Tafsīr alBaghawī. See Madārij(Ṣ), 1203.
2 See glossary, “Reality.”

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل »إ ياك نعبد وإياك نستعين« منزلة‪» :‬الفرار«‪.‬‬
‫قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬ففَ ِ ُر ّوا ِإل َى ال َل ّـه ِ﴾ ]الذار يات‪ .[50:‬وحقيقة الفرار الهرب من شيء إلى شيء‪ .‬وهو‬
‫نوعان‪ :‬فرار السعداء‪ ،‬وفرار الأشقياء‪.‬‬
‫ففرار السعداء‪ :‬الفرار إلى الل ّٰه تعالى‪.‬‬
‫وفرار الأشقياء‪ :‬الفرار منه لا إليه‪ .‬وأما الفرار منه إليه ففرار أوليائه‪ .‬قال ا بن عباس رضي الل ّٰه‬
‫عنهما في قوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬ففَ ِ ُر ّوا ِإل َى ال َل ّـه ِ﴾‪ ،‬فروا منه إليه‪ ،‬واعملوا بطاعته‪ .‬وقال سهل بن عبد الل ّٰه‪ :‬فروا‬
‫مما سوى الل ّٰه إلى الل ّٰه‪ .‬وقال آخرون‪ :‬اهر بوا من عذاب الل ّٰه إلى ثوابه بالإ يمان والطاعة‪.‬‬
‫وقال صاحب المنازل—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪:‬‬
‫ب م َم ّا لم ي َكْن إلى من لم يزَ َْل‪ .‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ :‬فرار العامة من الجهل إلى العلم‬
‫»هو الهر ُ‬
‫سعة ثقة ً ورجاء ً«‪.‬‬
‫جدا ً وعزما‪ ً،‬ومن الضيق إلى ال َ ّ‬
‫شمير ِ‬
‫ع َقدا ً وسعيا‪ ً،‬ومن الـكسل إلى ال َت ّ ْ‬
‫ير يد بما لم يكن »الخلق« وما لم يزل »الحق«‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬فرار العامة من الجهل إلى العلم عقدا ً وسعيا ً«‪.‬‬
‫ل لغة ً وعرفا ً‬
‫الجهل نوعان‪ :‬عدم العلم بالحق النافع‪ ،‬وعدم العمل بموجبه ومقتضاه‪ ،‬فكلاهما جه ٌ‬
‫ن اْلجا َه ِل ِينَ﴾ ]البقرة‪ [67:‬لما قال له قومه‪:‬‬
‫كونَ م ِ َ‬
‫وشرعا ً وحقيقة ً‪ .‬قال موسى‪َ ﴿ :‬أع ُوذ ُ باِ ل َل ّـه ِ َأْن َأ ُ‬
‫ب‬
‫كي ْد َه َُّن َأ ْ‬
‫ف ع َن ِ ّي َ‬
‫﴿ َأت ََّتخ ِذ ُناَ ه ُز ُو ًا﴾‪ ،‬أي من المستهزئين‪ .‬وقال يوسف الصديق‪﴿ :‬و َِإ َلّا ت َص ْر ِ ْ‬
‫ص ُ‬
‫ن اْلجا َه ِل ِينَ﴾ ]يوسف‪ ،[33:‬أي من مرتكبي ما حرمت عليهم‪ .‬وقال تعالى‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َن ّم َا‬
‫كن مّ ِ َ‬
‫ِإل َْيه َِّن و َ َأ ُ‬

‫‪3 In both cases, the context suggests a complex meaning for jahl: for Moses, the act of lying‬‬
‫‪in the name of God and for Joseph falling to the women’s trap would not have been lack of‬‬
‫‪knowledge but its abuse and failure to act upon it.‬‬

78

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Qatāda said, “The Companions of the Messenger of God, God grant him
blessing and peace, all agreed that all that is used as an excuse to disobey God is
ignorance.” Someone else has said, “The Companions have agreed that anyone
who disobeys God is ignorant.” [A poet has said:]
Let no one be ignorant toward us
Or we shall be ignorant above the ignorance of the ignorant.4
He thus called inattention to the implications of knowledge ignorance either
because one did not benefit from it, and thus is no better than one who is
ignorant, or because he failed to consider the consequences of his actions. The
fleeing that has been mentioned is fleeing from both kinds of ignorance; from
failure to attain the knowledge concerning belief, inner awareness, and [spiritual] insight, and from practical ignorance to beneficial effort and good action
in intention and effort.
His words “from sloth to readiness in determination ( jidd) and sincerity
(ʿazm)” mean that one flees from the propensity for laziness toward the drive
for action, rolling up his sleeves with sincerity and putting forth his best effort.
Here al-jidd means true determination, unhampered by lassitude, procrastination, and negligence, which means avoiding the attitude of “I will” and “I
shall,” and “perhaps” and “I wish”—the most harmful attitude for a servant to
have. It is a tree whose fruit are nothing but lament and regret. The difference
between the two is that al-ʿazm is the truthfulness and concentration of intention whereas al-jidd is the truthfulness of action and putting forth of one’s best
effort. God the Glorified has commanded that His commands be received with
sincere intention as well as sincere action, saying, “Take you hold of what We
have given you with strength” [2:63]. He also said, “And We wrote for him on
the tablets, concerning all things, a lesson to be taken and explanation for all
things, [saying,] ‘Take hold of them with determination …’ ” [7:145]. He also said,
“O John, take hold of the Book with might” [19:12], that is, with sincere exertion,
utmost effort and determination, not like someone who responds to his duty
hesitatingly and languidly.
By his words “from constriction to expansion in trust and hope” he means
fleeing from the constriction of his breast [caused] by worries, sorrows, woes,
and fears that he encounters in this abode from within his soul as well as
from outside, including those concerning one’s interests, or his dependents,
his wealth, body, family, and his foes. He flees from all of these toward the vast

4 This verse is attributed to ʿAmr b. Kulthūm. See Madārij(Ṣ), 1205.

‫‪79‬‬

‫‪chapter 8‬‬

‫سوء َ ِبج َه َال َة ٍ﴾ ]النساء‪ .[17:‬قال قتادة‪ :‬أجمع أصحاب رسول الل ّٰه أن كل‬
‫ن يعَ ْم َلوُ نَ ال ُ ّ‬
‫ال َت ّو ْ بةَ ُ ع َلىَ ال َل ّـه ِ ل َ ِل ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ما ع ُصيَ الل ّٰه به فهو جهالة‪ ،‬وقال غيره‪ :‬أجمع الصحابة على أن كل من عصى الل ّٰه فهو جاهل‪:‬‬

‫ألا لا يجه َل َْن أحدٌ علينا‬

‫ل فوق جهل الجاهلينا‬
‫فنجه َ‬

‫وسمى عدم مراعاة العلم جهلا‪ ً،‬إما لأنه لم ينتفع به فنزل منزلة الجاهل‪ ،‬وإما لجهله بسوء ما يجني‬
‫عواقب فعله‪.‬‬
‫فالفرار المذكور‪ :‬الفرار من الجهلين‪ ،‬من الجهل بالعلم إلى تحصيله اعتقادا ًومعرفة ً و بصيرة ً‪ ،‬والفرار‬
‫من جهل العمل إلى السعي النافع‪ ،‬والعمل الصالح قصدا ً وسعيا‪ً.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬ومن الـكسل إلى التشمير جدا ًوعزما ً«‪ ،‬أي يفر من إجابة داعي الـكسل إلى داعي العمل‪،‬‬
‫والتشمير بالجد والاجتهاد‪.‬‬
‫و »الجد« هو هاهنا صدق العزم‪ ،‬وإخلاصه من شوائب الفتور ووعود التسو يف والتهاون‪.‬‬
‫ل‪ ،‬فهو أضر شيء على العبد‪ ،‬وهي شجرة ثمرها الحسرات‬
‫سين وسوف‪ ،‬وعسى ولع َ ّ‬
‫وهو تجنب ال ِّ‬
‫والندامات‪ .‬والفرق بين الجد والعزم‪ :‬أن »العزم« صدق الإرادة واستجماعها‪ ،‬و »الجد« صدق‬
‫العمل و بذل الجهد فيه‪ .‬وقد أمر الل ّٰه سبحانه بتلقي أوامره بالعزم والجد‪ .‬فقال‪﴿ :‬خ ُذ ُوا م َا آت َي ْن َاك ُم‬
‫كت َب ْن َا ل َه ُف ِي اْلَأل ْو َا ِ‬
‫يء ٍ فَخذُ ْ هاَ‬
‫لشَ ْ‬
‫يء ٍ َمّو ْعِظَة ً و َتفَ ْ ِ‬
‫لشَ ْ‬
‫بقِ ُ َو ّة ٍ﴾ ]البقرة‪ ،[63:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬و َ َ‬
‫صيل ًا ل ِّك ُ ّ ِ‬
‫ح م ِن ك ُ ّ ِ‬
‫ب بقِ ُ َو ّة ٍ﴾ ]مريم‪ ،[12:‬أي بجد واجتهاد وعزم‪ ،‬لا‬
‫بقِ ُ َو ّة ٍ﴾ ]الأعراف‪ [145:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬ياَ َ‬
‫يح ْي َٰى خ ُذِ ال ْك ِتاَ َ‬
‫كمن يأخذ ما ُأمر به بتردد وفتور‪.‬‬
‫سعة ثقة ً ورجاء ً«‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬وم ِن الضيق إلى ال َ ّ‬
‫ير يد هروب العبد من ضيق صدره بالهموم والغموم‪ ،‬والأحزان والمخاوف التي تعتر يه في هذه‬
‫الدار من جهة نفسه‪ ،‬وما هو خارج عن نفسه مما يتعلق بأسباب مصالحه ومصالح من يتعلق به‪ ،‬وما‬

80

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

expanse of trust and true reliance upon God, with good hope in what He has
in store for him, expecting His tenderness and charity. One of the best things
commoners say is, “There is no worry when with God.”
God the Exalted said, “Whosoever is mindful of God, He makes for him a
way out and gives him from where he cannot even imagine” [65:2–3]. Al-Rabīʿ
b. Khuthaym5 said [concerning this verse], “He makes from him a way out of all
that worries people.” Abū al-ʿĀliya said, “[It means] a way out of every misery.”
Al-Ḥasan [al-Baṣrī] said, “A way out of what He has prohibited.”
[The aforementioned verse goes on to say,] “And whosoever relies on God,
He is sufficient (ḥasb) for him” [65:3], [that is,] whosoever trusts Him in his
misfortunes and his ventures, He suffices him in all that concerns him. Al-ḥasb
means that which suffices, as in, “God is our ḥasb” [3:173], God suffices us.
Whenever a servant has good expectations from God, and is hopeful and
truly reliant upon Him, God never frustrates his hopes, for His glory never fails
one who hopes and acts. [Al-Harawī] expresses this trust and hopefulness as
“expansion,” for, after having acquired faith, there is nothing that expands and
widens the breast like trust and hope and good expectation of Him.

[Al-Harawī] said,
The fleeing of the elite is from the report to the witnessing, from the forms
to the foundations, from indulgence to divestment.6
That is, the [true seekers] are not content that their faith be based on mere
report, seeking to witness what has been reported, seeking to rise above knowledge based on report to the sight of certitude through witnessing. [This is what]
Abraham the Friend, God’s blessings and prayers be upon our Prophet and
upon him, sought that from his Lord, when he said, “ ‘My Lord, show me how
You give life to the dead.’ He said, ‘Have you not believed?’ He said, ‘Yes, but
[I ask] only that my heart may be satisfied’” [2:260]. Abraham thus asked that
his certitude be turned into witnessing, and his knowledge become testimony.
This is the meaning the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, expressed
as “doubt” in his saying, “We have more of a right to doubt than Abraham” when
he said, “‘My Lord, show me how You give life to the dead.’ He said, ‘Have you

5 Al-Rabīʿ b. Khuthaym al-Thawrī al-Kūfī (d. 65/685) was a renunciant, a senior Successor, who
was honored in the circle of ʿAbdallāh b. Masʿūd and the like, known for his knowledge, understanding, and piety. See Siyar 4:258.

‫‪81‬‬

‫‪chapter 8‬‬

‫يتعلق بماله و بدنه وأهله وعدوه‪ .‬يهرب من ضيق صدره بذلك كله إلى سعة فضاء الثقة بالل ّٰه‪ ،‬وصدق‬
‫التوكل عليه‪ ،‬وحسن الرجاء لجميل صنعه به‪ ،‬وتوقع المرجو من لطفه و بره‪ .‬ومن أحسن كلام العامة‬
‫ب﴾‬
‫يح ْت َ ِ‬
‫ث ل َا َ‬
‫حي ْ ُ‬
‫مخ ْر َج ًا و َيرَ ْز ُق ْه ُ م ِْن َ‬
‫ق ال َل ّـه َ َ‬
‫قولهم‪ :‬لا ه ََّم مع الل ّٰه‪ .‬قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َم َن ي َ َت ّ ِ‬
‫يج ْع َل ل َ ّه ُ َ‬
‫س ُ‬
‫خثيَ ْم‪ :‬يجعل له مخرجا ًمن كل ما ضاق على الناس‪ .‬وقال أبو العالية‪:‬‬
‫]الطلاق‪ .[3–2:‬قال الر بيع بن ُ‬
‫مخرجا ًمن كل شدة‪.‬‬
‫سبهُ ُ﴾ ]الطلاق‪ ،[3:‬ومن يثق به‬
‫ح ْ‬
‫وقال الحسن‪ :‬مخرجا ًمما نهاه عنه‪﴿ ،‬و َم َن ي َتوَ َ َكّْل ع َلىَ ال َل ّـه ِ فهَ ُو َ َ‬
‫سب ُن َا ال َل ّـه ُ﴾ ]آل عمران‪ ،173:‬التو بة‪،[59:‬‬
‫ح ْ‬
‫في نوائبه ومهماته يكفيهكل ما أهمه‪ .‬والحسب الكافي ﴿ َ‬
‫كافينا الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وكلما كان العبد حسن الظن بالل ّٰه‪ ،‬حسن الرجاء له‪ ،‬صادق التوكل عليه فإن الل ّٰه لا يخيب أمله‬
‫فيه البتة‪ ،‬فإنه سبحانه لا يخيب أمل آمل‪ ،‬ولا يضيع عمل عامل‪ .‬وعبر عن الثقة وحسن الظن بالسعة‪،‬‬
‫فإنه لا أشرح للصدر ولا أوسع له—بعد الإ يمان—من ثقته بالل ّٰه ورجائه له وحسن ظنه به‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬وفرار الخاصة من الخـبر إلى الشهود‪ ،‬ومن الرسوم إلى الأصول‪ ،‬ومن الحظوظ إلى التجر يد«‪.‬‬
‫يعني أنهم لا يرضون أن يكون إ يمانهم عن مجرد خبر‪ ،‬حتى يترقوا منه إلى مشاهدة المخبر عنه‪،‬‬
‫فيطلبون الترقي من علم اليقين بالخـبر إلى عين اليقين بالشهود‪ ،‬كما طلب إ براهيم الخليل—صلوات الل ّٰه‬
‫ل‬
‫ل َأو َل َْم تؤُ ْم ِن ۖ ق َا َ‬
‫تح ْيِي ال ْموَ ْت َى ٰ ۖ ق َا َ‬
‫ف ُ‬
‫كي ْ َ‬
‫ب َأرِن ِي َ‬
‫وسلامه على نبينا وعليه—ذلك من ر به إذ قال‪﴿ :‬ر َ ِّ‬
‫كن ل ِّي َْطم َئ َِّن ق َلبْ ِي﴾ ]البقرة‪ ،[260:‬فطلب إ براهيم عليه السلام أن يكون اليقين عيانا‪ ً،‬والمعلوم‬
‫بلَىَ و َل َٰ ِ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫مشاهدا ً‪ .‬وهذا هو المعنى الذي عبر عنه النبي بالشك في قوله‪» :‬نحن أحق بالشك من إ براهيم« حيث‬

‫‪6 Tajrīd in Arabic is literally to peel or denude, which translates etymologically and literally‬‬
‫‪to divestment, from the Latin verb vestire (to clothe). It is the name of the ninety-seventh‬‬
‫‪station.‬‬

82

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

not believed?’ He said, ‘Yes, but [I ask] only that my heart may be satisfied.’”
Neither he, God grant him blessing and peace, nor Abraham ever doubted, far
be it from them; he only expressed by it the [aforementioned] meaning. This is
one of the explanations of the Hadith. There is another explanation of it, which
is by way of negation, that is, neither Abraham doubted when he said what he
said, nor do we doubt. This explanation is correct too: had he asked what he
did out of doubt, we would have more of a right to it, but in fact, he did not ask
out of doubt, rather, for satisfaction.
The ranks [of certitude] are three. The knowledge of certitude is obtained
through the report. Then, the reality of what is reported appears to the heart or
the sight, until its knowledge becomes the sight of certitude. Then one encounters and experiences it and it becomes the reality of certitude. Thus, our knowledge of the Garden and the Fire at this point are knowledge of certitude. When
the Garden is brought near to the righteous at the Stand [on the Day of Judgment] and the Fire is shown to the erring, and they will see them with their
eyes, that would be the sight of certitude. As the Exalted has said, “Ye shall see
the Fire. Then you shall see it with the sight of certitude” [102:6–7]. When the
people of the Garden enter the Garden and the people of the Fire enter the
Fire, that would be the reality of certitude. We shall explicate this further in its
appropriate place.7
As for his words “from the forms to the foundations,” he means by “the forms”
the appearances of knowledge and action and by the “foundations” the realities of faith and dealings of the hearts, the tastes, and the intimations of faith.
He thus flees from establishing knowledge and action to submitting the ego
to [the requirements of] inner knowledge. The men of determination in this
journey do not remain content with the forms and surfaces of deeds, and do
not count them except in accordance with their spirit and reality, and what is
confirmed by divine intimation, {which is the extent of their portion from the
[scriptural] command. Divine intimation} does not require abandoning adherence to the command, as some bandits of the path and heretics among the Sufis
have imagined. Rather, it sublimates from them the realities of the command,
the secrets of worship, and the spirit of the dealings. What they seek to get out
of the [scriptural] command is comparable to what a scholar gets out of the
speech of a speaker, which includes clear expressions and hints, warnings and
allusions, as opposed to the commoners, who understand such that they may
repeat [a speech] from memory but without understanding or full appreciation
of its implications. Those [who have attained divine intimations] are the most

7 The author returns to this in the Eighty-first station, that of al-Mukāshafa or Unveiling.

‫‪83‬‬

‫‪chapter 8‬‬

‫كن ل ِّي َْطم َئ َِّن ق َلبْ ِي﴾‪ .‬وهو لم يشك‬
‫ل بلَىَ و َل َٰ ِ‬
‫ل َأو َل َْم تؤُ ْم ِن ۖ ق َا َ‬
‫تح ْيِي ال ْموَ ْت َى ٰ ۖ ق َا َ‬
‫ف ُ‬
‫كي ْ َ‬
‫ب َأرِن ِي َ‬
‫قال‪﴿ :‬ر َ ِّ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ولا إ براهيم حاشاهما من ذلك‪ ،‬وإنما عبر عن هذا المعنى بهذه العبارة‪ .‬هذا أحد الأقوال في الحديث‪.‬‬
‫وفيه قول ثان‪ :‬أنه على وجه النفي‪ ،‬أي لم يشك إ براهيم حيث قال ما قال‪ ،‬ولم نشك نحن‪.‬‬
‫وهذا القول صحيح أيضا‪ ً،‬أي لو كان ما طلبه للشك لكنا نحن أحق به منه‪ ،‬لـكن لم يطلب ما طلب‬
‫شكا‪ ً،‬وإنما طلبه طمأنينة ً‪.‬‬
‫فالمراتب ثلاث‪ :‬علم يقين يحصل عن الخـبر ثم تتجلى حقيقة المخبر عنه للقلب أو البصر حتى يصير‬
‫العلم به عين يقين‪ ،‬ثم يباشره و يلابسه فيصير حق يقين‪ .‬فعلِ م ُنا بالجنة والنار الآن علم يقين‪ ،‬فإذا أزلفت‬
‫الجنة للمتقين في الموقف‪ ،‬و برزت الجحيم للغاو ين‪ ،‬وشاهدوهما عيانا‪ ً،‬كان ذلك عين يقين كما قال تعالى‪:‬‬
‫ن اْلجحَيِ م َ ث ُ َم ّ ل َترَ َو َُّنه َا ع َي ْنَ اليْ قَ ِينِ﴾ ]التكا ثر‪ .[7–6:‬فإذا دخل أهل الجنة الجنة‪ ،‬وأهل النار النار‪،‬‬
‫﴿ل َترَ َو ُ َ ّ‬
‫فذلك حق اليقين‪ .‬وسنز يد ذلك إ يضاحا ًإن شاء الل ّٰه إذا انتهينا إليه‪.‬‬
‫وأما قوله‪» :‬ومن الرسوم إلى الأصول«‪.‬‬
‫ير يد بالرسوم ظواهر العلم والعمل‪ ،‬و بالأصول حقائق الإ يمان ومعاملات القلوب‪ ،‬وأذواق‬
‫الإ يمان ووارداته‪ .‬فيفر من إحكام العلم والعمل إلى خشوع السر للعرفان‪ .‬فإن أر باب العزائم في السير‬
‫لا يقنعون برسوم الأعمال وظواهرها‪ ،‬ولا يعتدون منها إلا بأرواحها وحقائقها‪ ،‬وما يثبته لهم التعرف‬
‫الإلهي ]وهو نصيبهم من الأمر‪.‬‬
‫والتعرف الإلهي لا يقتضي مفارقة الأمر‪ ،‬كما يظن قطاع الطر يق وزنادقة الصوفية‪ ،‬بل يستخرج‬
‫منهم حقائق الأمر‪ ،‬وأسرار العبودية‪ ،‬وروح المعاملة‪ .‬فحظهم من الأمر حظ العالم بمراد المتكلم من‬
‫كلامه‪ ،‬تصر يحا ً وإيماء ً وتنبيها ً وإشارة ً‪ .‬وحظ غيرهم منه حظ التالي له حفظا ً بلا فهم ولا معرفة‬

84

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

in need of the [scriptural] command, for they have not reached those intimations and realities except through it. To protect [scriptural command] by way
of knowledge, inner awareness, practice, and [spiritual] states is a necessity for
which they have no alternative whatsoever.
This is the portion (i.e., the understanding of the scholars) that has escaped
the heretics, the bandits of the path who claim to be on the path of [the
Sufis]. When they learn that it is the essence and the spirit of these commandments that is demanded, not their appearance, shape, or form, they say: We
will focus our concerns on their objectives and realities and we have no need
for their form and appearance. To busy oneself with their form is to busy oneself with the means at the expense of the ends, and that which is sought for
its own sake at the expense of that which is sought only to attain something
else. They are deceived in this by what they see in [the conduct] of those who
limit themselves to the forms and appearances of the deeds without attending to their realities, objectives, and spirit. The former see themselves nobler
than the latter and their goals as higher, and that they seek the real fruit, the
others only the peel. The deficiency of some and the transgression of others has resulted in the suspension of the commandment entirely, and they
have thought that they have attained to Reality without its form and appearance. But in reality they have not attained except disbelief and heresy, rejecting what is known by necessity as the teaching of the Messenger. Thus, some
have become disbelievers, heretics, and hypocrites, and others deficient and
imperfect. Those who uphold both this and that are those who see that the
commandment is directed to their hearts before their limbs, and that the heart
must worship as must the limbs, and that the abandonment of the worship of
the heart is like abandoning physical worship, and the perfection of worship is
that both the king (i.e., the heart) and his armies (the other organs) stand in
worship. Such are the elite of the people of faith and of knowledge and gnosis.

1

Fleeing from the Ego

[Al-Harawī’s] words, “from indulgence to divestment,” mean fleeing from the
indulgence of the ego with all its different levels. No one is aware of these
except those endowed with the inner knowledge of God and His pleasure, His
rights upon His servants, and knowledge of their own selves and deeds and the
ailments of both. It may be that the highest aspirations of some worshippers
count as indulgence for others from which they seek God’s forgiveness, fleeing
from them to Him, seeing them as impediments against their goal.

‫‪85‬‬

‫‪chapter 8‬‬

‫لمراده‪ .‬وهؤلاء أحوج شيء إلى الأمر‪ ،‬لأنهم لم يصلوا إلى تلك التعرفات والحقائق إلا به‪ .‬فالمحافظة‬
‫عليه لهم علما ًومعرفة ً وعملا ًوحالا ًضرور ية ً‪ ،‬لا عوض لهم عنه البتة‪.‬‬
‫وهذا القدر هو الذي فات الزنادقة‪ ،‬قطاع الطر يق من المنتسبين إلى طر يقة القوم‪ .‬فإنهم لما علموا‬
‫أن حقائق هذه الأوامر هي المطلو بة‪ ،‬وأرواحها لا صورها وأشباحها ورسومها‪ ،‬قالوا‪ :‬نجمع هِم َمنا‬
‫على مقاصدها وحقائقها‪ ،‬ولا حاجة لنا إلى رسومها وظواهرها‪ ،‬بل الاشتغال برسومها اشتغال عن‬
‫الغاية بالوسيلة‪ ،‬وعن المطلوب لذاته بالمطلوب لغيره‪ ،‬وغرهم ما رأوا فيه الواقفين مع رسوم الأعمال‬
‫وظواهرها‪ ،‬دون مراعاة حقائقها ومقاصدها وأرواحها‪ .‬فرأوا نفوسهم أشرف من نفوس أولئك‪،‬‬
‫وهممهم أعلى‪ ،‬وأنهم المشتغلون باللب وأولئك بالقشر‪ .‬فتركب من تقصير هؤلاء وعدوان هؤلاء‬
‫تعطيل جملة الأمر‪ ،‬هؤلاء عطلوا سره ومقصوده وحقيقته‪ ،‬وهؤلاء عطلوا رسمه وصورته‪ .‬فظنوا أنهم‬
‫يصلون إلى حقيقته من غير رسمه وظاهره‪ ،‬فلم يصلوا إلا إلى الـكفر والزندقة‪ ،‬وجحد ما ع ُلم بالضرورة‬
‫مجيء الرسول به‪ .‬فهؤلاء كفار زنادقة منافقون‪ ،‬وأولئك مقصرون غير كاملين‪ .‬والقائمون بهذا وهذا‬
‫هم الذين يرون أن الأمر متوجه إلى قلو بهم قبل جوارحهم‪ ،‬وأن على القلب عبودية في الأمر كما على‬
‫الجوارح‪ ،‬وأن تعطيل عبودية القلب بمنزلة تعطيل عبودية الجوراح‪ ،‬وأن كمال العبودية قيام كل من‬
‫الملك وجنوده بعبوديته‪ ،‬فهؤلاء خواص أهل الإ يمان‪ ،‬وأهل العلم والعرفان‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قوله‪» :‬ومن الحظوظ إلى التجر يد«‪.‬‬
‫ير يد الفرار من حظوظ النفوس على اختلاف مراتبها‪ .‬فإنه لا يعرفها إلا المعتنون بمعرفة الل ّٰه‬
‫ومراده‪ ،‬وحقه على عبده‪ ،‬ومعرفة نفوسهم وأعمالهم وآفاتهما‪ ،‬ورب مطالب عالية لقوم من العباد‬
‫هي حظوظ لقوم آخر ين‪ ،‬يستغفرون الل ّٰه منها‪ ،‬و يفرون إليه منها‪ .‬يرونها حائلة ً بينهم و بين مطلو بهم‪.‬‬

86

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

In general, indulgence is all that is other than God’s will and pleasure, whatever it may be. It could be a prohibited indulgence, or disliked, or neutral, or
even liked, so long as something else is more beloved to God. The difference
cannot be known except with solid knowledge of God and His command as
well as one’s ego, its attributes, and states.
At this stage, indulgences become distinct from the rights, and he runs from
the indulgence to divestment. For most, this cannot be attained because they
worship God on the basis of their own indulgences and of what they want of
Him, whereas the purification of worship to only what he wants of His servant
[is a different station altogether]:
That is the station none is given
Except a prophet and a truth-loving among the men
True abstinence is abstinence in those [indulgences]
Not in what has been permitted in clear Sūras
Truth is your truthfulness in stripping them away
Purity is to purify them if you could only see
This is the trust of men of insight
Stripping their deeds of that dirt
Thus is their repentance from it, for they are
Ever repentant until they enter graves8
In sum, the one who attains this divestment is such that he is not content with
anything less than God, nor happy with any attainment other than God, and
grieves over nothing that he loses other than God. He does not rest content at
attaining noble levels, however great in the eyes of men; he rests in nothing
but God. He does not need anyone but God, is not pleased except when in harmony with what pleases God, and does not grieve except over that which he
has missed from God. He fears nothing but falling in the eyes of God or being
veiled from God. All of his being is from God, for God, and with God. His journey is ever towards God. His knowledge was raised to a sublime height, and he
rolled up his sleeves and set his heart to it. That goal became his exclusive concern, and he took it on. Indulgences call him towards themselves, but he says,
“I want the One whom if I have attained, I have attained everything, and if I
missed Him, I have missed everything.” He is with God divested from His creatures, and with His creatures divested from his ego. He is with the command
without his own indulgences—and I mean only those indulgences that resist

8 These are most likely Ibn al-Qayyim’s own lines.

‫‪87‬‬

‫‪chapter 8‬‬

‫و بالجملة‪ ،‬فالحظ ما سوى مراد الل ّٰه الدينى منك‪ ،‬كائنا ًما كان‪ ،‬وهو ما بين حظ محرم إلى مكروه‬
‫إلى مباح إلى مستحب‪ ،‬غيره أحب إلى الل ّٰه منه‪ .‬ولا يتميز هذا إلا في مقام الرسوخ في العلم بالل ّٰه وأمره‪،‬‬
‫و بالنفس وصفاتها وأحوالها‪.‬‬
‫فهناك ٺتبين له الحظوظ من الحقوق‪ ،‬و يفر من الحظ إلى التجر يد‪ .‬وأكثر الناس لا يصلح لهم هذا‪،‬‬
‫لأنهم إنما يعبدون الل ّٰه على الحظوظ وعلى مرادهم منه‪ .‬وأما تجر يد عبادته على مراده من عبده‪:‬‬

‫أحدٌ‬

‫ق من الب َشر‬
‫سوى نبٍّي وصّدي ٍ‬

‫فتلك‬

‫والزهد زهدك فيها ليس زهدك في‬

‫سو َر‬
‫محكم ال ُ ّ‬
‫ما قد أبيح لنا في ُ‬

‫ق صدق ُك في تجر يدها وكذا ال‬
‫والصد ُ‬

‫إخلاص تخليص ُها إن كنت ذا بصر‬

‫ل أر باب البصا ئر في‬
‫كذا تو ُكّ ُ‬

‫تجر يد أعمالهم من ذلك الـك َد َر‬

‫أبدا‬

‫في تو بة أو ي َصيروا داخل الحفُ َر‬

‫كذاك‬

‫منزلة ٌ‬

‫تو بت ُهم‬

‫لم‬

‫منها‬

‫يعطَها‬

‫فه ُم‬

‫و بالجملة‪ ،‬فصاحب هذا التجر يد لا يقنع من الل ّٰه بأمر يسكن إليه دون الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ولا يفرح بما حصل له‬
‫دون الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ولا يأسى على ما فاته سوى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ولا يستغني برتبة شر يفة وإن عظمت عنده أو عند الناس‪،‬‬
‫فلا يستغني إلا بالل ّٰه‪ ،‬ولا يفتقر إلا إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ولا يفرح إلا بموافقته لمرضاة الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ولا يحزن إلا على ما‬
‫فاته من الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ولا يخاف إلا من سقوطه من عين الل ّٰه‪ ،‬واحتجاب الل ّٰه عنه‪ .‬فكله بالل ّٰه‪ ،‬وكله لل ّٰه‪ ،‬وكله‬
‫مع الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وسيره دائما إلى الل ّٰه‪ .‬قد ُرفع له ع ِلم ٌ فشمر إليه‪ ،‬وتجرد له مطلو به فعمل عليه‪ .‬تناديه الحظوظ‪:‬‬
‫إل َيّ‪ ،‬وهو يقول‪ :‬إنما أر يد من إذا حصل لي حصل كل شيء‪ ،‬وإذا فاتني فاتني كل شيء‪ .‬فهو مع‬
‫الل ّٰه مجرد عن خلقه‪ ،‬ومع خلقه مجرد عن نفسه‪ ،‬ومع الأمر مجرد عن حظه‪ ،‬وأعني الحظ المزاحم‬

88

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

the [accomplishment of the] command. As for the indulgence that helps the
command, which does not degrade from his level nor in the eyes of his Lord
[he partakes in such indulgences]. For this is also an occasion of error in which
many shaykhs have fallen, thinking that desiring an indulgence is necessarily a
deficiency. The reality is that indulgences are of two kinds, one that resists the
command and one that sustains it and helps him accomplish it. The first one is
the one that is blameworthy whereas the second one is praiseworthy, and partaking in it is part of perfection of worship. The first is one thing, the second
entirely another.

2

Fleeing from All Other Than the Truth

He said, “The fleeing of the elite of the elite is from other than the Truth to the
Truth, then from witnessing the fleeing to the Truth, then fleeing from witnessing the fleeing.”
This, given [al-Harawī’s] commitment to making the annihilation of witnessing the ultimate goal of the seekers, such that he flees first from the creation
to the Truth, and witnesses through this fleeing the singularity of what he witnesses, but there remained something still with him, which is the witnessing
of his fleeing, which amounts to sensing the creation. So he flees again from
witnessing his fleeing, thus severing all relations between him and creation.
There remains nothing except his witnessing of his fleeing from witnessing his
fleeing; he finally even flees from witnessing that fleeing. At this point, all links
are severed. This has been explained earlier.9 This is neither the highest of stations or ranks nor the ultimate perfection, but above it is something higher and
nobler, which is that he witnesses his fleeing, and that it is by God, from God,
to God; thus he witnesses that he fled from Him to Him, giving every spectacle
its due of worship, and this is the state of the perfect ones. And God alone we
supplicate for help.

9 See Madārij(Ṣ), 1206.

‫‪89‬‬

‫‪chapter 8‬‬

‫للأمر‪ .‬وأما الحظ المعين على الأمر‪ ،‬فإنه لا يحطه تناوله عن مرتبته‪ ،‬ولا يسقطه من عين ر به‪ .‬وهذا‬
‫أيضا ًموضع غلط فيه من غلط من الشيوخ‪ ،‬فظنوا أن إرادة الحظ نقص في الإرادة‪.‬‬
‫والتحقيق فيه أن الحظ نوعان‪ :‬حظ يزاحم الأمر‪ ،‬وحظ يؤازر الأمر فينفذه‪ .‬فالأول هو المذموم‪،‬‬
‫والثاني ممدوح‪ ،‬وتناوله من تمام العبودية‪ .‬فهذا لون وهذا لون‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬وفرار خاصة الخاصة‪ ،‬م َم ّا د ُون الحق إلى الحق‪ ،‬ثم من شهود الفرار إلى الحق‪ ،‬ث َم ّ الف ِرار ُ من‬
‫شهود الفرار«‪.‬‬
‫هذا على قاعدته في جعل الفناء عن الشهود غاية السالـكين‪ ،‬فيفر أولا ًمن الخلق إلى الحق‪ ،‬و يشهد‬
‫بهذا الفرار انفراد مشهوده الذي فر إليه‪ ،‬لـكن بقيت عليه بقية‪ ،‬وهي شهود فراره‪ ،‬فيعدله إحساسا ً‬
‫بالخلق‪ .‬فيفر ثانيا ًمن شهود فراره‪ ،‬فتنقطع النسب كلها بينه و بين الخلق بهذا الفرار الثاني‪ ،‬فلا يبقى‬
‫فيه بقية إلا ملاحظة فراره من شهود فراره‪ ،‬فيفر من شهود الفرار‪ ،‬فتنقطع حينئذ النسب كلها‪ .‬وقد‬
‫تقدم الكلام على هذا وأنه ليس أعلى المقامات والرتب‪ ،‬ولا هو غاية الـكمال‪ .‬وأن فوقه ما هو أعلى منه‬
‫مقاما ًوأشرف منزلا‪ ً،‬وهو أن يشهد فراره‪ ،‬وأنه بالل ّٰه من الل ّٰه إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فيشهد أنه فر به منه إليه‪ .‬و يعطي‬
‫كم ّل‪ .‬والل ّٰه المستعان‪.‬‬
‫كل مشهد حقه من العبودية‪ ،‬وهذا حال الـ َُ‬

chapter 9

The Station of Disciplining
Among the stations of “You we worship and You alone we supplicate for help”
is the station of disciplining, which is to discipline the ego upon truthfulness
and purification.
The author of al-Manāzil, God have mercy on him, said,
It is the disciplining of the ego to accept the truth.
By this, two things are meant. [First,] to discipline [the ego] to accept the truth
when it is presented to it, [be it concerning something] in one’s words, deeds,
or intentions, such that when the truth is presented to [one’s ego], it embraces
it, follows it, and submits to it. Second, accepting the truth from the one who
presented it to him. The Exalted said, “And the one who has brought the truth
and confirmed it: such are the righteous” [39:33]. It is not sufficient, therefore,
to be truthful, but you must affirm the truthful. Many people are truthful but
their pride, envy, or something else might prevent them from confirming others
who speak the truth.
He said,
It has three levels. The disciplining of the commoners, which is to discipline their character with knowledge, purify their actions with sincerity,
and to fulfill the rights in their dealings.
By “disciplining of the character with knowledge,” he means to reform and
purify it in accordance with [scriptural] knowledge, such that he does not make
a move in outward or inward matters except within the purview of knowledge,
such that his open and secret movements are all measured in accordance with
the balance of the Law. As for “purification of actions with sincerity,” it means
stripping off any motivations for other than God. This is an expression of the
affirmation of the unicity of desire and purification of motivation to Him alone.
As for the fulfillment of the rights in dealings, it is that you give what you have
been commanded of the rights of God and the rights of the servants in full, with
total sincerity toward the owner of the right, pleasing him in every way, earning
his praise and gratitude.
Since these three things are very difficult for the soul, to undertake them is
a kind of training, and when they become habitual, they turn into character.

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬الر ياضة«‪ .‬هي تمر ين النفس على الصدق‬
‫والإخلاص‪.‬‬
‫قال صاحب »المنازل«—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪» :‬هي تمر ين النفس على قبول الصدق«‪.‬‬
‫وهذا يراد به أمران‪ :‬تمر ينها على قبول الصدق إذا عرضه عليها في أقواله وأفعاله وإرادته‪ ،‬فإذا‬
‫عرض عليها الصدق قبلته وانقادت له وأذعنت له‪.‬‬
‫ك ه ُم ُ‬
‫ق ب ِه ِ ۙ ُأول َٰئ ِ َ‬
‫صَّد َ‬
‫ق وَ َ‬
‫صْد ِ‬
‫والثاني‪ :‬قبول الحق ممن عرضه عليه‪ .‬قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َال َ ّذ ِي ج َاء َ باِ ل ِّ‬
‫ال ْم َُت ّق ُونَ﴾ ]الزمر‪ .[33:‬فلا يكفي صدقك‪ ،‬بل لا بد من صدقك وتصديقك للصادقين‪ .‬فكثير من‬
‫الناس يصدق‪ ،‬ولـكن يمنعه من التصديق كبر أو حسد‪ ،‬أو غير ذلك‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهي على ثلاث درجات‪ :‬ر ياضة العامة وهي تهذيب الأخلاق بالعلم‪ ،‬وتصفية الأعمال‬
‫بالإخلاص‪ ،‬وتوفير الحقوق في المعاملة«‪.‬‬
‫أما تهذيب الأخلاق بالعلم‪ ،‬فالمراد به إصلاحها وتصفيتها بموجب العلم‪ .‬فلا يتحرك بحركة ظاهرة‬
‫أو باطنة إلا بمقتضى العلم‪ ،‬فتكون حركات ظاهرة ً و باطنة ً موزونة ً بميزان الشرع‪.‬‬
‫وأما تصفية الأعمال بالإخلاص فهو تجر يدها عن أن يشو بها باعث لغير الل ّٰه‪ .‬وهو عبارة عن توحيد‬
‫المراد‪ ،‬وتجر يد الباعث إليه‪.‬‬
‫وأما توفير الحقوق في المعاملة‪ ،‬فهو أن تعطي ما ُأمرت به من حق الل ّٰه وحقوق العباد كاملا ًموفرا ً‪.‬‬
‫قد نصحت فيه صاحب الحق غاية النصح‪ ،‬وأرضيتهكل الرضى‪ ،‬ففزت بحمده لك وشكره‪.‬‬
‫ولما كانت هذه الثلاثة شاقة ً على النفس جدا ً‪ ،‬كان تكلفها ر ياضة ً‪ ،‬فإذا اعتادها صارت خ ُلقا‪ً.‬‬

92

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

He said,
The discipline of the elite is the finality of separation, the severance of
attention toward the station he has passed, and letting the knowledge run
its course.
By “the finality of separation,” he means severing what separates the heart from
God through concentration upon Him, facing God in your entirety, presence
with Him with all your heart without attention to anyone else.
As for “the severance of attention toward the station he has passed,” it means
he must not busy himself with admiring the knowledge and delight of that station and its goodness, but ignores all of that, facing toward God, seeking more,
fearing that that station may become a veil that would prevent him from his
journey. His determination is his protection, and he has no power to rise above
it. Whoever is not making progress, is unwittingly regressing, for there is no
standing still in nature; nor is there any in this journey. Either move forward or
be left behind. The true seeker does not look behind, and is undeterred by the
call of those trying to drag him down, but only looks to those who are ahead of
him.
As for “letting the knowledge run its course,” it is to follow the call of knowledge wherever it takes him, swimming along in its current wherever it goes.
Its meaning is to submit to knowledge and not contradict it with his [spiritual] concentration, taste, or state, but follow wherever it goes. The obligation
is to make knowledge [of the Law] the authority and judge over the [spiritual]
state, rather than opposing the former with the latter. This is exceedingly difficult except for the truthful ones, the men of determination, which is why it
is considered a type of self-disciplining. When the soul is trained and habituated upon it, it becomes character. Many of the seekers are such that when
a lightning bolt appears to them, or a state or taste overwhelms them, they
leave knowledge behind their backs, discarding it, and give priority to their personal states. This is the case with most of the seekers, and is the case with the
deviants who obstruct the path of God and seek to distort it. This is why the
rightly guided masters have so greatly emphasized seeking and holding on to
knowledge.

‫‪93‬‬

‫‪chapter 9‬‬

‫قال‪» :‬ور ياضة الخاصة حس ْم ُ التفرق‪ ،‬وقطع الالتفات إلى المقام الذي جاوزه‪ ،‬وإبقاء العلم يجري‬
‫مجراه«‪.‬‬
‫ير يد بحسم التفرق قطع ما يفرق قلبك عن الل ّٰه بالجمعية عليه‪ ،‬والإقبال عليه بكليتك‪ ،‬حاضرا ً معه‬
‫بقلبك كله‪ ،‬لا تلتفت إلى غيره‪.‬‬
‫وأما قطع الالتفات إلى المقام الذي جاوزه‪ ،‬فهو ألا يشتغل باستحسان علوم ذلك المقام ولذته‬
‫واستحسانه‪ ،‬بل يلهى عنه معرضا ًمقبلا ًعلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬طالبا لً لز يادة‪ ،‬خائفا ًأن يكون ذلك المقام له حجابا ً‬
‫يقف عنده عن السير‪ .‬فهمته حفظه‪ .‬ليس له همة ولا قوة أن ينهض إلى ما فوقه‪ .‬ومن لم تكن همته‬
‫التقدم فهو في تأخر ولا يشعر‪ .‬فإنه لا وقوف في الطبيعة ولا في السير‪ ،‬بل إما إلى قدام وإما إلى وراء‪.‬‬
‫فالسالك الصادق لا ينظر إلى ورائه ولا يسمع النداء إلا من أمامه لا من ورائه‪.‬‬
‫وأما إ بقاء العلم يجري مجراه‪ ،‬فالذهاب مع داعي العلم أ ين ذهب به‪ ،‬والجري معه في تياره أ ين‬
‫جرى‪.‬‬
‫وحقيقة ذلك‪ :‬الاستسلام للعلم وألا يعارضه بجمعية ولا ذوق ولا حال‪ .‬بل امض معه حيث‬
‫ذهب‪ .‬فالواجب تسليط العلم على الحال‪ ،‬وتحكيمه عليه‪ ،‬وألا يعارض به‪.‬‬
‫وهذا صعب جدا ً إلا على الصادقين أر باب العزائم‪ .‬فلذلك كان من أنواع الر ياضة‪.‬‬
‫ومتى تمرنت النفس عليه وتعودته صار خ ُلقا‪ ً.‬وكثير من السالـكين إذا لاحت له بارقة أو غلبه حال‬
‫أو ذوق‪ ،‬خل ّى العلم وراء ظهره‪ ،‬ونبذه وراءه ظهر يا‪ ً،‬وح َكّم عليه الحال‪ .‬هذا حال أكثر السالـكين‪.‬‬
‫وهي حال أهل الانحراف الذين يصدون عن سبيل الل ّٰه و يبغونها عوجا‪ ً.‬ولهذا عظمت وصية أهل‬
‫الاستقامة من الشيوخ بالعلم والتمسك به‪.‬‬

94

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

1

The Disciplining of the Elite of the Elite

He said,
The disciplining of the elite of the elite is the divestment of witnessing,
the rising to the union, the rejection of obstructions, and the severance of
compensation.
As for “the divestment of witnessing,” it is of two kinds. The divestment from
attention to any other than Him, and divestment from seeing and witnessing
any other than Him. “Rising to the union” means rising above the separation to
the union of being. This could mean two things. First, to rise above the multiplicity of acts to the unicity of their source, and second, to rise above the
attachments of [divine] names and attributes to the divine Being. For in [the
Sufis’] view, the witnessing of the Being without these attachments is the presence of union. This, however, is a slippery place where many lose their bearing
and are confounded. It calls for further investigation.
We say that separation is of two kinds. Separation in the objects of action
and separation in the meanings of divine names and attributes. Similarly, union
is of two kinds, union in the ontological command and union in being, the
former being the union of the objects of action with [divine] decree and predestination1 and judgment, whereas the latter is the union of divine names
and attributes with the [divine] being. The being, therefore, is one, uniting in it
divine names and attributes. Decree and predestination unite all that has been
decreed and predestined, and the witnessing is based on this.
Witnessing the union of all beings under His decree and predestination,
even though true, is not sufficient even to establish faith, let alone comprise
a high level of spiritual beauty. And annihilation in this witnessing seeks as its
end annihilation in the unicity of lordship, which is not sufficient alone, even
though it is necessary.
Witnessing the union of divine names and attributes in the unicity of being
is a correct witnessing, and is in accordance with the truth.
As for rising above witnessing the separation of divine names and attributes
and their attachments to the unicity of Pure Being, the best that could be said
about it is that its attainer is excused for the narrowness of his heart [as it
confronts the separation of the Names and meanings of the Attributes and
the overwhelming of the heart by the witnessed]. But by no means can he be
praised for witnessing the [divine] being stripped of every name and attribute
1 See glossary, “Decree and Predestination, or qaḍāʾ wa-qadar.”

‫‪95‬‬

‫‪chapter 9‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬ور ياضة خاصة الخاصة‪ :‬تجر يد الشهود‪ ،‬والصعود إلى الجم َ ْع‪ ،‬ورفض المعار َضات‪ ،‬وقطع‬
‫المعاو َضات«‪.‬‬
‫أما تجر يد الشهود فنوعان‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬تجر يده عن الالتفات إلى غيره‪.‬‬
‫والثاني‪ :‬تجر يده عن رؤ يته وشهوده‪.‬‬
‫وأما الصعود إلى الجمع فيعني به الصعود عن معاني التفرقة إلى الجمع الذاتي‪ .‬وهذا يحتمل أمرين‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬أن يصعد عن تفرقة الأفعال إلى وحدة مصدرها‪.‬‬
‫والثاني‪ :‬أن يصعد عن علائق الأسماء والصفات إلى الذات‪ .‬فإن شهود الذات بدون علائق الأسماء‬
‫والصفات عندهم هو حضرة الجمع‪ .‬وهذا موضع مزلة أقدام‪ ،‬ومضلة أفهام‪ ،‬لا بد من تحقيقه‪ .‬فنقول‪:‬‬
‫التفرقة تفرقتان‪ :‬تفرقة في المفعولات‪ ،‬وتفرقة في معاني الأسماء والصفات‪.‬‬
‫والجمع جمعان‪ :‬جمع في الحكم الـكوني‪ ،‬وجمع ذاتي‪.‬‬
‫فالجمع في الحكم الـكوني اجتماع المفعولات كلها في القضاء والقدر والحكم‪.‬‬
‫والجمع الذاتي اجتماع الأسماء والصفات في الذات‪.‬‬
‫فالذات واحدة جامعة للأسماء والصفات‪.‬‬
‫والقضاء والقدر جامع لجميع المقضيات والمقدروات‪ ،‬والشهود مترتب على هذا‪.‬‬
‫فشهود اجتماع الكائنات في قضائه وقدره—وإن كان حقا ً—فهو لا يعطي إ يمانا‪ ً،‬فضلا ًعن أن‬
‫يكون أعلى مقامات الإحسان‪ .‬والفناء في هذا الشهود‪ ،‬غايته فناء في توحيد الر بو بية الذي لا ينفع‬
‫وحده‪ ،‬ولا بد منه‪.‬‬
‫وشهود اجتماع الأسماء والصفات في وحدة الذات شهود صحيح‪ .‬وهو شهود مطابق للحق في نفسه‪.‬‬
‫وأما الصعود عن شهود تفرقة الأسماء والصفات وعلائقها إلى وحدة الذات المجردة‪ ،‬فغايته أن يكون‬
‫صاحبه معذورا ً لضيق قلبه ]عن تفرقة الأسماء ومعاني الصفات‪ ،‬وغلبة المشهود على قلبه[‪ ،‬وأما أن‬
‫يكون محمودا ً في شهوده ذاتا ًمجردة ً عن كل اسم وصفة وعن علائقها فكلا ولما‪.‬‬

96
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
and their implications! What faith and what inner awareness results from that?
It is nothing but negation of witnessing, which is like negation in knowledge
and faith. It is analogous in matters of witnessing to the negation by the Jahmites in regard to the reported [attributes]. The difference between them is that
[the Jahmite position] is in contradiction to the truth proved and established in
its own right, and tantamount to giving lie to God, denying what He deserves of
the attributes of perfection and the description of might and meanings of His
Beautiful Names. This, accordingly, is the negation of perceiving [the divine
names and attributes] in order to rise to the union of being, even while believing and acknowledging [the attributes]. This is, therefore, a different matter.
Perfection lies in witnessing the matter exactly as it is, which is to witness
the [divine] being characterized by the attributes of glory and perfection. The
more one witnesses the meanings of the divine names and attributes, the closer
one is to perfection.
True, he may be excused for annihilation in the Pure Being from witnessing the meanings of the divine names and attributes owing to the power of the
spiritual incidence and weakness of the recipient.
Give this matter its due consideration. Do not let the casuistry of the partisans of annihilation, who base their conclusions on spiritual taste and unveiling, prevent you from seeing it for what it is. We do not deny [the occurrence
of the experience of the Pure Being], but the problem is its rank and priority.
And success is from God alone.
As for “the rejection of the obstructions,” it could mean two things. First,
[reject] the separation that opposes his unitive witnessing, which is what he in
fact means. Second, reject those wills that oppose His will, and the objects of
will that oppose objects of God’s will. This latter meaning is closer to perfection
and loftier than the first.
As for “severance of compensation,” it means the divestment of one’s dealings from the desire for compensation, rendering it exclusive for His being, and
that He is the one deserving of worship even if the worshipper gets no compensation for it. He deserves to be worshipped in His own right, not merely
to attain some compensation, reward, or objective. This is also an occasion of
divestment.
It can be said [in response to this] that looking for compensation is necessary for the worker, and the real issue is to watch for the compensation and
the difference in its kind. The true lover who has divested himself from looking for compensation has in fact seen the greatest of returns and set his heart
upon attaining it, which is the nearness to and attainment of God, being occupied with Him to the exclusion of all else, enjoying the bliss of His love and
the delight of anticipating His meeting. These are compensations that the elite

‫‪97‬‬

‫‪chapter 9‬‬

‫وأي إ يمان يعطي ذلك؟ وأي معرفة؟ وإنما هو سلب ونفي في الشهود‪ ،‬كالسلب والنفي في العلم‬
‫والاعتقاد‪ .‬فنسبته إلى الشهود كنسبة نفي الجهمية وسلبهم إلى الأخبار‪ ،‬لـكن الفرق بينهما أن ذلك‬
‫السلب في العلم‪ ،‬والاعتقاد مخالف للحق الثابت في نفس الأمر‪ ،‬وكذب على الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ونفي لما يستحقه من‬
‫صفات كماله ونعوت جلاله ومعاني أسمائه الحسنى‪.‬‬
‫وأما هذا السلب‪ ،‬ففي الشعور به للصعود منه إلى الجمع الذاتي مع الإ يمان به‪ ،‬والاعتراف بثبوته‪،‬‬
‫فهذا لون وذاك لون‪.‬‬
‫والـكمال في شهود الأمر على ما هو عليه‪ ،‬فيشهد الذات موصوفة ً بصفات الجلال‪ ،‬منعوتة ً بنعوت‬
‫الـكمال‪ .‬وكلما كثر شهوده لمعاني الأسماء والصفات كان أكمل‪.‬‬
‫نعم‪ ،‬قد يعذر في الفناء في الذات المجردة لقوة الوارد‪ ،‬وضعف المحل عن شهود معاني الأسماء‬
‫والصفات‪.‬‬
‫فتأمل هذا الموضع‪ ،‬وأعطه حقه‪ ،‬ولا يصدنك عن تحقيقه ما يحيل عليه أر باب الفناء من‬
‫الـكشف والذوق‪ ،‬فإنا لا ننكره ونقر به‪ ،‬لـكن الشأن في مرتبته‪ .‬و بالل ّٰه التوفيق‪.‬‬
‫وأما رفض المعارضات‪ :‬فيحتمل أمرين‪.‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬ما يعارض شهوده الجمعي من التفرقات‪ ،‬وهو مراده‪.‬‬
‫والثانى‪ :‬رفض ما يعارض إرادته من الإرادات‪ ،‬وما يعارض مراد الل ّٰه من المرادات‪ .‬وهذا أكمل‬
‫من الأول‪ ،‬وأعلى منه‪.‬‬
‫وأما قطع المعاوضات فهو تجر يد المعاملة عن إرادة المعاوضة‪ ،‬بل تجردها لذاته‪ ،‬وأنه أهل أن‬
‫يعبد‪ ،‬ولو لم يحصل لعابده عوض منه‪ .‬فإنه يستحق أن يعبد لذاته لا لعلة‪ ،‬ولا لعوض ولا لمطلوب‪.‬‬
‫وهذا أيضا ًموضع لابد من تجر يده‪.‬‬
‫فيقال‪ :‬ملاحظة المعاوضة ضرور ية للعامل‪ ،‬وإنما الشأن في ملاحظة الأعواض وتباينها‪ .‬فالمحب‬
‫الصادق الذي قد تجرد عن ملاحظة عوض‪ ،‬قد لاحظ أعظم الأعواض‪ ،‬وشمر إليها‪ .‬وهي قر به‬
‫من الل ّٰه ووصوله إليه‪ ،‬واشتغاله به عما سواه‪ ،‬والتنعم بحبه ولذة الشوق إلى لقائه‪ .‬فهذه أعواض لا‬

98

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

cannot do without, and it is their highest goal and objective. It does not take
away from their stations or divestment of their worship; rather, the more perfect of them in worship are the most desirous of these ends.
True, the seeking of compensation by something other [than Him], something created, such as honor, wealth, authority, and power, or wide-eyed maidens, palaces, and children, and the like, is deficient compared to the compensation sought by the elite, and there is no doubt in this if one exclusively seeks
these ends. But if their greatest goal is nearness to and attainment of Him and
the delight of His love and anticipation of His meeting, and they additionally
ask for His reward in the form of created things separate from Him, then there
is nothing deficient in his worship in any way. As the Prophet, God grant him
blessing and peace, said, “It is about that that we are buzzing”—by which he
meant the Garden.2 He also said,
When you ask God, ask Him al-Firdaws, for that is the midmost and the
highest of the Garden, above it is the Throne of the Merciful, and from it
flow the rivers of the Garden.3
It is known that this is the abode of the elite of the elite, the masters of the
knowers, and their asking Him is not a deficiency or blame in their worship.
We have exhausted this issue in The Book of the Two Flights when discussing
deficiencies of the stations.
It may also be that the Shaykh, God have mercy on him, meant by “the severance of compensation” to testify that God has not given you anything in
compensation, but only as grace and favor; not for something He wants of you
in return, as is the case with the dealings of the servants with each other. But
[this meaning does not quite fit since] we are speaking here concerning the
servant, of what he is commanded to detangle from, such as separation and
compensation, and [the first interpretation] is more fitting to his words, and
God knows best.

2 Abū Dāwūd #792.
3 This is part of a longer narration in Bukhārī #2790.

‫‪99‬‬

‫‪chapter 9‬‬

‫بد للخاصة منها‪ ،‬وهي من أجل مقاصدهم وأعواضهم‪ .‬ولا يقدح في مقاماتهم وتجر يد عبودياتهم‪ ،‬بل‬
‫أكملهم عبودية ً أشدهم التفاتا ًإلى هذه الأعواض‪.‬‬
‫نعم‪ ،‬طلب الأعواض المنفصلة المخلوقة—من الجاه والمال والر ياسة والملك—أو طلب الحور‬
‫العين‪ ،‬والقصور والولدان‪ ،‬ونحو ذلك بالنسبة إلى تلك الأعواض التي يطلبها الخاصة معلولة‪ ،‬وهذا‬
‫لا شك فيه إذا تجرد طلبهم لها‪.‬‬
‫أما إذا كان مطلو بهم الأعظم الذاتي هو قر به والوصول إليه‪ ،‬والتنعم بحبه‪ ،‬والشوق إلى لقائه‪،‬‬
‫وانضاف إلى هذا طلبهم لثوابه المخلوق المنفصل‪ ،‬فلا علة في هذه العبودية بوجه ما ولا نقص‪ .‬وقد‬
‫قال النبي‪» :‬حولها ندندن«ن يعني الجنة‪.‬‬
‫وقال‪» :‬إذا سألتم الل ّٰه فاسألوه الفردوس‪ .‬فإنه وسط الجنة وأعلى الجنة‪ ،‬وفوقه عرش الرحمن‪ ،‬ومنه‬
‫تفجر أنهار الجنة«‪.‬‬
‫ومعلوم أن هذا مسكن خاصة الخاصة‪ ،‬وسادات العارفين‪ .‬فسؤالهم إ ياه ليس علة ً في عبوديتهم‪،‬‬
‫ولا قدحا ًفيها‪.‬‬
‫وقد استوفينا ذكر هذا الموضع في )كتاب سفر الهجرتين( عند الكلام على علل المقامات‪.‬‬
‫و يحتمل أن ير يد الشيخ—رحمه الل ّٰه—بقطع المعاوضات أن تشهد أن الل ّٰه ما أعطاك شيئا ًمعاوضة ً‪،‬‬
‫بل إنما أعطاك تفضلا ًوإحسانا‪ ً،‬لا لعوض يرجوه منك‪ ،‬كما يكون عطاء العبد للعبد‪ ،‬وإنما نتكلم فيما‬
‫من العبد‪ ،‬مما يؤمر بالتجر يد عنه‪ ،‬كتجرده عن التفرقة والمعاوضة‪ ،‬وهو َأليْ َق المعنيين بكلامه‪ .‬والل ّٰه‬
‫أعلم‪.‬‬

chapter 10

The Station of Listening
Among the stations of “You we worship and You we supplicate for help” is the
station of listening or hearing (al-samāʿ).1 It is a verbal noun like al-nabāt. God
has commanded it in His book, and praised those who do it, and declaimed
that theirs is the glad tiding. He the Exalted has said, “And fear God and listen”
[5:108]. He also said, “And listen and obey” [64:16]. He also said, “And if they had
said [instead], ‘We listen and obey’ and ‘Wait for us [to understand],’ it would
have been better for them and more suitable” [4:46]. He also said, “So give good
tidings to My servants, those who listen to the Word, and follow the best [meaning] in it: those are the ones whom God has guided, and those are the ones
endued with understanding” [39:17–18]. He also said, “And when the Qurʾan is
recited, listen to it and pay attention that you may receive mercy” [7:204]. He
also said, “And when they listen to what has been revealed to the Messenger,
you see their eyes brimming with tears because of what they have recognized
of the truth. They say, ‘Our Lord, we have believed, so register us among the witnesses’” [5:83]. He has made His causing someone to hear an evidence of some
good in them, and their inability to accept an evidence of lack of good, saying,
“Had God known any good in them, He would have made them hear. And if He
had made them hear, they would [still] have turned away in rejection” [8:23].
He declaimed concerning His enemies that they have abandoned hearing and
prohibited [others] from it, “And the disbelievers said, ‘Hear not this Recitation
and make noise in it that you may gain the upper hand’ ” [41:26].
Hearing is the messenger of faith to the heart, and its preacher and teacher.
How often He says in the Qurʾan, “Do they not, then, hear?” He also said, “So
have they not traveled through the earth, so that they [acquire] hearts with
which to reason and ears with which to hear? For indeed, it is not eyes that are
blinded, but blinded are the hearts which are within the breasts” [22:46]. Thus,
hearing [attentively, or listening,] is the foundation of reason, and the basis of
faith upon which it is built; it is its precursor, companion, and assistant. But
the real problem is the content of what is listened to, and here people have
fallen into confusion and disagreement, and many have erred. The essence of

1 In English, hearing entails the physical act of receiving a sound, especially if it is involuntary,
whereas listening entails not only hearing but also processing that sound in some way. One
orders someone to listen, not to hear, whereas when one fails to receive a sound clearly, one

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬السماع«‪.‬‬
‫وهو اسم مصدر كالنبات‪ .‬وقد أمر الل ّٰه به في كتابه‪ ،‬وأثنى على أهله‪ ،‬وأخبر أن البشرى لهم‪ ،‬فقال‬
‫تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َا َت ّق ُوا ال َل ّـه َ و َاْسمعَ ُوا﴾ ]المائدة‪ ،[108:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬و َاْسمعَ ُوا و َ َأطِيع ُوا﴾ ]التغا بن‪ ،[16:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬و َلوَ ْ‬
‫ن‬
‫َأَّنه ُْم ق َالوُ ا سَم ِعْن َا و َ َأَطعْن َا و َاْسم َْع و َانظ ُر ْناَ ل َك َانَ خ َي ْر ًا َل ّه ُْم و َ َأق ْو َم َ﴾ ]النساء‪ ،[46:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬ف َب َش ِّرْ عِب َاد ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ب﴾ ]الزمر‪–17:‬‬
‫ك ه ُْم ُأولوُ ا اْلَألبْ َا ِ‬
‫ن ه َد َاه ُم ُ ال َل ّـه ُ ۖ و َُأول َٰئ ِ َ‬
‫ك ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫حسَنهَ ُ ۚ ُأول َٰئ ِ َ‬
‫ل ف َي َ َت ّب ِع ُونَ َأ ْ‬
‫ي َْست َمِع ُونَ ال ْق َو ْ َ‬
‫صتوُ ا لعَ َل َـ ّك ُْم ترُ ْحَموُ نَ﴾]الأعراف‪ ،[204:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬و َِإذ َا‬
‫‪ ،[18‬وقال‪﴿ :‬و َِإذ َا قرُ ِئ َ ال ْق ُر ْآنُ ف َاْستَم ِع ُوا ل َه ُو َ َأن ِ‬
‫كت ُب ْن َا‬
‫ق ۖ يقَ ُولوُ نَ ر َ َب ّن َا آم َ َن ّا ف َا ْ‬
‫ن اْلح َ ّ ِ‬
‫ن ال َد ّْمِع م َِم ّا ع َرَفوُ ا م ِ َ‬
‫ض مِ َ‬
‫ل ترَ َى َأْعينُ َه ُْم تفَ ِي ُ‬
‫سو ِ‬
‫ل ِإل َى ال َر ّ ُ‬
‫سَم ِع ُوا م َا ُأ نز ِ َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ن﴾ ]المائدة‪.[83:‬‬
‫شاه ِدِي َ‬
‫م ََع ال َ ّ‬
‫وجعل الإسماع منه والسماع منهم دليلا ًعلى علم الخـير فيهم‪ ،‬وعدم ذلك التسليم على عدم الخـير‬
‫ضونَ﴾ ]الأنفال‪.[23:‬‬
‫فيهم‪ ،‬فقال‪﴿ :‬و َلوَ ْ ع َل ِم َال َل ّـه ُ فيِ ه ِْم خ َي ْر ًا َلَّأْسمعَ َه ُْم ۖ و َلوَ ْ َأْسمعَ َه ُْم ل َتوَ ََل ّوا َّوه ُم ُمّعْرِ ُ‬
‫كف َر ُوا ل َا ت َْسم َع ُوا ل ِهَٰ ذ َا‬
‫ن َ‬
‫ل ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫وأخبر عن أعدائه‪ :‬أنهم هجروا السماع ونهوا عنه‪ ،‬فقال‪﴿ :‬و َق َا َ‬
‫ن و َال ْغ َو ْا فيِ ه ِ﴾ ]فصلت‪.[26:‬‬
‫ال ْق ُر ْآ ِ‬
‫فالسماع رسول الإ يمان إلى القلب‪ ،‬وداعيه ومعلمه‪ .‬وكم في القرآن من قوله‪َ ﴿ :‬أف َل َا ي َْسم َع ُونَ﴾‪.‬‬
‫ن ي َْسم َع ُونَ بِه َا ف ِ َإَّنه َا ل َا تعَ ْم َى‬
‫ب يعَ ْق ِلوُ نَ بِه َا َأْو آذ َا ٌ‬
‫وقال‪َ ﴿ :‬أف َل َْم ي َِسير ُوا ف ِي اْلَأْر ِ‬
‫ض ف َت َكُونَ ل َه ُْم ق ُلوُ ٌ‬
‫صد ُورِ﴾ ]الحج‪.[46:‬‬
‫ب ا َل ّت ِي ف ِي ال ُ ّ‬
‫صار ُ و َل َٰ ِ‬
‫اْلَأب ْ َ‬
‫كن تعَ ْم َى ال ْق ُلوُ ُ‬
‫فالسماع أصل العقل‪ ،‬وأساس الإ يمان الذي انبنى عليه‪ ،‬وهو رائده وجليسه ووز يره‪ .‬ولـكن الشأن‬
‫كل الشأن في المسموع‪ ،‬وفيه وقع خبط الناس واختلافهم‪ ،‬وغلط من غلط منهم‪.‬‬

‫‪complains of not having heard. The Arabic verb samiʿa can mean both, but the form istamaʿa‬‬
‫‪means to listen. In Arabic, the two verbs are related at root (s-m-ʿ), which allows our authors‬‬
‫‪to treat them as levels or stages of the same act.‬‬

102

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

listening is drawing the heart’s attention to the meaning of what has been heard
and its movement in response in aspiration or fear, love or hatred, for [the
heart] is the caravan leader that drives everyone to its home and retreat.
Among those who listen there is one who listens only to his nature, ego, and
desire, and his share from what he hears is only that which pleases his nature.
Another listens to his state, faith, inner knowledge, and reason, and such a one
is enlightened in proportion to his ability, strength, and his make-up. Another
listens by God and by nothing else—as stated in a sound Divine Hadith, “Until
by Me he hears and by Me he sees.”2 This is the noblest form of hearing and the
most truthful of all.
The discourse on hearing, be it its praise or dispraise, requires knowing the
form of what is heard and its reality, its cause and motivation, and its fruit and
goal. The case of hearing is investigated in these three parts and the beneficial
separated from the harmful, the truth from falsehood, the praiseworthy from
the blameworthy.
As for the substance of what is listened to, it may be of three kinds. First,
that which God loves and is pleased with, and has required of His servants, and
praises and is pleased with those who partake in it. Second, that which God
hates and is wroth with and has prohibited for His servants, and has praised
those who avoid it. Third, that which is neutral and permitted, which He neither loves nor hates, and has neither praised its doer nor dispraised. Its ruling
is like the ruling of all the things to which the Law is indifferent, such as things
that are seen, smelled, tasted, and worn. Whoever makes this third kind impermissible has spoken on God’s behalf without knowledge and prohibited what
God has permitted. Whoever takes this as part of his religiosity seeking to draw
near to God through it has lied upon God, and created a religion for himself,
and in that respect rivals the associationists.

2 Part of the longer tradition cited earlier in Bukhārī #6502.

‫‪103‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫وحقيقة »السماع« تنبيه القلب على معاني المسموع‪ ،‬وتحر يكه عنها طلبا ًوهر با ًوحبا ًو بغضا‪ ً،‬فهو‬
‫حاد يحدو بكل أحد إلى وطنه ومألفه‪.‬‬
‫وأصحاب السماع‪ ،‬منهم من يسمع بطبعه ونفسه وهواه‪ ،‬فهذا حظه من مسموعه‪ ،‬ما وافق طبعه‪.‬‬
‫ومنهم من يسمع بحاله وإيمانه ومعرفته وعقله‪ ،‬فهذا يفتح له من المسموع بحسب استعداده وقوته‬
‫ومادته‪.‬‬
‫ومنهم من يسمع بالل ّٰه لا يسمع بغيره‪ ،‬كما في الحديث الإلهي الصحيح‪» :‬فبي يسمع و بي يبصر«‪.‬‬
‫وهذا أعلى سماعا‪ ً،‬وأصح من كل أحد‪.‬‬
‫والكلام في »السماع«—مدحا ًوذما ً—يحتاج فيه إلى معرفة صورة المسموع‪ ،‬وحقيقته وسببه‪،‬‬
‫والباعث عليه‪ ،‬وثمرته وغايته‪ .‬فبهذه الفصول الثلاثة يتحرر أمر»السماع« و يتميز النافع منه والضار‪،‬‬
‫والحق والباطل‪ ،‬والممدوح والمذموم‪.‬‬
‫فأما »المسموع« فعلى ثلاثة أضرب‪:‬‬
‫أحدها‪ :‬مسموع يحبه الل ّٰه و يرضاه‪ ،‬وأمر به عباده‪ ،‬وأثنى على أهله‪ ،‬ورضي عنهم به‪.‬‬
‫الثاني‪ :‬مسموع يبغضه الل ّٰه و يكرهه‪ ،‬ونهى عنه‪ ،‬ومدح المعرضين عنه‪.‬‬
‫الثالث‪ :‬مسموع مباح مأذون فيه‪ ،‬لا يحبه ولا يبغضه‪ ،‬ولا مدح صاحبه ولا ذمه‪ ،‬فحكمه حكم‬
‫سا ئر المباحات‪ ،‬من المناظر والمشام والمطعومات والملبوسات المباحة‪ .‬فمن حرم هذا النوع الثالث فقد‬
‫قال على الل ّٰه ما لا يعلم‪ ،‬وحرم ما أحل الل ّٰه‪ .‬ومن جعله دينا ًوقر بة ً يتقرب به إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فقد كذب على‬
‫الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وشرع دينا ًلم يأذن به الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وضاهى بذلك المشركين‪.‬‬

104
1

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Against Music3

As for the first kind, that is the object of hearing that He has praised in His Book,
commanded it and extolled those who hear it, dispraised and cursed those who
evade it, and called them worse than beasts, such as is implied in the verse,
“[The people of the Fire will say] Had we listened and reasoned, we would not
be among the companions of Fire” [67:10]. This is the listening of the recited
signs of God that He sent down to His Messenger, God grant him blessing and
peace. This listening is the foundation of faith upon which it is built. This is of
three kinds: first, the hearing in the sense of receiving the sound, which is the
act of the physical ear and auditory faculties; second, the hearing or listening of
understanding and mind; and finally, the hearing or listening of response and
acceptance.4 All three are found in the Qurʾan.
As for the hearing of the senses, it is in the words of the Exalted when
reporting the words of the believers among the Jinn, “We have heard a wonderful Recitation: it guides to righteousness, and so we believed in it” [72:1–2],
and their words, “O our people, we have heard a Book that has been revealed
after Moses, confirming what came before it; it guides to the Truth and to a
straight path” [46:30]. This is the hearing of the senses, which was followed by
faith and a positive response. As for the hearing of understanding, it is denied
for the people of evasion and heedlessness, in the saying of the Exalted, “You
surely cannot make the dead hear, nor can you make the deaf hear the call”
[30:52], and His words, “God surely makes whomever He wills hear; you cannot make those in the graves hear” [35:22]. The particularization here pertains
to making them hear in the sense of understanding and reason. Otherwise,
the general hearing [of the senses] which is sufficient to establish the proof
[upon which one becomes obligated to respond] is not particular, as in the saying of the Exalted, “Had God known any good in them He would have made
them hear, and had He made them hear, they would have turned back in evasion” [8:23]; that is, had God known in those disbelievers any acceptance and
submission, He would have made them understand. Otherwise, they already

3 Al-samāʿ was a “controversial practice” endorsed by some, but not all, Sufi confraternities.
This ‘hearing’ or ‘audition’ is “best described as a type of ‘mystical concert’ in which a group
of seekers and affiliated parties gather, under the direction of a Sufi master, to listen to the
stylized recitation of religious litanies or mystically-themed poetry by a professional or semiprofessional reciter (qawwāl) supported by melodic or percussive accompaniment … samāʿ
was understood as a contemplative exercise whose proper execution, and the individual

‫‪105‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫فأما النوع الأول‪ :‬فهو السماع الذي مدحه الل ّٰه في كتابه‪ ،‬وأمر به وأثنى على أصحابه‪ ،‬وذم المعرضين‬
‫ل م َا ك ُ َن ّا‬
‫عنه ولعنهم‪ ،‬وجعلهم أضل من الأنعام‪ ،‬وهم القائلون في النار‪﴿ :‬و َق َالوُ ا لوَ ْ ك ُ َن ّا ن َْسم َُع َأْو نعَ ْق ِ ُ‬
‫سعيِ ر ِ﴾ ]الملك‪ ،[10:‬وهو سماع آياته المتلوة التي أ نزلها على رسوله‪ .‬فهذا السماع أساس‬
‫ب ال َ ّ‬
‫صح َا ِ‬
‫ف ِي َأ ْ‬
‫الإ يمان الذي عليه بناؤه‪.‬‬
‫وهو على ثلاثة أنواع‪ :‬سماع إدراك بحاسة الأذن‪ ،‬وسماع فهم وعقل‪ ،‬وسماع إجابة وقبول‪ ،‬والثلاثة‬
‫في القرآن‪.‬‬
‫فأما سماع الإدراك‪ :‬ففي قوله تعالى حكاية عن مؤمني الجن قولهم‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َن ّا سَم ِعْن َا قرُ ْآناً ع َج َب ًا يَه ْدِي‬
‫ص ّدِق ًا لمّ ِ َا‬
‫ل م ِن بعَ ْدِ م ُوس َى م ُ َ‬
‫ِإل َى ال ُر ّْشدِ فآَ م َ َن ّا ب ِه ِ﴾ ]الجن‪ ،[2–1:‬وقولهم‪﴿ :‬ياَ قوَ ْم َن َا ِإ َن ّا سَم ِعْن َا كتِ اَباً ُأ نز ِ َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ستقَ ِيٍم﴾ ]الأحقاف‪ .[30:‬فهذا سماع إدراك اتصل به الإ يمان‬
‫ق ُمّ ْ‬
‫ق و َِإل َى ٰ َطرِ ي ٍ‬
‫ب َي ْنَ ي َد َي ْه ِ يَه ْدِي ِإل َى اْلح َ ّ ِ‬
‫والإجابة‪.‬‬
‫ك ل َا ت ُْسمُِع ال ْموَ ْت َى ٰ و َل َا‬
‫وأما سماع الفهم فهو المنفي عن أهل الإعراض والغفلة‪ ،‬بقوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬ف ِ َإ َن ّ َ‬
‫سمٍِع َمّن ف ِي ال ْق ُبوُ رِ﴾‬
‫ت ب ِم ُ ْ‬
‫ن ال َل ّـه َ ي ُْسمُِع م َن ي َش َاء ُ ۖ و َم َا َأن َ‬
‫م ال ُد ّع َاء َ﴾ ]الروم‪ ،[52:‬وقوله‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َ ّ‬
‫ت ُْسمُِع ال ُص ّ َ ّ‬
‫]فاطر‪.[22:‬‬
‫فالتخصيص هاهنا لإسماع الفهم والعقل‪ ،‬وإلا فالسمع العام الذي قامت به الحجة‪ ،‬لا تخصيص‬
‫ضونَ﴾‬
‫فيه‪ .‬ومنه قوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َلوَ ْ ع َل ِم َ ال َل ّـه ُ فيِ ه ِْم خ َي ْر ًا َلَّأْسمعَ َه ُْم ۖ و َلوَ ْ َأْسمعَ َه ُْم ل َتوَ ََل ّوا َّوه ُم ُمّعْرِ ُ‬
‫]الأنفال‪ ،[23:‬أي لو علم الل ّٰه في هؤلاء الـكفار قبولا ً وانقيادا ً لأفهمهم‪ ،‬وإلا فهم قد سمعوا سمع‬

‫‪and group experience thereof, had a potentially efficacious bearing on the participants’ spir‬‬‫‪itual development.” It was intended to “elicit the manifestation of mystical states, especially‬‬
‫‪that of ‘ecstasy’ (wajd), in the attendees, who in contemplating the varied levels of the mul‬‬‫‪tisensory performance taking place in front of them could be led to various inner break‬‬‫”‪throughs not otherwise available through other mystico-ascetic or contemplative praxes.‬‬
‫‪Furthermore, “[c]losely associated with the samāʿ, and certainly one of its more controver‬‬‫‪sial aspects, was the ritualized practice of ‘gazing upon (beardless) young men’ … a practice‬‬
‫‪in which the physical beauties of the object of visual contemplation were understood, ideally,‬‬
‫‪as being symbolical representations of inner spiritual truths.” Erik Ohlander, “Early Sufi Rit‬‬‫‪uals, Beliefs, and Hermeneutics,” in The Cambridge Companion to Sufism, ed. Lloyd Ridgeon‬‬
‫‪(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015), 69–70.‬‬
‫‪4 The latter two, note, could be rendered in English as listening more accurately.‬‬

106
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
received the hearing of the senses, but “Had He made them hear it, they would
have turned back in evasion”—they would not have submitted nor benefitted
from what they understood, for their hearts have a drive of rebellion and defiance that would have prevented them from benefitting from what they have
heard.
As for the hearing of acceptance and response, it is in the words of the
Exalted reporting that His believing servants said, “We have heard and obeyed”
[24:51]. Thus, this hearing is one of acceptance and response and bears the fruit
of obedience. In fact, it comprises all three kinds, as they declare that they
have encountered what they heard, understood it, and responded to it. Another
instance of the hearing of understanding is, “Had they gone forth with you, they
would not have added among you nothing but disorder, and they would have
been active among you, seeking [to cause] mischief to you. And among you are
avid listeners to them. God knows the wrongdoers” [9:47]. That is, [among you
are] those who are open toward them and respond to them. This is the more
correct of the two opinions concerning this verse. As for those who say that this
reference is to spies or moles [of the associationists among Muslims], it is weak,
because the Almighty has declaimed His wisdom in holding them back from
going out [with the Muslims], for their going along would have caused disorder and corruption and efforts to create discord in the army, there being in the
army those who were open to their suggestions. Thus, in holding them back so
that [the Muslims] do not suffer from their guile was favor and mercy from God.
As for the inclusion of spies and moles in the army, that has nothing to do with
the wisdom of holding them back, for it is known that spies and moles were
with [those who were held back], and the Almighty declaimed that He held
them back to prevent corruption from the army, so that they could not spread
discord; this discord was prevented by holding them and their spies and moles
back. Furthermore, spies are called “eyes” customarily, not “avid listeners.” In
addition, this is like the words of the Exalted concerning their brothers among
the Jews, “Avid listeners to lies, devourers of bribe” [5:42]—which means prone
to accepting [the lies].
Be that as it may, the listening of the elite of the elite, the closest ones, is
the listening of the Qurʾan in these three ways: receiving, understanding and
reflection, and responding. Every time God has praised people for listening
and commanded His allies in it, it is this kind of listening. That is the listening to the verses [not to poetic verse]; listening to the Qurʾan not listening to
the Satan, listening to the speech of the Lord of the earth and the heaven, not
the sonnets of poets; listening to the odes of salvation, not [frivolous] poems;
listening to the prophets, the messengers, and the believers, not singers and
musicians.

‫‪107‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫ضونَ﴾‪ ،‬أي ولو أفهمهم لما انقادوا ولا انتفعوا بما فهموه‪،‬‬
‫الإدراك‪﴿ ،‬و َلوَ ْ َأْسمعَ َه ُْم ل َتوَ ََل ّوا َّوه ُم ُمّعْرِ ُ‬
‫لأن في قلو بهم من داعي التولي والإعراض ما يمنعهم عن الانتفاع بما سمعوه‪.‬‬
‫وأما سماع القبول والإجابة ففي قوله تعالى حكاية عن عباده المؤمنين أنهم قالوا‪﴿ :‬سَم ِعْن َا و َ َأَطعْن َا﴾‬
‫]النور‪ .[51:‬فإن هذا سماع قبول وإجابة‪ ،‬مثمر للطاعة‪.‬‬
‫والتحقيق أنه متضمن للأنواع الثلاثة‪ ،‬وأنهم أخبروا بأنهم أدركوا المسموع وفهموه وأجابوا له‪.‬‬
‫خل َالـ َك ُْم ي َب ْغ ُون َك ُم ُ ال ْف ِت ْنةَ َو َفيِ ك ُْم‬
‫ضع ُوا ِ‬
‫خب َال ًا و َل ََأْو َ‬
‫جوا فيِ ك ُم َمّا ز َاد ُوك ُْم ِإ َلّا َ‬
‫ومن سمع القبول‪﴿ :‬لوَ ْ خ َر َ ُ‬
‫سَ َم ّاع ُونَ ل َه ُْم﴾ ]التو بة‪ ،[47:‬أي قابلون منهم مستجيبون لهم‪ .‬هذا أصح القولين في الآية‪.‬‬
‫وأما قول من قال‪ :‬عيون لهم وجواسيس‪ ،‬فضعيف‪ .‬فإنه سبحانه أخبر عن حكمته في ٺثبيطهم عن‬
‫الخروج‪ ،‬بأن خروجهم يوجب الخبال والفساد‪ ،‬والسعي بين العسكر بالفتنة‪ ،‬وفي العسكر من يقبل‬
‫منهم‪ ،‬و يستجيب لهم‪ .‬فكان في إقعادهم عنهم لطفا ًبهم ورحمة ً‪ ،‬حتى لا يقعوا في عنت القبول من‬
‫منهم‪.‬‬
‫أما اشتمال العسكر على جواسيس وعيون لهم‪ ،‬فلا تعلق له بحكمة التثبيط والإقعاد‪ ،‬ومعلوم أن‬
‫جواسيسهم وعيونهم منهم‪ .‬وهو سبحانه قد أخبر أنه أقعدهم لئلا يسعوا بالفساد في العسكر و يبغوهم‬
‫الفتنة‪ ،‬وهذه الفتنة إنما تندفع بإقعادهم‪ ،‬وإقعاد جواسيسهم وعيونهم‪.‬‬
‫وأيضا ًفإن الجواسيس إنما تسمى »عيونا ً«‪ ،‬هذا المعروف في الاستعمال لا تسمى سماعين‪.‬‬
‫ت﴾‬
‫سْح ِ‬
‫ب َأ َكّالوُ نَ ل ِل ُ ّ‬
‫وأيضا ً فإن هذا نظير قوله تعالى في إخوانهم من اليهود‪﴿ :‬سَ َم ّاع ُونَ ل ِلـ ْك َذِ ِ‬
‫]المائدة‪ ،[42:‬أي قابلون له‪.‬‬
‫والمقصود أن سماع خاصة الخاصة المقر بين هو سماع القرآن بالاعتبارات الثلاثة‪ :‬إدراكا ًوفهما ً‬
‫وتدبرا ً وإجابة ً‪ .‬وكل سماع في القرآن مدح الل ّٰه أصحابه وأثنى عليهم‪ ،‬وأمر به أولياءه‪ ،‬فهو هذا السماع‪.‬‬
‫وهو سماع الآيات ]لا سماع الأبيات[‪ ،‬وسماع القرآن‪ ،‬لا سماع الشيطان‪ .‬وسماع كلام رب الأرض‬
‫والسماء‪ ،‬لا سماع قصائد الشعراء‪ .‬وسماع المراشد‪ ،‬لا سماع القصائد‪ .‬وسماع الأنبياء والمرسلين‬
‫والمؤمنين‪ ،‬لا سماع المغنين والمطر بين‪.‬‬

108

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

This is the listening that shepherds the hearts to the proximity of the Knower
of Secrets, the driver who drives the souls to the lands of bliss, the motivator that encourages the distracted to attain the highest stations and ranks, the
caller who calls to faith, the guide who guides the rider to the path of the
Gardens, the preacher who exhorts the hearts night and day, on behalf of the
Breaker of Dawn, “Come to success, come to success.”
You shall never find this listening (that is, the Qurʾan) lacking in guidance
to some proof, comment on some lesson to be drawn, reminder toward some
inner awareness, thought in some sign, pointer toward some righteousness,
refutation of some error, rectitude against some deception, insight against
some blindness, command toward some benefit, prohibition against some
harm and corruption, guidance toward some light, exit from some darkness,
rebuke against some desire, encouragement toward some element of piety, elucidation of some insight, life, nourishment, and healing for some heart, and
salvation and refuge, clearing up of some doubt, clarification of some proof,
demonstration of some truth, and falsification of some falsehood.
We would be pleased with the judgment of the people of taste in the listening to verse and poetry, and appeal to them by the One who has revealed the
Qurʾan as guidance, light, and life, and ask: do they find that, or a fraction of it,
in their tambour and reed pipe, the sonnet of the singers, or tunes of melodies?
[Or in] the songs that turn on stirring up a free love that is shared by the lover
of the Merciful, the lover of lands, the lover of brothers, the lover of knowledge and gnosis, the lover of wealth and prices, the lover of women, the lover
of young men, and the lover of cross? For [singing] stirs up in the heart of anyone who is drawn to and is in love with a thing what was hitherto still, rousing
what was settled, exciting his passion, bringing out his longings, so he dances
to the tune of what exists in his heart of love, longing, and passion toward his
beloved, whatever it may be. This is why you find among them all a taste for
listening [to singing and music], and [they experience in it] a kind of trance,
passion, and weeping.
How bizarre, by God! What faith and light, what insight and guidance, and
inner awareness are attained through the listening to poetic verse in melodious voices and dances? Most of it addresses in what one desires of illicit things
that God and His Messenger are displeased with and [God] punishes for such
as seductive and licentious talk concerning prohibited males and females. For
majority of seductive and licentious [singing] concerns images of prohibited
love. It is seldom that a poet speaks seductively about his wife, slave-girl, or
mother of his children; if it happens, it is as rare as hair on a bull. How, then, can
someone who has the least amount of wisdom and life in his heart, who seeks
divine nearness and increase in faith and nobility before Him, fall into seeking

‫‪109‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫فهذا السماع حاد يحدو القلوب إلى جوار علام الغيوب‪ ،‬وسائق يسوق الأرواح إلى ديار الأفراح‪،‬‬
‫ومحرك يثير ساكن العزمات إلى أعلى المقامات وأرفع الدرجات‪ ،‬ومناد ينادي للإ يمان‪ ،‬ودليل يدل‬
‫الركب في طر يق الجنان‪ ،‬وداع يدعو القلوب بالمساء والصباح‪ ،‬من قبل فالق الإصباح »حي على‬
‫الفلاح‪ ،‬حي على الفلاح«‪.‬‬
‫فلن تعدم من هذا السماع إرشادا ً لحجة‪ ،‬وتبصرة ً لعبرة‪ ،‬وتذكرة ً لمعرفة‪ ،‬وفكرة ً في آية‪ ،‬ودلالة ً‬
‫على رشد‪ ،‬وردا ً على ضلالة‪ ،‬وإرشادا ً من غي‪ ،‬و بصيرة ً من عمى‪ ،‬وأمرا ً بمصلحة‪ ،‬ونهيا ًعن مضرة‬
‫ومفسدة‪ ،‬وهداية ً إلى نور‪ ،‬وإخراجا ً من ظلمة‪ ،‬وزجرا ً عن هوى‪ ،‬وحثا ً على تقى‪ ،‬وجلاء ً لبصيرة‪،‬‬
‫وحياة ً لقلب‪ ،‬وغذاء ً ودواء ً وشفاء ً‪ ،‬وعصمة ً ونجاة ً‪ ،‬وكشف شبهة‪ ،‬وإيضاح برهان‪ ،‬وتحقيق حق‪،‬‬
‫وإبطال باطل‪.‬‬
‫ى‬
‫ونحن نرضى بحكم أهل الذوق في سماع الأبيات والقصائد‪ ،‬ونناشدهم بالذي أ نزل القرآن هد ً‬
‫وشفاء ً ونورا ًوحياة ً‪ ،‬هل وجدوا ذلك—أو شيئا ًمنه—في الدف والمزمار‪ ،‬ونغمة الشادن ومطر بات‬
‫الألحان‪ ،‬والغناء المشتمل على تهييج الحب المطلق الذي يشترك فيه محب الرحمن‪ ،‬ومحب الأوطان‪،‬‬
‫ومحب الإخوان‪ ،‬ومحب العلم والعرفان‪ ،‬ومحب الأموال والأثمان‪ ،‬ومحب النسوان‪ ،‬ومحب المردان‪،‬‬
‫ومحب الصلبان؟ فهو يثير من قلب كل مشتاق ومحب إلى شيء ساكنه‪ ،‬و يزع ج قاطنه‪ ،‬فيثور وجده‪،‬‬
‫و يبدو شوقه‪ ،‬فيتحرك على حسب ما في قلبه من الحب والشوق‪.‬‬
‫والوجد بذلك المحبوب كائنا ً ما كان‪ .‬ولهذا تجد لهؤلاء كلهم ذوقا ً في السماع‪ ،‬وحالا ً ووجدا ً‬
‫و بكاء ً‪.‬‬
‫و يالله العجب! أي إ يمان ونور‪ ،‬و بصيرة وهدى‪ ،‬ومعرفة تحصل باستماع أبيات بألحان وتوقيعات‪،‬‬
‫لعل أكثرها قيلت فيما يهوى من محرم يبغضه الل ّٰه ورسوله‪ ،‬و يعاقب عليه‪ ،‬من تغزل وتشبب بمن لا‬
‫يحل له من ذكر أو أنثى؟ فإن غالب التغزل والتشبيب إنما هو في الصور المحرمة‪.‬‬
‫ومن أندر النادر تغزل الشاعر وتشبيبه في امرأته وأمته وأم أولاده‪ ،‬مع أن هذا واقع لـكنهكالشعرة‬
‫في جلد الثور‪ ،‬فكيف يقع لمن له أدنى بصيرة وحياة قلب أن يتقرب إلى الل ّٰه و يزداد إ يمانا ًوقر با ًمنه‬

110

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

pleasure in what is hated and loathed to Him—He loathes the one who says
it, receives it, and is pleased with it? And things have aggravated so much that
he claims that this hearing is more beneficial for the heart than listening to the
Qurʾan and beneficial knowledge and the traditions of His Prophet, God grant
him blessing and peace!
By God! Such a heart is eclipsed, deceived, turned upside down, and unfit for
the reality of the Qurʾan and the taste of its meanings, divulgence of its secrets,
and so [God] entrusted him with the qurʾān of Satan, as reported in the Muʿjam
of al-Ṭabarānī and elsewhere, both as raised [to the Prophet’s authority] and
truncated [to the authority of a Companion]: “Satan said, ‘O Lord, make me
a qurʾān [recitation].’ He said, ‘Your qurʾān is poetry.’ [Satan] said, ‘Make me a
book.’ He said, ‘Your book is the tattoo.’ He said, ‘Make for me a muezzin.’ He
said, ‘Your muezzin is the reed pipe.’ He said, ‘Make me a house.’ He said, ‘Your
house is the bath house.’ He said, ‘Make me a trap.’ He said, ‘Your trap is women.’
He said, ‘Make me food.’ He said, ‘Your food is all upon which My name is not
pronounced.’”5

2

The Prohibition of Singing and Music

What God despises, hates, and praises the avoidance of, is the listening to all
that harms the servant in his heart and his religion, like the listening of all falsehood, except if he intends to refute it and seek lessons from it and know the
beauty of its opposite, for a thing shows the beauty of its opposite. It has been
said,
When I hear you talk, the talk of everyone else makes me love yours more.
[Similarly disliked] is the hearing of idle talk, whose avoidance God has praised
in His saying, “And when they hear vain talk, they turn away from it” [28:55],
and His saying, “When they pass by vain talk, they pass with dignity” [25:72].
Muḥammad b. al-Ḥanfiyya6 said, “It means singing.” Al-Ḥasan or someone else
said, “They ennobled themselves [by leaving] when they heard it.” Ibn Masʿūd,
God have mercy on him, said, “Singing causes hypocrisy to grow in the heart
just like water causes vegetation to grow.” This is the statement of someone who

5 Al-Ṭabarānī, al-Muʿjam al-Kabīr, 8:245; graded as weak or fabricated by most critics. See
Madārij(Ṣ), 1238.

‫‪111‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫وكرامة ً عليه‪ ،‬بالتذاذ ما هو بغيض إليه‪ ،‬مقيت عنده‪ ،‬يمقت قائله وقابله والراضي به؟ وتترقى به الحال‬
‫حتى يزعم أن ذلك أنفع لقلبه من سماع القرآن والعلم النافع‪ ،‬وسنة نبيه‪.‬‬
‫يالله! إن هذا القلب مخسوف به‪ ،‬ممكور به منكوس‪ ،‬لم يصلح لحقائق القرآن وأذواق معانيه‪،‬‬
‫ومطالعة أسراره فتولاه بقرآن الشيطان‪ ،‬كما في معجم الطبراني وغيره—مرفوعا ً وموقوفا ً—‪» :‬إن‬
‫الشيطان قال‪ :‬يارب‪ ،‬اجعل لي قرآنا‪ ً.‬قال‪ :‬قرآنك الشعر‪ .‬قال‪ :‬اجعل لي كتابا‪ ً.‬قال‪ :‬كتابك الوشم‪ .‬قال‪:‬‬
‫اجعل لي مؤذنا‪ ً.‬قال‪ :‬مؤذنك المزمار‪ .‬قال‪ :‬اجعل لي بيتا‪ ً.‬قال‪ :‬بيتك الحمام‪ .‬قال‪ :‬اجعل لي مصائد‪.‬‬
‫قال‪ :‬مصائدك النساء‪ .‬قال‪ :‬اجعل لي طعاما‪ ً.‬قال‪ :‬طعامك ما لم يذكر عليه اسمي«‪ .‬والل ّٰه سبحانه وتعالى‬
‫أعلم‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫ما يبغضه الل ّٰه و يكرهه و يمدح المعرض عنه‪ .‬وهو سماع كل ما يضر العبد في قلبه ودينه‪ ،‬كسماع الباطل‬
‫كله‪ ،‬إلا إذا تضمن رده وإبطاله والاعتبار به‪ ،‬بعلمه بحسن ضده‪ .‬فإن الضد يظهر حسنه الضد‪ .‬كما‬
‫قيل‪:‬‬

‫وإذا سمعت إلى حديثك زادني‬

‫حبا له سمعي حديث سواكا‬

‫ضوا‬
‫وكسماع اللغو الذي مدح الل ّٰه التاركين لسماعه‪ ،‬والمعرضين عنه بقوله‪﴿ :‬و َِإذ َا سَم ِع ُوا ال َل ّغْو َ َأْعرَ ُ‬
‫ع َن ْه ُ﴾ ]القصص‪ ،[55:‬وقوله‪﴿ :‬و َِإذ َا م َُّروا باِ ل َل ّغْوِ م َُّروا ك ِر َام ًا﴾ ]الفرقان‪ .[72:‬قال محمد بن الحنفية‪:‬‬
‫هو الغناء‪ .‬وقال الحسن أو غيره‪ :‬أكرموا نفوسهم عن سماعه‪.‬‬
‫قال ا بن مسعود—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪» :‬الغناء ينبت النفاق في القلب كما ينبت الماء البقل«‪.‬‬

‫‪6 Muḥammad b. ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib (d. 81/701), more famously known as Ibn al-Ḥanafiyya, was the‬‬
‫‪son of ʿAlī and Khawla, a tribeswoman from Banū Ḥanifa. See Siyar 4:110.‬‬

112

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

truly knows the nature and fruit of singing, for no one is given to it without his
heart unwittingly becoming hypocritical. If such a person knew the reality of
hypocrisy and its ends, he could see it in his heart. For the love of singing and
love of the Qurʾan cannot come together in the heart of a servant except one of
them expelling the other. We have witnessed, as have others, the heaviness of
the Qurʾan upon the people of singing, and how they are bored by it and scream
at the reciter if he makes it long for them, their hearts being unable to benefit
from what he reads. [Their hearts] neither are moved by [its recitation] nor find
it melodious, nor are their yearnings stirred by it. When the qurʾān of Satan
comes, then, there is no god but God! How their voices humble, movements
cease, hearts find rest and tranquility, weeping and trance occur, and [you see]
movement inside and out, generosity with money and clothes, fragrance and
sleepless nights, and recitals throughout the night. If this is not hypocrisy, it
surely is its anchor and foundation.
The Book is recited and they tapped with no fear
But that is the tapping of the oblivious, the heedless
When the song arrived, they danced like the flies
By God, they did not dance for God
Tambour and reed and the melody of the singer
Since when have you tied worship to diversion?
The Book became too burdensome
When they saw its commands and prohibitions
Singing was easier when they saw
It sets them free in diversion without limits
Friends! The religion of Muhammad
None has ruined and wronged but these7
How could the hearing that the servant hears for his own pleasure and desire
be more beneficial than the one he hears by God, for God, and from God? If
[the Sufis who employ singing in worship] claim that they listen to this poetic
singing in the same way [as the Qurʾan], this is the height of confusion that has
befallen [the Sufis], for [the spiritual seeker] can only hear by God, for God, and
from God what God loves and is pleased with. This is why we have said that the
opinion on this matter cannot be established except after knowing the image,
the reality, and the rank of what is being heard. For God has made a measure
7 These are most likely Ibn al-Qayyim’s own lines. Some manuscripts give additional lines, the
gist of which is to drive home the harmfulness and prohibition of singing and music. See
Madārij(Ṣ), 1243.

‫‪113‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫وهذا كلام عارف بأ ثر الغناء وثمرته‪ ،‬فإنه ما اعتاده أحد إلا ونافق قلبه وهو لا يشعر‪ .‬ولو عرف‬
‫حقيقة النفاق وغايته لأبصره في قلبه‪ ،‬فإنه ما اجتمع في قلب عبد قط محبة الغناء ومحبة القرآن إلا‬
‫وطردت إحداهما الأخرى‪ .‬وقد شاهدنا نحن وغيرنا ثقل القرآن على أهل الغناء وسماعه‪ ،‬وتبرمهم به‪،‬‬
‫وصياحهم بالقاريء إذا طول عليهم‪ ،‬وعدم انتفاع قلو بهم بما يقرأه‪ ،‬فلا تتحرك ولا تطرب‪ ،‬ولا تهيج‬
‫منها بواعث الطلب‪ .‬فإذا جاء قرآن الشيطان فلا إله إلا الل ّٰه‪ ،‬كيف تخشع منهم الأصوات‪ ،‬وتهدأ‬
‫الحركات‪ ،‬وتسكن القلوب وتطمئن‪ ،‬و يقع البكاء والوجد‪ ،‬والحركة الظاهرة والباطنة‪ ،‬والسماحة‬
‫بالأثمان والثياب‪ ،‬وطيب السهر‪ ،‬وتمني طول الليل‪ .‬فإن لم يكن هذا نفاقا ًفهو آخية النفاق وأساسه‪:‬‬

‫تلُي الكتاب فأطرقوا لا خيفة‬

‫لـكنه إطراق ساه ٍ لاهي‬

‫وأتى الغناء فكالذباب تراقصوا‬

‫والل ّٰه ما رقصوا من أجل الل ّٰه‬

‫د ٌّ‬
‫ن‬
‫ف ومزمار ونغمة شاد ٍ‬

‫ت عبادة بملاهي؟‬
‫فمتى عهد َ‬

‫ثقَ ُل الكتاب عليهم لما رأوا‬

‫تقييد َه‬

‫ونواهي‬

‫ف الغنا لما رأوا‬
‫وعليهم خ َ ّ‬

‫إطلاقه في اللهو دون مناهي‬

‫ن محمد‬
‫يا فرقة ما ض َر ّ دي َ‬

‫وجنى عليه وملَ ّه إلا هي‬

‫بأوامر‬

‫وكيف يكون السماع الذي يسمعه العبد بطبعه وهواه أنفع له من الذي يسمعه بالل ّٰه ولل ّٰه وعن الل ّٰه‪،‬‬
‫فإن زعموا أنهم يسمعون هذا السماع الغنائي الشعري كذلك‪ ،‬فهذا غاية اللبس على القوم‪ .‬فإنه إنما‬
‫يسمع بالل ّٰه ولل ّٰه وعن الل ّٰه ما يحبه الل ّٰه و يرضاه‪ .‬ولهذا قلنا‪ :‬إنه لا يتحرر الكلام في هذه المسألة إلا بعد‬
‫معرفة صورة المسموع وحقيقته ومرتبته‪ ،‬فقد جعل الل ّٰه لكل شيء قدرا‪ ،‬ولن يجعل الل ّٰه من شر به‬

114

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

for everything, and God will never make the one whose drink, pleasure, delight,
and ecstasy are in the hearing of the clear signs [of the Qurʾan] like the one
whose drink, pleasure, delight, and ecstasy are in singing and poetry.

3

The Arguments of Those Who Permit Singing

The greatest of wonders is the argument of those who contend that singing is
part of the [Sufi] way, or that it is permissible because it is delightful and pleasing. The soul finds joy and tranquility in it, that even a child finds comfort in a
beautiful voice. The burden of the camel who bears the exhaustion of journey
and hardship of carrying its load is eased by the singsong. A beautiful voice is a
blessing of God, an increase in His creation, for God has dispraised the disagreeable sound, “Surely, the most disagreeable of sounds is the braying of donkeys”
[31:19]. God has characterized the blessings of the Garden saying, “[The righteous] shall be made happy in a Garden” [30:15] because of its beautiful melody.
How could, then, it be prohibited when it is to be found in the Garden? [They
further argue by] the fact that God the Exalted does not give ear to anything as
He does when listening to a prophet with a beautiful voice singing the Qurʾan.8
[And they argue by] the fact that Abū Mūsā al-Ashʿarī,9 God be pleased with
him, when the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, heard his voice and
praised him for its beauty, saying, “This one has been given a voice from the
voices of the family of David.”10 Abū Mūsā said, “Had I known that you are listening, I would have adorned it even more,” [by which he meant] I would have
beautified and improved it. [They also argue by] the Prophet’s words, God grant
him blessing and peace, “Beautify the Qurʾan with your voices”11 and by his
words, God grant him blessing and peace, “Whoever does not recite the Qurʾan
melodiously is not part of us.”12 The correct [interpretation of this tradition]
is that [recitation of the Qurʾan] is a kind of singing, [by which is meant] the
beautification of the voice when reciting it. This is how Aḥmad [b. Ḥanbal], God
have mercy on him, interpreted it, and said, “[It means] he beautifies it with his
voice to the extent he can.” [They also argue] that the Prophet, God grant him
blessing and peace, confirmed ʿĀʾisha, God be pleased with her, for the singing
of the two singing maids on the Day of Eid and said to Abū Bakr, “Leave them,
for every nation has a festival, and today is the festival of us people of Islam.”13
8 The reference is to a tradition in Bukhārī #524 and Muslim #792.
9 Abū Mūsā al-Ashaʿrī (d. 50/670), ʿAbdallāh b. Qays, was a famous Companion who served as
the governor of Basra during the caliphate of ʿUmar and that of Kufa under ʿUthmān. See
Siyar 2:380.

‫‪115‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫ونصيبه وذوقه ووجده من سماع الآيات البينات‪ ،‬كمن نصيبه وشر به وذوقه ووجده من سماع الغناء‬
‫والأبيات‪.‬‬

‫ومن أعجب العجائب استدلال من استدل على أن هذا السماع من طر يق القوم‪ ،‬أو أنه مباح بكونه‬
‫مستلذا ًطيبا‪ ً،‬تلذه النفوس وتستروح إليه‪ .‬وأن الطفل يسكن إلى الصوت الطيب‪ ،‬والجمل يقاسي تعب‬
‫السير ومشقة الحمولة‪ ،‬فيهون عليه بالحداء‪ ،‬و بأن الصوت الطيب نعمة من الل ّٰه على صاحبه‪ ،‬وز يادة في‬
‫ت اْلحم َ ِير ِ﴾ ]لقمان‪ ،[19:‬و بأن‬
‫صو ْ ُ‬
‫تلَ َ‬
‫صو َا ِ‬
‫ن َأنكرَ َاْلَأ ْ‬
‫خلقه‪ ،‬و بأن الل ّٰه ذم الصوت الفظيع‪ ،‬فقال‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َ ّ‬
‫يحـبْ رَ ُونَ﴾ ]الروم‪ ،[15:‬بأن ذلك هو السماع الطيب‪،‬‬
‫ضة ٍ ُ‬
‫الل ّٰه وصف نعيم الجنة فقال فيه‪﴿ :‬فهَ ُْم ف ِي ر َْو َ‬
‫فكيف يكون حراما ً وهو في الجنة؟ و بأن الل ّٰه تعالى ما أذن لشيء كإذنه‪ ،‬أي كاستماعه لنبي حسن‬
‫الصوت يتغنى بالقرآن‪ ،‬و بأن أبا موسى الأشعري—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—استمع النبي ﷺ إلى صوته‪ ،‬وأثنى‬
‫عليه بحسن الصوت‪ ،‬وقال‪» :‬لقد أوتي هذا مزمارا ًمن مزامير آل داود«‪ .‬فقال له أبو موسى‪» :‬لو أعلم‬
‫أنك استمعت لحـبرته لك تحبيرا ً«‪ ،‬أي ز ينته لك وحسنته‪ .‬و بقوله ﷺ‪» :‬ز ينوا القرآن بأصواتكم«‪ .‬و بقوله‬
‫ﷺ‪» :‬ليس منا من لم يتغن بالقرآن«‪ ،‬والصحيح أنه من التغني‪ ،‬وهو تحسين الصوت به‪ .‬و بذلك فسره‬
‫أحمد—رحمه الل ّٰه—فقال‪ :‬يحسنه بصوته ما استطاع‪ .‬و بأن النبي ﷺ أقر عائشة—رضي الل ّٰه عنها—على‬
‫غناء القينتين يوم العيد وقال لأبي بكر‪» :‬دعهما‪ .‬فإن لكل قوم عيدا ً وهذا عيدنا أهل الإسلام«‪.‬‬

‫‪Bukhārī #5048; Muslim #793.‬‬
‫‪Abū Dāwūd #1464.‬‬
‫‪Bukhārī #7527.‬‬
‫‪Bukhārī #949, #951; Muslim #892.‬‬

‫‪10‬‬
‫‪11‬‬
‫‪12‬‬
‫‪13‬‬

116

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

[They argue] that he, God grant him blessing and peace, permitted singing in
weddings and named it diversion. Similarly, the Messenger of God, God grant
him blessing and peace, heard the singsong [of camel drivers] and permitted
it. He also used to hear the [poetry] recital of the Companions, as they would
recite rajaz14 poetry in his presence in the digging of the trench:
We are the ones who pledged to Muhammad
To strive so long as we live
He also entered Mecca when the rajaz-reciter would recite in his presence the
lines of ʿAbdallāh b. Rawwāḥa.15 Furthermore, the camel-driver sung upon his
departure from Khaybar, saying,
By God if not for God we would be lost
Give charity nor offer prayers
He sent down tranquility upon us
So set our feet firm when we meet
Those who rebelled against us
When they intended corruption, we refused
And when called upon we came
Upon this [the Prophet] prayed for the reciter.16
He also heard the poem of Kaʿb b. Zuhayr and rewarded him with a cloak.17
Similarly, he asked al-Aswad b. Sarīʿ18 to say lines of poetry in which [the latter]
praised his Lord. He asked a hundred lines of the poetry of Umayya b. Abī alṢalt19 to be recited.20 Al-Aʿshā recited some of his poetry to [the Prophet] and
he listened to it. He confirmed the truth of the words of Labīd:21 “Lo! All but
God is false.”22 He also prayed for Ḥassān [b. Thābit] that he be helped by the
Holy Spirit (Gabriel) so long as he defended him [by responding to the enemy’s
14

15

16
17
18

Rajaz is the simplest meter in Arabic poetry; it was the typical poetic medium of fighters,
sung in the heat of pre-Islamic battles; singing rajaz in battle was seen as a sign of courage
and bravery. See Peter Webb, “Poetry and the Early Islamic Historical Tradition,” in Warfare
and Poetry in the Middle East, ed. Hugh Kennedy (London: I.B. Tauris, 2013), 138.
ʿAbdallāh b. Rawwāḥa (d. 8 AH), a Companion and descendant of the famous pre-Islamic
poet, Imruʾ al-Qays. He was a well-known poet in his own right throughout the life of the
Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, and also served as a commander during the
Battle of Muʾtah, where he was martyred. See Siyar 1:230.
Recorded in Bukhārī #4196 and Muslim #1802 with slight variation.
As recorded in al-Ṭabarānī, al-Kabīr 19:176–179.
Al-Aswad b. Sarīʿ al-Tamīmī al-Saʿdī (d. 42/663), a Companion and a poet, who fought
alongside the Prophet in four battles. See Madārij(Ṣ), 1249.

‫‪117‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫و بأنه ﷺ أذن في العرس في الغناء وسماه‪ :‬لهوا‪ ،‬وقد سمع رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ الحداء وأذن فيه‪.‬‬
‫وكان يسمع إنشاد والصحابة‪ ،‬وكانوا يرتجزون بين يديه في حفر الخندق‪:‬‬

‫نحن الذين بايعوا محمدا ً‬

‫على الجهاد ما بقينا أبدا‬

‫ودخل مكة والمرتجز يرتجز بين يديه بشعر عبد الل ّٰه بن رواحة‪ .‬وحدا به الحادي في منصرفه من خيبر‪.‬‬
‫فجعل يقول‪:‬‬

‫والل ّٰه لولا الل ّٰه ما اهتدينا‬

‫ولا تصدقنا ولا صلينا‬

‫فأ نزل ْن سكينة علينا‬

‫وثب ِّت الأقدام ألاقي ْنا‬

‫إن الأولا قد بغوا علينا‬

‫إذا أرادوا فتنة أبينا‬

‫ح بنا أتينا‬
‫ونحن إن صي َ‬
‫فدعا لقائله‪.‬‬
‫وسمع قصيدةكعب بن زهير‪ .‬وأجازه بردة ً‪.‬‬
‫واستنشد الأسود بن سر يع قصائد حمد بها ر به‪.‬‬
‫واستنشد من شعر أمية بن أبي الصلت مائة قافية‪.‬‬
‫وأنشده الأعشى شيئا ًمن شعره فسمعه‪.‬‬
‫وصدق لبيدا ً في قوله‪:‬‬
‫ألا كل شيء ما خلا الل ّٰه باطل‬
‫ودعا لحسان »أن يؤ يده الل ّٰه بروح القدس مادام ينافح عنه« وكان يعجبه شعره‪ .‬وقال له‪» :‬اهجهم‪.‬‬
‫وروح القدس معك«‪.‬‬
‫‪Umayya b. ʿAbdallāh (d. 5/627) was a Jāhilī poet who used to recite lines that forewarned‬‬
‫‪of a coming Prophet, who he himself hoped to be. When news of the Prophet Muhammad‬‬
‫‪reached him, he rejected him out of envy. See Madārij(Ṣ), 1249.‬‬
‫‪Muslim #2255.‬‬
‫‪Labīd b. Rabīʿa (d. 41/662), was a leading pre-Islamic poet who converted to Islam, known‬‬
‫‪to have only recited one line after his conversion. See MI, 1250.‬‬
‫‪Bukhārī #6147; Muslim #2256.‬‬

‫‪19‬‬

‫‪20‬‬
‫‪21‬‬
‫‪22‬‬

118

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

satire], and he liked [Ḥassān’s] poetry. He said, “Satirize them, may the Holy
Spirit be with you.”23 ʿĀʾisha, God be pleased with her, recited to him the lines
of Abū Kabīr al-Hadhalī,
Exempt of any remain of menses,
born of hale nurse unsoiled,
Were you to look at the folds of his face
they beam like a white lightning-cloud!
Then she said, “This line is more applicable to you,” and he was pleased with
her words.
[They also argue] on the grounds that Ibn ʿUmar, God be pleased with him,
permitted it, as did ʿAbdallāh b. Jaʿfar, and the people of Medina at large. Also,
[they contend] that such-and-such ally of God attended and heard it, and
so whoever declares it impermissible impugns those masters, exemplars, and
luminaries. [They also argue] that consensus has been established on the permissibility of the harmonious and melodious chirping of the birds, and taking
delight in hearing the voice of a human just as permissible, if not more. Furthermore, the hearing [of songs] drives the soul of the listener and his heart to his
beloved; if his object of love were illicit, so would be the singing that facilitates
it. If it is permissible, so is singing in its right. If, similarly, it is godly, listening to
songs about it would also constitute devotion and obedience, for it motivates
divine love, strengthens and stirs it.
[They also argue that] taking delight in a melodious sound is like taking
delight in a beautiful view, or smelling of pleasant smells, or eating delectable
foods. If this is illicit, so are all the other kinds of delights and sensations.
The response is that all this constitutes distraction from the purpose and
dodging the point of contention, associating with it irrelevant things. For a
thing’s being pleasant and delightful to a sense has no relation to its permissibility or impermissibility, or for recommendation for or against it. For delight
could be found in all the five categories: it could be found in what is impermissible, obligation, disliked, recommended, and neutral. How could anyone who
knows proper conditions and methods of argument argue like this?
How is this different from arguing for fornication or adultery on the grounds
of the pleasure the perpetrator feels in the act that no one in their right mind
can deny? Does anyone argue on the grounds of pleasure and delight in an act
for its permissibility? Are most impermissible things void of pleasure? Are the

23

Recorded in Bukhārī #3213 and Muslim #2486, with some variation.

‫‪119‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫وأنشدته عائشة—رضي الل ّٰه عنها—قول أبي كبير الهذلي‪:‬‬

‫ومبرأ من كل غ ُبر حيضة‬

‫وفساد مرضعة وداء مغيل‬

‫وإذا نظرت إلى أس َرّة وجهه‬

‫ت كبرق العارض المتهل ِّل‬
‫برق َ ْ‬

‫وقالت‪» :‬أنت أحق بهذا البيت« فسَ ُ َر ّ بقولها‪.‬‬
‫و بأن ا بن عمر رضي الل ّٰه عنهما رخص فيه‪ ،‬وعبد الل ّٰه بن جعفر وأهل المدينة‪ .‬و بأن كذا وكذا وليا ً‬
‫لل ّٰه حضروه وسمعوه‪ ،‬فمن حرمه فقد قدح في هؤلاء السادة القدوة الأعلام‪.‬‬
‫و بأن الإجماع منعقد على إ باحة أصوات الطيور المطر بة الشجية‪ ،‬فلذة سماع صوت الآدمي أولى‬
‫بالإ باحة أو مساو ية‪.‬‬
‫و بأن السماع يحدو روح السامع وقلبه إلى نحو محبو به‪ .‬فإن كان محبو به حراما ًكان السماع معينا ً‬
‫له على الحرام‪ ،‬وإن كان مباحا ًكان السماع في حقه مباحا‪ ً،‬وإن كانت محبته رحمانية ًكان السماع في‬
‫حقه قر بة ً وطاعة ً‪ ،‬لأنه يحرك المحبة الرحمانية و يقو يها و يهيجها‪.‬‬
‫و بأن التذاذ الأذن بالصوت الطيب كالتذاذ العين بالمنظر الحسن‪ ،‬والشم بالروائح الطيبة‪ ،‬والفم‬
‫بالطعوم الطيبة‪ .‬فإن كان هذا حراما ًكانت جميع هذه اللذات والإدراكات محرمة‪.‬‬
‫فالجواب أن هذا حيدة عن المقصود‪ ،‬وروغان عن محل النزاع‪ ،‬وتعلق بما لا تعلق به‪ .‬فإن جهة‬
‫كون الشيء مستلذا ً للحاسة ملائما ً لها لا يدل على إ باحته ولا تحر يمه ولا كراهته ولا استحبابه‪ .‬فإن‬
‫هذه اللذة تكون في الأحكام الخمسة‪ :‬تكون في الحرام والواجب والمكروه والمستحب والمباح‪ .‬فكيف‬
‫يستدل بها على الإ باحة من يعرف شروط الدليل ومواقع الاستدلال؟‬
‫وهل هذا إلا بمنزلة من استدل على إ باحة الزنا بما يجد به فاعله من اللذة‪ ،‬وأن لذته لا ينكرها ذو طبع‬
‫سليم‪ .‬وهل يستدل بوجود اللذة والملاءمة على حل اللذيذ الملائم أحد؟ وهل خلت غالب المحرمات من‬

120

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

sounds of musical instruments anything but delightful—while their impermissibility has been soundly reported, through the soundest [chain of narrators],
on the authority of the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, and [the
report also prophesies that] there will be in his community those who will make
[musical instruments] licit,24 and on the impermissibility of some of these
[items listed in this report] there is consensus, and the majority of scholars
declare them all impermissible? Is there evidence of the judgment of permissibility or impermissibility [of singing] in a camel’s or a child’s taking delight
in a harmonious sound? Even stranger is the argument that it is permissible
because beautiful voices are God’s creation and grace. It is said in response: Is
a handsome face not a similar grace? Does that constitute a proof of the permissibility of enjoying and taking pleasure in it without limits? Is this anything
but the school of the libertines who go along with nature? Is there in God’s dispraise of a donkey’s braying an argument for the permissibility of melodious
voices singing in adorned tones and sweet tunes of beautiful faces in a variety
of poetic compositions, accompanied by tambours and love sonnets? {This, by
your father, is rather ludicrous and odd.}25
Even odder is the argument for permissibility on the basis of the people of
the Garden’s listening; it is equally fitting for such a one to argue for the permissibility of wine, because there will be wine in the Garden. Furthermore, [they
should argue] for the permissibility of silk, because that is the raiment of the
people of the Garden, and for the permissibility of utensils and jewelry made
of gold and silver for men because that is known that it will be the case in the
Garden.
If it is said that the proof is established for the prohibition of these but not for
singing, it would be said: This is a different argument altogether having nothing
to do with the permissibility of something in the Garden. This shows that your
argument on the basis of the people of the Garden’s [enjoyment of singing]
is invalid and vain. As for your contention that the proof of the prohibition of
listening to songs is not established, it would be said: What do you mean by
hearing and what kinds of things? For there are kinds of hearing and things
heard which are deemed prohibited, disliked, neutral, obligatory, or liked; you
first determine the type, and only then a positive or negative judgment can be
passed.

24
25

This is referring to the tradition in Bukhārī #5590.
Some modern editors, following Ḥāmid al-Fiqī, omit this statement due to the theological
objection against swearing by anyone but God. Madārij(Ṣ), 1255n6.

‫‪121‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫اللذات؟ وهل أصوات المعازف التي صح عن النبى ﷺ تحر يمها‪ ،‬وأن في أمته من سيستحلها بأصلح‬
‫إسناد‪.‬‬
‫وأجمع أهل العلم على تحر يم بعضها‪ .‬وقال جمهورهم‪ :‬بتحر يم جملتها—إلا لذيذة تلذ للسمع—‪ ،‬وهل‬
‫في التذاذ الجمل والطفل بالصوت الطيب دليل على حكمه من إ باحة أو تحر يم؟‬
‫وأعجب من هذا الاستدلال على الإ باحة بأن الل ّٰه خلق الصوت الطيب‪ ،‬وهو ز يادة نعمة منه‬
‫لصاحبه‪.‬‬
‫فيقال‪ :‬والصورة الحسنة الجميلة‪ ،‬أليست ز يادة في النعمة‪ ،‬والل ّٰه خالقها‪ ،‬ومعطي حسنها؟ أفيدل‬
‫ذلك على إ باحة التمتع بها‪ ،‬والالتذاذ على الإطلاق؟ وهل هذا إلا مذهب أهل الإ باحة الجار ين مع‬
‫رسوم الطبيعة؟‬
‫وهل في ذم الل ّٰه لصوت الحمار ما يدل على إ باحة الأصوات المطر بات بالنغمات الموزونات‬
‫والألحان اللذيذات‪ ،‬من الصور المستحسنات‪ ،‬بأنواع القصائد المستحسنات بالدفوف والشبابات‬
‫]هذا وأبيك إحدى المضحكات والمعجبات[‬
‫وأعجب من هذا الاستدلال على الإ باحة بسماع أهل الجنة‪ .‬وما أجدر صاحبه أن يستدل على‬
‫إ باحة الخمر بأن في الجنة خمرا ً‪ .‬وعلى حل لبس الحر ير بأن لباس أهلها حر ير‪ .‬وعلى حل أواني الذهب‬
‫والفضة والتحلي بها للرجال بكون ذلك ثابتا ًفي الجنة‪.‬‬
‫فإن قال‪ :‬قد قام الدليل على تحر يم هذا‪ ،‬ولم يقم على تحر يم السماع‪ .‬قيل‪ :‬هذا الآن استدلال آخر‪،‬‬
‫غير الاستدلال بإ باحته لأهل الجنة‪ .‬فعلم أن استدلالك بإ باحته لأهل الجنة استدلال باطل لا يرضى‬
‫به محصل‪.‬‬
‫وأما قولك‪» :‬لم يقم دليل على تحر يم السماع«‪.‬‬
‫فيقال لك‪ :‬أي السماعات تعني؟ وأي المسموعات تر يد؟ فالسماعات والمسموعات منها المحرم‬
‫والمكروه والمباح والواجب والمستحب‪ .‬فعين نوعا يً قع الكلام فيه نفيا ًوإثباتا‪ً.‬‬

122

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

If you said that [we are concerned with] the listening to poems, you will be
asked which kind? Those that praise God, His Messenger and Book, and satirize His enemies? If so, Muslims continue to relate, listen to, and study them,
and such are the ones that the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and
peace, and his Companions listened to26 and rewarded and encouraged Ḥassān
to utter. These are the ones that have confused the people of Satanic hearing because they say: those were poems, and our listening is to poems. True,
then, the Sunna is speech, so is heretical innovation; praising God is speech,
so is backbiting and slandering people. The question is whether the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, and His Companions listened
to this Satanic chanting which comprises more than one hundred harms mentioned elsewhere, and we have mentioned some of them in the foregoing.27
This confusion also afflicts them in the Prophet’s commendation of a beautiful
voice in reciting the Qurʾan, and permitting it and giving ear to it, and God’s
love for it. They have transposed this commendation to the voices of women,
beardless boys, and others, and singing accompanied by musical instruments
and vocalists, with the mention of the [feminine] figure, bosom, and waist,
and praise of the eyes and its works, and the black hair and beauty of youth,
blushing cheeks, meeting and separation, victimization and desertion, anger
and attention, longing, worry and separation, and the like. These are incomparably more harmful to the heart than drinking wine. What comparison can
there be between being drunk for a day or two and the intoxication of passionate love whose companion cannot find healing except in the congregation
of the losers, despondent and grief-stricken, imprisoned and murdered? Can
the intoxication of the drink be compared to the intoxication of the souls with
music? Could it be imagined of a wise person to prohibit an intoxicant whose
harm is known, but allow an intoxicant whose harm is many, many times the
harm of the drink? Above such a thing is the Judge of all Judges.
If they dispute the intoxicating quality of samāʿ and its effect on reason and
souls, they oppose both sense and wisdom, and their obstinacy becomes evident. How could a physician help a patient suffering from a minor harm by
permitting him to take in what contains in it a much greater ailment? A fair
observer will concede that the sickness of the soul due to the intoxication of
the drink is incomparably smaller than its sickness due to the intoxication of
hearing. Our discourse, in any case, is for the one in his senses, not the one
missing them.
26
27

In reference to the tradition in Aḥmad 5:105.
The reference is to Ibn al-Qayyim’s treatise, al-Kalām ʿalā masʾala al-samāʿ, ed. Rāshid ʿAbd
al-ʿAzīz al-Ḥamad (Riyadh: Dār al-ʿĀṣima, 1409), which extends over 500 pages.

‫‪123‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫هجي‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬سماع القصائد‪ .‬قيل لك‪ :‬أي القصائد تعني؟ ما م ُدح الل ّٰه به‪ ،‬ورسوله وكتابه‪ ،‬و ُ‬
‫به أعداؤه؟ فهذه لم يزل المسلمون يروونها و يسمعونها و يتدارسونها‪ .‬وهي التي سمعها رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‬
‫وأصحابه‪ ،‬وأثاب عليها‪ ،‬وحرض حسانا ًعليها‪ .‬وهي التي غرت أصحاب السماع الشيطاني فقالوا‪ :‬تلك‬
‫قصائد‪ ،‬وسماعنا قصائد‪ ،‬فنعم إذن‪ ،‬والسنةكلام‪ ،‬والبدعةكلام‪ ،‬والتسبيح كلام‪ ،‬والغيبةكلام‪،‬‬
‫والقذف كلام‪ ،‬ولـكن هل سمع رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ وأصحابه سماعكم هذا الشيطاني المشتمل على أكثر من‬
‫مائة مفسدة مذكورة في غير هذا الموضع؟ وقد أشرنا فيما تقدم إلى بعضها‪.‬‬
‫ونظير هذا‪ :‬ما غّرهم من استحسانه ﷺ الصوت الحسن بالقرآن‪ ،‬وأذنه له وإذنه فيه‪ ،‬ومحبة‬
‫الل ّٰه له‪ .‬فنقلوا هذا الاستحسان إلى صوت النسوان والمردان وغيرهم‪ ،‬بالغناء المقرون بالمعازف‬
‫والشادن‪ ،‬وذكر القد والنهد والخصر‪ ،‬ووصف العيون وفعلها‪ ،‬والشعر الأسود‪ ،‬ومحاسن الشباب‪،‬‬
‫وتور يد الخدود‪ ،‬وذكر الوصل والصد‪ ،‬والتجني والهجران‪ ،‬والعتاب والاستعطاف‪ ،‬والاشتياق‬
‫والقلق والفراق‪ ،‬وما جرى هذا المجرى‪ ،‬مما هو أفسد للقلب من شرب الخمر بما لا نسبة بينهما‪ .‬وأي‬
‫نسبة سكر يوم ونحوه إلى سكرة العشق التي لا يستفيق صاحبها إلا في عسكر الهالـكين‪ ،‬سليبا ً حز ينا‪ً،‬‬
‫وأسيرا ً قتيلا ً؟‬
‫وهل تقاس سكرة الشراب بسكرة الأرواح بالسماع؟ وهل ي ُظن بحكيم أن يحرم سكرا ً لمفسدة فيه‬
‫معلومة‪ ،‬و يبيح سكرا ً مفسدته أضعاف أضعاف مفسدة الشراب؟ حاشا أحكم الحاكمين‪.‬‬
‫فإن نازعوا في سكر السماع‪ ،‬وتأثيره في العقول والأرواح‪ ،‬خرجوا عن الذوق والحس‪ .‬فظهرت‬
‫مكا برة القوم‪ .‬فكيف يحمي الطبيب المر يض عما يشوش عليه صحته‪ ،‬و يبيح له ما فيه أعظم السقم؟‬
‫والمنصف يعلم أنه لا نسبة بين سقم الأرواح بسكر الشراب‪ ،‬وسقمها بسكر السماع‪ .‬وكلامنا مع واجد‬
‫لا فاقد‪ ،‬فهو المقصود بالخطاب‪.‬‬

124

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Even stranger is their argument for the permissibility of listening [to such]
accompanied by what we have mentioned of its social form,28 based on the act
of two little girls who had not even reached puberty with a very young woman
on the day of the [Eid] Festival and celebration, who sang a few lines from the
poetry of the Arabs about courage, war, noble character, and chivalry. How far
is this from that!
What more, this tradition is their biggest argument, despite the fact that the
greatest of truth-lovers, God be pleased with him, called it ‘Satan’s melody,’ and
the Messenger, God grant him blessing and peace, agreed with this description,
but allowed the two little girls of pre-legal age [to continue singing], and there
was no harm in this singing and listening. Does this serve as a proof for the permissibility of what they do and what they know of samāʿ, consisting as it does
of what is obvious to all? Glory be to God, how their reason and understanding
have lost their way.
Even odder than all of this is the argument upon its permissibility based on
what the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, listened to from
the camel-driver’s singsong comprising truth and affirmation of unicity. Has
anyone considered mere poetry, its declaiming and listening, impermissible to
begin with? How similar in strength is [their argument] to the web of a spider?
Even more peculiar is their argument for its permissibility based on the
permissibility of listening to the sweet chirping of the birds: is this argument
anything but of the genus of the analogy of those who said, “Trading is like
usury” [2:275]. What relation is there between the chirping of the birds to the
songs of beautiful, delicate women, of strings and harps, and feminine voices
of beardless youth, and singing by which the souls and hearts are led to yearn
for meeting every beloved man or woman? What is the relation of the temptation of all this to the voice of a dove, nightingale, songbird, and the like? In
fact, we say that if the two were the same, to take samāʿ as a kind of devotion
and worship by which inner knowledge, tastes, and ecstasy are revealed and
spiritual states advanced would indeed be of the same nature as the nearness
to God through the sounds of the birds. But we seek God’s protection that the
two be deemed the same.
What resolves the contention concerning the judgment of this matter consists of three principles, which are the most important principles of faith and
devotion; whoever does not build on them his edifice stands on the brink of a
crumbling precipice.

28

A curious mention of ijtimāʿiyya; modern Arabic employs it to mean social body, but
“social” here should be taken to mean the collection of practices and types of people.

‫‪125‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫وأعجب من هذا استدلالهم على إ باحة السماع—المركب مما ذكرنا من الهيئة الاجتماعية—بغناء‬
‫بنيتين صغيرتين دون البلوغ‪ ،‬عند امرأة صبية في يوم عيد وفرح بأبيات من أبيات العرب‪ ،‬في وصف‬
‫الشجاعة والحروب‪ ،‬ومكارم الأخلاق والشيم‪ .‬فأ ين هذا من هذا؟‬
‫والعجب أن هذا الحديث من أكبر الحجج عليهم‪ .‬فإن الصديق الأكبر—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—سمى‬
‫ذلك »مزمور الشيطان«‪ ،‬وأقره الرسول ﷺ على هذه التسمية‪ ،‬ورخص فيه لجو ير يتين غير مكلفتين‪،‬‬
‫ولا مفسدة في إنشاده ولا استماعه‪ ،‬أفيدل هذا على إ باحة ما يعملونه و يعلمونه من السماع المشتمل‬
‫على ما لا يخفى؟ فيا سبحان الل ّٰه! كيف ضلت العقول والأفهام؟‬
‫وأعجب من هذا كله الاستدلال على إ باحته بما سمعه رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ من الحداء المشتمل على الحق‬
‫والتوحيد‪ .‬وهل حرم أحد مطلق الشعر وقوله واستماعه؟ فكم هذا التعلق ببيوت العنكبوت؟‬
‫وأعجب من هذا الاستدلال على إ باحته بإ باحة أصوات الطيور اللذيذة‪ .‬وهل هذا إلا من جنس‬
‫ل الر ِ ّباَ ﴾ ]البقرة‪ .[275:‬وأ ين أصوات الطيور إلى نغمات الغيد‬
‫قياس الذين قالوا‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َن ّم َا البْ َي ُْع م ِث ْ ُ‬
‫الحسان والأوتار والعيدان‪ ،‬وأصوات أشباه النساء من المردان‪ ،‬والغناء بما يحدو الأرواح والقلوب‪،‬‬
‫إلى مواصلةكل محبو بة ومحبوب؟ وأ ين الفتنة بهذا إلى الفتنة بصوت القمري والبلبل والهزار ونحوها؟‬
‫بل نقول‪ :‬لو كانا سواء ً لكان اتخاذ هذا السماع قر بة ً وطاعة ً‪ ،‬تستنزل به المعارف والأذواق‬
‫والمواجيد‪ ،‬وتحرك به الأحوال بمنزلة التقرب إلى الل ّٰه بأصوات الطيور‪ ،‬ومعاذ الل ّٰه أن يكونا سواء ً‪.‬‬
‫والذي يفصل النزاع في حكم هذه المسألة ثلاث قواعد من أهم قواعد الإ يمان والسلوك‪ .‬فمن لم يبن‬
‫عليها فبناؤه على شفا جرف هار‪.‬‬

126
4

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

First Principle: Scripture Is the Judge of Mystical Knowledge

The first principle is [the answer to the question] whether [what is called] the
spiritual taste, state, and ecstasy is the judge or the judged upon which another
judge declares its judgment and to which it turns for verdict.
This is an occasion of the misguidance of those who have lost the sound path
of the people [of taṣawwuf ] by making it the judge, turning to it for the verdict on what is permissible and unacceptable and what is sound and harmful.
They have made [personal taste or mystical knowledge] the standard for what
is true and what is false, discarding for its sake the implications of knowledge
and clear scriptural texts, making personal tastes, states, and ecstasies arbiters
over them both. The problem has thus become enormous and the corruption
compounded, the signposts of faith and the straight path obliterated. The spiritual path has been turned upside down: it used to be directed to God, now they
have made its end their own selves. Thus, the common people who are [supposedly] veiled from their spiritual tastes worship God, whereas these people
worship their selves.
The irony is that they have taken up a variety of self-disciplining exercises
and renunciation in order to strip desires and indulgences off their selves,
but have ended up shifting from one kind of desire to another, greater kind,
and from one kind of indulgence to another, greater kind. Their situation in
the desires which they have left behind was better. The case of the victims of
those desires is better than these people, for the former do not oppose their
inner states to knowledge nor privilege them over scriptural texts, nor make
them their religion and devotion, nor badmouth scriptural knowledge and
its people for its sake. The desires to which they have shifted, they have
turned them into the signposts to which they intend to journey; it is the
direction of their hearts’ prayers. They stand for their indulgences, rather
than God, annihilating themselves into them against what God has commended them. People worship God, they worship themselves. They denigrate
and badmouth those given to diversions and desires, but they are the most
addicted to their own indulgences. They have only renounced some pleasures for the sake of others higher than those, abandoning one desire for
another.
Let the wise contemplate this state of affairs in himself and in others, for
all that opposes the normative decree of God for the servant is his own indulgence and desire, be it wealth, power, beautiful face, or spiritual delight, ecstasy,
or state. Furthermore, the one who prefers this over what God wants is worse
than one who acknowledges that it is a deficiency and trial, and that what God
wants ought to be preferred over it, and constantly reports to God.

‫‪127‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫القاعدة الأولى‪ :‬أن الذوق والحال والوجد‪ ،‬هل هو حاكم أو محكوم عليه؟ فيحكم عليه بحاكم آخر‬
‫و يتحاكم إليه‪.‬‬
‫فهذا منشأ ضلال من ضل من المفسدين لطر يق القوم الصحيحة‪ ،‬حيث جعلوه حاكما‪ ً،‬فتحاكموا‬
‫إليه فيما يسوغ و يمتنع وفيما هو صحيح وفاسد‪ .‬وجعلوه محكا لً لحق والباطل‪ ،‬فنبذوا لذلك موجب العلم‬
‫والنصوص‪ ،‬وحكموا عليهما الأذواق والأحوال والمواجيد‪ .‬فعظم الأمر وتفاقم الفساد‪ ،‬وطمست‬
‫معالم الإ يمان والسلوك المستقيم‪ ،‬وانعكس السير‪ ،‬وكان إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فصيروه إلى النفوس‪ .‬فالناس‬
‫المحجو بون عن أذواقهم يعبدون الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وهؤلاء يعبدون نفوسهم‪.‬‬
‫العجب أنهم دخلوا في أنواع من الر ياضات والمجاهدات والزهد ليتجردوا عن شهوات النفوس‬
‫وحظوظها‪ ،‬فانتقلوا من شهوات إلى شهوات أكبر منها‪ ،‬ومن حظوظ إلى حظوظ أعظم منها‪ .‬وكان‬
‫حالهم في الشهوات التي انتقلوا عنها أكمل‪ ،‬وحال أر بابها خير من حال هؤلاء‪ ،‬لأنهم لم يعارضوا بها‬
‫العلم‪ ،‬ولا قدموها على النصوص‪ ،‬ولا جعلوها دينا ًوقر بة ً‪ ،‬ولا ازدروا بها العلم وأهله‪ .‬والشهوات التي‬
‫انتقلوا إليها جعلوها أعلاما يً شمرون إليها‪ ،‬فهي قبلة قلو بهم‪ .‬فهم واقفون مع حظوظهم من الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فانون‬
‫بها عن مراد الل ّٰه منهم‪ .‬الناس يعبدون الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وهم يعبدون أنفسهم‪ ،‬عاتبون لأهل الحظوظ والشهوات‬
‫ومزدرون بهم‪ .‬وهم أعظم الناس حظوظا‪ ً،‬وإنما زهدوا في حٍّظ إلى حظ أعلى منه‪ ،‬وتركوا شهوة ً‬
‫لشهوة‪.‬‬
‫فليتدبر اللبيب هذا الموضع في نفسه وفي غيره‪ .‬فكل ما خالف مراد الل ّٰه الديني من العبد فهو حظه‬
‫وشهوته‪ ،‬مالا ًكان أو ر ياسة ً أو صورة ً أو ذوقا ًأو وجدا ً أو حالا‪ً.‬‬
‫ثم من قدمه على مراد الل ّٰه فهو أسوأ حالا ًممن عرف أنه نقص ومحنة‪ ،‬وأن مراد الل ّٰه أولى بالتقديم‬
‫منه‪ ،‬فهو يتوب منهكل وقت إلى الل ّٰه‪.‬‬

128

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Moreover, in taking subjective taste as the final arbiter one has fallen into
such corruption that only God knows, for tastes are different in themselves, of
many types, mutually varied in every way. Every group has its tastes, states, and
ecstasies in accordance with its beliefs and practices. Those who uphold the
view of unicity of being have their tastes, states, and ecstasies, which in their
belief are sufficient. Christians have their tastes in Christianity, their ecstasies
in accordance with their exercises and beliefs. Everyone who believes in something and walks on a path, be it true or false, if he disciplines himself, devoting
himself to it, adhering to it, such that it becomes established in its heart, he
finds in it spiritual states, taste, and ecstasy. Whose tastes should then be the
standards by which to judge and tell the truth from falsehood?
Here we have the master of all people of tastes and ecstasies, all unveilings
and states, the one to be specifically inspired and unveiled from the Community, [namely, ʿUmar b. al-Khaṭṭāb,] who does not turn to his taste, ecstasy, or
inspirations in anything of the matters of religion. So much so that men, women, and even Bedouins would ask of him, and when they informed him something on the authority of the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and
peace, he would not turn to his taste, ecstasy, or inspiration. Rather, he would
say, “If we did not hear this, we would have judged otherwise,” and he would
say, “O people, a man was wrong, a woman was right.”29 This is the conduct of
one who is sincere to himself and to the Community, God be pleased with him,
not like the one who deceives himself, his religion, and his community.

5

Second Principle: All Disagreements Are Judged by Scripture

The second principle is that when a disagreement transpires on any act or
spiritual state or taste, on whether it is sound or fallacious, true or false, the
obligation is to return to the proof acceptable to God and the believing servants, and that proof is the revelation from which rulings on new problems,
conditions, and occurrences are sought, presented and judged by. Whatever
it deems good, acceptable, preferable, and sound, is accepted, and whatever
it declares to be false and rejects, it is false and rejected. Whoever does not
build his knowledge, conduct, and path on this has nothing to go on, no matter
what the excuses, all he has is treachery and deception, “like a mirage in sandy
deserts, which the man parched with thirst mistakes for water; until when he
comes up to it, he finds it to be nothing: But he finds God with him, and God
will pay him his account: and God is swift in taking account” [24:39].
29

Related in al-Qurṭubī’s Tafsīr 5:99.

‫‪129‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫ثم إنه وقع من تحكيم الذوق من الفساد ما لا يعلمه إلا الل ّٰه‪ .‬فإن الأذواق مختلفة في نفسها‪،‬‬
‫كثيرة الألوان‪ ،‬متباينة أعظم التبا ين‪ .‬فكل طائفة لهم أذواق وأحوال ومواجيد بحسب معتقداتهم‬
‫وسلوكهم‪ .‬فالقائلون بوحدة الوجود لهم ذوق وحال ووجد في معتقدهم بحسبه‪ ،‬والنصارى لهم‬
‫ذوق في النصرانية ووجد بحسب ر ياضتهم وعقائدهم‪ ،‬وكل من اعتقد شيئا ًوسلك سلوكا ًحقا ًكان‬
‫أو باطلا ً—فإنه إذا ارتاض وتجرد ولزمه‪ ،‬وتمكن من قلبه‪ ،‬بقي له فيه حال وذوق ووجد‪ .‬فبذوق‬
‫من توزن الحقائق إذن‪ ،‬و يعرف الحق من الباطل؟‬
‫وهذا سيد أهل الأذواق والمواجيد‪ ،‬والـكشوف والأحوال‪ ،‬من هذه الأمة المحدث المكاشف‪،‬‬
‫لا يلتفت إلى ذوقه ووجده ومخاطباته في شيء من أمور الدين حتى ينشد عنه الرجال والنساء‬
‫والأعراب‪ .‬فإذا أخبروه عن رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ بشيء لم يلتفت إلى ذوقه ولا إلى وجده وخطابه‪ ،‬بل‬
‫يقول‪ :‬لو لم ي ُسمع هذا لقضينا بغيره‪ ،‬و يقول‪» :‬أيها الناس رجل أخطأ وامرأة أصابت«‪ .‬فهذا فعل‬
‫الناصح لنفسه وللأمة رضي الل ّٰه عنه‪ ،‬ليس كفعل من غش نفسه والدين والأمة‪.‬‬

‫القاعدة الثانية‪ :‬أنه إذا وقع النزاع في حكم فعل من الأفعال أو حال من الأحوال أو ذوق من الأذواق‬
‫هل هو صحيح أو فاسد وحق أو باطل‪ ،‬وجب الرجوع فيه إلى الحجة المقبولة عند الل ّٰه وعند عباده‬
‫المؤمنين‪ .‬وهو وحيه الذي ٺ ُت َلقى أحكام النوازل والأحوال والواردات منه‪ ،‬وتعرض عليه وتوزن به‪،‬‬
‫فما زكاه منها وقبله ورجحه وصححه فهو المقبول‪ ،‬وما أبطله ورده فهو الباطل المردود‪ ،‬ومن لم يبن على‬
‫يح ْسَبهُ ُ‬
‫ب ب ِق ِيع َة ٍ َ‬
‫كس َر َا ٍ‬
‫هذا الأصل علمه وسلوكه‪ ،‬فليس على شيء وإن وإن‪ .‬وإنما معه خدع وغرور ﴿ َ‬
‫ب﴾ ]النور‪.[39:‬‬
‫شي ْئ ًا و َو َج َد َ ال َل ّـه َ عِند َه ُ فوَ فَ َ ّاه و َال َل ّـه ُ س َر ِ يُع اْلح ِسَا ِ‬
‫يج ِْده ُ َ‬
‫ح َت ّى ِإذ َا ج َاء َه ُ ل َْم َ‬
‫ظْمآنُ م َاء َ‬
‫ال َ ّ‬
‫ً ٰ‬

130
6

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Third Principle: The Weighing of Harm and Benefit

The third principle is that when any seeker or seeker is confused about the judgment of a thing with respect to its permissibility or otherwise, he should look
at its harm, benefit, and end; if its harm is clearly preponderant, it is impossible for the Lawgiver to command or permit it; indeed, one knows for certain
its impermissibility in the Law. Especially if it happens to be a way that leads
to God and His Messenger’s displeasure—being both a bridge and a ladder to
[the displeasure], and its forerunner and agent. No men of insight doubt its
prohibition. How could it be imagined of the All-wise and All-knowing that He
would prohibit of an intoxicant so much as a needle’s head because it drives the
ego to intoxication which leads to prohibited things, but then permit what is a
far greater tempter of the selves to the prohibited? For singing, as Ibn Masʿūd,
God have mercy on him, said, is the ladder to fornication and adultery. People
have seen that it does not afflict a young man without him becoming corrupt,
nor a woman without her becoming wanton, nor a young man or an old man
without many, many afflictions. What one sees leaves no need of theoretical
demonstration, especially when the entire assemblage that most seductively
drives the selves to sin {and wickedness, is brought together in a desired fashion, by way of place and possibility, with cohorts and brothers}, and musical
instruments, with sticks and tambours and strings and harps. The vocalist with
a melodious voice accompanied by handsome beardless men or women sings
of erotic love, reunion, rejection, and abandonment.
Goblets of desire pass among them
not a single one of them will you find in his senses
Everyone to the extent of his drink
has responded to seductive desire
They are bent with drunkenness
and not just for having drunk the mother of all seduction
The cupbearer runs between them
they prefer no other cupbearer
He ripped off their hearts such that
robes to him seemed too concealing
They did not wake up until there came to them the caller of the meeting
respond, for each one among you meets his Lord in the state he is in
Then only will you know whether a cesspit
you drank from with your boon companions or a pure drink
By God, doubtless you will know that before the meeting you were/are
aware
you must one day awaken either here or there, so be pleased

‫‪131‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫القاعدة الثالثة‪ :‬إذا أشكل على الناظر أو السالك حكم شيء هل هو الإ باحة أو التحر يم‪ ،‬فلينظر إلى‬
‫مفسدته وثمرته وغايته‪ .‬فإن كان مشتملا ًعلى مفسدة راجحة ظاهرة‪ ،‬فإنه يستحيل على الشارع الأمر‬
‫به أو إ باحته‪ ،‬بل العلم بتحر يمه من شرعه قطعي‪ ،‬ولا سيما إذا كان طر يقا ً مفضيا ً إلى ما يبغضه الل ّٰه‬
‫ورسوله‪ ،‬موصلا ً إليه عن قرب‪ ،‬وهو رقية له ورائد و بر يد‪ .‬فهذا لا يشك في تحر يمه أولو البصا ئر‪.‬‬
‫فكيف يظن بالحكيم الخبير أن يحرم مثل رأس الإ برة من المسكر‪ ،‬لأنه يسوق النفس إلى السكر الذي‬
‫يسوقها إلى المحرمات‪ ،‬ثم يبيح ما هو أعظم سوقا لً لنفوس إلى المحرم بكثير؟ فإن الغناء—كما قال ا بن‬
‫مسعود رضي الل ّٰه عنه—هو »رقية الزنا«‪.‬‬
‫وقد شاهد الناس أنه ما عاناه صبي إلا وفسد‪ ،‬ولا امرأة إلا و بغت‪ ،‬ولا شاب إلا وإلا‪ ،‬ولا شيخ‬
‫إلا وإلا‪ ،‬والعيان من ذلك يغني عن البرهان‪ ،‬ولا سيما إذا جمع هيئة ً تحدو النفوس أعظم حدو إلى‬
‫المعصية ]والفجور‪ ،‬بأن يكون على الوجه الذي ينبغي من المكان والإمكان‪ ،‬والعشراء والإخوان[‪،‬‬
‫وآلات المعازف من اليراع والدف والأوتار والعيدان‪ ،‬وكان القوال شاديا ً شجي الصوت‪ ،‬لطيف‬
‫الشمائل من المردان أو النسوان‪ ،‬وكان القول في العشق والوصال‪ ،‬والصد والهجران‪.‬‬

‫ودارت كؤوس الهوى بينهم‬

‫فلست ترى فيهم صاحيا‬

‫فكل على قدر مشرو به‬

‫وكل أجاب الهوى الداعيا‬

‫فمالوا سكارى ولا سكر من‬

‫تناول أم الهوى خاليا‬

‫وجاٍر على القوم ساقيهم‬

‫ولم يؤثروا غيره ساقيا‬

‫فمزق منهم قلو با غدت‬

‫لباسا عليه يرُ ى ضافيا‬

‫فلم يستفيقوا إلى أن أتى‬

‫إليهم منادي اللقا داعيا‬

‫أجيبوا فكل امرىء منكم‬

‫على حاله ر َب ّه لاقيا‬

‫حمأة‬

‫شر بت مع القوم أم صافيا‬

‫وتالل ّٰه لا بد قبل اللقا‬

‫ستعلم ذا إن تك واعيا‬

‫لا بد تصحو فإما هنا‬

‫وإما هناك فكن راضيا‬

‫هنالك‬

‫تعلم‬

‫من‬

132
7

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Spiritual Taste

If one must turn to spiritual taste for judgment, let us turn to a taste that neither
you nor we can refuse, setting aside all these tastes that we have mentioned.
The heart experiences two states: grief and sorrow over what has been lost,
and delight and joy over what is present. Accordingly, it has two kinds of worship. Its worship corresponding to the first state is the worship of contentment,
which is for the forerunners, and patience, which is for the companions of the
right hand. Its worship corresponding to the second state is the worship of
gratitude, and the grateful too are of two kinds, the forerunners and the companions of the right hand. [The heart] is cut off from those two kinds of worship
by two rash and wicked voices that are from Satan and not from the Merciful,
the voice of screaming and wailing upon grief and loss of a dear one, and the
voice of diversion, music, and singing upon delight over the attainment of what
one desires. Satan has thus replaced those two kinds of worship with these two
voices. The Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, pointed to this meaning in the tradition of Anas, God be pleased with him, “I have been forbidden
two senseless and wicked voices, the voice of wailing over a calamity and the
voice of reed pipe upon a blessing.”30
This agrees with the pleasure, desire, and delight of the ego, and those emotions are excited in him until those deficient in the portion of the Prophetic
light begin to worship through them. Such are those who have drunk but a little
from the Muhammadan wellspring. In addition to [this deficient knowledge],
they possessed sincerity and aspiration, and the desire to oppose the people
of misguided desires and indolence. They also saw the hardness of the hearts
of those who reject their path, the thickness of their veils, denseness of their
natures, and dullness of their souls. All this was further occasioned by the [spiritual yearning] that moved their inner self, ignited the fire of love, beckoned
their selves to their original dwellings and to the origins from where they were
captured. The aspiring, training selves on this journey always require a stimulus
to continue to move them, a caravan-leader to cheer them on. In the absence
of the Qurʾan as their stimulus, they had only singing and music to turn to.
These matters have led to them preferring samāʿ, loving it so deeply that
mountains can move from their places but not their love for it, since it is the
rouser of their aspirations, mover of their stillness, and stimulus for their inner
selves.

30

Narrated in Tirmidhī #1005 with slight variation.

‫‪133‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫وإذا لم يكن بد من المحاكمة إلى الذوق‪ ،‬فهلم نحاكمك إلى ذوق لا ننكره نحن ولا أنت‪ ،‬غير هذه‬
‫الأذواق التي ذكرناها‪.‬‬
‫فالقلب يعرض له حالتان‪ :‬حالة حزن وأسف على مفقود‪ ،‬وحالة فرح وطرب بموجود‪ .‬وله بمقتضى‬
‫هاتين الحالتين عبوديتان‪:‬‬
‫فله بمقتضى الحالة الأولى عبودية الرضاء وهي للسابقين‪ ،‬والصبر وهي لأصحاب اليمين‪.‬‬
‫وله بمقتضى الحالة الثانية عبودية الشكر‪ ،‬والشاكرون فيها أيضا نوعان‪ :‬سابقون‪ ،‬وأصحاب يمين‪.‬‬
‫فاقتطعته النفس والشيطان عن هاتين العبوديتين بصوتين أحمقين فاجر ين‪ ،‬هما للشيطألا للرحمن‪،‬‬
‫صوت الندب والنياحة عند الحزن وفوات المحبوب‪ ،‬وصوت اللهو والمزمار والغناء عند الفرح‬
‫وحصول المطلوب‪ ،‬فعوضه الشيطان بهذين الصوتين عن تلك العبوديتين‪.‬‬
‫وقد أشار النبي ﷺ إلى هذا المعنى بعينه في حديث أنس رضي الل ّٰه عنه‪» :‬إنما نهيت عن صوتين‬
‫أحمقين فاجر ين‪ :‬صوت و يل عند مصيبة‪ ،‬وصوت مزمار عند نعمة«‪.‬‬
‫ل‬
‫ووافق ذلك راحة من النفس وشهوة ولذة‪ ،‬وس َرت فيها تلك الرقائق حتى تعبد بها من ق َ ّ‬
‫نصيبه من النور النبوي‪ ،‬وقل مشر به من العين المحمدية‪ ،‬وانضاف ذلك إلى صدق وطلب‪ ،‬وإرادة‬
‫مضادة لأهل شهوات الغي وأهل البطالة‪ .‬ورأوا قساوة قلوب المنكر ين لطر يقتهم‪ ،‬وكثافة حجبهم وغلظة‬
‫طباعهم‪ ،‬وثقل أرواحهم‪ .‬وصادف ذلك تحر يكا ًلسواكنهم‪ ،‬وإيقادا لً لواع ج الحب‪ ،‬وإزعاجا لً لنفوس‬
‫إلى أوطانها الأولى ومعاهدها التي سبيت منها‪.‬‬
‫والنفوس الطالبة المرتاضة السا ئرة لا بد لها من محرك يحركها وحاد يحدوها‪ ،‬وليس لها من حادي‬
‫القرآن عوض عن حادي السماع‪ .‬فتركب من هذه الأمور إ يثار منهم للسماع ومحبة صادقة لهن تزول‬
‫الجبال عن أماكنها ولا تفارق قلو بهم‪ .‬إذ هو مثير عزماتهم‪ ،‬ومحرك سواكنهم‪ ،‬ومزع ج بواطنهم‪.‬‬

134

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The cure for one with such a condition is to gradually shift to listening to the
Qurʾan recited in beautiful voices, with attention to its meaning, reflection on
its discourse, until the love of listening to songs leaves his heart and is replaced
by the love of the Qurʾan, and he finds in it his delight, nourishment, and spiritual state and ecstasy. Only then will he know that his former passion pales in
comparison, and he will feel like the author of these lines,
I once thought that my desire knew no end
for something above which I saw naught
When we met and I saw her splendor
I realized it had only been a child’s play
That wailing contravenes patience and singing and music contravenes gratitude is a matter known by necessity [in religion], which no one can doubt
except those far away from knowledge and faith.31 For gratitude is to be occupied with obedience to God, not with a voice that is “senseless and wicked,”
that of Satan. Similarly, wailing is a contravention of patience, as ʿUmar b. alKhaṭṭāb, God be pleased with him, said of a [for-hire] wailing woman, striking
her such that her hair became uncovered, saying, “She has no sanctity: she
encourages wailing, and God has forbidden it; she discourages patience, and
God has commanded it; she tempts the living [with more grief] and hurts the
dead and sells her tears and weeps for the grief of someone else.”32
It is known to all high and low that the temptation of singing and music is a
great deal stronger than that of wailing. What we have seen—we and others—
and known by experience is that no sooner do the instruments of music and
amusement appear and become widespread among a people and they become
preoccupied with it than their enemy overtakes them and they suffer from
famine, drought, and evil rulers. The intelligent one is one who reflects on and
thinks about the occurrences in the world. And God is the helper.
Do not think that our discourse on this station is too long, for it is of great
import to the [seekers].
As for their saying, “Whoever objects to [samāʿ] has objected to such-andsuch ally [of God],” it is the argument of the riffraff. True, we say, but what
would you say if the allies of God object to allies of God? Allies of God greater
in number and higher in status before God and before the believers, nearer to
the superior centuries, have objected to them. Furthermore, infallibility is not
a condition for being God’s ally. It may be that allies of God fight with swords
31

The addition in square brackets appears in most, but not all, manuscripts, but seems to
have been a mistake. See Madārij(Ṣ), 1272.

‫‪135‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫فدواء مثل صاحب هذا الحال أن ينقل بالتدريج إلى سماع القرآن بالأصوات الطيبة‪ ،‬مع الإمعان‬
‫في تفهم معانيه‪ ،‬وتدبر خطابه قليلا ً قليلا‪ ً،‬إلى أن يخلع قلبه محبة سماع الأبيات‪ ،‬و يلبس محبة سماع‬
‫الآيات‪ .‬و يصير ذوقه وشر به وحاله ووجده فيه‪ ،‬فحينئذ يعلم هو من نفسه أنه لم يكن على شيء‪ ،‬و يتمثل‬
‫حينئذ بقول القائل‪:‬‬

‫ت أرى أن قد تناهى بي َ الهوى‬
‫وكن ُ‬

‫إلى غاية ما فوقها لي َ مطلب‬

‫حسنها‬

‫ت أني إنما كنت ألعب‬
‫ت يق ن ُ‬

‫فلما‬

‫تلاقينا‬

‫وعاينت‬

‫ومنافاة النوح للصبر والغناء والمعازف للشكر أمر معلوم بالضرورة من الدين‪ ،‬لا يمتري فيه إلا أبعد‬
‫الناس من العلم والإ يمان‪ .‬فإن الشكر إنما هو الاشتغال بطاعة الل ّٰه‪ ،‬لا بالصوت الأحمق الفاجر الذي هو‬
‫للشيطان‪ .‬وكذلك النوح ضد الصبر‪ ،‬كما قال عمر بن الخطاب رضي الل ّٰه عنه في النائحة—وقد ضر بها‬
‫حتى بدا شعرها—وقال‪» :‬لا حرمة لها‪ ،‬إنها تأمر بالجزع وقد نهى الل ّٰه عنه‪ ،‬وتنهى عن الصبر وقد أمر‬
‫الل ّٰه به‪ ،‬وتفتن الحي وتؤذي الميت‪ ،‬وتبيع ع َبرتها وتبكي بشجوِ غيرها«‪.‬‬
‫ومعلوم عند الخاصة والعامة أن فتنة سماع الغناء والمعازف أعظم من فتنة النوح بكثير‪ .‬والذي‬
‫شاهدناه—نحن وغيرنا—وعرفناه بالتجارب أنه ما ظهرت المعازف وآلات اللهو في قوم وفشت‬
‫سل ِّط عليهم العدو و بلوا بالقحط والجدب وولاة السوء‪ .‬والعاقل يتأمل أحوال‬
‫فيهم واشتغلوا بها‪ ،‬إلا ُ‬
‫العالم و ينظر‪ ،‬والل ّٰه المستعان‪.‬‬
‫ولا تستطل كلامنا في هذه المنزلة‪ ،‬فإن لها عند القوم شأنا ًعظيما‪ً.‬‬
‫وأما قولهم‪» :‬من أنكر على أهله‪ ،‬فقد أنكر على كذا وكذا ولي« فحجة عامية‪ .‬نعم ]إذا[ أنكر أولياء‬
‫الل ّٰه على أولياء الل ّٰه كان ماذا؟ فقد أنكر عليهم من أولياء الل ّٰه من هو أكثر منهم عدد ًا‪ ،‬وأعظم عند الل ّٰه‬
‫وعند المؤمنين منهم قدرا ً‪ ،‬وأقرب بالقرون المفضلة عهدا ً‪ ،‬وليس من شرط ولي الل ّٰه العصمة‪ .‬وقد‬

‫‪It was common for those who were mourning a loss to hire wailers on their behalf to‬‬
‫‪demonstrate the extent of their grief.‬‬

‫‪32‬‬

136

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

opposite each other in a battle, and when some of them marched upon others,
it was said, “Some people of the Garden have marched upon the people of the
Garden.” That one who commits what is prohibited or disliked, either due to
a flawed interpretation or in disobedience, is an ally of God does not prevent
us from objecting to him, nor does it deprive him of being an ally of God the
Exalted.
But far, very far, be it from one of the early allies of God that they would
attend one of these innovated concerts, consisting as they do of the [aforementioned] form that tempts the hearts worse than the temptation of the drink.
Far be the allies of God from that! The hearing concerning which the shaykhs
have disagreed is their gathering in one place, remembering God and reciting
something from the Qurʾan; then some vocalist would sing some ascetic poetry
denigrating this world and encouraging [the longing for] the meeting of God
the exalted and his love, his fear and his hope and the abode of the afterlife,
drawing their attention to the treachery or heedlessness or distance or severance in their states, lamenting what they lost or compensating for what they
missed, or fulfilling promises or affirming them, or remembering ache and longing, or the fear of separation or rejection, and the like.
This is the listening concerning which they have disagreed, not the listening
of whistling and clapping, music and wine poetry, infatuation with beautiful figures of beardless youth and women, mentioning their beauty, and their
reunion and separation. If any intelligent person were to be asked about this,
he would declare its prohibition, and know that the Law did not come to permit
it, and that there is nothing more harmful for the people than this, nor more
detrimental to their intelligence, hearts, religion, wealth, children, and women.

8

Levels of Audition

The author of al-Manāzil said,
The listening is of three levels. The listening of the commoners, which
comprises three things: responding to the rebuke of the warning with
[desire]33 and responding to the call of the promise with exertion, and
getting to witness the favor with insight.

33

Ibn al-Qayyim reads it raghba, longing or desire, and interprets it as obedience; al-Harawī’s
text has it raʿah, which is discomfort with and avoidance of sins, and more appropriate in
the context.

‫‪137‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫تقاتل أولياء الل ّٰه في صفين بالسيوف ولما سار بعضهم إلى بعض كان يقال‪ :‬سار أهل الجنة إلى أهل‬
‫الجنة‪ .‬وكون ولي الل ّٰه يرتكب المحظور والمكروه متأولا ًأو‬
‫عاصيا ً لا يمنع ذلك الإنكار عليه‪ ،‬ولا يخرجه عن أصل ولاية الل ّٰه تعالى‪ ،‬وهيهات هيهات أن‬
‫يكون أحد من أولياء الل ّٰه المتقدمين حضر هذا السماع المحدث المشتمل على هذه الهيئة التي تفتن‬
‫القلوب أعظم من فتنة المشروب‪ ،‬حاشا أولياء الل ّٰه من ذلك‪ .‬وإنما السماع الذي اختلف فيه مشايخ‬
‫القوم‪ ،‬اجتماعهم في مكان خال من الأغيار يذكرون الل ّٰه‪ ،‬و يتلون شيئا ً من القرآن‪ ،‬ثم يقوم بينهم‬
‫قو ّال ينشدهم شيئا ًمن الأشعار المزهدة في الدنيا‪ ،‬المرغبة في لقاء الل ّٰه تعالى ومحبته‪ ،‬وخوفه ورجائه‪،‬‬
‫والدار الآخرة‪ ،‬و ينبههم على بعض أحوالهم من غ َْدرة أو غفلة‪ ،‬أو بعُ د أو انقطاع‪ ،‬أو تأسف على‬
‫فائت‪ ،‬أو تدارك لفارط‪ ،‬أو وفاء بعهد‪ ،‬أو تصديق بوعد‪ ،‬أو ذكر قلق وشوق‪ ،‬أو خوف فرقة أو صد‪،‬‬
‫وما جرى هذا المجرى‪.‬‬
‫فهذا السماع الذي اختلف فيه القوم‪ ،‬لا سماع المكاء والتصدية والمعازف والخمار يات‪ ،‬وعشق‬
‫الصور من المردان والنسوان‪ ،‬وذكر محاسنها ووصالها وهجرانها‪ .‬فهذا لو سئل عنه من سئل من أولي‬
‫العقول لقضى بتحر يمه‪ ،‬وعلم أن الشرع لا يأتي بإ باحته‪ ،‬وأنه ليس على الناس أض ُر ّ منه‪ ،‬ولا أفسد‬
‫لعقولهم وقلو بهم وأديانهم وأموالهم وأولادهم وحر يمهم منه‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل‪» :‬السماع على ثلاث درجات‪ :‬سماع العامة وهو ثلاثة أشياء‪ :‬إجابة زجر الوعيد‬
‫رغبة ً‪ ،‬وإجابة دعوة الوعد جهدا ً‪ ،‬و بلوغ مشاهدة المنِة استبصارا ً«‪.‬‬

138

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The “warning” is against abandoning the commanded and committing the
prohibited, and “responding to its caller” is to act in obedience. His saying
“desire” means obedience motivated by God being the issuer of the command,
the prohibition, and the promise. The reality of desire is hope and fear; thus one
does what he is commanded by the light of faith, hoping for reward, and gives
up what he is prohibited from by the light of faith, fearing the punishment.
Desire has another basis, which is that the act under its purview is the act
of choice and longing, not the act of one who dislikes doing it, as if watching
himself being driven to death.
As for “responding to the promise with exertion,” it is to conform to the command seeking what is promised, exerting oneself to that end, employing his
best faculties.
As for “getting to observing the favors with insight,” it is the recognition of
the listener, while listening, of the fact all that has come to him of good is from
God’s favor and grace on him, without his deserving it, not a return that his
efforts caused. As the Exalted said, “They impress on you as a favor that they
have embraced Islam. Say, ‘Count not your Islam as a favor upon me: Nay, God
has conferred a favor upon you that He has guided you to the faith, if you are
truthful’” [59:17].
He similarly witnessed that what has been kept from him of this world, or
what has afflicted him of harm and distress, that too is a favor from God in a
number of ways, as it brings out right thinking. As one of the Predecessors said,
“O son of Adam, you do not know which of the two blessings is better for you:
His blessing upon you by giving you or His blessing upon you by leaving you
out.”34
When touched by felicity he followed it by gratitude
When touched with harm, he responded with patience
Both are for him but a blessing which
Imagination cannot capture, nor the land and the sea
If you said: Does one see God’s favor even in what afflicts him of disobedience
and sin? I say: Yes, in fact, if accompanied by sincere repentance and righteous
deeds that erase [the sins], they are the greatest of favors upon him, as established earlier.
34

Ibn Abī al-Dunyā, Kitāb al-Shukr, ed. Yāsīn al-Sawwās and ʿAbd al-Qādir al-Arnaʾūṭ (Damascus: Dār Ibn Kathīr, 1985), 161. There is an addition in some manuscripts, noted on
Madārij(Ṣ), 1277–1278. Ibn Abī al-Dunyā (d. 281 AH) led an ascetic life and frequently taught
and wrote on moral characteristics. See A. Dietrich, “Ibn Abi ’l-Dunyā” in EI2.

‫‪139‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫الوعيد يكون على ترك المأمور وفعل المحظور‪ .‬فإجابة داعيه هو العمل بالطاعة‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬رغبة ً« يعني امتثالا لً ـكون الل ّٰه عز وجل أمر ونهى وأوعد‪.‬‬
‫وحقيقة الرغبة الخوف والرجاء‪ .‬فيفعل ما أمر به على نور الإ يمان راجيا لً لثواب‪ .‬و يترك ما نهى‬
‫عنه على نور الإ يمان‪ ،‬خائفا ًمن العقاب‪.‬‬
‫وفي الرغبة فائدة أخرى‪ ،‬وهي أن فعله يكون فعل راغب مختار لا فعل كاره‪ ،‬كأنما يساق إلى‬
‫الموت وهو ينظر‪.‬‬
‫وأما إجابة الوعد جهدا ً فهو امتثال الأمر طلبا ً للوصول إلى الموعود به‪ ،‬باذلا ً جهده في ذلك‪،‬‬
‫مستفرغا ًفيه قواه‪.‬‬
‫وأما بلوغ مشاهدة المنة استبصارا ً فهو تنبه السامع في سماعه إلى أن جميع ما وصله من خير فمن‬
‫منة الل ّٰه عليه وتفضله عليه‪ ،‬من غير استحقاق منه ولا بذل عوض استوجب به ذلك‪ .‬كما قال تعالى‪:‬‬
‫كنت ُم ْ‬
‫ن ِإن ُ‬
‫ل ال َل ّـه ُ ي َم ُُّن ع َل َي ْك ُْم َأْن ه َد َاك ُْم ل ِل ِْإ يم َا ِ‬
‫﴿ي َم ُ ُن ّونَ ع َل َي ْ َ‬
‫ك َأْن َأْسل َموُ ا ۖ ق ُل َلّا ت َم ُ ُن ّوا ع َليََ ّ ِإْسل َام َك ُم ۖ ب َ ِ‬
‫صادِقيِ نَ﴾ ]الحجرات‪.[17:‬‬
‫َ‬
‫وكذلك يشهد أن ما زوي عنه من الدنيا أو ما لحقه منها من ضرٍّ وأذى فهو منة ٌ أيضا ًمن الل ّٰه عليه من‬
‫وجوهكثيرة‪ ،‬يستخرجها الفكر الصحيح‪ ،‬كما قال بعض السلف‪» :‬يا ا بن آدم‪ ،‬لا تدري أي النعمتين‬
‫عليك أفضل‪ ،‬نعمته فيما أعطاك‪ ،‬أو نعمته فيما زوى عنك«‪.‬‬

‫ب شكرها‬
‫س بالسراء أعق َ َ‬
‫إذا م َ ّ‬

‫وإن مس بالضراء أعقبها الصبر‬

‫وما منهما إلا له فيه نعمة ٌ‬

‫تضيق بها الأوهام والبر والبحر‪.‬‬

‫فإن قلت‪ :‬فهل يشهد منته فيما لحقه من المعصية والذنب؟‬
‫قلت‪ :‬نعم‪ .‬إذا اقترن بها التو بة النصوح‪ ،‬والحسنات الماحية‪ ،‬كانت من أعظم المنن عليه‪ ،‬كما تقدم‬
‫تقر يره‪.‬‬

140
9

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The Audition of the Elite

He said, “The audition of the elite comprises three things: witnessing the goal
in every sign, stopping at the objective at every moment, and ridding oneself of
any pleasure in separation.”
“The goal in every sign” is the Lord Blessed and Exalted, for all that is listened
to is to introduce Him and His Names, His deeds and judgments, His promise
and warning, His command and prohibitions, His justice and grace. This spectacle is arrived at by listening through God, for God, in God, and from God.
Listening through Him means that one hears such that none of his own ego
remains in the hearing, and if anything remained, his total connection to what
is heard severs it, thus his listening is through His Ever-presence, divested of
any attention to himself.
As for listening for Him, it means divesting the ego in listening from any
will that opposes the will of God in his regard, and concentrating his faculties
of hearing on the attainment of God’s pleasure from what is being listened to.
As for listening in Him, it is a different matter altogether. It is to divest all that
does not behoove the Truth by way of attribution, name, description, or deed
from what befits His perfection, and to affirm for Him what befits his perfection
in what is heard and purifies Him of what does not.
This is an occasion which only those established in knowledge and inner
awareness of God can fulfill, for God disorients those given to distortion and
denial [of His words or attributes],35 including the partisans of assimilation
and likeness: “God has guided the believers concerning which they all disagreed
of the truth by His leave; God guides whomsoever He wills to a straight path”
[2:213].
As for listening from him [directly]: what can be received via a medium is a
qualified listening. As for the unqualified [listening], it cannot be hoped for in
this transient world except for those God has chosen through His messengerhood and speech. But listening to His speech is like listening to Him, for [the
Qurʾan] is His speech that He has uttered in reality, and whosoever hears it as
if he has heard God.
This is the real listening from God, not the listening of the kind claimed by
men of fantasies, as one of them said [claiming about God], “He called to me
inwardly” or “He addressed me” or “He said to me.” I wonder who exactly is
the one calling to you? Who exactly is the one addressing you, O deceived and
conceited one? And how do you know? Are these voices from the Satan or the
Merciful? What is the evidence that it is God who is addressing you?
35

The people of distortion and denial are referring to two technical categories of people,

‫‪141‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬وسماع الخاصة ثلاثة أشياء‪ :‬شهود المقصود في كل رمز‪ ،‬والوقوف على الغاية في كل حين‪،‬‬
‫والخلاص من التلذذ بالتفرق«‪.‬‬
‫المقصود في كل رمز هو الرب تبارك وتعالى‪ ،‬فإن المسموع كله يعرف به و بصفاته‪ ،‬وأسمائه وأفعاله‬
‫وأحكامه‪ ،‬ووعده ووعيده‪ ،‬وأمره ونهيه‪ ،‬وعدله وفضله‪ .‬وهذا الشهود ينال بالسماع بالل ّٰه ولل ّٰه وفي الل ّٰه‬
‫ومن الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫أما السماع به‪ ،‬فألا يسمع وفيه بقية من نفسه‪ .‬فإن كانت فيه بقية قطعها كمال تعلقه بالمسموع‪،‬‬
‫فيكون سماعه بقيوميته مجردا ً من التفاته إلى نفسه‪.‬‬
‫وأما السماع له‪ ،‬فأن يجرد النفس في السماع من كل إرادة تزاحم مراد الل ّٰه منه‪ ،‬و يجمع قوى‬
‫سمعه ]على[ تحصيل مراد الل ّٰه من المسموع‪.‬‬
‫وأما السماع فيه فشأن آخر‪ .‬وهو تجر يد ما لا يليق نسبته إلى الحق من وصف‪ ،‬أو سمة أو نعت أو‬
‫فعل مما هو لائق بكماله‪ .‬فيثبت له ما يليق بكماله من المسموع‪ ،‬و ينزهه عما لا يليق به‪.‬‬
‫وهذا الموضع لم يتخلص فيه إلا الراسخون في العلم والمعرفة بالل ّٰه‪ .‬وأضل الل ّٰه عنه أهل التحر يف‬
‫ق بإِ ْذن ِه ِ ۗ و َال َل ّـه ُ‬
‫ن اْلح َ ّ ِ‬
‫خت َلفَ ُوا فيِ ه ِ م ِ َ‬
‫ن آم َنوُ ا لم ِ َا ا ْ‬
‫والتعطيل وأهل التشبيه والتمثيل‪﴿ ،‬فهَ َد َى ال َل ّـه ُ ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ستقَ ِيٍم﴾ ]البقرة‪.[213:‬‬
‫ط ُمّ ْ‬
‫يَه ْدِي م َن ي َش َاء ُ ِإل َى ٰ ص ِر َا ٍ‬
‫وأما السماع منه‪ ،‬فإنما يتصور بواسطة‪ ،‬فهو سماع مقيد‪ .‬وأما المطلق فلا مطمع فيه في عالم الفناء‬
‫إلا لمن اختصه الل ّٰه برسالاته و بكلامه‪ .‬ولـكن السماع لكلامهكالسماع منه‪ ،‬فإنهكلامه الذي تكلم به‬
‫حقا‪ ً،‬فمن سمعه فليقدر نفسهكأنه يسمعه من الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫هذا هو السماع من الل ّٰه‪ ،‬لا سماع أر باب الخيال ودعوى المحال‪ ،‬القائل أحدهم‪» :‬ناداني في سري‬
‫وخاطبني وقال لي«‪.‬‬
‫يا ليت شعري من المنادي لك ومن المخاطب‪ ،‬يا مخدوع يا مغرور؟ فما يدر يك‪ ،‬أنداء شيطاني أم‬
‫رحماني؟ وما البرهان على أن المخاطب لك هو الرحمن؟‬

‫‪ahl al-taḥrīf wa-l-taʿṭīl. The former group is accused of altering or distorting the words of‬‬
‫‪God, as has been accused of the Christians and Jews in the Qurʾan (see Q. 4:46, 5:13, etc.).‬‬
‫‪Those of denial, on the other hand, argue that God cannot be qualified with any attributes‬‬
‫‪shared by humans.‬‬

142

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Yes, we do not deny [in principle the fact of] the calling, addressing, and
inspiration [from God]. The problem is the one being called on, addressed, and
inspired; that is where some reflection is due.
In general, whoever has the Qurʾan recited to him should consider himself
as if having listened to God addressing him through it. If this occurs to him
along with the listening through Him, for Him, and in Him, [he will find that]
the meanings, subtleties, and wonders of what he hears rush to his heart, all
brought near to him so he may pick whatever he wishes from knowledge and
wisdom, inner knowledge and insight, and guidance and lessons.
As for “stopping and reflecting at the objective at every moment,” it is the
seeking and journeying to the ultimate, desired, end to which his hearing is a
means, and that end is the Truth the Glorified. For He is the end of all search,
“And that to your Lord is the goal” [53:42]. There is nothing sought beyond God,
nor short of Him any resting place, nor do eyes cool except in Him; everything
sought other than Him is a vanishing shadow, a fleeting fantasy; if one enjoys
it, it is a thing of deception.
As for “ridding oneself of taking pleasure in separation,” it means that separation in the meanings of what is heard, and the passing of the heart between
its stations causes it pleasure, as it is well-known for transitions. He does away
with the pleasure of transition, as it is his indulgence, in favor of concentration
on what is being heard [making it truly] by Him, from Him, and for Him.
The Shaykh, God have mercy on him, did not say, “ridding oneself of separation” for the meanings of what is heard [from the Qurʾan] are comprehended
and understood only through separation due to its variety; hence he should
erase its pleasure, not it [in itself], so that it does not become part of his indulgence. This is the subtlest of the states of the sincere listeners.

10

The Audition of the Elite of the Elite

He said, “The audition of the elite of the elite is the listening that removes
defects from the unveiling, connects the pre-eternal36 (what has always been)
to the sempiternal (what will always be), and returns the endings to the beginning.”
36

The Arabic pair of words azal (what has always been) and abad (what will always be)
has no exact match in English. The Western philosophical tradition has come to distinguish two concepts of eternity and sempiternity: “The English word ‘eternal’ comes from
aeturnus in Latin, itself a derivation from aevum, an age or time. So ‘eternity’ means everlastingness. However, in the course of philosophical discussion the idea of everlastingness

‫‪143‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫نعم‪ ،‬نحن لا ننكر النداء والخطاب والحديث‪ ،‬وإنما الشأن في المنادي المخاطب المحدث‪ ،‬فهاهنا‬
‫تسكب العبرات‪.‬‬
‫و بالجملة‪ ،‬فمن قريء عليه القرآن فليقدر نفسهكأنما يسمعه من الل ّٰه يخاطبه به‪ ،‬فإذا حصل له—مع‬
‫ذلك—السماع به وله وفيه‪ ،‬ازدحمت معاني المسموع ولطائفه وعجائبه على قلبه‪ ،‬وازدلفت إليه بأيها‬
‫يبدأ‪ ،‬فما شئت من علم وحكم‪ ،‬وتعرف و بصيرة‪ ،‬وهداية وعبرة‪.‬‬
‫وأما الوقوف على الغاية في كل حين فهو التطلب والسفر إلى الغاية المقصودة بالمسموع الذي جعل‬
‫ك ال ْم ُنت ََهى﴾ ]النجم‪ ،[42:‬وليس وراء‬
‫ن ِإل َى ٰ ر َب ِّ َ‬
‫وسيلة إً ليها‪ ،‬وهو الحق سبحانه‪ .‬فإنه غايةكل طلب ﴿و َ َأ َ ّ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫الل ّٰه مرمى ولا دونه مستقر‪ ،‬ولا تقر العين بغيره البتة‪ .‬فكل مطلوب سواه فظل زائل وخيال مفارق‪،‬‬
‫وإن تمتع به صاحبه فمتاع الغرور‪.‬‬
‫وأما الخلاص من التلذذ بالتفرق‪ ،‬فالتفرق في معاني المسموع وتنقل القلب في منازلها يوجب له‬
‫لذة ً‪ ،‬كما هو المألوف في الانتقال‪ .‬فيتخلص من لذة تفرقه التي هي حظه‪ ،‬إلى الجمعية على المسموع به‬
‫ومنه وله‪.‬‬
‫ولم يقل الشيخ—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪» :‬الخلاص من التفرق«‪ .‬فإن المسموع إنما يدرك معناه و يفهم‬
‫بالتفرق لتنوعه‪ ،‬ولـكن ليتخلص من لذته لا منه‪ ،‬لئلا يكون مع حظه‪ ،‬وهذا من ألطف أحوال‬
‫السامعين المخلصين‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬وسماع خاصة الخاصة‪ :‬سماع ينفي العلل عن الـكشف‪ ،‬و يصل الأبد إلى الأزل‪ ،‬و يرد النهايات‬
‫إلى الأول«‪.‬‬

‫‪has been further refined, and two contrasting concepts can be denoted by it. It is usual to‬‬
‫‪make the contrast clear by calling one of these ‘eternity’ or ‘atemporality’ and the other‬‬
‫‪‘sempiternity’ or ‘everlastingness’” (http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/eternity/). These are‬‬
‫‪different kinds of distinctions. We shall call azal pre-eternity, and abad sempiternity.‬‬

144

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

“Unveiling” means the encounter of the heart to the reality of what has been
heard, and it has two [potential] defects. The first is doubt, which obviates
this encounter; [the attainment of this station is that] there must remain no
doubt, and this is the sight of certitude. The second is the negation of media
between the listener and the one being listened to, such that they vanish for
him into what is being listened to, and he is annihilated from witnessing them,
and annihilated from witnessing his annihilation, such that he, the listener, not
the medium, becomes the witness. He is the guide,37 the listening is from Him,
as is the guidance, and the beginning, and to Him is the end.
As for connecting “the sempiternity to preeternity,” its meaning, if we take it
literally, is impossible, for sempiternity and preeternity are mirror opposites,
and the meeting of one to the other is impossible. His meaning, instead, is
that what is present eternally in existence and witnessing was existent in preeternity, known and predetermined, thus the judgment of [whatever will take
place forever] returns to preeternity in knowledge and reality; thus what has
always been becomes what will always be, just as what will always be has always
been present in knowledge and judgment. To elaborate on that: in sempiternity
appears what was hidden in preeternity, thus everything ends in His knowledge, judgment, and wisdom, and that is preeternal. This is of a piece with
returning endings to their beginning, such that the end becomes the same as
what has passed. God the Exalted is the First and the Last; all that was and will
be is returned to His preexisting knowledge and judgment. Thus, sempiternity
returns to preeternity, and ends to the beginning, and God knows best.

37

Most of the manuscripts state al-hādī (“the guide”), which is more appropriate than the
choice by the editors of Madārij(Ṣ), al-bādī (“the evident”). See Madārij(Ṣ), 1283.

‫‪145‬‬

‫‪chapter 10‬‬

‫فالـكشف هو مكافحة القلب لحقيقة المسموع‪ .‬وعلله أمران‪:‬‬
‫شبه التي تنتفي بهذه المكافحة‪ ،‬فلا تبقى معها شبهة‪ .‬وهذا هو عين اليقين‪.‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬ال ُ ّ‬
‫والثاني‪ :‬نفي الوسائط بين السامع والمسموع‪ .‬فيغيب بمسموعه عنها و يفنى عن شهودها‪ ،‬و يفنى عن‬
‫شهود فنائه عنها بحيث يشهده هو المسمع لا الواسطة‪ ،‬وهو البادي‪ ،‬فمنه الإسماع ومنه الهداية‪ ،‬ومنه‬
‫الابتداء وإليه الانتهاء‪ .‬وأما وصله الأبد إلى الأزل‪ ،‬فهذا—إن أخذ على ظاهره—فهو محال‪ ،‬لأن‬
‫الأبد والأزل متقابلان تقابل التناقض‪ ،‬فاتصال أحدهما بالآخر عين المحال‪ .‬وإنما مراده أن ما يكون‬
‫في الأبد موجودا ًمشهودا ًفقد كان في الأزل معلوما ًمقدرا ً‪ ،‬فعاد حكم الأبد إلى الأزل علما ًوحقيقة ً‪،‬‬
‫وصار الأزلي أبديا ًكما كان الأبدي أزليا ًفي العلم والحكم‪.‬‬
‫وإيضاح ذلك أن الأبد ظهر فيه ما كان في الأزل خافيا‪ ً،‬فانتهى الأمر كله إلى علمه وحكمه‬
‫وحكمته‪ ،‬وذلك أزلي‪ .‬وهذا هو رد النهايات إلى الأول‪ ،‬فتصير الخاتمة هي عين السابقة‪ ،‬والل ّٰه تعالى‬
‫هو الأول والآخر‪ ،‬وكل ما كان و يكون آخرا فً مردود إلى سابق علمه وحكمه‪ .‬فرجع الأبد إلى الأزل‪،‬‬
‫والنهايات إلى الأول‪ ،‬والل ّٰه أعلم‪.‬‬

chapter 11

The Station of Grief
From among the stations of “You we worship and You we supplicate for help”
is the station of grief.1
It is not one of the stations that is sought nor is its attainment a command,
even if the seeker cannot avoid it. Grief has not come in the Qurʾan except in
a prohibition or negation. As in the words of the Exalted, “Faint not nor grieve,
for you will overcome them if you are [indeed] believers” [3:139], and “Grieve
not over them” [16:127] in more than one place, and “Grieve not: God is with
us” [9:40]. In negation, it appears in the words of the Exalted, “There shall be
no fear upon them nor shall they grieve” [2:38]. The wisdom in this [absence]
is that grief is a station that is not easy, and it has no benefit for the heart;
the dearest thing to the Satan is to afflict the servant with grief to cut him off
from his path and halt his journey. The Exalted has said, “Secret counsels are
only [inspired] by the Satan, in order that he may cause grief to the believers”
[58:10]. The Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, prohibited three people “that the two of them whisper leaving out the third for that would grieve
him.”2
Grief, therefore, is not sought after or intended, nor is there benefit in it, and
the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, has sought protection from it:
“O God, I seek your refuge from anxiety and grief”:3 [grief] being the companion of anxiety. The difference between them is that the affliction that visits the
heart if it is in the future it generates anxiety, and if it has passed it is grief; both
of them enervate the heart and exhaust the determination.
Nevertheless, visiting this station is a necessity in real life. The people of the
Garden will say upon entering it, “Praise is to God who has removed all grief
from us” [35:34]. This shows that they were afflicted with grief in this world, as
with all other afflictions, without their choice.
As for the words of the Exalted, “Nor [is there blame] on those who came to
you to be provided with mounts, and when you said, ‘I can find no mounts for
you,’ they turned back, their eyes streaming with tears of grief that they could
not find the means to spend” [9:92]; they were not praised for the grief itself,
but for what led them to grief, due to the intensity of their faith, that they were

1 The verbal noun of ḥ-z-n is vocalized in Arabic both as ḥuzn and ḥazan, and appears in both
forms in the Qurʾan, see e.g. 9:92, 12:84.

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬الحزن«‪.‬‬
‫وليست من المنازل المطلو بة ولا المأمور بنزولها‪ ،‬وإن كألا بد للسالك من نزولها‪ .‬ولم يأت »الحزن«‬
‫في القرآن إلا منهيا ًعنه أو منفيا‪ً.‬‬
‫تح ْز َْن ع َليَ ْه ِْم﴾‬
‫تح ْز َنوُ ا﴾ ]آل عمران‪ ،[139:‬وقوله‪﴿ :‬و َل َا َ‬
‫فالنهي كقوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َل َا تَه ِنوُ ا و َل َا َ‬
‫ن ال َل ّـه َ م َعنَ َا﴾ ]التو بة‪ .[40:‬والمنفي كقوله‪﴿ :‬ف َل َا‬
‫تح ْز َْن ِإ َ ّ‬
‫]النحل‪ [127:‬في غير موضع‪ ،‬وقوله‪﴿ :‬ل َا َ‬
‫يح ْز َنوُ نَ﴾ ]البقرة‪.[38:‬‬
‫ف ع َليَ ْه ِْم و َل َا ه ُْم َ‬
‫خو ْ ٌ‬
‫َ‬
‫وسر ذلك أن »الحزن« موقف غير مسير ولا مصلحة فيه للقلب‪ .‬وأحب شيء إلى الشيطان أن‬
‫ن‬
‫ن ل ِي َْحز ُنَ ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫شي ْطَا ِ‬
‫ن ال َ ّ‬
‫يحزن العبد ليقطعه عن سيره و يوقفه عن سلوكه‪ .‬قال تعالى‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َن ّم َا ال َن ّْجو َى م ِ َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫آم َنوُ ا﴾ ]المجادلة‪.[10:‬‬
‫ونهى النبي ﷺ الثلاثة‪» :‬أن يتناجى اثنان منهم دون الثالث‪ ،‬لأن ذلك يحزنه«‪ .‬فالحزن ليس‬
‫بمطلوب ولا مقصود ولا فيه فائدة‪ .‬وقد استعاذ منه النبي ﷺ فقال‪» :‬اللهم إني أعوذ بك من الهم‬
‫والحزن«‪ ،‬فهو قر ين الهم‪.‬‬
‫والفرق بينهما أن المكروه الذي يرد على القلب‪ ،‬إن كان لما يستقبل أورثه الهم‪ ،‬وإن كان لما مضى‬
‫أورثه الحزن‪ .‬وكلاهما مضعف للقلب مفتر للعزم‪ .‬ولـكن نزول منزلته ضرور ية بحسب الواقع‪ .‬ولهذا‬
‫ب ع َ َن ّا اْلح َز َنَ﴾ ]فاطر‪ .[34:‬فهذا يدل على أنهم‬
‫يقول أهل الجنة إذا دخلوها‪﴿ :‬اْلحم َ ْد ُ ل َِل ّـه ِ ال َ ّذ ِي َأْذه َ َ‬
‫كان يصيبهم في الدنيا الحزن‪ ،‬كما يصيبهم سا ئر المصائب التي تجري عليهم بغير اختيارهم‪.‬‬
‫جد ُ م َا َأْحم ِلـ ُك ُْم ع َل َي ْه ِ توَ ََل ّوا َّو َأْعينُ ُه ُْم‬
‫ت ل َا َأ ِ‬
‫ن ِإذ َا م َا َأتوَ ْك َ ل ِت َْحمِلهَ ُْم قلُ ْ َ‬
‫وأما قوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َل َا ع َلىَ ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫يج ِد ُوا م َا ي ُنف ِق ُونَ﴾ ]التو بة‪ .[92:‬فلم يمدحوا على نفس الحزن‪ ،‬وإنما مدحوا‬
‫ن ال َد ّْمِع ح َز َناً َأ َلّا َ‬
‫ض مِ َ‬
‫تفَ ِي ُ‬

‫‪2 Bukhārī #6277, #6290; Muslim #2184.‬‬
‫‪3 This is a part of the narration in Bukhārī #6363.‬‬

148

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

left behind by the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, not
having the means [to procure a ride]. In this there is exposure of the hypocrites
who neither grieved for staying behind nor desired to be like the others who
could.
As for his words, God grant him blessing and peace, in a sound tradition,
“Nothing afflicts a believer, be it anxiety, exhaustion, or grief, except that God
expiates his sins by it,”4 they point to its being an affliction that God gives to his
servants through which his sins are erased; it does not prove that it is a station
that should be sought and dwelt upon.
Furthermore, the tradition of Hind b. Abī Hāla in describing the Prophet,
God grant him blessing and peace: “He was constantly in grief”5 is a tradition
without basis, for in its chain there are unknown [narrators]. Furthermore, how
could he be continuously aggrieved when God had protected him from grieving
for the world and its causes, prohibited him from grieving about the disbelievers, forgave all his past and future sins? Where would grief come from? Rather,
he was constantly cheerful, laughing, as it appears in his description “laughing
warrior,” God’s blessings and peace be upon him.6
As for the report that “God loves every grievous heart,” it has no supporting
chain, nor is its narrator known, nor is its soundness. Even if it is supposed to
be sound, grief is a calamity like others by which God puts his servants to test,
and if the servant is patient, God loves his patience over the calamity.
As for the report, “When God loves a servant, he installs in his heart a wailer,
and if he hates a servant, he makes in his heart a reed pipe,” it is an Israelite
report. It has been said that it is in the Torah. Its meaning is correct, in the sense
that the believer is aggrieved over his sins, whereas the wicked is heedless and
lost in his play, melodious and pleased.
As for the saying of the Exalted concerning His Prophet Isrāʾīl (i.e., Jacob):
“And his eyes became white with grief, even as he suppressed [it]” [12:84], this
is mere declaration of his state that befell him upon losing his dear child, and
that He tested him with it, as He tested him with the separation between them.
The men of the path have agreed, [in any case,] that the grief of this world
is dispraised, with the exception of Abū ʿUthmān al-Ḥīrī, who said, “Grief of
every kind is a grace and increase for the believer, so long as it does not cause
disobedience.” He further said, “[It is so] because even if it does not lead one
to be an elect [of God], it at least causes purification.”7 It would be said to him:
No doubt that it is a trial and a test from God, of a piece with sickness, anxiety,
and humiliation; but a station of the path it is not.
4 Bukhārī #5640; Muslim #2573.
5 Recorded by Tirmidhī, al-Ṭabarānī, and Ibn Saʿd. See Madārij(Ṣ), 1288.

‫‪149‬‬

‫‪chapter 11‬‬

‫على ما دل عليه الحزن من قوة إ يمانهم‪ ،‬حيث تخلفوا عن رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ لعجزهم عن النفقة‪ .‬ففيه‬
‫تعر يض بالمنافقين الذين لم يحزنوا على تخلفهم‪ ،‬وغبطوا نفوسهم به‪.‬‬
‫وأما قوله ﷺ في الحديث الصحيح‪» :‬ما يصيب المؤمن من هم ولا نصب ولا حزن‪ ،‬إلا كفر الل ّٰه‬
‫به من خطاياه«‪ ،‬فهذا يدل على أنه مصيبة من الل ّٰه يصيب بها العبد‪ ،‬يكفر بها من سيئاته‪ .‬لا يدل على‬
‫أنه مقام ينبغي طلبه واستيطانه‪.‬‬
‫وأما حديث هند بن أبي هالة في صفة النبي ﷺ‪» :‬إنهكان متواصل الأحزان«‪ ،‬فحديث لا يثبت‪،‬‬
‫وفي إسناده من لا يعرف‪.‬‬
‫وكيف يكون متواصل الأحزان وقد صانه الل ّٰه عن الحزن على الدنيا وأسبابها‪ ،‬ونهاه عن الحزن‬
‫على الـكفار‪ ،‬وغفر له ما تقدم من ذنبه وما تأخر؟ فمن أ ين يأتيه الحزن؟ بل كان دائم البشر ضحوك‬
‫السن‪ ،‬كما في صفته‪» :‬الضحوك القتال« صلوات الل ّٰه وسلامه عليه‪.‬‬
‫وأما الخـبر المروي‪» :‬إن الل ّٰه يحب كل قلب حز ين«‪ ،‬فلا يعرف إسناده ولا من رواه ولا تعلم‬
‫صحته‪.‬‬
‫وعلى تقدير صحته فالحزن مصيبة من المصائب التي يبتلي الل ّٰه بها عبده‪ .‬فإذا ابتلى به العبد فصبر عليه‬
‫أحب صبره على بلائه‪.‬‬
‫وأما الأ ثر الآخر‪» :‬إذا أحب الل ّٰه عبدا ً‪ ،‬نصب في قلبه نائحة ً‪ .‬وإذا أبغض عبدا ً‪ ،‬جعل في قلبه‬
‫مزمارا ً« فأ ثر إسرائيلي‪ .‬قيل‪ :‬إنه في التوراة وله معنى صحيح‪ .‬فإن المؤمن حز ين على ذنو به‪ ،‬والفاجر‬
‫كظ ِيم ٌ﴾‬
‫ن فهَ ُو َ َ‬
‫ن اْلح ُز ْ ِ‬
‫ت ع َي ْن َاه ُ م ِ َ‬
‫ض ْ‬
‫لاه لاعب مترنم فرح‪ .‬وأما قوله تعالى عن نبيه إسرائيل‪﴿ :‬و َاب ْي َ َ ّ‬
‫]يوسف‪ ،[84:‬فهو إخبار عن حاله بمصابه بفقد ولده وحبيبه‪ ،‬وأنه ابتلاه بذلك‪ ،‬كما ابتلاه بالتفر يق‬
‫بينه و بينه‪.‬‬
‫وأجمع أر باب السلوك على أن حزن الدنيا غير محمود إلا أبا عثمان الحـيري‪ ،‬فإنه قال‪ :‬الحزن بكل‬
‫وجه فضيلة وز يادة للمؤمن‪ ،‬ما لم يكن بسبب معصية‪ .‬قال‪ :‬لأنه إن لم يوجب تخصيصا‪ ً،‬فإنه يوجب‬
‫تمحيصا‪ً.‬‬
‫فيقال‪ :‬لا ر يب أنه محنة و بلاء من الل ّٰه‪ ،‬بمنزلة المرض والهم والغم‪ .‬وأما أنه من منازل الطر يق فلا‪.‬‬
‫‪6 This statement, mentioned by the author and his teacher Ibn Taymiyya, is attributed to‬‬
‫‪Israelite scriptures, and appears in Shīʿī collections of hadith, where it is considered sound.‬‬
‫‪See al-Shaykh al-Ṣadūq, Kamāl al-dīn wa tamām al-niʿma, ed. ʿAlī Akbar al-Ghifārī (Maḍādir‬‬
‫‪al-ḥadīth al-shīʿiyya, AH 1405), 198.‬‬
‫‪7 Al-Qushayrī, al-Risāla, 139.‬‬

150
1

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Levels of Grief

The author of al-Manāzil, God have mercy on him, said,
Grief is the pain of what has been missed and sorrow over what has been
withheld.
He means that what has missed a man was either within his capacity or it was
not; if it was, it hurts to have missed it, and if it was not, it causes sorrow.
He said,
It has three levels. First, the grief of the commoners, which is to grieve
over deficiency in service, falling into betrayal, and loss of the days past.
“Deficiency in service” in the view of [the Sufis] is a higher state than failing
to perform the deeds altogether, but rather, it is a lament that accompanies the
deeds, for “service” in their view is part of good character and etiquette, not part
of the deeds, and is a right of worship and its etiquette and its obligation. The
one who grieves over this kind, of course, would be all the more aggrieved over
having lost the deed altogether.
As for “falling into betrayal,” it too is more specific than the sinfulness committed by engaging in the prohibited, for that happens due to a prior deficiency
in nearness to God the Exalted. When He is veiled from him, [the servant] falls
into betrayal. The Shaykh mentioned “grief” in the [ten-fold] division of chapters, and it is for him part of the division of “the beginnings.”8
As for the loss of bygone days, it also is of two types: losing them through the
absence of obedience in them, and losing them through the absence of causes
of faith, and taste of its sweetness, nearness, and familiarity to God, and beauty
of company with Him.
Each one of these three is of two types, for the initiates and for the intermediates, and the discourse applies to both, even though he attached it to the
latter.
He said, “The second level is the grief of the possessors of the will, and that
is grief over the attachment of the heart to the separation; over distraction of
the heart from the witnessing; and over consolation from the grief.”

8 The reference is to al-Harawī’s division of the one hundred stations into ten divisions, each
of ten stations.

‫‪151‬‬

‫‪chapter 11‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال صاحب »المنازل« رحمه الل ّٰه‪:‬‬
‫»الحزن‪ :‬توجع لفائت‪ ،‬وتأسف على ممتنع «‪.‬‬
‫ير يد أن ما يفوت الإنسان قد يكون مقدورا لً ه وقد لا يكون‪ .‬فإن كان مقدورا ً توجع لفوته‪ ،‬وإن‬
‫كان غير مقدور تأسف لامتناعه‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وله ثلاث درجات‪ :‬الأولى حزن العامة‪ .‬وهو حزن على التفر يط في الخدمة‪ ،‬وعلى التورط‬
‫في الجفاء‪ ،‬وعلى ضياع الأيام«‪.‬‬
‫التفر يط في الخدمة عندهم فوق التفر يط في العمل وتضييعه‪ ،‬بل هذا الحزن يكون مع القيام‬
‫بالعمل‪ .‬فإن الخدمة—عندهم—من باب الأخلاق والآداب لا من باب الأفعال‪ .‬وهي حق‬
‫العبودية وأدبها وواجبها‪ ،‬وصاحب هذا الحزن بالأولى أن يحزن لتضييع العمل‪ .‬وأما التورط في الجفاء‬
‫فهو أيضا ً أخص من المعصية بارتكاب المحظور‪ ،‬لأنه قد يكون بفقد أنس سابق مع الل ّٰه تعالى‪ .‬فإذا‬
‫توارى عنه تورط في الجفوة‪ .‬فإن الشيخ ذكر »الحزن« في قسم الأبواب‪ .‬وهو عنده من قسم البدايات‪.‬‬
‫وأما تضييع الأيام فنوعان أيضا‪ ً:‬تضييعها بخلوها عن الطاعات‪ ،‬وتضييعها بخلوها عن مواجيد‬
‫الإ يمان وذوق حلاوته والأنس بالل ّٰه وحسن الصحبة معه‪.‬‬
‫فكل واحد من الثلاثة نوعألاهل البداية‪ ،‬وللسالـكين المتوسطين‪ .‬وكلامه يعم النوعين وإن كان‬
‫بالثاني‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬حزن أهل الإرادة‪ .‬وهو حزن على تعلق القلب بالتفرقة‪ ،‬وعلى اشتغال النفس‬
‫عن الشهود‪ ،‬وعلى التسلي عن الحزن«‪.‬‬

152

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

“The attachment of the heart to the separation” is the lack of concentration
in the presence of God and distraction of thoughts in the valleys of one’s pleasure.
As for the “distraction of the heart from the witnessing,” it is of two kinds: distraction from remembrance that causes witnessing and brings to fruition other
things; and second, its distraction from witnessing, owing to the weakness of
remembrance, or the weakness of the heart’s attention to the witnessing, or for
another obstacle. However, when the witnessing overpowers the self, it cannot
be distracted from it except by something that overpowers it.
As for “consolation from the grief,” he means by it that the presence of the
grief in the heart is a proof of its will and aspiration; its absence and consolation is a deficiency. Thus, he grieves over the absence {of grief just as he weeps
over the absence} of weeping and fears the absence of fear. This requires some
reflection. Grief over the loss of grief is praised only when he becomes preoccupied in blameworthy pleasure. If, however, what kept him from grieving over
the absence of grief is a praiseworthy delight, delight in the grace of God and
His mercy, then there is no place or meaning for grieving over the loss of grief.
He said,
The elite do not partake in the station of grief because grief is loss whereas
the elite are the people who have found [the Truth].
This, if he means by it that such people should not intend to be aggrieved, is
correct. However, if he meant that grief does not afflict them, then that is not
the case, for grief is a part of nature, even though it is not a sought after station.
He said,
But the third level of grief is to be aggrieved about the contradictions
that are not yet thoughts; the opposition of intentions, and the objections
against the decrees.
These are three matters [that occur] in accordance with witnessing and will.
First, the grief of the contradictions, for the incidence of hope comes to the
heart, for instance, without the accompanying incidence of fear, or the opposite. Similarly, the incidence of expansion without there being the incidence of
contraction. Similarly, there appears to him the incidence of familiarity without the incidence of awe. The discordance of these incidences inevitably cause
him grief.
These contradictions are not of the same class as thoughts, but rather, they
are from divine incidences, which is why he said, “approaching thoughts,” for
the contradictions that appear as thoughts are other than these.

‫‪153‬‬

‫‪chapter 11‬‬

‫تعلق القلب بالتفرقة‪ :‬هو عدم الجمعية في الحضور مع الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وتشتيت الخواطر في أودية المرادات‪.‬‬
‫وأما اشتغال النفس عن الشهود فهو نوعان‪ :‬اشتغالها عن الذكر الذي يوجب الشهود و يثمره بغيره‪.‬‬
‫والثاني اشتغالها به عن الشهود لضعف الذكر أو لضعف القلب عن الشهود‪ ،‬أو لمانع آخر‪ .‬ولـكن‬
‫إذا قهر الشهود النفس لم تتمكن من التشاغل عنه‪ ،‬إلا بقاهر يقهرها عنه‪.‬‬
‫وأما التسلي عن الحزن‪ ،‬يعني أن وجود الحزن في القلب دليل على الإرادة والطلب‪ .‬ففقده والتسلي‬
‫عنه نقص‪ ،‬فيحزن على فقد ]الحزن‪ ،‬كما يبكي على فقد[ البكاء‪ ،‬و يخاف من عدم الخوف‪ ،‬وهذا فيه‬
‫نظر‪ .‬وإنما يحمد الحزن على فقد الحزن ]أما إذا اشتغل بفرح مذموم[ أما إذا اشتغل عن الحزن بفرح‬
‫محمود—وهو الفرح بفضل الل ّٰه ورحمته—‪ ،‬فلا معنى للحزن على فوات الحزن‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وليست الخاصة من مقام الحزن في شيء‪ ،‬لأن الحزن فقد‪ .‬والخاصة أهل وجدان«‪.‬‬
‫وهذا إن أراد به أنه لا ينبغي لهم تعمد الحزن فصحيح‪ .‬وإن أراد أنه لا يعرض لهم حزن‪ ،‬فليس‬
‫كذلك‪ .‬والحزن من لوازم الطبيعة‪ ،‬ولـكنه ليس بمقام‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬ولـكن الدرجة الثالثة من الحزن‪ :‬التحزن للمعارضات دون الخواطر‪ ،‬ومعارضات القصود‪،‬‬
‫واعتراضات الأحكام«‪.‬‬
‫هذه ثلاثة أمور‪ ،‬بحسب الشهود والإرادة‪:‬‬
‫الأول‪ :‬حزن المعارضات‪ .‬فإن القلب يعترضه وارد الرجاء مثلا‪ ً،‬فلم ينشب أن يعارضه وارد‬
‫الخوف‪ ،‬و بالعكس‪ .‬و يعترضه وارد البسط‪ ،‬فلم ينشب أن يعترضه وارد القبض‪ .‬و يرد عليه وارد‬
‫الأنس‪ ،‬فيعترضه وارد الهيبة‪ .‬فيوجب له اختلاف هذه المعارضات عليه حزنا ًلا محالة‪.‬‬
‫وليست هذه المعارضات من قبيل الخواطر‪ ،‬بل هي من قبيل الواردات الإلهية‪ .‬فلذلك قال‪» :‬دون‬
‫الخواطر«‪ ،‬فإن معارضات الخواطر غير هذا‪.‬‬

154

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

According to [the Sufis], this is from the effects of the divine names and
attributes and the connection of the rays of their light to the heart, which is
called by them ‘illumination’.
As for “the contradictions of intentions,” it is the hardest thing for the people,
and it shows their urgent need for knowledge above all things. For the truthful
one seeks in the entirety of his journey the dearest of paths to God, for he walks
to Him through Him and toward Him. When two paths appear to him and he
does not know which one is more pleasing and dearer to God, among them
there is one who makes scriptural knowledge his arbiter either through his own
effort or, if he is incapable, then through following someone else’s authority. If
even that is unavailable, he may quietly wait for what destiny decides for him,
his own self being devoid of goals. Another among them relies utterly on his
shaykh if he has one. Another turns to the supplication for choosing what is
best and then waits for what his destiny holds.
The men of determination, however, strive their utmost in seeking what
is most pleasing to God through acquiring [scriptural] knowledge and inner
awareness. If they are unable to arrive at a [definitive] answer, they rely on their
best assessment; if two things appear to them to be equal, they prefer the one
more conducive to the general benefit.
The prioritizing of benefits has different levels: at times, the course of action leading to general benefit is preferred; and at times, that which leads to
increase in faith; and at times, whatever opposes the desires of the ego; at
times, the attainment of a benefit that cannot be otherwise attained; and at
times, that which brings safety from fear of an affliction that cannot be otherwise avoided. These are the five directions of prioritizing; rarely is one of them
absent.
If he is devoid of all that, he has no rational [means of prioritizing], and
must wait for what his destiny has in store. He turns in desperation to his Lord,
pleading with Him like one seeking what He is pleased with and likes. When
the move comes, he supplicates God for the best, beseeches God once again,
fearing that that move might be from his ego or the Satan, knowing that he is
never infallible and ever striving against his enemy, so long as he is in the world
of test and trial. Only then he proceeds to act. This is the ultimate [act] that the
sincere [seekers] can do.
For the people of jihad in this respect there is guidance and unveiling that is
not accessible to the people of spiritual exercises. This is why al-Awzāʿī and Ibn
al-Mubārak said, “When people differ concerning a thing, wait for the practice
of the people of the frontier”—that is, the people of jihad. This is so for God the
Exalted said, “Those who exert themselves (i.e., in jihad), We shall surely guide
them” [29:69].

‫‪155‬‬

‫‪chapter 11‬‬

‫وعند القوم هذا من آثار الأسماء والصفات واتصال أشعة أنوارها بالقلب‪ ،‬وهو المسمى عندهم‬
‫بالتجلي‪.‬‬
‫وأما معارضات القصود فهي أصعب ما على القوم‪ ،‬وفيه يظهر اضطرارهم إلى العلم فوق كل‬
‫ضرورة‪ .‬فإن الصادق يتحرى في سلوكهكله أحب الطرق إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فإنه سالك به وإليه‪ .‬فيعترضه طر يقألا‬
‫يدري أيهما أرضى لل ّٰه وأحب إليه‪ .‬فمنهم من يحكم العلم بجهده استدلالا ًفإن عجز فتقليدا ً‪ ،‬فإن عجز عنهما‬
‫سكن ينتظر ما يحكم له به القدر‪ ،‬و يخل ّي باطنه من المقاصد جملة‪.‬‬
‫ومنهم من يلقي الكل على شيخه‪ ،‬إن كان له شيخ‪.‬‬
‫ومنهم من يلجأ إلى الاستخارة والدعاء‪ ،‬ثم ينتظر ما يجري به القدر‪.‬‬
‫وأصحاب العزائم يبذلون وسعهم في طلب الأرضى علما ًومعرفة ً‪ ،‬فإن أعجزهم قنعوا بالظن الغالب‪،‬‬
‫فإن تساوى عندهم الأمران‪ ،‬قدموا أرجحهما مصلحة‪.‬‬
‫ولترجيح المصالح رتب متفاوتة‪ ،‬فتارة ً يترجح بعموم النفع‪ ،‬وتارة ً يترجح بز يادة الإ يمان‪ ،‬وتارة ً يترجح‬
‫بمخالفة النفس‪ ،‬وتارة ً يترجح باستجلاب مصلحة أخرى بها لا تحصل من غيرها‪ ،‬وتارة ً يترجح بأمنها من‬
‫الخوف من مفسدة لا تؤمن في غيرها‪ .‬فهذه خمس جهات من الترجيح‪ .‬قل أن يعدم واحدة منها‪.‬‬
‫فإن أعوزه ذلك كله تخلى عن الخواطر جملة ً‪ ،‬وانتظر ما يحركه به محرك القدر‪ ،‬وافتقر إلى ر به‬
‫افتقار مستنزل ما يرضيه و يحبه‪ .‬فإذا جاءته الحركة استخار الل ّٰه وافتقر إليه افتقارا ً ثانيا‪ ً،‬خشية أن‬
‫تكون تلك الحركة نفسية ً أو شيطانية ً لعدم العصمة في حقه‪ ،‬واستمرار المحنة بعدوه ما دام في عالم‬
‫الابتلاء والامتحان‪ ،‬ثم أقدم على الفعل‪ .‬فهذا نهاية ما في مقدور الصادقين‪.‬‬
‫ولأهل الجهاد في هذا من الهداية والـكشف ما ليس لأهل المجاهدة‪ .‬ولهذا قال الأوزاعي وا بن‬
‫المبارك‪» :‬إذا اختلف الناس في شيء فانظروا ما عليه أهل الثغر«‪ .‬يعني أهل الجهاد‪ .‬فإن الل ّٰه تعالى‬
‫سب ُل َن َا﴾ ]العنكبوت‪.[69:‬‬
‫ن ج َاه َد ُوا فيِ ن َا ل َن َه ْدِينَ ّه ُْم ُ‬
‫يقول‪﴿ :‬و َال َ ّذ ِي َ‬

156

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

As for the “objections to judgments,” it may be that he meant by it creational
judgments, which is more likely. It may also be that he meant normative judgments. [In the first case:] the men of ecstatic stations may fall into objections
{to the judgments in effect upon them that they find disagreeable, and they
grieve when they realize their objections to those}9 as bad etiquette. Those
objections appear in the form of their wills that oppose what happens to them
from the judgment of divine predestination, and their grief is over their lack of
agreement with it and for possessing a will other that what has been ordained
for them [by God].
If the meaning was divine normative judgments, [it would then mean that]
they experience spiritual states that cannot be reconciled with the normative
commands, as discussed earlier, and they find no way to avoid establishing
what is commanded, but in so doing they invariably experience a kind of objection to it either inwardly or outwardly, in accordance with the extent of the
interruption of their spiritual state owing to the command. They grieve over
this contradiction. If they establish the command and see that their benefit
lies in it and praise its end, they grieve over their hastiness in objecting to it. To
submit to the call of [scriptural] knowledge is an obligation, and opposing it by
spiritual states falls into the category of [personal] will and defects [in spiritual
stations], and the seeker grieves of any remaining traces of [that contradiction]
within him. And God knows best.

9 The part between the braces is in the margins rather than the main text; see Madārij(Ṣ), 1297.

‫‪157‬‬

‫‪chapter 11‬‬

‫وأما اعتراضات الأحكام فيجوز أن ير يد به الأحكام الـكونية‪ ،‬وهو أظهر‪ .‬وأن ير يد به الأحكام‬
‫الدينية‪ .‬فإن أر باب الأحوال يقع منهم اعتراضات ]على الأحكام الجار ية عليهم بخلاف ما ير يدونه‪،‬‬
‫فيحزنون عند إدراكهم لتلك الاعتراضات[ على ما صدر منهم من سوء الأدب‪ .‬وتلك الاعتراضات‬
‫هي إراداتهم خلاف ما جرى لهم به القدر‪ .‬فيحزنون على عدم الموافقة‪ ،‬وإرادة خلاف ما أر يد بهم‪.‬‬
‫وإن كان المراد به الأحكام الدينية‪ ،‬فإنهم تعرض لهم أحوال لا يمكنهم الجمع بينها و بين أحكام‬
‫الأمر—كما تقدم—‪ ،‬فلا يجدون بدا ً من القيام بأحكام الأمر‪ ،‬ولا بد أن يحدث لهم نوع اعتراض‬
‫خفي أو جلي‪ ،‬بحسب انقطاعهم عن الحال بالأمر‪ ،‬فيحزنون لوجود هذه المعارضة‪ .‬فإذا قاموا بأحكام‬
‫الأمر‪ ،‬ورأوا أن المصلحة في حقهم ذلك‪ ،‬وحمدوا عاقبته‪ ،‬حزنوا على تسرعهم إلى المعارضة‪ .‬فالتسليم‬
‫لداعي العلم واجب‪ ،‬ومعارضة الحال من قبيل الإرادات والعلل‪ ،‬فيحزن على بقيتّ ها فيه‪ .‬والل ّٰه أعلم‪.‬‬

chapter 12

The Station of Fear
Among the stations of “You we worship and You we supplicate for help” is the
station of fear.
Fear is one of the most distinguished stations on the path, most beneficial
for the heart, and an obligation upon all. God the Exalted has said: “So fear them
not and fear Me (khawf ) if you are believers” [3:175]; and said, “And Me [alone]
you must fear (rahba)” [2:40]; and said, “So do not fear people, but fear Me
(khashya)” [5:44]. He has praised and applauded its people and said, “Indeed,
they who live in awe for fear of their Lord, and they who believe in the signs
of their Lord, and they who do not associate anything with their Lord, and
they who give what they give while their hearts are fearful because they will be
returning to their Lord—it is these who hasten in every good work, and these
who are foremost in them” [23:57–61].
In a tradition narrated in al-Musnad [of Aḥmad] and al-Tirmidhī, on the
authority of ʿĀʾisha, God be pleased with her, said: “I said, ‘O Messenger of God,
does the verse “And they who give what they give while their hearts are fearful”
refer to he who commits fornication, drinks alcohol, and steals?’ He said, ‘No, O
daughter of the Truth-lover [Abū Bakr] but to a man who fasts, prays, and gives
charity, and fears that it may not be accepted from him.’ ”1
Al-Ḥasan, God be pleased with him, [commenting on this verse] said, “By
God, they obeyed Him and strove hard in it, yet they feared it might be rejected.
A believer combines righteousness with fear, while a hypocrite combines evil
with impunity.”

1 Aḥmad 6:205; Tirmidhī #3175.

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬الخوف«‪.‬‬
‫تخ َافوُ ه ُْم‬
‫وهي من أجل منازلها وأنفعها للقلب‪ ،‬وفرض على كل أحد‪ .‬قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬ف َل َا َ‬
‫ن﴾ ]البقرة‪ ،[40:‬وقال‪:‬‬
‫ي ف َاْرهبَ وُ ِ‬
‫ن ِإن ُ‬
‫و َخ َافوُ ِ‬
‫كنت ُم ُمّؤ ْم ِن ِينَ﴾ ]آل عمران‪ ،[175:‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َِإ َي ّا َ‬
‫ن‬
‫ن ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ن﴾ ]المائدة‪ ،[44:‬ومدح أهله فى كتابه وأثنى عليهم فقال‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َ ّ‬
‫خشَو ْ ِ‬
‫س و َا ْ‬
‫﴿ف َل َا َ‬
‫تخ ْشَو ُا ال َن ّا َ‬
‫ن‬
‫كونَ و َال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ن ه ُم برِ َ ّبِه ِْم ل َا ي ُش ْر ِ ُ‬
‫ت ر َ ّبِه ِْم يؤُ ْم ِنوُ نَ و َال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ن ه ُم ب ِآياَ ِ‬
‫شف ِق ُونَ و َال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫شيةَ ِ ر َ ّبِه ِم ُمّ ْ‬
‫خ ْ‬
‫ه ُم مّ ِْن َ‬
‫ساب ِق ُونَ﴾‬
‫ت و َه ُْم ل َه َا َ‬
‫ك ي ُس َارِع ُونَ ف ِي اْلخـ َي ْر َا ِ‬
‫جع ُونَ ُأول َٰئ ِ َ‬
‫جلةَ ٌ َأَّنه ُْم ِإل َى ٰ ر َ ّبِه ِْم ر َا ِ‬
‫يؤُ ْتوُ نَ م َا آتوَ ا َّوق ُلوُ بُه ُْم و َ ِ‬
‫]المؤمنون‪ .[61–57:‬وفي المسند والترمذي عن عائشة—رضي الل ّٰه عنها—قالت‪ :‬قلت يا رسول الل ّٰه‪:‬‬
‫جلةَ ٌ﴾]المؤمنون‪ ،[60 :‬أهو الذي يزني و يشرب الخمر و يسرق؟ قال‪:‬‬
‫ن يؤُ ْتوُ نَ م َا آتوَ ا َّوق ُلوُ بُه ُْم و َ ِ‬
‫﴿و َال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫»لا يا ابنة الصديق‪ ،‬ولـكنه الرجل يصوم و يصلي و يتصدق‪ ،‬و يخاف ألا يقبل منه«‪ .‬قال الحسن رضي‬
‫الل ّٰه عنه‪ :‬عملوا والل ّٰه بالطاعات‪ ،‬واجتهدوا فيها‪ ،‬وخافوا أن ترد عليهم‪ .‬إن المؤمن جمع إحسانا ًوخشية ً‪،‬‬
‫والمنافق جمع إساءة ً وأمنا‪ً.‬‬

160
1

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Kinds of Fear

The terms wajal, khawf, khashya, and rahba [are all used to indicate kinds of
fear in Arabic, and] have similar meanings without being synonyms.2 Abū alQāsim al-Junayd said, “Khawf is the anticipation of punishment with every
passing breath.” It has been said, “Khawf is the disruption and movement of
the heart upon the cognizance of that which is feared.” It has also been said,
“Khawf is the strength of the knowledge of the path of destiny;” this, however,
is the cause of fear, not its definition. It has also been said, “Khawf is the fleeing
of the heart from the occurrence of what is disliked upon its cognizance.”
Khashya (reverential fear) is more specific than khawf, for it is specific to the
true knowers of God—as God the Exalted has said, “Truly, the ones who fear
God from among His servants are only the knowers” [35:28]. Hence, khashya is
fear associated with the intimate knowledge of God. The Prophet, God grant
him blessing and peace, said, “I am most mindful of God among you, and most
fearful of Him.”3 Khawf is movement, while khashya is withdrawal, stillness,
and rest. For the one who sees a fierce enemy or a flood or something like that
has two states. First, movement in order to flee from it—and this is the state
of khawf. Second, his stillness and settling in a place safe from the danger—
and this is khashya. From this it is said, inkhashā al-shayʾ: he entered and hid
into something; [the meaning of this root kh-sh-y is same as inkhashsha from
the root kh-sh-sh because] the repeated [ faʿʿala] and omitted [ fʿa, fʿw, or fʿy]
forms are [grammatically] kin, such as taqaḍḍā and taqaḍḍaḍa al-bāzī, [both
of which mean: he released the falcon.]
As for rahba, it means the urge to flee from what is disliked—which is the
opposite of raghba, which means the journey of the heart toward that which it
likes. Thus, between al-rahb and al-harab [fleeing] there is a connection both
in expression and meaning, united as they are by the “intermediate derivation,”
where the ordering of two letters between two roots is reversed but the meaning remains the same.4
As for wajal, it is the trembling and splitting of the heart upon remembrance
or vision of someone whose power or punishment one fears.
2 For a comparable discussion of the various words for fear in English, see George Crabb,
English Synonyms Explained (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1844), 306–308. The types he
mentions are apprehension (unease when anticipating an unpleasant occurrence, concerns
mostly things), alarm (derived from a call to arms upon a signal of danger), terror (fear from
an unknown danger which the imagination magnifies), fright (less vivid, more general, more
personal kind of fear). Awe and reverence both denote a strong sentiment of respect mingled
with some emotions of fear, with the former being the stronger. “Children should be early
taught,” our nineteenth-century author remarks, “to have a reverence for the Bible as a book,

chapter 12

161

:‫ قال أبو القاسم الجنيد‬.‫و »الوجل« و »الخوف« و »الخشية« و »الرهبة« ألفاظ متقار بة غير مترادفة‬
.‫الخوف توقع العقو بة على مجاري الانفاس‬
.‫ الخوف اضطراب القلب وحركته من تذكر المخوف‬:‫وقيل‬
.‫ لا أنه نفسه‬،‫ وهذا سبب الخوف‬،‫ الخوف قوة العلم بمجاري الأحكام‬:‫وقيل‬
.‫ الخوف هرب القلب من حلول المكروه عند استشعاره‬:‫وقيل‬
ِ ‫يخ ْش َى ال َل ّـه َ م ِْن عِب َادِه‬
َ ‫ ﴿ِإ َن ّم َا‬:‫ قال تعالى‬.‫ فإن الخشية للعلماء بالل ّٰه‬،‫والخشية أخص من الخوف‬
.«ً ‫ وأشدكم له خشية‬،‫ »إني أتقاكم لل ّٰه‬:‫ وقال النبي ﷺ‬.‫ فهي خوف مقرون بمعرفة‬.[28:‫ال ْعلُ َم َاء ُ﴾ ]فاطر‬
‫ فإن الذي يرى العدو والسيل ونحو ذلك له‬.‫ والخشية انجماع وانقباض وسكون‬،‫فالخوف حركة‬
.‫حالتان‬
.‫ وهي حالة الخوف‬،‫ حركته للهرب منه‬:‫إحداهما‬
‫ والمضاعف‬،‫ انخشى الشيء‬:‫ ومنه‬.‫ وهي الخشية‬،‫ سكونه وقراره في مكألا يصل إليه‬:‫والثانية‬
.‫ كتقضى البازي وتقضض‬،‫والمعتل أخوان‬
‫ وهي ضد »الرغبة« التي هي سفر القلب في‬،‫وأما »الرهبة« فهي الإمعان في الهرب من المكروه‬
.‫طلب المرغوب فيه‬
‫ يجمعهما الاشتقاق الأوسط الذي هو عقد تقاليب‬.‫و بين الرهب والهرب تناسب في اللفظ والمعنى‬
.‫الكلمة على معنى جامع‬
.‫ أو لرؤ يته‬،‫وأما »الوجل« فرجفان القلب وانصداعه لذكر من يخاف سلطانه وعقو بته‬
in distinction from all other books.” Fear (“to feel a shuddering”) and dread (“fear with exceeding trouble”) affect primarily the mind, whereas trembling, terror, and horror, we are told, are
more primal and affect other senses. The intensity of sentiment increases from fright to trembling, to terror, to horror. “We apprehend an unpleasant occurrence; we fear a misfortune; we
dread a calamity.” Fear is a “salutary” sentiment in a society, observes the author, whereas
dread is “irksome.” God is feared, God’s punishment dreaded. Trembling, tremor (trembling
which arises from a mental affection), and trepidation (stronger than the last two), are all of
a piece.
3 Recorded in Bukhārī #5063 and Muslim #1108 with slight variation.
4 Premodern grammarians recognized many more complex patterns of how meanings attached to combinations of letters than the modern orientalist grammar, which reduced this
to a system of trilateral roots and their derivatives. This point is powerfully made in Georges
Bohas, “Levels of Analysis of the Word in Arabic,” in The Word in Arabic, ed. Giuliano Lancioni
and Lidia Bettini (Leiden: Brill, 2001), 147–194.

162

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

As for hayba (awe), it is fear associated with awe and glorification, and it
mostly occurs with inner knowledge, love, and recognition of glory, that is, a
sense of greatness along with love.
Thus, khawf, then, is for the common believers; khashya is for those endowed
with [scriptural] knowledge and inner awareness; hayba is for the lovers; and
ijlāl (i.e., wajal) is for those near to God.
The extent of one’s khawf and khashya is proportional to one’s [scriptural]
knowledge and inner awareness. As the Prophet, God grant him blessing and
peace, said, “I am the most knowledgeable of God among you, and most fearful of Him.”5 He also said, “If you knew what I know, you would laugh little and
weep much; you would not enjoy intimacy with women; and would go out wandering in the wildernesses, beseeching God.”6
When faced with his object of fear, a man who possesses khawf may find
refuge in fleeing or he may be petrified, whereas a man with khashya seeks
the support of knowledge. Their likeness is of one who has no knowledge of
medicine and a skilled physician; the former seeks refuge in prevention and
fleeing, whereas the physician turns to his knowledge of medicine and diseases.
Abū Ḥafṣ7 said, “Khawf is God’s lash with which He sets right those fleeing
from His door.” He also said, “Khawf is a lamp in the heart by which the good
and the evil inside the heart can be seen; you flee from everyone you fear except
God: when you fear Him, you run to Him.”
Hence, the one who fears flees from his Lord to his Lord.
Abū Sulaymān [al-Dārānī] said, “When fear abandons it, a heart is ruined.”
Ibrāhīm b. Sufyān said, “When fear resides in the hearts, it burns away the
sources of lust and eradicates worldly attachments.”
Dhū al-Nūn, God have mercy on him, said, “People will stay on the [right]
path so long as they have fear; when this fear abandons them, they go astray.”
Ḥātim al-Aṣamm8 said, “Do not be deceived by a good status: there is no
status better than the Garden, but Adam there encountered what he encountered; nor by the abundance of worship, for Iblīs after his long worship did what
he did; nor by the abundance of knowledge, for Balʿām b. Bāʿūr faced what he
faced while knowing the Greatest [Divine] Name; nor by the meeting and seeing of the righteous, for no man is more righteous than the Prophet, God grant
him blessing and peace, but meeting him did not help his enemies or the hypocrites.”

5 This tradition appears with khashya instead of khawf in Bukhārī #6101 and Muslim #2356.
6 Aḥmad 5:173; Tirmidhī #2312.

‫‪163‬‬

‫‪chapter 12‬‬

‫وأما »الهيبة« فخوف مقارن للتعظيم والإجلال‪ .‬وأكثر ما يكون مع المعرفة والمحبة والإجلال‪،‬‬
‫تعظيم مقرون بالحب‪.‬‬
‫فالخوف لعامة المؤمنين‪ ،‬والخشية للعلماء العارفين‪ ،‬والهيبة للمحبين‪ ،‬والإجلال للمقر بين‪ .‬وعلى قدر‬
‫العلم والمعرفة يكون الخوف والخشية‪ ،‬كما قال ﷺ‪» :‬إني لأعلمكم بالل ّٰه وأشدكم له خوفا ً«‪ .‬وقال‪» :‬لو‬
‫تعلمون ما أعلم لضحكتم قليلا‪ ً،‬ولبكيتم كثيرا ً‪ ،‬ولما تلذذتم بالنساء على الفرش‪ ،‬ولخرجتم إلى الصعدات‬
‫تجأرون إلى الل ّٰه تعالى«‪.‬‬
‫فصاحب الخوف يلتجيء إلى الهرب والإمساك‪ .‬وصاحب الخشية يلتجيء إلى الاعتصام بالعلم‪.‬‬
‫ومثلهما مثل من لا علم له بالطب ومثل الطبيب الحاذق‪ ،‬فالأول يلتجيء إلى الحمية والهرب‪ ،‬والطبيب‬
‫يلتجيء إلى معرفته بالأدو ية والأدواء‪.‬‬
‫قال أبو حفص‪ :‬الخوف سوط الل ّٰه‪ ،‬يقوم به الشارد عن بابه‪ ،‬وقال‪ :‬الخوف سراج في القلب‪ ،‬به‬
‫يبصر ما فيه من الخـير والشر‪ .‬وكل أحد إذا خفته هر بت منه إلا الل ّٰه تعالى‪ ،‬فإنك إذ خفته هر بت إليه‪.‬‬
‫فالخائف هارب من ر به إلى ر به‪.‬‬
‫قال أبو سليمان—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪ :‬ما فارق الخوف قلبا ًإلا خرب‪.‬‬
‫وقال إ براهيم بن شيبان‪ :‬إذا سكن الخوف القلوب أحرق مواضع الشهوات منها‪ ،‬وطرد الدنيا عنها‪.‬‬
‫وقال ذو النون—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪ :‬الناس على الطر يق ما لم يز ُل عنهم الخوف‪ .‬فإذا زال عنهم الخوف ضلوا‬
‫الطر يق‪.‬‬
‫وقال حاتم الأصم‪ :‬لا تغتر بمكان صالح‪ ،‬فلا مكان أصلح من الجنة‪ ،‬ولقى فيها آدم ما لقي‪ ،‬ولا‬
‫تغتر بكثرة العبادة‪ ،‬فإن إ بليس بعد طول العبادة لقي ما لقي‪ ،‬ولا تغتر بكثرة العلم‪ ،‬فإن بلعام بن باعور‬
‫لقي ما لقي وكان يعرف الاسم الأعظم‪ ،‬ولا تغتر بلقاء الصالحـين ورؤ يتهم‪ ،‬فلا شخص أصلح من النبي‬
‫ﷺ‪ ،‬ولم ينتفع بلقائه أعداؤه والمنافقون‪.‬‬

‫‪7 Abū Ḥafṣ ʿAmr b. Salam or Salama (d. 264/878) was titled the shaykh of Khurasān and was‬‬
‫‪said to have been the first to introduce taṣawwuf to Nisābūr. See Siyar 12:510.‬‬
‫‪8 Abū ʿAbd al-Raḥmān Ḥātim b. ʿUnwān (d. 237/852) was dubbed the Luqmān of his time for‬‬
‫‪his wisdom, and was known for his exhortations and words on asceticism. See Siyar 11:484.‬‬

164

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Fear, however, is not the end in itself, but a means towards an end. When that
which is feared goes, so does the fear, for the people of the Garden experience
neither fear nor grief.
Fear is associated with actions, and love with being and attributes. When the
believers enter the abode of bliss, their love for their Lord will multiply but fear
will not touch them. This is why love is higher and nobler than fear.
The true and praiseworthy fear is that which comes between a person and
the prohibitions of God. When it exceeds that, hopelessness and despair may
result.
Abū ʿUthmān [al-Ḥīrī], God be pleased with him, said, “True fear is vigilance
against sins, open and secret.”
I also heard Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya, may God honor his soul, say, “The
praiseworthy fear is that which prevents you from the prohibitions of God.”
The author of al-Manāzil, God have mercy on him, said,
Fear is to do away with the tranquility of security by contemplating the
great news.
He means parting from the complacency of one’s sense of being safe by recalling what God has declaimed of the promise and the warning.
He [further] said,
It has three levels. The first level is the fear of punishment, and this kind of
fear establishes the soundness of faith, and it is the fear of the commoners. It is born out of the affirmation of the warning, and remembrance of
the crime, and the consideration of the punishment.
This fear is preceded by cognition and knowledge—for a man cannot fear what
he has no cognition of. It has two attachments. The first is that which is disliked
and whose occurrence is feared. The second is the cause and the way that leads
to it. One’s fear depends on his awareness of the connection between the cause
and that which is feared as well as the magnitude of what is feared.
The lack of knowledge of either of these leads to a concomitant lack of fear.
If one does not know that a certain act leads to a feared outcome or he knows so
but does not know the magnitude of that which he fears, he does not have true
fear. When he is aware of the magnitude of what he fears and is certain about
the connection between the cause and its feared outcome, he acquires fear.
This is the meaning of its being “born out of the affirmation of the warning,
and remembrance of the crime, and the consideration of the punishment.”

‫‪165‬‬

‫‪chapter 12‬‬

‫والخوف ليس مقصودا ً لذاته‪ ،‬بل مقصودا ً لغيره قصد الوسائل‪ .‬ولهذا يزول بزوال المخوف‪ ،‬فإن‬
‫أهل الجنة لا خوف عليهم ولا هم يحزنون‪.‬‬
‫والخوف يتعلق بالأفعال‪ ،‬والمحبة ٺتعلق بالذات والصفات‪ .‬ولهذا ٺتضاعف محبة المؤمنين لر بهم‬
‫إذا دخلوا دار النعيم‪ ،‬ولا يلحقهم فيها خوف‪ ،‬ولهذا كانت منزلة المحبة ومقامها أعلى وأرفع من منزلة‬
‫الخوف ومقامه‪.‬‬
‫والخوف المحمود الصادق ما حال بين صاحبه و بين محارم الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فإذا تجاوز ذلك خيف منه اليأس‬
‫والقنوط‪.‬‬
‫قال أبو عثمان—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—‪ :‬صدق الخوف هو الورع عن الآثام ظاهرا ً و باطنا‪ً.‬‬
‫وسمعت شيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية يقول‪ :‬الخوف المحمود‪ ،‬ما حجزك عن محارم الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وقال صاحب المنازل—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪:‬‬
‫»الخوف هو الانخلاع من طمأنينة الأمن بمطالعة الخـبرَ «‪.‬‬
‫يعني الخروج عن سكون الأمن‪ ،‬باستحضار ما أخبر الل ّٰه به من الوعد والوعيد‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ :‬الدرجة الأولى‪ :‬الخوف من العقو بة‪ .‬وهو الخوف الذي يصح به‬
‫الإ يمان‪ ،‬وهو خوف العامة‪ .‬وهو يتولد من تصديق الوعيد‪ ،‬وذِكر الجناية‪ ،‬ومراقبة العاقبة«‪.‬‬
‫الخوف مسبوق بالشعور والعلم‪ ،‬فمحال خوف الإنسان مما لا شعور له به‪ .‬وله متعلقان‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬نفس المكروه المحذور وقوعه‪.‬‬
‫والثاني‪ :‬السبب والطر يق المفضي إليه‪ .‬فعلى قدر شعوره بإفضاء السبب إلى المخوف‪ ،‬و بقدر المخوف‬
‫يكون خوفه‪ ،‬وما نقص من شعوره بأحد هذين نقص من خوفه بحسبه‪.‬‬
‫فمن لم يعتقد أن سبب كذا يفضي إلى محذور كذا‪ ،‬لم يخف من ذلك السبب‪ .‬ومن اعتقد أنه‬
‫يفضي إلى مكروه ما ولم يعرف قدره‪ ،‬لم يخف منه ذلك الخوف‪ .‬فإذا عرف قْدر المخوف وتيقن‬
‫إفضاء السبب‪ ،‬حصل له الخوف‪.‬‬
‫هذا معنى تولده من تصديق الوعيد‪ ،‬وذكر الجناية‪ ،‬ومراقبة العاقبة‪.‬‬

166

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The “consideration of the punishment” involves that [the seeker] recalls
what is feared, making it the center of one’s focus that is never forgotten; for
even if one knows it, its forgetting and failure to keep an eye on it comes
between the heart and the fear. This is why fear is the index of the soundness
of faith, and its parting from the heart is tantamount to the departing of faith.

2

Fear of Self-deception

He said,
The second level is the fear of deception in the running of breaths
drowned in the awakening, tinged with sweetness.
He means that whoever attains awakening untinged by negligence and his
breaths drowned in it and found it pleasant—for nothing is sweeter than being
present in the act of awakening—he should beware the deception, and that
this presence, awakening, and sweetness might be lost. How many of those
who were blessed with ecstatic states had their states turned against them,
rendering them from being righteous to being wicked, leaving them rubbing
their hands in lament, beating upon their left with their right? The full moon of
ecstasy that once illumined his nights entirely, when faced with eclipse, thrust
him into darkness, replacing nearness with desertion, presence with absence,
encounter with evasion, nearness with distance, union with separation, as it
has been said:
You thought well of the days where the going was good
You feared not the evil lurking in the fate
Your nights spared you and you were deceived
It is the clear nights that turn overcast9
[Concerning] the third level, he said,
There is no desolation of fear in the station of the elite, except the awe of
the Majesty, and it is the farthest rank that is alluded to in the extremity
of fear.

9 These famous lines are from the Dīwān al-Shāfiʿī.

‫‪167‬‬

‫‪chapter 12‬‬

‫وفي مراقبة العاقبة ز يادة استحضار المخوف‪ ،‬وجعله نصب عينه‪ ،‬بحيث لا ينساه‪ ،‬فإنه—وإن‬
‫كان عالما بً ه—لـكن نسيانه وعدم مراقبته‪ ،‬يحول بين القلب و بين الخوف‪ .‬فلذلك كان الخوف علامة‬
‫صحة الإ يمان‪ ،‬وترحله من القلب علامة ترحل الإ يمان‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬خوف المكر في جر يان الأنفاس المستغرقة في اليقظة‪ ،‬المشو بة ِ بالحلاوة«‪ .‬ير يد‬
‫أن من حصلت له اليقظة بلا غفلة واستغرقت أنفاسه فيها واستحلى ذلك‪ ،‬فإنه لا أحلى من الحضور في‬
‫اليقظة‪ .‬فإنه ينبغي أن يخاف المكر‪ ،‬وأن يسلب هذا الحضور واليقظة والحلاوة‪ .‬فكم من مغبوط بحاله‬
‫انعكس عليه الحال‪ ،‬ورجع من حسن المعاملة إلى قبيح الأعمال‪ ،‬فأصبح يقلب كفيه و يضرب باليمين‬
‫على الشمال‪ .‬بينما بدر أحواله مستنيرا ً في ليالي التمام‪ ،‬إذ أصابه الـكسوف فدخل في الظلام‪ .‬فبدل‬
‫بالأنس وحشة ً‪ ،‬و بالحضور غيبة ً‪ ،‬و بالإقبال إعراضا‪ ً،‬و بالتقر يب إ بعادا ً‪ ،‬و بالجمع تفرقة ً‪ .‬كما قيل‪:‬‬

‫ك بالأيام إذ حس ُن َت‬
‫أحسنت ظن َ‬

‫ولم تخف سوء ما يأتي به القدر‬

‫ت بها‬
‫وسالمت ْك الليالي فاغترر َ‬

‫وعند صفو الليالي يحد ُث الـكدر‬

‫قال‪» :‬وليس في مقام أهل الخصوص وحشة ُ الخوف‪ ،‬إلا هيبة الجلال‪ ،‬وهي أقصى درجة يشار إليها‬
‫في غاية الخوف«‪.‬‬

168

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

It means that the desolation and loneliness of fear comes only from being
cut off and sinning, whereas the elite who have attained to God and His nearness have a fear that is not the fear of desolation like the fear of the sinful and
separated, for God Almighty is with them, through His reception of them and
love for them. Unlike [the fear of desolation,] the awe of majesty is connected
to His being and attributes; the more a servant is aware of and close to them,
the greater the awe of His majesty in his heart, and it is higher than the level of
ordinary fear.
He said,
It is the awe that opposes the seeker in times of whisperings, protects the
witness in the moments of nightly conversations, and pries open the witness from the shock of might.
That is, [the seeker] is in greatest awe when quietly praying and talking, and
this is the time when the servant praises his Lord and humbles himself, seeking His favors, praising him in His blessings, Names, and Attributes, or whispers
[by reciting] His words. This is what [the Sufis] mean by the whisperings.
These whisperings cause the lifting of the veil between the heart and the
Lord, lifting the curtain that prevents the lights of His names and attributes and
their illumination of him. Thus, the awe opposes it during these times, and the
reins of his whisperings are taken from him in accordance with their strength.
As for “the protection of the [witness in] nightly conversations during the
conversation,” ‘nightly conversation’ in their view is more particular than the
whispering, and it is the addressing of the heart to the Lord as a lover addresses
his beloved; if not accompanied by the awe of His majesty, it could slip into permissiveness and conceit. The awe comes to protect the nightly converser from
violating the etiquette of servitude.
As for the prying open of the witness by the shock of might, the “prying open”
means cutting off, that is, it almost kills him and erases him, due to the shock
of might and glory of the lordship in all its three senses. These are: the might
of rejection, the might of power and severity, and the might of authority and
compulsion. When this might strikes the observer, it nearly splits him apart and
erases his being, for nothing can stand before the might of lordship.

‫‪169‬‬

‫‪chapter 12‬‬

‫يعني أن وحشة الخوف إنما تكون مع الانقطاع والإساءة‪ .‬وأهل الخصوص أهل وصول إلى الل ّٰه‬
‫وقرب منه‪ .‬فليس خوفهم خوف وحشة‪ ،‬كخوف المسيئين المنقطعين‪ ،‬لأن الل ّٰه عز وجل معهم بصفة‬
‫الإقبال عليهم‪ ،‬والمحبة لهم‪ ،‬وهذا بخلاف هيبة الجلال‪ ،‬فإنها متعلقة بذاته وصفاته‪ .‬وكلما كان عبده‬
‫به أعرف وإليه أقرب‪ ،‬كانت هيبة جلاله في قلبه أعظم‪ .‬وهي أعلى من درجة خوف العامة‪.‬‬
‫ت المناجاة‪ ،‬وتصون الم ُشاهد أحيان الم ُسامرة‪ ،‬وتفصم‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهي هيبة تعُ ارض الم ُكاشف أوقا َ‬
‫المعُ ا ين بصدمة العزة«‪.‬‬
‫يعنى أن أكثر ما تكون »الهيبة« أوقات المناجاة‪ .‬وهي وقت تملق العبد ر به وتضرعه بين يديه‪،‬‬
‫واستعطافه والثناء عليه بآلائه وأسمائه وأوصافه أو مناجاته بكلامه‪ .‬هذا هو مراد القوم بالمناجاة‪ .‬وهذه‬
‫المناجاة توجب كشف الغطاء بين القلب و بين الرب‪ ،‬ورفع الحجاب المانع من مكافحة القلب لأنوار‬
‫أسمائه وصفاته‪ ،‬وتجليها عليه‪ ،‬فتعارضه »الهيبة« في خلال هذه الأوقات‪ ،‬فتقبض من عنان مناجاته‬
‫بحسب قوة واردها‪.‬‬
‫وأما صون المسامر أحيان المسامرة‪ ،‬فالمسامرة عندهم أخص من المناجاة‪ .‬وهي مخاطبة القلب‬
‫للرب خطاب المحب لمحبو به‪ .‬فإن لم تقارنها هيبة جلاله أخذت به في نوع الانبساط والإدلال‪ .‬فتجيء‬
‫الهيبة صائنة ً للمسامر في مسامرته من انخلاعه من أدب العبودية‪.‬‬
‫وأما فصمها المعا ين بصدمة العزة‪ ،‬فإن »الفصم« هو القطع‪ .‬أي تكاد تقتله وتمحقه بصدمة عزة‬
‫الر بو بية بمعانيها الثلاثة‪ .‬وهي عزة الامتناع‪ ،‬وعزة القوة والشدة‪ ،‬وعزة السلطان والقهر‪ .‬فإذا صدمت‬
‫المعا ين كادت تفصمه وتمحق أ ثره‪ ،‬إذ لا يقوم لعزة الر بو بية شيء‪.‬‬

170
2

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Balancing Fear and Hope

The heart in its journey towards God the Exalted is like a bird whose head is
love, and hope and fear are its two wings. When the head and the two wings
are sound, the bird flies well, but when the head is cut off, it immediately dies,
and when either or both wings are absent, the bird is the victim of any hunter
or snare.
The Predecessors preferred to strengthen the wing of fear during times of
good health, and to strengthen the wing of hope when departing this world.
This is the way of Abī Sulaymān [al-Dārānī] and others. [Abū Sulaymān] said,
“The heart should be overwhelmed by fear, for when hope overwhelms it, it is
corrupted.”
Another said, “The most perfect of states is the balance between hope and
fear and being overwhelmed by love, for love is the mount, hope is the caravanleader, and fear is the driver, and God is the one who grants attainment with
His favor and bounty.”
Some have said that it is better to strengthen fear more than hope because
when vain hopes overcome a person he is ruined. Others say that the best of
situations is a complete balance of hope and fear with overwhelming love, for
love is composite, while hope is an intensifier and fear a driver. And God is ultimately the only one who takes us across by His mercy and grace.

‫‪171‬‬

‫‪chapter 12‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫القلب في سيره إلى الل ّٰه تعالى بمنزلة الطا ئر‪ .‬فالمحبة رأسه والخوف والرجاء جناحاه‪ .‬فمتى سلم الرأس‬
‫والجناحان‪ ،‬فالطير جيد الطيران‪ .‬ومتى قطع الرأس مات الطا ئر‪ .‬ومتى ع ُدِم الجناحان فهو عرضة‬
‫لكل صائد وكاسر‪ .‬لـكن السلف استحبوا أن يقوى في الصحة جناح الخوف على جناح الرجاء‪ ،‬وعند‬
‫الخروج من الدنيا‪ ،‬يقوى جناح الرجاء على جناح الخوف‪ .‬هذه طر يقة أبي سليمان وغيره‪.‬‬
‫قال‪ :‬ينبغي للقلب أن يكون الغالب عليه الخوف‪ ،‬فإنه إذا كان الغالب عليه الرجاء فسد‪.‬‬
‫وقال غيره‪ :‬أكمل الأحوال اعتدال الرجاء والخوف وغلبة الحب‪ .‬فالمحبة هي المركب‪ ،‬والرجاء‬
‫حاٍد‪ ،‬والخوف سائق‪ ،‬والل ّٰه الموصل بمنه وكرمه‪.‬‬

chapter 13

The Station of Trembling
Among the stations of “You we worship and You we supplicate for help” is the
station of trembling.1 God the Exalted has said, “Those who fear their Lord in
the unseen, and those who tremble at the Hour” [21:49]. The Exalted also said,
“And they will approach one another, inquiring of each other. They will say,
‘Indeed, we lived among our people trembling; so God favored us and protected
us from the punishment of the Scorching Fire’” [52:25–27].
Trembling means a subtle fear; it is the fear out of mercy for someone (as in,
“fearing for someone”); it is to fear what compassion (raʾfa) is to mercy—i.e., a
subtler, more delicate kind of mercy. This is why the author of al-Manāzil, God
have mercy on him, said,
Trembling is the constancy of caution, accompanied by compassion. It is
on three levels. First, trembling for the ego from its sudden fall into disobedience.
That is, [lest the ego] hasten toward the path of lust and disobedience and
defiance of worship. “And trembling upon one’s deed, lest it is wasted.” That
is, he fears that his deeds might be among those concerning which God the
Exalted has said, “And We shall turn unto the work they did and make it scattered motes” [25:23]. These are deeds done for the sake of other than God, or
in contradiction to His command and the way of His Messenger. He also fears
that His [righteous] deeds may be lost in the future, either through discontinuance or owing to disobedient acts that would scatter them and lay waste to
them all, leaving him like the one concerning whom God the Exalted has said,
“Does any of you wish that he should have a garden with date-palms and vines
and streams flowing underneath, and all kinds of fruit, while he is stricken with
old age, and his children are not strong [enough to look after themselves]—
that it should be caught in a whirlwind, with fire therein, and be burnt up?”
[2:266]. One day ʿUmar, God be pleased with him, said to the Companions, God
be pleased with them all, “Whom do you think this verse concerns?” They said,
“God knows best.” ʿUmar became irritated and said, “Say whether you know

1 Trembling is not the optimum translation of ishfāq; the latter means a subtle fear out of mercy
and compassion for someone.

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬الإشفاق«‪.‬‬
‫شف ِق ُونَ﴾ ]الأنبياء‪ ،[49:‬وقال‬
‫ساع َة ِ م ُ ْ‬
‫ن ال َ ّ‬
‫ب و َه ُم مّ ِ َ‬
‫يخ ْشَو ْنَ ر ََّبه ُم باِ ل ْغيَ ْ ِ‬
‫ن َ‬
‫قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫شف ِق ِينَ ف َم ََّن ال َل ّـه ُ ع َل َي ْن َا و َو َق َاناَ‬
‫ل ف ِي َأه ْل ِن َا م ُ ْ‬
‫ض ي َت َسَاء َلوُ نَ ق َالوُ ا ِإ َن ّا ك ُ َن ّا ق َب ْ ُ‬
‫ل بعَ ْض ُه ُْم ع َلىَ بعَ ْ ٍ‬
‫تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َ َأقبْ َ َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫طور‪.[27–25:‬‬
‫سم ُوِم﴾ ]ال ّ‬
‫ب ال َ ّ‬
‫ع َذ َا َ‬
‫»الإشفاق« رقة الخوف‪ .‬وهو خوف برحمة من الخائف لمن يخاف عليه‪ ،‬فنسبته إلى الخوف نسبة‬
‫الرأفة إلى الرحمة‪ ،‬فإنها ألطف الرحمة وأرقها‪ .‬ولهذا قال صاحب المنازل رحمه الل ّٰه‪:‬‬
‫»الإشفاق دوام الحذر مقرونا بً الترحم‪ .‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ :‬الأولى‪ :‬إشفاٌق على النفس أن‬
‫تجمح إلى العناد«‪ .‬أي تسرع وتذهب إلى طر يق الهوى والعصيان ومعاندة العبودية‪.‬‬
‫»وإشفاق على العمل أن يصير إلى الضياع«‪ ،‬أي يخاف على عمله أن يكون من الأعمال التي قال‬
‫ل فَج َع َلنْ َاه ُ هبَ َاء ً َمّنثوُ ر ًا﴾ ]الفرقان‪ ،[23:‬وهي الأعمال‬
‫الل ّٰه تعالى فيها‪﴿ :‬و َق َدِْمن َا ِإل َى ٰ م َا عمَ ِلوُ ا م ِْن عمَ َ ٍ‬
‫التي كانت لغير الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وعلى غير أمره وسنة رسوله‪ .‬و يخاف أيضا ًأن يضيع عمله في المستقبل‪ ،‬إما بتركه‬
‫وإما بمعاص تفرقه وتحبط به فيذهب ضائعا‪ ً.‬و يكون حال صاحبهكالحال التي قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪َ ﴿ :‬أيوَ َ ُدّ‬
‫صابهَ ُ‬
‫ت و َ َأ َ‬
‫ل ال َثمّ َر َا ِ‬
‫تج ْرِي م ِن َ‬
‫ب َ‬
‫ل و َ َأْعن َا ٍ‬
‫َأح َد ُك ُْم َأن ت َكُونَ ل َه ُ َ‬
‫تح ْت ِه َا اْلَأْنه َار ُ ل َه ُ فيِ ه َا م ِن ك ُ ّ ِ‬
‫ج َن ّة ٌ مّ ِن َّنخ ِي ٍ‬
‫ت﴾ ]البقرة‪ .[266:‬قال عمر رضي الل ّٰه عنه‬
‫صار ٌ فيِ ه ِ ناَ ر ٌ ف َاحْترَ َق َ ْ‬
‫صابَه َا ِإْع َ‬
‫ضع َف َاء ُ ف ََأ َ‬
‫كبرَ ُ و َل َه ُ ذ ُرِّ َي ّة ٌ ُ‬
‫الـ ْ ِ‬
‫للصحابة رضي الل ّٰه عنهم يوما‪» ً:‬فيمن ترون هذه الآية نزلت؟ فقالوا‪ :‬الل ّٰه أعلم‪ ،‬فغضب عمر وقال‪ :‬قولوا‬

174

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

or you don’t know!” Upon which Ibn ʿAbbās, God be pleased with him, said,
“I have an idea about it, O Commander of the Believers.” He said, “O son of my
brother, say it and do not feel shy.” Ibn ʿAbbās, God be pleased with him, said, “A
parable has been struck herein of a deed.” ʿUmar said, “Which deed?” He said,
“Of a deed.” ʿUmar said, “Of a wealthy man who acts in obedience to God, and
God sent to him Satan, and he begins to act wickedly until all his deeds were
drowned.”2
He said,
And trembling for the creation due to awareness of its excuses.
This may be considered a kind of contradiction, for why would one tremble
with fear along with knowing their excuse? It is not, however, contradictory, for
as noted above, trembling is fear tinged with mercy. He fears for them from the
perspective of their opposition to the command and prohibition, along with
mercy for them as he observes the passing of the decree of predestination upon
them.
He said,
The second level is trembling for the time, that it be tinged with separation.
That is, he fears for his time lest he adulterate it with that which separates him
from his presence with God Almighty.
He said,
And for the heart, lest it face resistance.
The obstructing “resistance” could be either fatigue, or a doubt, or a desire. Each
of this is an impediment for the seeker.
He said,
And [he fears] for the certitude, lest it be contaminated.
[“Certitude”] is tranquility in the One in whose hands rest all the causes, but
when his certitude is contaminated by reliance on a cause [such as his worship], attachment to it, and tranquility in it, his certitude is damaged. The

2 Bukhārī #4538.

‫‪175‬‬

‫‪chapter 13‬‬

‫نعلم أو لا نعلم‪ .‬فقال ا بن عباس—رضي الل ّٰه عنهما—‪ :‬في نفسي منها شيء يا أمير المؤمنين‪ .‬قال‪ :‬يا ا بن‬
‫أخي قل‪ ،‬ولا تحقرن نفسك‪ .‬قال ا بن عباس—رضي الل ّٰه عنهما—‪ :‬ضر بت مثلا لً عمل‪ .‬قال عمر‪ :‬أي‬
‫عمل؟ قال ا بن عباس‪ :‬لعمل‪ .‬قال عمر‪ :‬لرجل غني يعمل بطاعة الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فبعث الل ّٰه له الشيطان‪ ،‬فعمل‬
‫بالمعاصي حتى أغرق أعماله«‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وإشفاق على الخليقة لمعرفة معاذيرها«‪ .‬هذا قد يوهم نوع تناقض‪ .‬فإنهكيف يشفق مع معرفة‬
‫العذر؟ وليس بمتناقض‪ ،‬فإن الإشفاق—كما تقدم—خوف مقرون برحمة‪ .‬فيشفق عليهم من جهة‬
‫مخالفة الأمر والنهي‪ ،‬مع نوع رحمة‪ ،‬بملاحظة جر يان القدر عليهم‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬إشفاق على الوقت‪ ،‬أن يشو به تفرق«‪ .‬أي يحذر على وقته أن يخالطه ما يفرقه‬
‫عن الحضور مع الل ّٰه عز وجل‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وعلى القلب أن يزاحمه عارض«‪ .‬والعارض المزاحم إما فترة وإما شبهة وإما شهوة‪ .‬وهو كل‬
‫سبب يعوق السالك‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وعلى اليقين أن يداخله سبب«‪ .‬هو الطمأنينة إلى من الأسباب كلها بيده‪ ،‬فمتى داخل يقينه‬
‫ق به وطمأنينة إليه‪ ،‬قدح ذلك في يقينه‪ .‬وليس المراد قطع الأسباب عن أن‬
‫ن إلى سبب وتعل ٌ‬
‫ركو ٌ‬

176

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

intention is not to deny causality per se or to neglect causes, for that would be
heresy and disbelief, and impossible [to argue for]. For the Messenger himself
is a cause toward guidance and faith. Righteous deeds are a cause for the attainment of salvation, and disbelief a cause for the entry into the Fire. Similarly, the
observed [natural] causes are indeed effective causes. What he means is that
[the seeker] fears the association of his certitude with a cause other than God;
he does not become attached to the causes, but rather seeks to lose them in the
ultimate Cause. The Shaykh, God have mercy on him, was one of those who
exaggerated in their rejection of the causes, nor does he see any end beyond
annihilation in the affirmation of the unicity of lordship. His discourse on the
third level in most of the chapters (i.e., stations) turns on these two principles.
You have known what they are, and that the correct opinion is something else.
[The correct view] is the affirmation of causes and powers, and that annihilation in lordship is not the end of the path, but above it is something that is
nobler, loftier, and more honorable. Based on these two principles he has presented in his book matters for which he has been duly faulted.3
He said,
The third level is his trembling that protects him from self-admiration,
prevents him from quarrelling with the creation, and leads the seeker to
protect his vigilance.
The first [part of this statement] concerns the deeds, the second concerns the
creation, and the third concerns the will; each one has something that could
spoil it.
Self-admiration corrupts the deed, as does ostentation; he fears that his
effort [is lost] from this corruptor, and his trembling fear protects him from
it.
The creation corrupts creation; he fears for his character and manners
toward the creation, and this fear protects him from [its harm].
The will is corrupted by lack of vigilance, which is negligence and laxity; he
fears for his will from things that may corrupt it. If his deeds, character, and will
are sound, his path, his heart, and his inner state are on the right course. And
God alone is the helper.

3 See, e.g., Chapter 2 § 2 and volume one, Translator’s Introduction, 1:53, 1:59.

‫‪177‬‬

‫‪chapter 13‬‬

‫تكون أسبابا ً والإعراض عنها‪ ،‬فإن هذا زندقة وكفر ومحال‪ .‬فإن الرسول سبب في حصول الهداية‬
‫والإ يمان‪.‬‬
‫والأعمال الصالحة سبب لحصول النجاة‪ ،‬والـكفر سبب لدخول النار‪ .‬والأسباب المشاهدة أسباب‬
‫لمسبباتها‪ ،‬ولـكن الذي ير يد أن يحذر من إضافة يقينه إلى سبب غير الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ولا يتعلق بالأسباب‪ ،‬بل‬
‫يفنى بالمسبب عنها‪.‬‬
‫والشيخ—رحمه الل ّٰه—ممن يبالغ في إنكار الأسباب‪ ،‬ولا يرى وراء الفناء في توحيد الر بو بية غاية‪.‬‬
‫وكلامه في الدرجة الثالثة في معظم الأبواب‪ ،‬يرجع إلى هذين الأصلين‪ .‬وقد عرفت ما فيهما‪ ،‬وأن‬
‫الصواب خلافهما‪ ،‬وهو إثبات الأسباب والقوى‪ .‬وأن الفناء في توحيد الر بو بية ليس هو غاية الطر يق‪،‬‬
‫بل فوقه ما هو أجل منه وأعلى وأشرف‪.‬‬
‫ومن هاتين القاعدتين عرض في كتابه من الأمور التي أنكرت عليه ما عرض‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬إشفاٌق يصون سعيه عن الع ُْجب‪ ،‬و يكف صاحبه عن مخاصمة الخ َلق‪ ،‬و يحمل‬
‫المر يد على حفظ الج ِد«‪.‬‬
‫الأول يتعلق بالعمل‪ .‬والثاني بالخلق‪ .‬والثالث بالإرادة‪ .‬وكل منها له ما يفسده‪.‬‬
‫فالعجب يفسد العمل كما يفسده الر ياء‪ ،‬فيشفق على سعيه من هذا المفسد شفقة ً تصونه عنه‪.‬‬
‫والمتعلق بالخلق مفسدة للخلق‪ ،‬فيشفق على خلقه من هذا المفسد شفقة ً تصونه عنه‪.‬‬
‫والإرادة يفسدها عدم الجد‪ ،‬وهو الهزل واللعب‪ ،‬فيشفق على إرادته مما يفسدها‪ .‬فإذا صح له عمله‬
‫وخلقه وإرادته‪ ،‬استقام سلوكه وقلبه وحاله‪ .‬والل ّٰه المستعان‪.‬‬

chapter 14

The Station of Humility
Among the stations of “You we worship and You we supplicate for help” is the
station of humility.
God the Exalted said,
Is the time not ripe for the believers that their hearts be humble to God’s
reminder and to the truth which is revealed, lest they become like those
who received the scripture before but when long ages passed over them,
their hearts were hardened, and many of them are wicked sinners. [57:16]
Commenting on this verse, Ibn Masʿūd, God be pleased with him, said, “There
were hardly four years between our Islam and the revelation of this verse in
which God took us to task.” Ibn ʿAbbās, God be pleased with them both, commented, “God found dampening in the believers’ hearts, so he took them to task
in the thirteenth year after the onset of revelation.”
The Exalted also said, “Successful indeed are the believers who are humble
in their [daily] prayers” [23:1–2].
Khushūʿ in the original language means the state of being low and still. God
said: “And all the sounds came to have khushūʿ before the All-merciful” [20:108];
that is, they became still, humble, and quiet. From [its usage] is the characterization of the earth as possessing khushūʿ, that is, [its being] dry and low, which
does not rise due to water or vegetation. God the exalted said: “And from His
signs is that you see the earth khāshiʿa (low and dry) but as soon as We send
down water upon it, it stirs to life and grows” [41:39].
Khushūʿ (humility), therefore, is the standing of the heart before the Exalted
Lord with humility, lowliness, and with full concentration towards Him.
It has been said that humility is submission to the Truth. This is one of the
causes of humility, and among its signs is that if a servant is opposed and
responded to with the truth, he welcomes the truth with acceptance and submission.
It has also been said that humility is to put out the fires of passion, calming
the smoke of the heart, and illumination of the heart by the light of glorification.
Al-Junayd, God have mercy on him, said, “Humility is the submission of the
hearts before the Knower of the unseen.”
The knowers of God have agreed that the site of humility is the heart, but
its fruits are borne on the physical body. As the Prophet said to the man who

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬الخشوع«‪.‬‬
‫ق﴾ ]الحديد‪ .[16:‬قال‬
‫ن اْلح َ ّ ِ‬
‫ل مِ َ‬
‫تخ ْشََع ق ُلوُ بُه ُْم ل ِذ ِك ْر ِ ال َل ّـه ِ و َم َا نزَ َ َ‬
‫ن آم َنوُ ا َأن َ‬
‫ن ل َ ِل ّذ ِي َ‬
‫قال تعالى‪َ ﴿ :‬أل َْم ي ْأَ ِ‬
‫ا بن مسعود—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—‪» :‬ما كان بين إسلامنا و بين أن عاتبنا الل ّٰه بهذه الآية إلا أر بع سنين«‪.‬‬
‫وقال ا بن عباس—رضي الل ّٰه عنهما—‪» :‬إن الل ّٰه استبطأ قلوب المؤمنين‪ ،‬فعاتبهم على رأس ثلاث‬
‫شع ُونَ﴾‬
‫صل َاتِه ِْم خ َا ِ‬
‫ن ه ُْم ف ِي َ‬
‫ح ال ْمؤُ ْم ِنوُ نَ ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫عشرة سنة ً من نزول القرآن«‪ .‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬ق َْد َأف ْل َ َ‬
‫]المؤمنون‪.[2–1:‬‬
‫ت‬
‫صو َا ُ‬
‫ت اْلَأ ْ‬
‫خشَع َ ِ‬
‫و»الخشوع« في أصل اللغة الانخفاض والذل والسكون‪ .‬قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َ َ‬
‫ن﴾ ]طه‪ ،[108:‬أي سكنت وذلت وخضعت‪ .‬ومنه وصف الأرض بالخشوع‪ ،‬وهو يبسها‬
‫ل ِل َر ّْحمَٰ ِ‬
‫شع َة ً ف ِ َإذ َا‬
‫ض خ َا ِ‬
‫ك ترَ َى اْلَأْر َ‬
‫وانخفاضها وعدم ارتفاعها بالري والنبات‪ .‬قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َم ِْن آياَ ت ِه ِ َأ َن ّ َ‬
‫ت﴾ ]فصلت‪.[39:‬‬
‫ت و َر َب َ ْ‬
‫َأ نز َلنْ َا ع َليَ ْه َا ال ْم َاء َ اه ْتزَ ّ ْ‬
‫و»الخشوع« قيام القلب بين يدي الرب تعالى بالخضوع والذلة والجمعية عليه‪.‬‬
‫وقيل »الخشوع« الانقياد للحق‪ .‬وهذا من موجبات الخشوع‪.‬‬
‫فمن علاماته أن العبد إذا خولف ورد عليه بالحق‪ ،‬استقبل ذلك بالقبول والانقياد‪.‬‬
‫وقيل »الخشوع« خمود نيران الشهوة‪ ،‬وسكون دخان الصدر‪ ،‬وإشراق نور التعظيم في القلب‪.‬‬
‫وقال الجنيد—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪» :‬الخشوع تذلل القلوب لعلام الغيوب«‪ .‬وأجمع العارفون على أن‬
‫»الخشوع« محله القلب‪ ،‬وثمرته على الجوارح‪ ،‬فهي تظهره‪ .‬و»رأى النبي ﷺ رجلا ً يعبث بلحيته في‬

180

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

was fidgeting with his beard while praying, “Had his heart had humility, his
limbs would also have shown its effect.”1 {The Prophet said, “Piety is in here,”
pointing to his chest, thrice. One of the knowers said, “Good outwardly character is the index of good inwardly character.”}2 One of [the Predecessors]
saw a man drooping his shoulders and body, so he said, “O so-and-so, humility is in here,” pointing to his chest, “and not there,” pointing to his shoulders.
One of the Companions, God be pleased with them all, Ḥudhayfa, said, “I
seek God’s refuge from hypocritical humility.” He was asked, “And what is hypocritical humility?” He said, “When the body shows humility but the heart is
devoid of it.”
{ʿUmar b. al-Khaṭṭāb once noticed a man meekly stooping his neck while
praying. He said: “O one with a neck, raise your neck, for khushūʿ is not found
in the necks, but in the hearts.” Once ʿĀʾisha, the Mother of the Believers, saw
some young men walking sluggishly so she inquired about them. She was told
that these are worshippers. She said, “When ʿUmar b. al-Khaṭṭāb walked, he was
swift; when he talked, he made himself heard; when he hit, it hurt; and when
he fed, he fed well—and he truly was a worshipper.”}3
Al-Fuḍayl b. ʿIyāḍ said: “It was disliked that a man’s body shows more humility than his heart.” Hudhayfa, God be pleased with him, said, “The first of what
you will lose in your religion is humility {and the last of what you will lose is
regular prayers. How many worshippers pray but have no good in them.} It may
be that you enter a mosque with an entire congregation offering prayers but
you don’t find among them one with true humility.” Sahl [al-Tustarī], God have
mercy on him, used to say, “Satan does not go near one whose heart has true
humility.”

1

Putting Out the Fire of Ego

The author of al-Manāzil, God have mercy on him, said,
Humility is putting out the fire of the ego and the calming of the ego in
reverence or dread.

1 Graded as weak, see Madārij(Ṣ), 1323.
2 This addition is missing in some of the manuscripts. Madārij(Ṣ), 1323.
3 The part within the braces is missing in some of the manuscripts.

‫‪181‬‬

‫‪chapter 14‬‬

‫الصلاة فقال‪ :‬لو خشع قلب هذا لخشعت جوارحه«‪ .‬ورأى بعضهم رجلا ً خاشع المنكبين والبدن‪.‬‬
‫فقال‪ :‬يا فلان‪ ،‬الخشوع هاهنا‪ ،‬وأشار إلى صدره‪ ،‬لا هاهنا‪ ،‬وأشار إلى منكبيه‪.‬‬
‫وكان بعض الصحابة—رضى الل ّٰه عنهم—وهو حذيفة يقول‪» :‬أعوذ بالل ّٰه من خشوع النفاق‪ .‬فقيل‬
‫له‪ :‬وما خشوع النفاق؟ فقال‪ :‬أن يرُ ى الجسد خاشعا ًوالقلب غير خاشع«‪.‬‬
‫وقال الفضيل بن عياض‪ :‬كان يكره أن يري الرجل من الخشوع أكثر مما في قلبه‪.‬‬
‫وقال حذيفة رضي الل ّٰه عنه‪» :‬أول ما تفقدون من دينكم الخشوع‪ .‬و يوشك أن تدخل مسجد الجماعة‬
‫فلا ترى فيهم خاشعا ً«‪.‬‬
‫وقال سهل—رحمه الل ّٰه—»من خشع قلبه لم يقرب منه الشيطان«‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪:‬‬
‫ٍ‬
‫ط ِباع لمتعاظٍم‪ ،‬أو مفزع«‪.‬‬
‫»الخشوع خمود النْفس‪ ،‬وهمود ال ّ‬

182

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

That is, constriction of the ego and nature, which is to restrain the drive of
the ego to expand by filling of the heart with greatness and awe or dread. In
reality, khushūʿ is a concept that unites reverence, love, humbleness, and selfeffacement.
He said,
It has three levels. The first level is humbling oneself before the command,
submitting to the decree, and humility to the watch of the Truth.
“Humbling oneself before the command” means accepting it with humble
acceptance, submission, and obedience, and outwardly as well as inwardly
compliance, accompanied by expression of weakness, and dire need for guidance to [fulfill] the command before it is accomplished, help during its execution, and acceptance after it.
“Submission to the judgment” could mean submitting to the normative command of the Law, in which case it would mean not opposing it with opinion
or desire. It could also mean submitting to the judgment of predestination, in
which case it would mean to receive it without any discontent, displeasure,
and objection [to the divine will]. In truth, humility is to submit to both kinds
of commands. It requires submission with meekness and humility to His command as well as judgment.
As for “humility to the watch of the Truth,” it means humbling the heart and
the body {and effacing it to the sight of the Lord upon it, and His knowledge of
what lies in the heart and the body}.
This is one of the interpretations of the words of the Exalted, “And for whosoever fears the station of his Lord are two Gardens” [55:46] and His words, “As for
he who fears the station of his Lord and restrained the soul from desire” [79:40].
This is the station of the Lord over His servant with knowledge, strength, and
lordship.
His fear of this station causes him humility of the heart; the greater his realization of it, the greater his humility, and humility leaves his heart when he
becomes heedless of the knowledge of God the Exalted of him and His watch
of him.
The second interpretation is that it means the standing of the servant before
his Lord upon meeting him. On this view, it being more appropriate to the verse,
it falls in the class of adding the verbal noun [“standing”] to the one who fears.

‫‪183‬‬

‫‪chapter 14‬‬

‫يعنى انقباض النفس والطبع‪ ،‬وهو خمود قوى النفس عن الانبساط لمن له في القلوب عظمة‬
‫ومهابة‪ ،‬أو لما يفزع منه القلب‪.‬‬
‫والحق أن »الخشوع« معنى يلتئم من التعظيم‪ ،‬والمحبة والذل والانكسار‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ .‬الدرجة الأولى‪ :‬التذلل للأمر‪ ،‬والاستسلام للح ُْكم‪ ،‬والاتضاع لن َظر‬
‫الحق«‪.‬‬
‫التذلل للأمر تلقيه بذلة القبول والانقياد والامتثال‪ ،‬ومواطأة الظاهر الباطن‪ ،‬مع إظهار الضعف‪،‬‬
‫والافتقار إلى الهداية للأمر قبل الفعل‪ ،‬والإعانة عليه حال الفعل‪ ،‬وقبوله بعد الفعل‪.‬‬
‫وأما الاستسلام للحكم‪ ،‬فيجوز أن ير يد به الحكم َالديني الشرعي‪ ،‬فيكون معناه عدم معارضته برأي‬
‫ي‪ ،‬وهو عدم تلقيه بالتسخط والـكراهة والاعتراض‪.‬‬
‫أو شهوة‪ ،‬وأن ير يد به الاستسلام للحكم القدر ّ ِ‬
‫والحق أن »الخشوع« هو الاستسلام للحكمين‪ ،‬وهو الانقياد بالمسكنة‪ ،‬والذل لأمره وقضائه‪.‬‬
‫وأما الاتضاع لنظر الحق فهو اتضاع القلب والجوارح ]وانكسارها لنظر الرب إليها‪ ،‬واطلاعه على‬
‫ن﴾‬
‫ج َن ّت َا ِ‬
‫ف م َق َام َ ر َب ِّه ِ َ‬
‫تفاصيل ما في القلب والجوارح[‪ .‬وهذا أحد التأو يلين في قوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َلم ِ َْن خ َا َ‬
‫ن ال ْهوَ َى﴾ ]النازعات‪ ،[40:‬وهو‬
‫]الرحمن‪ ،[46:‬وقوله‪﴿ :‬و َ َأ َمّا م َْن خ َا َ‬
‫س عَ ِ‬
‫ف م َق َام َ ر َب ِّه ِ و َنََهى ال َن ّْف َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫مقام الرب على عبده بالاطلاع والقدرة والر بو بية‪.‬‬
‫فخوفه من هذا المقام يوجب له خشوع القلب لا محالة‪ .‬وكلما كان أشد استحضارا ً لهكان أشد‬
‫خشوعا‪ ً،‬وإنما يفارق القلب الخشوع إذا غفل عن اطلاع الل ّٰه تعالى عليه ونظره إليه‪.‬‬
‫والتأو يل الثاني أنه مقام العبد بين يدي ر به عند لقائه‪.‬‬
‫فعلى الأول يكون من باب إضافة المصدر إلى الفاعل‪.‬‬
‫وعلى الثاني—وهو أليق بالآية—يكون من باب إضافة المصدر إلى المخوف‪.‬‬

184

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

2

Recognizing the Lesions of One’s Soul and Deeds

He said,
The second level is to watch the lesions of the soul and deeds, seeing the
superiority of every superior, and inhaling the smell of annihilation.
He means looking out for the appearance of the deficiencies and flaws of your
soul and practice, for that makes the heart humble. Examining the defects of
the soul and its deeds such as arrogance, self-admiration, ostentation, weakness of truthfulness and dearth of certitude, confusion of intention, and failure to purify the motivation from selfish desire, {failure to perform acts in a
way that pleases your Lord, and other defects of the soul}4 and spoilers of
deeds.
As for “seeing the superiority of every superior,” it is that you watch out for
people’s rights and fulfill them, without considering what they did toward you
and your rights, and do not pay them back in coin. For doing so is foolishness
and stupidity of the soul. Do not demand your rights, acknowledge the superiority of those that are superior, and forget your own superiority.
I heard Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya, God sanctify his soul, say, “The knower
does not see his right upon anyone, nor witness his superiority over anyone, and
therefore does not get angry in return, demand, or fight back.”
As for “inhaling the smell of annihilation,” since annihilation in [al-Harawī’s]
view is the ultimate end, he made this level a breeze due to its subtlety. He
called it a breeze due to its subtle location in the soul, and due to its strong/
intense clinging to it. No doubt, humility is a cause of attaining annihilation,
its best kind as well as one less than the best.

3

The Third Level

He said,
The third level is protecting the sanctity upon unveiling, purification of
the time from the flattery of the creation, and stripping the vision of superiority/grace.

4 The part within the braces is missing in one of the manuscripts.

‫‪185‬‬

‫‪chapter 14‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬ترقب آفات النفس والعمل‪ ،‬ورؤ ية ُ فضل كل ذي فضل عليك‪ ،‬وتنسم نسيم‬
‫الفناء«‪.‬‬
‫ير يد انتظار ظهور نقائص نفسك وعملك وعيو بهما لك‪ .‬فإنه يجعل القلب خاشعا ًلا محالة‪ ،‬لمطالعة‬
‫عيوب نفسه وأعمالها ونقائصهما من الـكبر والعجب والر ياء وضعف الصدق وقلة اليقين وتشتت النية‬
‫وعدم تجرد الباعث من هوى نفساني‪] ،‬وعدم إ يقاع العمل على الوجه الذي ترضاه لر بك‪ ،‬وغير ذلك‬
‫من عيوب النفس[‪ ،‬ومفسدات الأعمال‪.‬‬
‫وأما رؤ ية فضل كل ذي فضل عليك فهو أن تراعي حقوق الناس فتؤديها‪ ،‬ولا ترى أن ما فعلوه‬
‫معك من حقوقك عليهم‪ ،‬فلا تعاوضهم عليها‪ ،‬فإن هذا من رعونات النفس وحماقاتها‪ ،‬ولا تطالبهم‬
‫بحقوق نفسك‪ .‬وتعترف بفضل ذي الفضل منهم‪ ،‬وتنسى فضل نفسك‪.‬‬
‫وسمعت شيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية—قدس الل ّٰه روحه—يقول‪ :‬العارف لا يرى له على أحد حقا‪ً،‬‬
‫ولا يشهد له على غيره فضلا‪ ً،‬فلذلك لا يعات ِب ولا يطال ِب ولا يضارِب‪.‬‬
‫وأما تنسم نسيم الفناء‪ ،‬فلما كان الفناء عنده غاية‪ ،‬جعل هذه الدرجةكالنسيم لرقته‪ ،‬وعب ّر عنها‬
‫بالنسيم لل ُطف موقعه من الروح وشدة تشبثها به‪ .‬ولا ر يب أن الخشوع سبب موصل إلى الفناء‪ ،‬فاضله‬
‫ومفضوله‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬حفظ الح ُرمة عند المكاشفة‪ ،‬وتصفية الوقت من مراءاة الخ َلق‪ ،‬وتجر يد رؤ ية‬
‫الفضل«‪.‬‬

186

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

As for “protecting the sanctity upon unveiling,” it is the discipline of the ego
through humility and self-effacement against complacence and conceit that
could result from the unveiling. For unveiling requires expansion, and risks
utterance of ecstatic outbursts if it is not accompanied by humility that protects the sanctity.
As for “the purification of the time from the flattery of the creation,” he does
not mean by it avoiding ostentation, for the people of this level are higher in
status than that. Rather, he means one should do his best to hide his states
from the creation, as part of his humility and self-effacement, so that people
do not notice it, lest their awareness of his states pleases him and ruins his
heart and his time with God the Exalted. How many seekers have lost the way
in this wasteland? Protected are only those whom God has protected. Nothing
is more beneficial for the truthful than the realization of his poverty, need, and
lowliness, and that he is nothing, that he is among those whose even Islam is
not fully sound yet, let alone attainment of noble states.
I have seen from Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya, God sanctify his soul, of this
[humility] that I have not seen in anyone else. He used to often say, “Nothing
is mine, nothing is from me, nothing is in me.” He used to often be an embodiment of this line,
I am a beggar, son of a beggar
So too were my father and grandfather
When he was praised to his face he would say, “By God, I am still trying to
improve my Islam. I have not even become a proper Muslim yet.”
Toward the end of his life he sent me a treatise on exegesis in his handwriting, and on its back were the following lines of poetry in his handwriting,
I am the beggar to the Lord of all things
I am the little destitute in all my states
I am the one who wrongs my soul, and it wrongs me
If any good comes to us, it comes from Him
{I cannot benefit myself
Nor can I repel harm from me
I have no master other than Him
Nor an intercessor to the Lord of the heavens
Except by the leave of the All-merciful, our Creator
To the intercessor, as has come to us in scripture}
I do not own a thing without Him
Nor am I a partner in even a grain

‫‪187‬‬

‫‪chapter 14‬‬

‫أما حفظ الحرمة عند المكاشفة فهو ضبط النفس بالذل والانكسار عن البسط والإدلال الذي‬
‫تقتضيه المكاشفة‪ .‬فإن المكاشفة توجب بسطا‪ ً،‬و يخاف منه شطح إن لم يصحبه خشوع يحفظ الحرمة‪.‬‬
‫وأما تصفية الوقت من مراءاة الخلق فلا ير يد به أنه يصفي وقته عن الر ياء‪ ،‬فإن أصحاب هذه‬
‫الدرجة أجل قدرا ً وأعلى من ذلك‪.‬‬
‫وإنما المراد أنه يخفي أحواله عن الخلق جهده كخشوعه وذله وانكساره‪ ،‬لئلا يراها الناس فيعجبه‬
‫اطلاعهم عليها ورؤ يتهم لها‪ .‬فيفسد عليه قلبه ووقته وحاله مع الل ّٰه تعالى‪ .‬وكم قد اقتطع في هذه المفازة‬
‫من سالك؟ والمعصوم من عصمه الل ّٰه‪ .‬فلا شيء أنفع للصادق من التحقق بالمسكنة والفاقة والذل‪،‬‬
‫وأنه لا شيء‪ ،‬وأنه ممن لم يصح له بعد الإسلام حتى يدعي الشرف‪.‬‬
‫ولقد شاهدت من شيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية—قدس الل ّٰه روحه—من ذلك أمرا ً لم أشاهده من‬
‫غيره‪ .‬وكان يقول كثيرا ً‪ :‬ما لي شيء‪ ،‬ولا مني شيء‪ ،‬ولا في شيء‪ .‬وكان كثيرا ً ما يتمثل بهذا البيت‪:‬‬

‫أنا المكدي وا بن المكدي‬

‫وهكذا كان أبي وجدي‬

‫وكان إذا أثنى عليه في وجهه يقول‪ :‬والل ّٰه إني إلى الآن أجدد إسلامي كل وقت‪ .‬وما أسلمت بعد‬
‫إسلاما ًجيدا ً‪.‬‬
‫و بعث إلي في آخر عمره قاعدة في التفسير بخطه‪ .‬وعلى ظهرها أبيات بخطه من نظمه‪:‬‬

‫أنا الفقير إلى رب البر َي ّات‬

‫أنا الم ُسَيكين فى مجموع حالاتى‬

‫أنا الظلوم لنفسى وهي ظالمتي‬

‫والخـير إن جاءنا من عنده يأتي‬

‫ب منفعة‬
‫]لا أستطيع لنفسى جل َ‬

‫ولا عن النفس لى دفُع المضرات‬

‫وليس لي دونه مولى يدب ّ ِرني‬

‫ولا شفيٌع إلى رب السماوات‬

‫إلا بإذن من الرحمن خالق ِنا‬

‫إلى الشفيع كما قد جا بآيات[‬

‫ت أملك شيئا دونه أبدا‬
‫ولس ُ‬

‫ك أنا في بعض ذرات‬
‫ولا شر ي ٌ‬

188

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Nor is there a helper to help Him
As there are with kings
{Utter dependence is ever my essential attribute
As independence is His eternal attribute
This is the case of all creation
Everyone is His servant, coming to him in submission
Whoever seeks an end from someone but his Creator
He is wrongful, ignorant, rebellious, associationist}
Praise is God’s the fill of the universe
What of it once was and what will one day be5
As for “the purification of the vision of bounty,” it means that he sees no favor or
bounty except from God; He is the bestower of bounty without any deserving
cause in you—there being no intercessor that intervened on your behalf, nor
a link that issued from you that brought you His favor. The “purification” here
means to exclusively attribute all bounty to its bestower and not attribute it to
anyone else. For in fact, [God] is above sharing [any of His acts] with other than
Him. The concern, therefore, is only with the purification of witnessing [that
is, not in His essence, for it is pure already] such that the witnessing befits the
One being witnessed. And God knows best.

4

Humility and Attentiveness in Prayers

If it is said: What do you say about the performance of prayer that lacked humility, does it count or not?
It would be said: As for its counting for reward, then no, it would not, except
for what he understood of it and performed with humility. Ibn ʿAbbās, God be
pleased with them both, said, “There is nothing for you of your prayer except
what you understand of it.”6 [It is recorded] in the Sunan and the Musnad,
raised [to the authority of the Prophet], “A servant says prayers, but only a half
of it is written for him, or a third, or a fourth,” and he kept going until he said,
“only a tenth.”
God has tied the success to the believers who offer prayers in humility
[Q. 23:1–2], which means that whoever does not possess humility in it is not
from the people of success, for if his reward would count, he would be considered among the successful.
5 See Ibn Taymiyya, Dīwān Ibn Taymiyya. Madārij(Ṣ), 1331.
6 Ahmad 4:419.

‫‪189‬‬

‫‪chapter 14‬‬

‫به‬

‫كما يكون لأر باب الولايات‬

‫ظهير ٌ‬

‫له كي‬

‫يستعين‬

‫ف ذات لازم ٌ أبدا‬
‫]والفقر لي وص ُ‬

‫ف له ذاتي‬
‫كما الغنى أبدا وص ٌ‬

‫ل الخ َلق أجمهم‬
‫وهذه الحال حا ُ‬

‫وك ُل ّهم‬

‫فمن بغى مطلبا من غير خالقه‬

‫ظلوم الجهول المشرك العاتي[‬
‫فهو ال َ ّ‬

‫والحمد لل ّٰه ملء ُ الـكون أجمعه‬

‫ما كان منه وما من بعد قد يأتي‬

‫عنده‬

‫عبدٌ له‬

‫آتي‬

‫ن به بلا سبب منك‪،‬‬
‫وأما تجر يد رؤ ية الفضل فهو ألا يرى الفضل والإحسان إلا من الل ّٰه‪ .‬فهو الما ُ ّ‬
‫ولا شفيع لك تقدم إليه بالشفاعة‪ ،‬ولا وسيلة سبقت منك توسلت بها إلى إحسانه‪.‬‬
‫والتجر يد هو تخليص شهود الفضل لوليه‪ ،‬حتى لا ينسبه إلى غيره‪ .‬وإلا فهو في نفسه مجرد عن‬
‫النسبة إلى سواه‪ .‬وإنما الشأن في تجر يده في الشهود‪ ،‬ليطابق الشهود الحق في نفس الأمر‪ .‬والل ّٰه أعلم‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫فإن قيل‪ :‬فما تقولون في صلاة من عدم الخشوع في صلاته‪ :‬هل يعتد بها أم لا؟‬
‫قيل‪ :‬أما الاعتداد بها في الثواب‪ ،‬فلا يعتد له منها‪ .‬إلا بما عقل فيه‪ ،‬وخشع فيه لر به‪.‬‬
‫قال ا بن عباس—رضى الل ّٰه عنهما—‪» :‬ليس لك من صلاتك إلا ما عقلت منها«‪.‬‬
‫وفي السنن والمسند مرفوعا‪» ً:‬إن العبد ليصلي الصلاة‪ ،‬ولم يكتب له إلا نصفها‪ ،‬إلا ثلثها‪ ،‬إلا‬
‫ر بعها—حتى بلغ عشرها«‪.‬‬
‫وقد علق الل ّٰه فلاح المصلين بالخشوع في صلاتهم‪ ،‬فدل على أن من لم يخشع فيها‪ ،‬فليس من أهل‬
‫الفلاح‪ ،‬ولو اعتّد له بها ثوابا لً كان من المفلحين‪.‬‬

190

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

As for its validity in the judgments of the world and fulfilling them, then
if the majority of it had humility and comprehension, it counts as valid by
consensus. The Sunna prayers and litanies that follow [the obligatory prayer]
further complete its deficiencies.
4.1
First View: Prayer without Proper Humility Is Legally Invalid
If, however, the majority of it lacked humility and comprehension, the jurists
have disagreed about the obligation of repeating it. Among the companions of
Aḥmad, Abū ʿAbdallāh b. Ḥāmid has deemed it an obligation, as did Abū Ḥāmid
al-Ghazālī in his Iḥyāʾ, but not in his Wasīṭ or his Basīṭ. They argue that such a
prayer has no reward [as agreed by the majority], nor is success guaranteed for
it [in the verses just mentioned]; it does not, therefore, fulfill the obligation, nor
is he free of compensating for such a prayer, like someone who prayed only to
show others.
They further argue that attentive humility and comprehension are the spirit
of prayer—its very objective and essence. How can something be valid if it was
void of its spirit and essence and possessed only its form and appearance?
They further argue that if a servant intentionally forsakes an obligatory element of the prayer, it makes it invalid. The absence of some of its parts is like
the absence of the limbs of a slave freed in expiation [which would be invalid];
what if [the offering] lacked its spirit, essence and purpose? It would be like
freeing a dead slave. If [the freeing of] a slave with a hand cut off does not
count as an expiation in devotions to God the Exalted, how could [the freeing]
of a dead slave count? This is why one of the Predecessors said that the prayer
is like a maid that you offer to a king from among the kings. What do you think
of one who offers a maid who is paralyzed, one-eyed, blind, or lacking a hand
or a leg, or sick, decrepit, or foul? Such is the prayer that the servant offers as
a devotion to His Exalted Lord; God is good and only accepts what is good. A
prayer void of spirit is not a good act, just as freeing a dead slave is not a good
act.
They also say that excluding the heart from {the worship of presence and
humility is like excluding the king of the organs from worship; worship does
not suffice if it comes only from} the subjects with their king excluded and suspended.
They further argue that limbs are subservient to the heart; they are sound
or corrupt depending on it. If it does not establish its part of the worship,
the limbs’ worship is even less valid. If [the heart’s] worship is corrupted due
to negligence and whisperings, how could the worship of his subjects and
armies be valid, when their matter is from it, and upon its command they
move?

‫‪191‬‬

‫‪chapter 14‬‬

‫وأما الاعتداد بها في أحكام الدنيا وسقوط القضاء‪ ،‬فإن غلب عليها الخشوع وتعقلها اعتد بها إجماعا‪ً،‬‬
‫وكانت السنن والأذكار عقيبها جوا بر ومكملات لنقصها‪.‬‬

‫وإن غلب عليه عدم الخشوع فيها وعدم تعقلها‪ ،‬فقد اختلف الفقهاء في وجوب إعادتها‪ ،‬فأوجبها أبو‬
‫عبد الل ّٰه بن حامد من أصحاب أحمد‪ ،‬وأبو حامد الغزالي في إحيائه لا في وسيطه و بسيطه‪.‬‬
‫واحتجوا بأنها صلاة لا يثاب عليها‪ ،‬ولم يضمن له فيها الفلاح‪ ،‬فلم تبرأ ذمته منها‪ ،‬ولم يسقط القضاء‬
‫عنهكصلاة المرائي‪.‬‬
‫حها‬
‫ت رو َ‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬ولأن الخشوع والعقل روح الصلاة ومقصودها ولبها‪ ،‬فكيف يعتد بصلاة فقد ْ‬
‫ولبها‪ ،‬و بقيت صورتُها وظاهرها؟‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬ولو ترك العبد واجبا ً من واجباتها عمدا ً لأبطلها تركه‪ .‬وغايته أن يكون بعضا ً من أبعاضها‬
‫بمنزلة فوات عضو من أعضاء العبد المعتق في الـكفارة‪ ،‬فكيف إذا عدمت روحها ولبها ومقصودها؟‬
‫وصارت بمنزلة العبد الميت‪ .‬فإذا لم يعتد بالعبد المقطوع اليد‪ ،‬بعتقه تقر با ً إلى الل ّٰه تعالى في كفارة‬
‫واجبة‪ ،‬فكيف يعتد بالعبد الميت؟‬
‫ولهذا قال بعض السلف‪ :‬الصلاة كجار ية تهدى إلى ملك من الملوك‪ .‬فما الظن بمن يهدي إليه جار ية ً‬
‫شلاء أو عوراء أو عمياء أو مقطوعة اليد والرجل‪ ،‬أو مريضة ً أو ز َم ِنةَ ً أو قبيحة ً‪ ،‬حتى يهدي جار ية‬
‫ميتة ً بلا روح أو جار ية ً قبيحة ً‪ .‬فهكذا الصلاة التي يهديها العبد‪ ،‬و يتقرب بها إلى ر به تعالى‪ .‬والل ّٰه طيب‬
‫لا يقبل إلا طيبا‪ ً،‬وليس من العمل الطيب صلاة لا روح فيها‪ .‬كما أنه ليس من العتق الطيب‪ ،‬عتق‬
‫عبد لا روح فيه‪.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬وتعطيل القلب عن ]عبودية الحضور والخشوع‪ ،‬تعطيل لملك الأعضاء عن عبوديته‪ ،‬وعزل‬
‫له عنها‪ .‬فماذا تغني طاعة[ الرعية وعبوديتها‪ ،‬وقد ع ُزل ملـكها وتعطل؟‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬والأعضاء تابعة للقلب‪ ،‬تصلح بصلاحه وتفسد بفساده‪ .‬فإذا لم يكن قائما بً عبوديته‪ ،‬فالأعضاء‬
‫أولى ألا يعتد بعبوديتها‪ ،‬وإذا فسدت عبوديته—بالغفلة والوسواس—فأنى تصح عبودية رعيته‬
‫وجنده ومادتهم منه‪ ،‬وعن أمره يصدرون‪ ،‬و به يأتمرون؟‬

192

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

They argue [from reports like that] in al-Tirmidhī and elsewhere, raised to
the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, “God does not accept supplication from a heedless heart.”7 This is either specific to the supplication of
worship, or general, including it as well as the supplication of needs, or specific
to the supplication of needs, which is the right of the servant. Thus, this is a
warning that it is the supplication of worship that is purely His right against a
heedless heart.
They also say that the worship of one who is overwhelmed by his heedlessness and forgetfulness cannot possess sincerity. For sincerity comprises intending the deity alone in one’s worship, and a heedless one has no intention; his
worship cannot, therefore, count.
They also say that God the Exalted has said, “Woe to the performers of the
prayer who are forgetful of their prayer” [107:4–5]. Being “forgetful” does not
mean abandoning it, for then they would not be “performers of the prayer” at
all. The forgetting could only refer to an obligatory part of the prayer, either its
time, as is the opinion of Ibn Masʿūd and others, or attentiveness and humility,
and the correct opinion is that it includes both. For God the Glorious affirms
their having prayed, but attributed to them forgetfulness, which could be forgetting its appointed time or the obligatory sincerity and attentiveness, which
is why he characterized them with ostentation. If it were forgetting to pray altogether, there would be no ostentation involved. They argue that if were to limit
the “forgetfulness” to the time of the prayer alone, it constitutes a warning of
ruin of forgetting sincerity and attentiveness a fortiori, {in a number of ways.
First, the time-requirement may be relaxed for a valid excuse, and moved to an
alternative [time], but the requirements of sincerity and attentiveness} cannot
ever be dropped or replaced. Second, the requirement of time is dropped for
the sake of the completion of the benefit of attentiveness. Thus, it is permissible to combine two prayers owing to a circumstance that prohibits doing one
of them in its time with the presence of the heart and attentiveness, such as in
the case of a traveler, an ill person, or someone who must attend to something
and thus needs to combine, as stated by Aḥmad and others.
On the whole, then, the interest of sincerity, humility, attentiveness, and concentration of the heart upon God the Exalted during the prayer is the most
important of all of its elements and requirements in the eyes of the Lawgiver.
How could it be imagined that he invalidates it by omitting one takbīr (saying “God is greater”) or properly settling in one of its positions, or omitting
one word, or an emphatic syllable in the obligatory recitation, or neglecting a

7 Tirmidhī #3479, graded as ḥasan li-ghayrihī to weak. Madārij(Ṣ), 1336.

‫‪193‬‬

‫‪chapter 14‬‬

‫قالوا‪ :‬وفي الترمذي وغيره مرفوعا إً لى النبي ﷺ‪» :‬إن الل ّٰه لا يستجيب الدعاء من قلب غافل«‪ .‬وهذا‬
‫إما خاص بدعاء العبادة‪ ،‬وإما عام له ولدعاء المسألة‪ ،‬وإما خاص بدعاء المسألة الذي هو حق العبد‬
‫فهو تنبيه على أنه دعاء العبادة الذي هو خالص حقه من قلب غافل‪.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬ولأن عبودية من غلبت عليه الغفلة والسهو في الغالب لا تكون مصاحبة للإخلاص‪ .‬فإن‬
‫الإخلاص قصد المعبود وحده بالتعبد‪ .‬والغافل لا قصد له‪ ،‬فلا عبودية له‪.‬‬
‫ساه ُونَ﴾ ]الماعون‪ .[5–4:‬وليس‬
‫صل َاتِه ِْم َ‬
‫ن ه ُْم ع َن َ‬
‫صل ِّينَ ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ل ل ّ ِل ْم ُ َ‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬وقد قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬فوَ يَ ْ ٌ‬
‫السهو عنها تركها وإلا لم يكونوا مصلين‪ ،‬وإنما هو السهو عن واجبها‪ :‬إما الوقت‪ ،‬كما قال ا بن مسعود‬
‫وغيره‪ ،‬وإما الحضور والخشوع‪ ،‬والصواب أنه يعم النوعين‪ .‬فإنه سبحانه أثبت لهم صلاة ً ووصفهم‬
‫بالسهو عنها‪ ،‬فهو السهو عن وقتها الواجب‪ ،‬أو إخلاصها وحضورها الواجب‪ .‬ولذلك وصفهم بالر ياء‪.‬‬
‫ولو كان السهو سهو ترك لما كان هناك ر ياء‪ .‬قالوا‪ :‬ولو قّدرنا أنه السهو عن واجب الوقت فقط‪ ،‬فهو‬
‫تنبيه على التوعد بالو يل على سهو الإخلاص والحضور بطر يق الأولى ]لوجوه‪ ،‬أحدها أن الوقت يسقط‬
‫في حال العذر‪ ،‬و ينتقل إلى بدله‪ ،‬والإخلاص والحضور[ لا يسقط بحال‪ ،‬ولا بدل له‪.‬‬
‫الثاني‪ :‬أن واجب الوقت يسقط لتكميل مصلحة الحضور‪ .‬فيجوز الجمع بين الصلاتين للشغل المانع‬
‫من فعل إحداهما في وقتها بلا قلب ولا حضور‪ ،‬كالمسافر والمر يض وذي الشغل الذي يحتاج معه‬
‫إلى الجمع‪ ،‬كما نص عليه أحمد وغيره‪.‬‬
‫فبالجملة‪ ،‬مصلحة الإخلاص والحضور وجمعية القلب على الل ّٰه تعالى في الصلاة أرجح في نظر الشارع‬
‫من مصلحة سا ئر واجباتها‪ .‬فكيف يظن به أنه يبطلها بترك تكبيرة واحدة‪ ،‬أو اعتدال في ركن‪ ،‬أو ترك‬
‫حرف‪ ،‬أو شدة من القراءة الواجبة‪ ،‬أو ترك تسبيحة‪ ،‬أو قول‪» :‬سمع الل ّٰه لمن حمده«‪ ،‬أو »ر بنا ولك‬

194

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

tasbīḥa (saying “God be glorified”), or the saying of “God has heard the one who
praises Him” or “Our Lord, Yours is the praise,” or the mention of His Messenger by sending blessings upon him, but does not invalidate it when he omits its
essence and greatest purpose, its spirit and its inner wisdom?
These are the arguments of this group, and these are, as you have seen, strong
and manifest.
4.2
Second View: Prayer without Proper Humility Is Legally Valid
The other school says that it is proved on the authority of Prophet, God grant
him blessing and peace, in the Ṣaḥīḥ, that he said, “When the call [to prayer]
is pronounced Satan takes to his heels and passes wind with noise during his
flight in order not to hear the call. When the call is completed, he comes back
and again takes to his heels when the call to stand is pronounced and after
its completion he returns again to whisper to him, and makes him remember
things which he did not remember [before the prayer], saying, “Remember this,
remember that,” concerning things that he did not remember. So much so that
the man no longer knows how much he has prayed. If this happens to one of
you, he should perform two prostrations while sitting.”8 These scholars argue
that in this performance of prayer in which Satan did distract a person, to the
point that he did not know how much he had prayed, he, God grant him blessing and peace, commanded only two prostrations of forgetfulness, not to repeat
the entire prayer. Had it become invalid as you claim, he would have ordered
to repeat it.
This, therefore, is the wisdom of the two prostrations of forgetfulness, to
undo the whispering of the Satan to a worshipper and his interference against
attentiveness in prayer. That is why the Prophet, God grant him blessing and
peace, dubbed these two prostrations “the two debasers”9 and commanded
these to whoever forgets. Furthermore, he did not distinguish between a few
or numerous instances of forgetting, nor between whether they constituted the
majority or minority [of the prayer in its entirety]. He said, “for all occurrences
of forgetfulness, there are [only] two prostrations.”10 He did not make an exception for forgetfulness that constitutes the majority.
This is the case, they further argue, because the laws of Islam are based on
external actions, while the realities of inner faith are the cause of the ultimate
reward or punishment. God the Exalted has two realms of dominion: dominion in this world in which God commands the external laws and actions of
the body; and a dominion in the Hereafter, which applies to both the outer
8 Bukhārī #1231; Muslim #389.
9 Based on the tradition in Abū Dāwūd #1025.

‫‪195‬‬

‫‪chapter 14‬‬

‫الحمد«‪ ،‬أو ذكر رسوله الل ّٰه بالصلاة عليه‪ ،‬ثم يصححها مع فوات لبها‪ ،‬ومقصودها الأعظم‪ ،‬وروحها‬
‫وسرها؟ فهذا ما احتجت به هذه الطائفة‪ .‬وهي حجج—كما تراها—قوة ً وظهورا ً‪.‬‬

‫قال أصحاب القول الآخر‪ :‬قد ثبت عن النبي ﷺ في الصحيح أنه قال‪» :‬إذا أذن المؤذن أدبر الشيطان‪،‬‬
‫وله ضراط حتى لا يسمع التأذين‪ .‬فإذا قضى التأذين أقبل‪ .‬فإذا ثوُ ِ ّب بالصلاة أدبر‪ .‬فإذا قضى التثو يب‬
‫أقبل حتى يخطر بين المرء و بين نفسه‪ ،‬فيذكره ما لم يكن يذكر‪ .‬يقول‪ :‬اذكر كذا‪ ،‬اذكر كذا‪ .‬لما لم يكن‬
‫يذكر حتى يظل الرجل أن يدري كم صلى‪ .‬فإذا وجد ذلك أحدكم فليسجد سجدتين وهو جالس«‪.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬فأمره النبي ﷺ في هذه الصلاة التي قد أغفله الشيطان فيها‪ ،‬حتى لم يدر كم صلى‪ ،‬بأن يسجد‬
‫سجدتي السهو‪ .‬ولم يأمره بإعادتها‪ ،‬ولو كانت باطلة ً—كما زعمتم—لأمره بإعادتها‪.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬وهذا هو السر في سجدتي السهو‪ ،‬ترغيما لً لشيطان في وسوسته للعبد‪ ،‬وكونه حال بينه و بين‬
‫صل في سهوه الذي‬
‫الحضور في الصلاة‪ .‬ولهذا سماها النبي ﷺ »المرغمتين« وأمر من سها بهما‪ ،‬ولم يف ِّ‬
‫صدر عنه موجب السجود بين القليل والـكثير‪ ،‬والغالب والمغلوب‪ .‬وقال‪» :‬لكل سهو سجدتان«‪ ،‬ولم‬
‫يستثن من ذلك السهو الغالب‪] ،‬مع أنه الغالب[‪.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬ولأن شرائع الإسلام على الأفعال الظاهرة‪ .‬وأما حقائق الإ يمان الباطنة‪ ،‬فتلك عليها شرائع‬
‫الثواب والعقاب‪ .‬فلل ّٰه تعالى حكمان‪:‬‬
‫حكم في الدنيا على الشرائع الظاهرة وأعمال الجوارح‪ ،‬وحكم في الأخرة على الحقائق والبواطن‪.‬‬

‫‪Abū Dāwūd #1038.‬‬

‫‪10‬‬

196

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

and inner actions. That is why the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace,
would accept the hypocrites according to their appearances and would leave
their inner secrets to God. They would marry, inherit from, and be inherited
from by other Muslims. Similarly, their prayer would count; they would not be
treated like those who abandon prayers if they prayed, however ostensibly. The
judgment of reward and punishment is not for man but God to hand out in the
afterlife.
Hence, they say, we accept according to the Laws of Islam the correctness of
the prayer of the hypocrite, the insincere and ostentatious, even though his performance would not avert punishment nor bring reward in the hereafter. Thus,
the legal validity is even more established for the prayer of a heedless Muslim
suffering from whispers and distraction of the heart from complete attentiveness.
True, such prayer does not attain its objective of God’s reward either in this
world or the next. For the prayer has additional reward in this world, which is
increase in faith, light, expansion, and relaxation in the heart, the sweetness
of worship, bliss, and happiness, and a pleasure that is experienced by the one
whose heart and concern comes together upon God, whose heart is attentive
in His presence. It is like what occurs to someone who is drawn close by the
king and chosen as his confidante and attendant, and God is higher and more
magnificent.
The same is the case with respect to the high ranks in the afterlife and the
companionship of those drawn close [to God]; all this is lost with the loss of
attentiveness and humility. Two men may pray next to each other in one rank,
but their prayers may have the difference of the heaven and the earth. All this
has no relation to the question at hand.
If you intend by the obligation of repetition [of a prayer without humility]
in order to obtain these fruits and benefits, than that is for him, if he wishes to
attain them, and if he wishes, he can deprive himself of them. But we do not
consider it obligatory, nor will we shun him and apply upon him the legal ruling
of one who abandons prayer completely.
This second explanation is the preferred one, and God knows better.

‫‪197‬‬

‫‪chapter 14‬‬

‫ولهذا كان النبي ﷺ يقبل علانية المنافقين‪ ،‬و َ يكِل سرا ئرهم إلى الل ّٰه تعالى‪ ،‬و يناكحون و يرثون‬
‫و يورثون‪ ،‬و يعتد بصلاتهم في أحكام الدنيا‪ .‬فلا يكون حكمهم حكم تارك الصلاة‪ ،‬إذ قد أتوا بصورتها‬
‫الظاهرة‪ ،‬وأحكام الثواب والعقاب‪ ،‬ليس إلى البشر بل إلى الل ّٰه يتولاه في الدار الآخرة‪.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬فنحن في حكم شرائع الإسلام نحكم بصحة صلاة المنافق والمرائي مع أنها لا ت ُسقط عنه‬
‫العقاب‪ ،‬ولا يحصل له الثواب‪ .‬فصلاة المسلم الغافل المبتلى بالوسواس وغفلة القلب عن كمال حضوره‬
‫أولى بالصحة‪.‬‬
‫نعم‪ ،‬لا يحصل مقصود هذه الصلاة من ثواب الل ّٰه عاجلا ًولا آجلا‪ ً.‬فإن للصلاة مزيدا ً عاجلا ً‬
‫في القلب من قوة إ يمانه‪ ،‬واستنارته وانشراحه وانفساحه‪ ،‬ووجد حلاوة العبادة‪ ،‬والفرح والسرور‪،‬‬
‫واللذة التي تحصل لمن اجتمع قلبه وهمه على الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وحضر قلبه بين يديه‪ ،‬كما يحصل لمن قر به السلطان‬
‫منه‪ ،‬وخصه بمناجاته والإقبال عليه‪ ،‬والل ّٰه أعلى وأجل‪ .‬وكذلك ما يحصل لهذا من الدرجات العلى في‬
‫الآخرة‪ ،‬ومرافقة المقر بين‪ .‬كل هذا يفوته بفوات الحضور والخشوع‪ .‬وإن الرجلين ليكون مقامهما في‬
‫الصف واحدا ً‪ ،‬و بين صلاتيهما كما بين السماء والأرض‪ ،‬وليس كلامنا في هذا كله‪.‬‬
‫فإن أردتم وجوب الإعادة لتحصل هذه الثمرات والفوائد‪ ،‬فذاك إليه إن شاء أن يحصلها وإن شاء‬
‫أن يفوتها على نفسه‪ ،‬وإن أردتم بوجوب الإعادة أنا نلزمه بها‪ ،‬ونعاقبه على تركها‪ ،‬ونرتب عليه أحكام‬
‫تارك الصلاة فلا‪.‬‬
‫وهذا القول الثاني أرجح القولين‪ .‬والل ّٰه أعلم‪.‬‬

chapter 15

The Station of Meekness
Among the stations of “You we worship and You we supplicate for help” is meekness.1
God the Exalted said: “And give glad tiding to the meek” [22:34], and then
explained the meaning of meekness in the succeeding verses, “Whose hearts
tremble when God is mentioned, and who observe patience over what befalls
them, and establish regular prayers, and spend from what we have given them.”
God also said, “Those who believe and act righteously and are meek toward
(akhbatū ilā) their Lord—such are the companions of the Garden who shall
abide therein forever” [11:23].
The linguistic origin of khabt is a dip in the earth. Ibn ʿAbbās, God be pleased
with them both, and Qatāda have explained al-mukhbitīn in this way, and said:
“They are those who lower themselves.” Mujāhid said: “Mukhbit is one who has
found tranquility in God Almighty,” and “khabt is a low part of the earth.” AlAkhfash2 said, “It means those who have humility.” Ibrāhīm al-Nakhaʿī said,
“Those who are sincere.” Al-Kalbī said, “Those with soft hearts.” ʿAmr b. Aws
[al-Thaqafī] said, “Those who wrong no one, and when wronged, do not seek
revenge.”3
All of these sayings revolve around two basic meanings, humility and tranquility towards God the Exalted. And that is why it has been made transitive with the particle ‘ilā’ (toward) which has been used [in 11:23 above] in
order to add the meaning of tranquility, penitence, and stillness toward/in
God.
The author of al-Manāzil said,
It is among the first stations of tranquility.
He means by the stations of tranquility [stations such as] stillness, certitude,
trust in God the Exalted, and the like. Meekness is their forerunner and beginning.

1 From a Greek origin, meek means “to make one’s self small, to be humble;” a particularly
relevant meaning is the meekness of a lamb to submit to being slaughtered (Crabb, English
Synonyms, 430).

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة »الإخبات«‪.‬‬
‫ن ِإذ َا ذ ُك ِر َ‬
‫قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َب َش ِ ّر ِ ال ْم ُْخبتِ ِينَ﴾ ]الحج‪ ،[34:‬ثم كشف عن معناهم‪ .‬فقال‪﴿ :‬ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫صل َاة ِ و َم َِم ّا ر َز َقنْ َاه ُْم ي ُنف ِق ُونَ﴾ ]الحج‪،[35:‬‬
‫صابَه ُْم و َال ْم ُق ِيمِي ال َ ّ‬
‫ن ع َلىَ م َا َأ َ‬
‫صا برِ ِي َ‬
‫ت ق ُلوُ بُه ُْم و َال َ ّ‬
‫جل َ ْ‬
‫ال َل ّـه ُ و َ ِ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ب اْلج َنَ ّة ِ ۖ ه ُْم فيِ ه َا خ َال ِد ُونَ﴾‬
‫ك َأ ْ‬
‫خب َتوُ ا ِإل َى ٰ ر َ ّبِه ِْم ُأول َٰئ ِ َ‬
‫ت و َ َأ ْ‬
‫صاِلحا َ ِ‬
‫ن آم َنوُ ا و َعمَ ِلوُ ا ال َ ّ‬
‫ن ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫وقال‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َ ّ‬
‫صح َا ُ‬
‫]هود‪.[23:‬‬
‫الخبت في أصل اللغة المكان المنخفض من الأرض‪ ،‬و به فسر ا بن عباس—رضي الل ّٰه عنهما—‬
‫وقتادة لفظ »المخبتين« وقالا‪ :‬هم المتواضعون‪ .‬فقال مجاهد‪ :‬المخبت المطمئن إلى الل ّٰه عز وجل‪ .‬قال‪:‬‬
‫والخبت المكان المطمئن من الأرض‪ .‬وقال الأخفش‪ :‬الخاشعون‪ .‬وقال إ براهيم النخعي‪ :‬المخلصون‪.‬‬
‫وقال الكلبي‪ :‬هم الرقيقة قلو بهم‪ .‬وقال عمرو بن أوس‪ :‬هم الذين لا يظلمون‪ ،‬وإذا ظلموا لم ينتصروا‪.‬‬
‫ي بإلى تضمينا لمعنى‬
‫وهذه الأقوال تدور على معنيين‪ :‬التواضع والسكون إلى الل ّٰه تعالى‪ ،‬ولذلك ع ُّدِ َ‬
‫الطمأنينة والإنابة‪ ،‬والسكون إلى الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل‪» :‬هو من أول مقامات الطمأنينة«‪ .‬يعني بمقامات الطمأنينة‪ ،‬السكينة واليقين‬
‫والثقة بالل ّٰه نحوها‪ .‬فالإخبات مقدمتها ومبدؤها‪.‬‬

‫‪2 Saʿīd b. Masʿada al-Akhfash (d. c. 215/831) was a linguist and grammarian, a disciple of the‬‬
‫‪famous grammarian Sībawayh, a Qadarite. See Siyar 10:206.‬‬
‫‪3 Most of these sayings are found in Tafsīr al-Baghawī, namely Maʿālim al-tanzīl fī tafsīr al‬‬‫‪Qurʾān by the Shāfiʿī exegete al-Ḥusayn b. Masʿūd al-Baghawī (d. 516/1122), which Ibn al‬‬‫‪Qayyim seems to have frequently employed.‬‬

200

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

He said,
And it is arriving of the traveler at the point beyond return or hesitation.
Meekness is the first station in which the seeker overcomes hesitation, which
is a kind of {doubt, and turning back, which is a kind of} heedlessness and
evasion. The seeker is a traveler to his Lord, journeying to Him to his last
breath, whose journey does not end so long as his breaths remain. [Given that,]
He likened the attainment of meekness to fresh water upon which a thirsty
and needy traveler comes at his first watering station. His station quenches
him and removes any thoughts of hesitation in completing his journey or of
returning to his land fearing the arduous journey. When he arrives to that
water, his hesitation and thoughts of return melt away. Similarly, when the
seeker arrives at the wellspring of meekness, he is rid of any second thoughts
and hesitation, and thus he attains the first station of tranquility on his journey.
He said,
It has three levels. The first level is that protection drowns the desire, the
will encompasses heedlessness, and the quest drops the complacence.
The seeker seeker is assailed by heedlessness that weakens his will and lust that
opposes his determination and drives him toward complacence and comfort.
This level of meekness protects him from these three. His protectedness overwhelms his desire, protectedness being the fortification and shield whereas
desire is the inclination toward fulfilling the demands of the ego; and “drowning in a thing” means being encompassed and surrounded by it. Thus, he means
that his protectedness overcomes his desire and its strength, covering all of its
parts, and when that happens, it is the proof of his meekness and entry into the
state of tranquility and arriving at its station. His purification in this station is
from any second thoughts between moving forward and backward, going back
and moving on, toward holding fast and firm determination, putting forth his
best in the path, and that is the sign of calmness.
His will encompasses his heedlessness, “will” according to the People being
the name for the first station of those intending God. A seeker is the one
who has parted from his “homeland” of his nature and ego, for the journey to
God and afterlife. When he alights on the station of meekness, his will surrounds his negligence, and he overcomes it and makes up for what he had
missed.

‫‪201‬‬

‫‪chapter 15‬‬

‫قال‪» :‬وهو ورود المسافر من الرجوع والتردد«‪.‬‬
‫لما كان الإخبات أول مقام يتخلص فيه السالك من التردد—الذي هو نوع ]شك‪ ،‬والرجوع الذي‬
‫هو نوع[ غفلة وإعراض—والسالك مسافر إلى ر به‪ ،‬سا ئر إليه على مدى أنفاسه‪ ،‬لا ينتهي مسيره إليه‬
‫ما دام نفسه يصحبه‪.‬‬
‫شب ّه حصول الإخبات له بالماء العذب الذي يرده المسافر على ظمأ وحاجة في أول مناهله‪ ،‬فيرو يه‬
‫مورده‪ ،‬و يز يل عنه خواطر تردده في إتمام سفره‪ ،‬أو رجوعه إلى وطنه لمشقة السفر‪ .‬فإذا ورد ذلك‬
‫الماء‪ ،‬زال عنه التردد وخاطر الرجوع‪ .‬كذلك السالك إذا ورد مورد »الإخبات« تخلص من التردد‬
‫والرجوع‪ ،‬ونزل أول منازل الطمأنينة لسفره‪ ،‬وجد في السير‪ .‬قال‪» :‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ .‬الدرجة‬
‫سلوة«‪.‬‬
‫ب ال َ ّ‬
‫ي الطل ُ‬
‫الأولى‪ :‬أن تستغرق العصمة ُ الشهوة َ‪ ،‬وتستدرك َ الإرادة ُ الغفلة‪ َ،‬و يستهو َ‬
‫المر يد السالك تعرض له غفلة عن مراده تضعف إرادته‪ ،‬وشهوة تعارض إرادته فتصده عن‬
‫مراده‪ ،‬ورجوع عن مراده سلوة ً عنه‪.‬‬
‫فهذه الدرجة من الإخبات تحميه عن هذه الثلاثة‪ ،‬فتستغرق عصمته شهوته‪.‬‬
‫و»العصمة« هي الحماية والحفظ‪ ،‬و»الشهوة« الميل إلى مطالب النفس‪ ،‬و»الاستغراق للشيء«‬
‫الاحتواء عليه والإحاطة به‪.‬‬
‫يقول‪ :‬تغلب عصمته شهوته وتقهرها وتستوفي جميع أجزائها‪ .‬فإذا استوفت العصمة جميع أجزاء‬
‫الشهوة‪ ،‬فذلك دليل على إخباته ودخوله في مقام الطمأنينة‪ ،‬ونزوله منازلها‪ ،‬وخلاصه في هذا المنزل‬
‫من تردد الخواطر بين الإقبال والإدبار‪ ،‬والرجوع والعزم إلى الاستقامة والعزم الجازم‪ ،‬والجد في‬
‫السير‪ ،‬وذلك علامة السكينة‪.‬‬
‫وتستدرك إرادتهُ غفلتهَ ‪ .‬و»الإرادة« عند القوم هي اسم لأول منازل القاصدين إلى الل ّٰه‪ .‬و»المر يد«‬
‫هو الذي خرج من وطن طبعه ونفسه‪ ،‬وأخذ في السير إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬والدار الآخرة‪ .‬فإذا نزل في منزلة‬
‫»الإخبات« أحاطت إرادته بغفلته‪ ،‬فاستدركها واستدرك بها فارطها‪.‬‬

202

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

As for the “dropping” of the complacence by the force of his quest, [it means
that his quest] overpowers his love for comfort such that his comfort falls like
something that falls into a well. This is a sign of true love that he overpowers his complacence and buries it in a hole such that it never comes back to
life.
In sum, his protectedness and fortification overpowers his desire, his will
overpowers his heedlessness, and his love overpowers his desire for comfort.
He said,
The second level is that nothing unravels his will, no obstacle pulls on his
heart, and no trial interrupts his path.
These are the three additional things for a man of will: a cause that opposes him
and unravels his determination and will, loneliness that obstructs his longing
[for God], especially if he is alone, and trial that rears its head upon him to deter
him from his path. If he is established in the station of meekness these lesions
are removed from him, for his will and determination for this journey cannot
be unraveled by any cause.
“Unraveling” here means turning back from his will and diverting from the
direction of his journey. No obstacles on the path, no engagements of the
heart, no seductions make his company with God feel lonely. The “obstacle”
here means an opposition, anything that objects to your path and comes in
its way. The strongest of these obstacles is the feeling of loneliness. He must
not pay attention to it. As one of the knowers has said, your loneliness in your
path of search is a proof of the sincerity of your search. Another said, “Do
not feel lonely in the path of the truth by the paucity of those who aspire
to it nor be deceived by falsehood by the abundance of those who fall for
it.”
As for the “trial” that cuts off the path, it means the incidents of the heart
that prevent him from contemplating the truth and intending it. When he is
well-established in the station of meekness and his will and search are true,
such trials cannot tempt him.
These resolutions cannot be sound except for one whose heart has been
illuminated by the lights of the [divine] names and attributes, their meanings
having been unveiled to him, and whose heart has attained the reality of certitude through them.
It has been said, “Whoever takes knowledge from the source of knowledge
is settled, and whoever takes it from its flowing torrent is overcome by the
tides of doubt, misled by expressions, and confused by the variety of opinions.”

‫‪203‬‬

‫‪chapter 15‬‬

‫وأما »استهواء طلبه لسلوته« فهو قهر محبته لسلوته‪ ،‬وغلبتها له بحيث تهوي السلوة وتسقط‪ ،‬كالذي‬
‫يهوى في بئر‪ .‬وهذا علامة المحبة الصادقة‪ ،‬أن يقهر وارد السلوة‪ ،‬و يدفنها في هوة لا تحيا بعدها أبدا ً‪.‬‬
‫فالحاصل أن عصمته وحمايته تقهر شهوته‪ ،‬وإرادته تقهر غفلته‪ ،‬ومحبته تقهر سلوته‪.‬‬
‫ق‬
‫ض ولا يقطََع عليه الطر ي َ‬
‫حش قلبهَ عار ٌ‬
‫ب‪ ،‬ولا يو ِ‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬ألا ينق ُض إرادته سب ٌ‬
‫فتنة ٌ«‪.‬‬
‫هذه ثلاثة أمور أخرى تعرض لصاحب الإرادة‪ :‬سبب يعرض له و ينقض عزمه وإرادته‪ ،‬ووحشة‬
‫تعرض له في طر يق طلبه ولا سيما عند تفرده‪ ،‬وفتنة تخرج عليه تقصد قطع الطر يق عليه‪.‬‬
‫فإذا تمكن من منزل »الإخبات« اندفعت عنه هذه الآفات‪ ،‬لأن إرادته وجدية السير لم ينقضها‬
‫سبب من أسباب التخلف‪.‬‬
‫و»النقض« هو الرجوع عن إرادته‪ ،‬والعدول عن جهة سفره‪.‬‬
‫ض من العوارض‪ ،‬الشواغل للقلب‪ ،‬والجواذب له عمن هو‬
‫ولا يوحش أنس َه بالل ّٰه في طر يقه عار ٌ‬
‫متوجه إليه‪.‬‬
‫و»العارض« هو المخالف‪ ،‬كالشيء الذي يعترضك في طر يقك‪ ،‬فيجيء في عرضها‪ .‬ومن أقوى‬
‫هذه العوارض عارض وحشة التفرد‪ ،‬فلا يلتفت إليه‪ ،‬كما قال بعض العارفين‪ :‬انفرادك في طر يق‬
‫طلبك دليل على صدق الطلب‪ .‬وقال آخر‪ :‬لا تستوحش في طر يق الحق من قلة السالـكين ولا يغُ تر في‬
‫الباطل بكثرة الهالـكين‪.‬‬
‫وأما »الفتنة« التي تقطع عليه الطر يق‪ ،‬فهي الواردات التي ترد على القلوب‪ ،‬تمنعها من مطالعة‬
‫الحق وقصده‪ .‬فإذا تمكن من منزل »الإخبات« وصحة الإرادة والطلب‪ ،‬لم يطمع فيه عارض الفتنة‪.‬‬
‫وهذه العزائم لا تصح إلا لمن أشرقت على قلبه أنوار آثار الأسماء والصفات‪ ،‬وتجلت عليه معانيها‪،‬‬
‫وكافح قلبه حقيقة اليقين بها‪.‬‬
‫وقد قيل‪ :‬من أخذ العلم من عين العلم ثبت‪ ،‬ومن أخذه من جر يانه أخذته أمواج الشبه‪ ،‬ومالت‬
‫به العبارات‪ ،‬واختلفت عليه الأقوال‪.‬‬

204

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

He said,
The third level is that the praise and the blame are the same to him, and
his blaming of his ego is perpetual, and he becomes blind to the creation’s
depreciation of him.
When a servant’s steps are established in the station of meekness, his aspiration
is elevated, and his ego rises above caring about people’s praise and blame; he
is not pleased with the praise of the people nor grieved by their dispraise. This
is the case of the one who has rid himself of the indulgences of his ego, and is
prepared to be lost in the worship of his Lord. His heart becomes ready for the
rays of the light of divine names and attributes, having tasted the sweetness of
faith and certitude of the heart.
To be captivated by other’s praise or blame is an indication of the severance
of the heart from God. Such [a heart] has not experienced His love and inner
awareness, nor tasted the sweetness of attachment to Him and tranquility in
Him.
His words “his blaming of his ego is perpetual” mean that the one who has
attained this station is never pleased with his ego; he loathes it and wishes to
part from it.
According to the People, “self” means what is known from the attributes
of the servant, the blameworthy aspects of his character and deeds, whether
earned or part of his [innate] nature. He is severely disapproving of these,
regardless. This is one of the interpretations of the words of the Exalted, “No, I
swear by the blaming self” [75:2]; Saʿīd b. Jubayr and ʿIkrima said [concerning
this part of the self], “It blames for good and for bad, and is not pleased in good
times or bad times.” Qatāda said, “ ‘Blaming’ here means wicked.” Mujāhid said,
“It laments what has been missed, saying ‘If I had done such-and-such’ and ‘If
I had not done such-and-such.’ ”
Al-Farrāʾ (the Kufan grammarian, d. 207/823) said, “There is no self, good or
evil, that fails to blame itself: if it does well it says, ‘Why did I not do more?’ and
if it does evil, it says, ‘I wish I had not done that.’ ”
Al-Ḥasan [al-Baṣrī] said, “[The blaming self in this verse means] the believing self—for a believer always blames himself. What did I mean or attain by this
word? That act? This food? That thing? And so forth. While a hardened sinner,
on the other hand, glides along with no scruples or self-criticism.” Al-Muqātil
said, “It means the disbelieving soul, which will blame itself in the hereafter for
what it failed to do in this world.”
The purpose being that whosoever offers his ego sincerely to God dislikes to
stay with it, for he loves that it be accepted by the one to whom it was offered.

‫‪205‬‬

‫‪chapter 15‬‬

‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬أن يستوي عنده المدح والذم‪ ،‬وتدوم لائمتهُ لنفسه‪ ،‬و يعمى عن نقصان‬
‫الخ َلق عن درجته«‪.‬‬
‫متى استقرت قدم العبد في منزلة »الإخبات« وتمكن فيها‪ ،‬ارتفعت همته‪ ،‬وعلت نفسه عن‬
‫خطفات المدح والذم‪ ،‬فلا يفرح بمدح الناس‪ ،‬ولا يحزن لذمهم‪ .‬هذا وصف من خرج عن حظ‬
‫نفسه‪ ،‬وتأهل للفناء في عبودية ر به‪ ،‬وصار قلبه مطرحا ًلأشعة أنوار الأسماء والصفات‪ ،‬و باشر حلاوة‬
‫الإ يمان واليقين قلبه‪.‬‬
‫والوقوف عند مدح الناس وذمهم علامة انقطاع القلب وخلوه من الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وأنه لم تباشره روح محبته‬
‫ومعرفته‪ ،‬ولم يذق حلاوة التعلق به والطمأنينة إليه‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬وأن تدوم لائمته لنفسه«‪ ،‬فهو أن صاحب هذا المنزل لا يرضى عن نفسه‪ ،‬وهو مبغض لها‬
‫ن لمفارقتها‪.‬‬
‫متم ّ ٍ‬
‫والمراد بالنفس عند القوم ما كان معلولا ًمن أوصاف العبد‪ ،‬مذموما ًمن أخلاقه وأفعاله‪ ،‬سواء‬
‫كان ذلك كسبيا لً ه أو خلقيا‪ ً.‬فهو شديد اللائمة لها‪ .‬وهذا أحد التأو يلين في قوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َل َا ُأق ْس ِم ُ‬
‫س ال َل ّ َو ّام َة ِ﴾ ]القيامة‪ .[2:‬قال سعيد بن جبير وعكرمة‪ :‬تلوم على الخـير والشر‪ ،‬ولا تصبر على السراء‬
‫باِ ل َن ّْف ِ‬
‫ولا على الضراء‪.‬‬
‫وقال قتادة‪ :‬اللوامة هي الفاجرة‪.‬‬
‫وقال مجاهد‪ :‬تندم على ما فات وتقول‪ :‬لو فعلت؟ ولو لم أفعل؟‬
‫وقال الفراء‪ :‬ليس من نفس برة ولا فاجرة إلا وهي تلوم نفسها‪ ،‬إن كانت عملت خيرا ًقالت‪ :‬هلا‬
‫زدت‪ ،‬وإن عملت شرا ً قالت‪ :‬ليتني لم أفعل‪.‬‬
‫وقال الحسن‪ :‬هي النفس المؤمنة‪ .‬إن المؤمن—والل ّٰه—ما تراه إلا يلوم نفسه‪ ،‬ما أردت بكلامي؟‬
‫ما أردت بأكلتي؟ وإن الفاجر يمضي ق ُد ُما ًقدما‪ ً،‬ولا يحاسب نفسه ولا يعاتبها‪.‬‬
‫وقال مقاتل‪ :‬هي النفس الكافرة‪ .‬تلوم نفسها في الآخرة على ما فرطت في أمر الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫والقصد أن من بذل نفسه لل ّٰه بصدق كره بقاءه معها‪ ،‬لأنه ير يد أن يتقبلها من ب ُذلت له‪ ،‬ولأنه قد‬

206

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Whoever offers an offering and it is accepted cannot be like the one whose
offering has been rejected. For his ego to still linger with him is a sign that its
offer was not accepted.
Furthermore, it is an agreed upon principle of the People [of Sufism], from
the first of them to the last, their truthful ones and their liars, that the ego is a
veil between the servant and God the Exalted, and that he cannot attain to God
until this veil is rent. As Abū Yazīd [al-Bisṭāmī] said, “I saw the Lord of Might
in sleep, so I said, ‘My Lord, what is the way to You?’ He said, ‘Leave your ego
behind and come.’”
The ego, therefore, is an enormous mountain obstructing the path to God,
and no traveling can avoid that mount, and it must end up with it. The majority
of the travelers turn back when they fail to cross its breadth and pass its valleys. Satan is at the peak of that mount dissuading people from climbing it and
makes them fear it. When the difficulty of climbing that mount comes together
with that frightener sitting atop, along with the weakness of the determination
and resolve of the traveler, cutting off and returning are born; only those that
God protects are protected.
The higher one ascends that mountain, the more extreme the screams,
admonitions, and fearmongering of the enemy—but as soon as one reaches
its top, all of the fears and apprehensions give way to peace and safety, the rest
of the journey looks easy and the obstacles and the arduousness of the steep
roads vanish. One now begins to see more clearly the wide-open path, with its
stations and stopovers, signposts and rest-stops that serve as the welcome from
the All-merciful.
What separates the servant and his ultimate success and felicity is [overcome through] the power of determination, grit to stay the course, courage of
the soul, and steadfastness of the heart—and grace is ultimately in the hands of
God who grants it to whomsoever He wills—and He is the dispenser of abundant grace.

‫‪207‬‬

‫‪chapter 15‬‬

‫قر بها له قر بانا‪ ً.‬ومن قرب قر بانا ًفتقبل منه ليس كمن رد عليه قر بانه‪ .‬فبقاء نفسه معه دليل على أنه لم‬
‫يتقبل قر بانه‪.‬‬
‫وأيضا ًفإنه من قواعد القوم المجمع عليها بينهم‪ ،‬التي اتفقت كلمة أولهم وآخرهم‪ ،‬ومحقهم ومبطلهم‬
‫عليها أن النفس حجاب بين العبد و بين الل ّٰه تعالى‪ ،‬وأنه لا يصل إلى الل ّٰه حتى يقطع هذا الحجاب‪،‬‬
‫كما قال أبو يز يد‪ :‬رأيت رب العزة في المنام‪ .‬فقلت‪ :‬ر بي كيف الطر يق إليك؟ فقال‪ :‬خل نفسك‬
‫وتعال‪.‬‬
‫فالنفس جبل عظيم شاق في طر يق السير إلى الل ّٰه‪ .‬وكل سا ئر فلا طر يق له إلا على ذلك الجبل‪،‬‬
‫فلا بد أن ينتهي إليه‪.‬‬
‫وأكثر السا ئر ين منه رجعوا على أعقابهم لما عجزوا عن قطعه واقتحام عقبته‪ .‬والشيطان على قلَُ ّة‬
‫الجبل‪ ،‬يحذر الناس من صعوده وارتقائه و يخوفهم منه‪ .‬فيتفق مشقة ذلك الجبل‪ ،‬وقعود ذلك المخوف‬
‫على قلته‪ ،‬وضعف عزيمة السا ئر ونيته‪ .‬فيتولد من ذلك الانقطاع والرجوع‪ .‬والمعصوم من عصمه‬
‫الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وكلما رقى السا ئر في ذلك الجبل اشتد به صياح القاطع‪ ،‬وتحذيره وتخو يفه‪ .‬فإذا قطعه و بلغ قلته‪،‬‬
‫فإذا المخاوف كلهن أمانا‪ ً،‬وحينئذ يسهل وتزول عنه عوارض الطر يق‪ ،‬ومشقة عقباتها‪ ،‬و يرى طر يقا ً‬
‫ل الرحمن‪.‬‬
‫واسعا ًآمنا بً ه المنازل والمناهل وعليه الأعلام‪ ،‬وفيه الإقامات نزُ ُ ُ‬
‫فبين العبد و بين السعادة والفلاح قوة عزيمة‪ ،‬وصبر ساعة‪ ،‬وشجاعة نفس‪ ،‬وثبات قلب‪ .‬والفضل‬
‫بيد الل ّٰه يؤتيه من يشاء‪ ،‬والل ّٰه ذو الفضل العظيم‪.‬‬

208
1

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Being Blind to People’s Opinions

His words, “And he is blind to the creation’s depreciation of him” mean that
he is too occupied with God to care about others’ opinion of him, even if he
is higher than many deficient ones in their ranks. Preoccupation with that is
considered a degradation of his status, a lowering of his level, and a regress in
his journey. If such a concern assails him without his choice or effort, he must
cure it by witnessing the favor, the fear of deception, and lack of his knowledge
of the future that awaits him. God help us.

‫‪209‬‬

‫‪chapter 15‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬و يعمى عن نقصان الخ َلق عن درجته«‪.‬‬
‫يعني أنه—وإن كان أعلى ممن هو دونه من الناقصين عن درجته—إلا أنه لاشتغاله بالل ّٰه‪ ،‬وامتلاء‬
‫قلبه من محبته ومعرفته‪ ،‬والإقبال عليه‪ ،‬يشتغل عن ملاحظة حال غيره‪ ،‬وعن شهود النسبة بين حاله‬
‫وأحوال الناس و يرى اشتغاله بذلك والتفاته إليه نزولا ًعن مقامه‪ ،‬وانحطاطا ًعن درجته‪ ،‬ورجوعا ً‬
‫على عقبه‪ .‬فإن هجم عليه ذلك—بغير استدعاء واختيار—فليداوه بشهود المنة‪ ،‬وخوف المكر‪ ،‬وعدم‬
‫علمه بالعاقبة التي يوافي عليها‪ .‬والل ّٰه المستعان‪.‬‬

chapter 16

The Station of Renunciation
Among the stations of “You we worship and You we supplicate for help” is the
station of renunciation.1
God the Exalted has said, “What is with you vanishes: what is with God
endures” [16:96].
He also said,
Know you that the life of this world is but play and amusement, pomp
and boasting and competing in riches and children. Like the rain, whose
growth delights the tillers, but soon it withers and you see it turn yellow,
and then it becomes dry. And in the Hereafter is a severe penalty and forgiveness from God and good pleasure. The life of this world is but a thing
of deception. [57:20]
The Exalted also said,
The similitude of the life of the world is as the rain which We send down
from the skies. By its mingling [arises] the produce of the earth, which
provides food for men and cattle, until the earth is clad with its golden
ornaments, adorned, and its people think they have all powers of disposal
over it. Then comes Our command by night or by day, and We make it like
a harvest clean-mown, as if it had not flourished just yesterday! Thus do
We explain the signs in detail for those who reflect. [10:24]
The Exalted also said, “Set forth to them the similitude of the life of this world:
It is like the rain which We send down from the skies: the earth’s vegetation
absorbs it, but soon it becomes dry stubble, which the winds scatter: it is [only]
God who prevails over all things. Wealth and children are allurements of the
life of this world: But the things that endure, good deeds, are best in the sight
of thy Lord, as rewards, and best as [the foundation for] hopes” [18:46].
1 For the translation of zuhd as renunciation, as renouncing excess luxury or attachments that
detract from God and the pursuit of afterlife (lit., thinking little of it), and as asceticism, training of the self through deprivation, see the Translator’s Introduction (volume 1). Renunciation
is not fully satisfactory either, but it allows us to disaggregate zuhd from certain Christian
and Hellenistic ideals. Among the best western treatments of the concept of zuhd in Islamic

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬الزهد«‪.‬‬
‫ق﴾ ]النحل‪ ،[96:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬اع ْل َموُ ا َأ َن ّم َا اْلحيَ َاة ُ ال ُد ّن ْي َا‬
‫قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬م َا عِند َك ُْم ي َنف َد ُ ۖ و َم َا عِند َ ال َل ّـه ِ باَ ٍ‬
‫ج‬
‫ب الـ ْكَُّفار َ ن َب َاتهُ ُ ث ُ َم ّ يَه ِي ُ‬
‫ل غ َي ْ ٍ‬
‫ب و َل َه ْو ٌ و َزِ ين َة ٌ و َتفَ َاخ ُر ٌ ب َي ْن َك ُْم و َت َك َا ثرُ ٌ ف ِي اْلَأْمو َا ِ‬
‫ل و َاْلَأْول َادِ ۖ ك َم َث َ ِ‬
‫ث َأْعج َ َ‬
‫لعَ ِ ٌ‬
‫ن ۚ و َم َا اْلحيَ َاة ُ ال ُد ّن ْي َا‬
‫ضو َا ٌ‬
‫ن ال َل ّـه ِ و َرِ ْ‬
‫شدِيد ٌ و َم َغْف ِرةَ ٌ مّ ِ َ‬
‫ب َ‬
‫حطَام ًا ۖ و َف ِي اْلآ ِ‬
‫صف َ ًر ّا ث ُ َم ّ ي َكُونُ ُ‬
‫ف َترَ َاه ُ م ُ ْ‬
‫خر َة ِ ع َذ َا ٌ‬
‫ط ب ِه ِ‬
‫خت َل َ َ‬
‫سم َاء ِ ف َا ْ‬
‫ن ال َ ّ‬
‫كم َاء ٍ َأ نز َلنْ َاه ُ م ِ َ‬
‫ل اْلحيَ َاة ِ ال ُد ّن ْي َا َ‬
‫ِإ َلّا م َت َاع ُ ال ْغ ُر ُورِ﴾ ]الحديد‪ ،[20:‬وقال‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َن ّم َا م َث َ ُ‬
‫ت و ََظَّن َأه ْلهُ َا َأَّنه ُْم‬
‫خر ُفهَ َا و َا َزّ َي ّن َ ْ‬
‫ض زُ ْ‬
‫ت اْلَأْر ُ‬
‫ح َت ّى ِإذ َا َأخ َذ َ ِ‬
‫س و َاْلَأن ْعاَ م َ‬
‫ض م َِم ّا ي ْأَ ك ُ ُ‬
‫ت اْلَأْر ِ‬
‫ن َب َا ُ‬
‫ل ال َن ّا ُ‬
‫ُ ٰ‬
‫ت‬
‫ل اْلآياَ ِ‬
‫ص ُ‬
‫ك نفُ َ ِّ‬
‫س ۚ ك َذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫صيدًا ك َ َأن َل ّْم تغَ ْ َ‬
‫ح ِ‬
‫ق َادِر ُونَ ع َليَ ْه َا َأتاَ هاَ َأْمرُناَ ل َي ْل ًا َأْو نَه َار ًا فَج َع َلنْ َاهاَ َ‬
‫ن باِ ْلَأْم ِ‬
‫سم َاء ِ‬
‫ن ال َ ّ‬
‫كم َاء ٍ َأ نز َلنْ َاه ُ م ِ َ‬
‫ل اْلحيَ َاة ِ ال ُد ّن ْي َا َ‬
‫ب ل َه ُم َمّث َ َ‬
‫لقِ َو ٍْم ي َت َف َ َك ّر ُونَ﴾ ]يونس‪ ،[24:‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َاض ْر ِ ْ‬
‫ل و َالبْ َنوُ نَ‬
‫يء ٍ ُمّْقت َدِر ًا ال ْم َا ُ‬
‫لشَ ْ‬
‫حهَ ِ‬
‫صب َ َ‬
‫ض ف ََأ ْ‬
‫ت اْلَأْر ِ‬
‫ط ب ِه ِ ن َب َا ُ‬
‫خت َل َ َ‬
‫ف َا ْ‬
‫ح ۗ و َك َانَ ال َل ّـه ُع َلىَ ك ُ ّ ِ‬
‫شيم ًا ت َْذر ُوه ُ الر ِ ّياَ ُ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ك ثوَ َاباً و َخ َي ْر ٌ َأم َل ًا﴾ ]الـكهف‪ ،[46–45:‬وقال‬
‫ت خ َي ْر ٌ عِند َ ر َب ِّ َ‬
‫صاِلحا َ ُ‬
‫ت ال َ ّ‬
‫زِ ين َة ُ اْلحيَ َاة ِ ال ُد ّن ْي َا ۖ و َالبْ َاقيِ َا ُ‬

‫‪history is Leah Kinberg, “What is Meant by Zuhd,” Studia Islamica 61 (1985): 27–44, who con‬‬‫‪cludes that zuhd is best understood as the entirety of Islamic ethics: a pious, scrupulous way‬‬
‫‪of life in which one not only upholds the Law but goes beyond it to avoid anything remotely‬‬
‫‪blameworthy. It has elements of contentment (riḍā), trusting reliance on God (tawakkul),‬‬
‫‪scrupulousness (waraʿ), and salvific orientation (qiṣar al-amal); it can be translated, in its‬‬
‫‪practical, lived sense, as integrity.‬‬

212

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The Exalted also said, “Say: Short is the enjoyment of this world: the Hereafter is the best for those who do right: Never will you be dealt with unjustly in
the very least!” [4:77].
He also said, “But you prefer the life of the world, but the Hereafter is better
and more enduring” [87:16–17].
He also said, “Strain not your eyes in longing for the things We have given
for enjoyment to some groups among them, the splendor of the life of this
world, through which We test them: the provision of thy Lord is better and more
enduring” [20:131–132].
He also said,
And were it not that all men might become of one [evil] way of life,
We would have provided, for everyone that rejects the All-merciful, silver roofs for their houses and stair-ways on which to go up. And [silver]
doors to their houses, and thrones [of silver] on which they could recline.
And also adornments of gold. But all this were nothing but things of thisworldly life: The Hereafter, in the sight of your Lord, is for the righteous.
[43:33–35]
Indeed the Qurʾan abounds in exhortation towards abstinence and detachment
from this world, and the declaration of its worthlessness, brevity, its imminent
demise, its quick disappearance. [It also abounds in] exhortation towards the
afterlife, and the declamation of its significance, eternity, and its swift arrival. If
God wills well for His servant, He creates a spectacle in his heart to witness the
truth of this world and the next so the servant may prefer what truly deserves
to be preferred.
The People [of Sufism] have said much about renunciation according to
their respective tastes, states, and experiences. The majority of the statements
of the People are expressions of their tastes and states, but the language of
[scriptural] knowledge is wider in scope, more cogent, and better grounded
than the language of personal experience.
I have heard Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya, God sanctify his soul, say: “Renunciation is to leave what does not benefit in the afterlife, and scrupulousness
is to leave what might harm you in the afterlife.” And this is one of the best statements about renunciation and scrupulousness, and the most comprehensive.
Sufyān al-Thawrī said, “Renunciation is economy in expectation of this
world—not eating filth or wearing coarse garment.”
Al-Junayd said, “I heard Sarī say, ‘God has taken away this world from His
allies and its reserve from His elect and expelled it from the hearts of His lovers,
for He is not pleased with it for them.’ ”

‫‪213‬‬

‫‪chapter 16‬‬

‫ل تؤُ ْثرِ ُونَ اْلحيَ َاة َ ال ُد ّن ْي َا‬
‫ن ا َت ّقَى﴾ ]النساء‪ ،[77:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬ب َ ْ‬
‫ل و َاْلآ ِ‬
‫ل م َت َاع ُ ال ُد ّن ْي َا ق َل ِي ٌ‬
‫تعالى‪﴿ :‬ق ُ ْ‬
‫خر َة ُ خ َي ْر ٌ لمّ ِ َ ِ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ك ِإل َى ٰ م َا م َ َت ّعْن َا ب ِه ِ َأْزو َاج ًا مّ ِْنه ُْم ز َه ْرةَ َ‬
‫ن ع َي ْن َي ْ َ‬
‫خر َة ُ خ َي ْر ٌ و َ َأب ْقَى﴾ ]الأعلى‪ ،[17–16:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬و َل َا ت َم َُّد َ ّ‬
‫و َاْلآ ِ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ض زِ ين َة ً‬
‫جع َلنْ َا م َا ع َلىَ اْلَأْر ِ‬
‫ك خ َي ْر ٌ و َ َأب ْقَى﴾ ]طه‪ ،[131:‬وقال‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َن ّا َ‬
‫ق ر َب ّ ِ َ‬
‫اْلحيَ َاة ِ ال ُد ّن ْي َا ل ِنفَ ْ تنِ َه ُْم فيِ ه ِ ۚ و َرِْز ُ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫صعيِ دًا ج ُر ُز ًا﴾ ]الـكهف‪ ،[8–7:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬و َلوَ ْل َا‬
‫ن عمَ َل ًا و َِإ َن ّا لَجا َع ِلوُ نَ م َا ع َليَ ْه َا َ‬
‫حسَ ُ‬
‫َل ّه َا ل ِن َب ْلوُ َه ُْم َأُّيه ُْم َأ ْ‬
‫ج ع َليَ ْه َا ي َْظه َر ُونَ‬
‫سق ُف ًا مّ ِن ف ِ َ ّ‬
‫ن ل ِب ُيوُ تِه ِْم ُ‬
‫حد َة ً َ ّ‬
‫س ُأ َمّة ً و َا ِ‬
‫لج َع َلنْ َا لم ِ َن ي َْكف ُر ُ باِ ل َر ّْحمَٰ ِ‬
‫ضة ٍ و َم َعاَ رِ َ‬
‫َأن ي َكُونَ ال َن ّا ُ‬
‫ك‬
‫خر َة ُ عِند َ ر َب ِّ َ‬
‫ك ل ََم ّا م َت َاع ُ اْلحيَ َاة ِ ال ُد ّن ْي َا ۚ و َاْلآ ِ‬
‫ل ذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫خر ُف ًا ۚ و َِإن ك ُ ُ ّ‬
‫كئوُ نَ و َز ُ ْ‬
‫و َل ِب ُيوُ تِه ِْم َأب ْو َاباً و َس ُر ُر ًا ع َليَ ْه َا ي َ َت ّ ِ‬
‫للِ ْم َُت ّق ِينَ﴾ ]الزخرف‪.[35–33:‬‬
‫والقرآن مملوء من التزهيد في الدنيا‪ ،‬والإخبار بخستها وقلتها وانقطاعها وسرعة فنائها‪ ،‬والترغيب في‬
‫الآخرة‪ ،‬والإخبار بشرفها ودوامها وسرعة إقبالها‪ ،‬فإذا أراد الل ّٰه بعبد خيرا ً أقام في قلبه شاهدا ً يعا ين‬
‫به حقيقة الدنيا والآخرة‪ ،‬و يؤثر منهما ما هو أولى بالإ يثار‪.‬‬
‫وقد أكثر الناس في الكلام في »الزهد« وكل أشار إلى ذوقه‪ ،‬ونطق عن حاله وشاهده‪ .‬فإن غالب‬
‫عبارات القوم عن أذواقهم وأحوالهم‪ .‬والكلام بلسان العلم أوسع من الكلام بلسان الذوق‪ ،‬وأقرب‬
‫إلى الحجة والبرهان‪.‬‬
‫وسمعت شيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية—قدس الل ّٰه روحه—يقول‪ :‬الزهد ترك مالا ينفع في الآخرة‪،‬‬
‫والورع ترك ما تخاف ضرره في الآخرة‪ .‬وهذه العبارة من أحسن ما قيل في »الزهد والورع« وأجمعها‪.‬‬
‫وقال سفيان الثوري‪ :‬الزهد في الدنيا قصر الأمل‪ .‬ليس بأكل الغليظ ولا لبس العباء‪.‬‬
‫وقال الجنيد‪ :‬سمعت س َر يا ً يقول‪ :‬إن الل ّٰه تعالى سلب الدنيا عن أوليائه وحماها عن أصفيائه‪،‬‬
‫وأخرجها من قلوب أهل وداده‪ ،‬لأنه لم يرضها لهم‪.‬‬

214

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

He also said, “Renunciation is [best defined] in God’s saying, ‘In order that
you may not despair over things you have lost, nor exult over favors bestowed
upon you. For God loves not any vainglorious boaster’ [57:23]. An ascetic, therefore, is one who does not exult over this-worldly possessions, nor regrets thisworldly losses.”
Yaḥyā b. Muʿādh said, “Renunciation bequeaths generosity in possessions
just as love bequeaths generosity in spirit.”
Ibn al-Jalāʾ2 said, “Renunciation is to see this world with its transience in
mind, so it becomes insignificant in your eyes and turning away from it becomes easier.”
Ibn Khafīf said, “The sign of renunciation is the presence of delight in giving
up possession.” He also said, “Renunciation is to rid the heart of the causes and
the hands of possessions.”
It has been said, “Renunciation is the detachment of the heart from this
world without pretension or effort.”
Al-Junayd said, “Renunciation is to let go from the heart what has left your
hand.”
Imam Aḥmad [b. Ḥanbal] said, “Renunciation in this world is brevity of
hope.” A second report from him has it, “It is to not be pleased when this world
is attained, nor grieve over it when it is lost.” When asked about a man who
possessed a thousand dinars, he said, “Yes, on the condition that he does not
feel happy if he gained more, nor sad if he lost them.”
ʿAbdallāh b. al-Mubārak said, “It is trust in God along with the love of
poverty.” This is [also] the opinion of Shaqīq [al-Balkhī]3 and Yūsuf b. Asbāṭ.4
ʿAbd al-Wāḥid b. Zayd said, “[It is] giving up dinars and dirhams.”
Abū Sulaymān al-Darānī said: “Renunciation is to abandon all that distracts
from God.” This is also the view of Shiblī.
When Ruwaym asked al-Junayd about renunciation, he said, “To not think
much of this world, and to erase its traces from the heart.” Another time, he
said, “It is to rid your hands of your possessions and your heart of following
[them].”
Yaḥyā b. Muʿādh said, “No one attains the reality of renunciation until he has
three traits: deeds without attachment, words without greed, and honor without power.” He also said, “The renunciant makes you smell vinegar and mustard,
whereas a knower makes you smell musk and ambergris.”

2 Aḥmad b. Yahyā (d. 306 AH) was amongst the leading Sufi shaykhs of his time, alongside alJunayd and Abū ʿUthmān in Nisābūr. See Siyar 14:251.

‫‪215‬‬

‫‪chapter 16‬‬

‫حوا ب ِم َا آتاَ ك ُْم﴾ ]الحديد‪.[23:‬‬
‫سو ْا ع َلىَ م َا ف َات َك ُْم و َل َا تفَ ْ ر َ ُ‬
‫وقال‪ :‬الزهد في قوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬ل ِّك َي ْل َا ت ْأَ َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫فالزاهد لا يفرح من الدنيا بموجود ولا يأسف منها على مفقود‪.‬‬
‫وقال يحيى بن معاذ‪ :‬الزهد يورث السخاء بالملك‪ ،‬والحب يورث السخاء بالروح‪.‬‬
‫وقال ا بن الجلاء‪ :‬الزهد هو النظر إلى الدنيا بعين الزوال‪ ،‬لتصغر في عينيك‪ ،‬فيسهل عليك‬
‫الإعراض عنها‪.‬‬
‫وقال ا بن خفيف‪ :‬علامة الزهد وجود الراحة في الخروج من الملك‪.‬‬
‫وقال أيضا‪ ً:‬الزهد سلو القلب عن الأسباب‪ ،‬ونفض الأيدي من الأملاك‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬هو عزوف القلب عن الدنيا بلا تكلف‪.‬‬
‫وقال الجنيد‪ :‬الزهد خلو القلب عما خلت منه اليد‪.‬‬
‫وقال الإمام أحمد‪ :‬الزهد في الدنيا قصر الأمل‪.‬‬
‫وعنه رواية ثانية‪ :‬أنه عدم فرحه بإقبالها ولا حزنه على إدبارها‪ .‬فإنه سئل عن الرجل يكون معه‬
‫ألف دينار‪ ،‬هل يكون زاهدا ً؟ فقال‪ :‬نعم على شر يطة ألا يفرح إذا زادت‪ ،‬ولا يحزن إذا نقصت‪.‬‬
‫وقال عبد الل ّٰه بن المبارك‪ :‬هو الثقة بالل ّٰه مع حب الفقر‪ .‬وهذا قول شقيق‪ ،‬و يوسف بن أسباط‪.‬‬
‫وقال عبد الواحد بن ز يد‪ :‬ترك الدينار والدرهم‪.‬‬
‫وقال أبو سليمان الداراني‪ :‬ترك ما يشغل عن الل ّٰه‪ .‬وهو قول الشبلي‪.‬‬
‫وسأل رو يم الجنيد عن الزهد فقال‪ :‬استصغار الدنيا‪ ،‬ومحو آثارها من القلب‪ .‬وقال مرة‪ :‬هو خلو‬
‫اليد عن الملك‪ ،‬والقلب عن التتبع‪.‬‬
‫وقال يحيى بن معاذ‪ :‬لا يبلغ أحد حقيقة الزهد حتى يكون فيه ثلاث خصال‪ :‬عمل بلا علاقة‪،‬‬
‫وقول بلا طمع‪ ،‬وعز بلا ر ياسة‪.‬‬
‫وقال أيضا‪ ً:‬الزاهد يسعطك الخل والخردل‪ ،‬والعارف يشمك المسك والعنبر‪.‬‬

‫‪3 Shaqīq b. Ibrāhīm (d. 194AH) was a great ascetic and warrior, having attained martyrdom. See‬‬
‫‪Siyar 9:313.‬‬
‫‪4 Yusūf b. Asbāṭ was an ascetic who also narrated hadith, but was mainly unreliable because,‬‬
‫‪according to Bukhārī, his books were buried with him and not properly transmitted. See Siyar‬‬
‫‪9:169.‬‬

216

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

It has been said, “True renunciation is renunciation with respect to the ego.”
This is the saying of Dhū al-Nūn al-Miṣrī.
It has also been said, “Renunciation is to prefer others when one has enough,
whereas chivalry is to prefer others when you are in need. The Exalted has said,
‘And they prefer [others] over themselves, even when in poverty’ [59:9].”
A man said to Yaḥyā b. Muʿādh, “When do I enter business of reliance, sport
the robe of the renunciants, and sit with them?” He said, “If you have trained
your ego to the point that if God cut off your provisions for three days, your ego
will not weaken. If you have not reached this level, your sitting on the rug of
the renunciants would be ignorance, and I fear that you would be exposed.”
Imam Aḥmad b. Ḥanbal has said, “Renunciation has three levels: first, to
abandon the prohibited things, and this is the renunciation of the commoners; second, to abandon what is unnecessary even from the permissible things,
and this is the renunciation of the elite; and third, to abandon all that distracts
from God—and this is the renunciation of the knowers.”
These words of Imam Aḥmad cover all that has been said before, with greater
detail and explanation of the levels of renunciation—thus it is the most comprehensive explanation of it—and it shows that the Imam, may God be pleased
with him, had the greatest knowledge of this quality. Indeed, Imam al-Shāfiʿī
testified to his preeminence in him eight things, one of which was renunciation.
What the knowers have agreed upon is that renunciation is the departure
of the heart from this world to the stations of the hereafter. The predecessors
have authored treatises on the same theme, such as treatises entitled al-Zuhd
by ʿAbdullāh b. al-Mubārak, Imam Aḥmad, al-Wakīʿ, al-Hannād b. al-Sarī, and
others.
Renunciation is associated with six things, and a servant does not deserve to
be called an ascetic unless he is ascetic in these respects, and these are [renunciation of] wealth, [beauty of] faces, [political] power, people, ego, and all that
is besides God. Renunciation in these things does not mean refusing to own
them, for God’s prophets Solomon and David were among the greatest renunciants of their time, but had the wealth, power, and women that they did. Our
Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, was the most ascetic of all men,
but had nine wives. ʿAlī, ʿAbd al-Raḥmān b. ʿAwf, al-Zubayr, and ʿUthmān, God
be pleased with them all, were great ascetics while also possessing wealth. Similarly, al-Ḥasan b. ʿAlī was the most disposed to love and marry women in this
Community. ʿAbdallāh b. al-Mubārak was among the masters of the renunciants, but possessed great wealth, and same is true of al-Layth ibn Saʿd and
Sufyān [al-Thawrī], who were among the leading ascetics. [The last mentioned]
possessed capital concerning which he would say, “If it were not for this, those
[men of power] would wipe us out.”

‫‪217‬‬

‫‪chapter 16‬‬

‫وقيل‪ :‬حقيقة الزهد هو الزهد في النفس‪ .‬وهذا قول ذي النون المصري‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬الزهد الإ يثار عند الاستغناء‪ ،‬والفتوة الإ يثار عند الحاجة‪ .‬قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َ يؤُ ْثرِ ُونَ ع َلىَ َأنف ُس ِه ِْم‬
‫ٰ‬
‫صة ٌ﴾ ]الحشر‪.[9:‬‬
‫صا َ‬
‫خ َ‬
‫و َلوَ ْ ك َانَ بِه ِْم َ‬
‫وقال رجل ليحيى بن معاذ‪ :‬متى أدخل حانوت التوكل‪ ،‬وألبس رداء الزاهدين‪ ،‬وأقعد معهم؟‬
‫فقال‪ :‬إذا صرت من ر ياضتك لنفسك إلى ح ٍّد لو قطع الل ّٰه الرزق عنك ثلاثة أيام لم تضعف نفسك‪.‬‬
‫فأما ما لم تبلغ إلى هذه الدرجة فجلوسك على بساط الزاهدين جهل‪ ،‬ثم لا آمن عليك أن تفتضح‪.‬‬
‫وقد قال الإمام أحمد بن حنبل‪ :‬الزهد على ثلاثة أوجه‪ :‬ترك الحرام‪ ،‬وهو زهد العوام‪.‬‬
‫والثاني‪ :‬ترك الفضول من الحلال‪ ،‬وهو زهد الخواص‪.‬‬
‫والثالث‪ :‬ترك ما يشغل عن الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وهو زهد العارفين‪.‬‬
‫وهذا الكلام من الإمام أحمد يأتي على جميع ما تقدم من كلام المشايخ—رضي الل ّٰه عنهم—‪ ،‬مع‬
‫ز يادة تفصيله وتبيين درجاته‪ .‬وهو من أجمع الكلام‪ .‬وهو يدل على أنه—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—من هذا‬
‫العلم بالمحل الأعلى‪ .‬وقد شهد له الشافعي—رحمه الل ّٰه—بإمامته في ثمانية أشياء‪» :‬أحدها الزهد«‪.‬‬
‫والذي أجمع عليه العارفون أن الزهد سفر القلب من وطن الدنيا‪ ،‬وأخذه في منازل الآخرة‪ .‬وعلى‬
‫هذا صنف المتقدمون كتب الزهد‪ ،‬كالزهد لعبد الل ّٰه ا بن المبارك‪ ،‬وللإمام أحمد‪ ،‬ولوكيع‪ ،‬ولهناد بن‬
‫السري‪ ،‬ولغيرهم‪.‬‬
‫ومتعلقه ستة أشياء لا يستحق العبد اسم »الزهد« حتى يزهد فيها‪ .‬وهي‪ :‬المال والصور والر ياسة‬
‫والناس والنفس‪ ،‬وكل ما دون الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وليس المراد رفضها من الملك‪ .‬فقد كان سليمان وداود من أزهد أهل زمانهما‪ ،‬ولهما من المال‬
‫والملك والنساء ما لهما‪ .‬وكان نبينا ﷺ أزهد البشر على الإطلاق‪ ،‬وله تسع نسوة‪ .‬وكان علي بن أبي‬
‫طالب‪ ،‬وعبد الرحمن بن عوف‪ ،‬والز بير‪ ،‬وعثمان من الزهاد مع ما لهم من الأموال‪.‬‬
‫وكان الحسن بن علي—رضي الل ّٰه عنهما—من الزهاد‪ ،‬مع أنهكان من أكثر الأمة محبة ً للنساء‬
‫ونكاحا ًلهن‪ ،‬وأغناهم‪ .‬وكان عبد الل ّٰه بن المبارك من الأئمة الزهاد‪ ،‬مع مال كثير‪ .‬وكذلك الليث بن‬
‫سعد وسفيان من أئمة الزهاد‪ .‬وكان له رأس مال يقول‪ :‬لولا هو لتمندل بنا هؤلاء‪.‬‬

218

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The best of what has been said about renunciation in this regard is the saying of al-Ḥasan or someone else, “Renunciation with respect to this world is not
to abstain from the permissible or to waste away your wealth, but that you rely
on what is in God’s hands more than what is in yours, and that you are more
desirous of the reward of a calamity if it strikes you than if it did not.” This is the
most comprehensive and finest statement on this subject. It has been raised to
the authority [of the Prophet].5

1

Is Renunciation Possible in These Times?

People disagree concerning whether renunciation is possible in these times.
Abū Ḥafṣ [al-Ḥaddād], God have mercy on him, said, “Renunciation is not
observed except with respect to what is licit, and there is nothing licit in the
world [in these times], and hence, no renunciation.”
People disagreed with him on this and said that licit things are still present
in [the world], even though there is much that is illicit in it. Even if it is assumed
that there is nothing licit, this is all the more reason to be ascetic toward it, and
to consume from it only what is necessary to survive, like consuming carrion,
blood, and pork.
{Yūsuf b. Asbāṭ said [supporting the first position] that if someone said to
me that a man had reached the status of Abū Dharr, Abū al-Dardāʾ, Salmān the
Persian, and al-Miqdād and the like from the Companions, God be pleased with
them, I would still not call such a person a renunciant, because renunciation is
from things that are unquestionably licit, and there is nothing of such status in
our times any more. As for the illicit things, if you perform them, God Almighty
will take you to account.}
They disagreed, however, about the proper object of renunciation. One
group said that it pertains only to [avoiding] what is licit, since the avoidance
of the illicit is an obligation regardless. Another group said that it pertains only
to that which is illicit; as for the licit, that is a bounty from God to his servant,
and God loves to see the result of His bounty on his servants. Therefore, thankfulness for His bounties, using those bounties for righteousness and as a way
to the Garden is better than avoiding them, abandoning them, and evading the
means to them. In reality, if something distracts one from God, it is better to
avoid it; and if not, and if one remains grateful to God, then his state is superior; and renunciation in this case consists in divesting the heart and its peace
from dependence on it.
5 Tirmidhī #2340.

‫‪219‬‬

‫‪chapter 16‬‬

‫ومن أحسن ما قيل في الزهد كلام الحسن أو غيره‪ :‬ليس الزهد في الدنيا بتحر يم الحلال ولا إضاعة‬
‫المال‪ ،‬ولـكن أن تكون بما في يد الل ّٰه أوثق منك بما في يدك‪ ،‬وأن تكون في ثواب المصيبة—إذا أصبت‬
‫بها—أرغب منك فيها لو لم تصبك‪ .‬فهذا من أجمع كلام في الزهد وأحسنه‪ .‬وقد روي مرفوعا‪ً.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫وقد اختلف الناس في »الزهد« هل هو ممكن في هذه الأزمنة؟‬
‫فقال أبو حفص—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪ :‬الزهد لا يكون إلا في الحلال‪ ،‬ولا حلال في الدنيا فلا زهد‪.‬‬
‫وخالفه الناس في هذا وقالوا‪ :‬بل الحلال موجود فيها‪ ،‬وفيها الحرام كثيرا ً‪ .‬وعلى تقدير ألا يكون‬
‫فيها الحلال‪ ،‬فهذا أدعى إلى الزهد فيها‪ ،‬وتناول ما يتناوله المضطر منها‪ ،‬كتناوله للميتة والدم ولحم‬
‫الخـنز ير‪ ،‬ثم اختلف هؤلاء في متعلق الزهد‪.‬‬
‫فقالت طائفة‪ :‬الزهد إنما هو في الحلال‪ ،‬لأن ترك الحرام فر يضة‪.‬‬
‫وقالت فرقة‪ :‬بل الزهد لا يكون إلا في الحرام‪ .‬وأما الحلال فنعمة من الل ّٰه على عبده‪ ،‬والل ّٰه يحب‬
‫أن يرى أ ثر نعمته على عبده‪ .‬فشكره على نعمه‪ ،‬والاستعانة بها على طاعته‪ ،‬واتخاذها طر يقا ًإلى جنته‬
‫أفضل من الزهد فيها‪ ،‬والتخلي عنها‪ ،‬ومجانبة أسبابها‪.‬‬
‫والتحقيق أنها إن شغلته عن الل ّٰه فالزهد فيها أفضل‪ .‬وإن لم تشغله عن الل ّٰه بل كان شاكرا ً لل ّٰه فيها‬
‫فحاله أفضل‪ .‬والزهد فيها تجر يد القلب عن التعلق بها والطمأنينة إليها‪.‬‬

220
2

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Parting from All Longings

The author of al-Manāzil said, God have mercy on him,
Renunciation is to part from longing for things entirely.
By “things” he meant those things to which renunciation is applicable, that is,
all that is other than God the Exalted. To drop their longing for them is to eliminate attachment of desire to them. His saying “entirely” emphasizes that one
should neither pay attention to them nor miss them or long for them.
He said, “For the commoners, it is an act of nearness; for the seeker, it is a
necessity; and for the elite, it is fear.”6
That is, the commoners draw near to God the Exalted, “nearness” being the
means by which a lover draws close to his beloved. It is a necessity for the seeker,
for he cannot attain separation from his obstacles except by removing longings
other than what is his ultimate goal. He is thus in urgent need for renunciation,
just as he needs food and drink to survive. If he is attached to other than his
ultimate goal, his veil, or the interruption or the setback [in his connection to
God] persists in accordance with the distance of that thing from his ultimate
goal and the strength of his connection to it.
It is only a “fear” for the elite because they fear for what they have attained
of the nearness, intimacy, and delight with God that that purity be soiled by
attending to other than God the Exalted. Thus, their abstinence is borne out of
fear.
He said,
It is three levels. The first is to abstain from doubtful things while already
having abandoned the illicit things out of their fear of punishment, their
disdain for any deficiency, and dislike of associating with the debauched.
As for abstaining from what is doubtful in terms of its permissibility, as explained in the tradition of al-Nuʿmān b. Bashīr,7 may God be pleased with them
both, who reported that the Prophet of God, God grant him blessing and peace,
said,
The licit is clear, and the illicit is clear, and between the two there are
doubtful matters that most people do not know about. Whoever avoids
6 The extant versions of the original text have it, “for the elite, it is a degradation (khassa).”
Such a reading would have elicited censure from Ibn al-Qayyim, for al-Harawī would appear

‫‪221‬‬

‫‪chapter 16‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪» :‬الزهد هو إسقاط الرغبة عن الشيء بالك ُل َِّي ّة«‪.‬‬
‫ير يد بالشيء المزهود فيه ما سوى الل ّٰه تعالى‪ ،‬والإسقاط عنه إزالة تعلق الرغبة به‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬بالكلية«‪ ،‬أي بحيث لا يلتفت إليه‪ ،‬ولا يتشوق إليه‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهو للعامة قر بة ٌ‪ .‬وللمر يد ضرورة ٌ‪ .‬وللخاصة خشية ٌ«‪.‬‬
‫يعني أن العامة ٺتقرب به إلى الل ّٰه تعالى‪ .‬و »القر بة« ما تقرب به المتقرب إلى محبو به‪.‬‬
‫وهو ضرورة للمر يد‪ ،‬لأنه لا يحصل له التخلي بما هو بصدده إلا بإسقاط الرغبة فيما سوى مطلو به‪.‬‬
‫فهو مضطر إلى الزهد كضرورته إلى الطعام والشراب‪ .‬إذ التعلق بسوى مطلو به لا يعدم منه حجابا ًأو‬
‫وقفة ً أو نكسة ً‪ ،‬على حسب بعد ذلك الشيء من مطلو به‪ ،‬وقوة تعلقه به وضعفه‪.‬‬
‫وإنما كان خشية ً للخاصة‪ ،‬لأنهم يخافون على ما حصل لهم من القرب والأنس بالل ّٰه‪ .‬وقرة عيونهم‬
‫به أن يتكدر عليهم صفوه بالتفاتهم إلى ما سوى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فزهدهم خشية وخوف‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ .‬الدرجة الأولى‪ :‬الزهد في الشبهة بعد ترك الحرام بالحذر من المعتبة‪،‬‬
‫ساق«‪.‬‬
‫والأنفة من المنقصة‪ ،‬وكراهة مشاركة الف ّ‬
‫أما الزهد في الشبهة فهو ترك ما يشتبه على العبد‪ ،‬هل هو حلال أو حرام؟ كما في حديث النعمان بن‬
‫بشير عن النبي ﷺ‪» :‬الحلال بي ّ ِن والحرام بي ّ ِن‪ ،‬و بين ذلك أمور مشتبهات لا يعلمهن كثير من الناس‪.‬‬

‫—‪to draw an unwarranted line between the spiritual conduct of the commoners and the elite‬‬
‫‪a tendency which Ibn al-Qayyim has repeatedly censured (see Translator’s Introduction on‬‬
‫‪al-Harawī and Manāzil). It is not clear if it is the latter’s charity or scribal error that explains‬‬
‫‪the discrepancy.‬‬
‫‪7 Al-Nuʿmān b. Bashīr (d. 65/685) was an Anṣārī Companion who later became the governor of‬‬
‫‪Kufa during the reign of Muʿāwiyya. See Siyar 3:411.‬‬

222

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

such doubtful matters will avoid the illicit, and whoever falls into the
doubtful will fall into the illicit—like a shepherd who lets his herd graze
around the [king’s] reserve is likely to transgress into the reserve. Verily,
every king has a reserve, and the reserve of God is his prohibitions. Verily,
in the body there is a piece of flesh; if it is good, all the body is good, and
if it is corrupt, all the body gets corrupted—verily, it is the heart.8
The doubtful things are the gulf separating the licit from the illicit. God has
made between every pair of opposites a gulf. Death is a gulf and what follows it
is a separation between this life and the afterlife. He made sins the gulf separating faith from disbelief. He made the Heights9 the gulf separating the Garden
from the Fire. Similarly, he made between every two rituals a separator that
is from neither. Thus, Muḥassir (the valley of Muzdalifa) separates Minā from
Muzdalifa and belongs to neither, and the pilgrim stays there neither the night
of the gathering [of ʿArafa] nor the nights of stay at Minā. Similarly, the valley
of ʿUrana is the separator between ʿArafa and the Sanctuary but is part of neither. Similarly, between dawn and sunrise there is a separator of day and night
which is neither from the night that ends with the dawn, nor is it from the day,
which begins with sunrise, even if it is legally considered part of the day.
The same is true of the stations on a journey, between which there is a gulf
that every traveler knows. Many of the states and incidents are only part of the
separation, but a seeker might mistake them for ends, and only the experts of
the path and scholars of its proofs can avoid that.
His words “after abandoning the illicit” mean that abandoning the doubtful
is not possible except after abandoning the illicit. His words “fearing the punishment” means that the reason for abandoning the doubtful is caution against
the punishment of God. His words “disdain for deficiency” mean that he disdains for himself any deficiency before his Lord and falling in His eyes; it does
not mean his dislike of deficiency before the people or falling in their eyes,
even though it may not be blameworthy; rather, it too is praiseworthy. What
is blameworthy is that his dislike be limited to that alone. His words “dislike of
associating with the sinners” mean that sinners rush toward the sites of longing
in this world, and such sites are overcrowded due to it, and the ascetic disdains
sharing those sites with them, raises himself above such sites, due to the worthlessness of those who partake in them. It was said to one of them, “What made
you abstain from the world?” He said, “The rarity of its loyalty, the abundance
of its treachery, the worthlessness of its participants.”
8 Bukhārī #52; Muslim #1599.
9 al-Aʿrāf, in reference to Q. 7:48.

‫‪223‬‬

‫‪chapter 16‬‬

‫فمن اتقى الشبهات اتقى الحرام‪ ،‬ومن وقع في الشبهات وقع في الحرام‪ ،‬كالراعي يرعى حول الحمى‪،‬‬
‫يوشك أن يرتع فيه‪ .‬ألا وإن لكل ملك حمى‪ ،‬ألا وإن حمى الل ّٰه محارمه‪ .‬ألا وإن في الجسد مضغة‪ ،‬إذا‬
‫صلحت صلح لها سا ئر الجسد‪ ،‬وإذا فسدت فسد لها سا ئر الجسد‪ .‬ألا وهي القلب«‪ .‬فالشبهات برزخ‬
‫بين الحلال والحرام‪ .‬وقد جعل الل ّٰه عز وجل بين كل متباينين برزخا‪ ً،‬كما جعل الموت وما بعده برزخا ً‬
‫بين الدنيا والآخرة‪ ،‬وجعل المعاصي برزخا ًبين الإ يمان والـكفر‪ ،‬وجعل الأعراف برزخا ًبين الجنة‬
‫والنار‪.‬‬
‫شعر َين من مشاعر المناسك برزخا ًحاجزا ً بينهما ليس من هذا ولا هذا‪.‬‬
‫وكذلك جعل بين كل م َ ْ‬
‫فمحس ِّر برزخ بين منى ومزدلفة‪ ،‬ليس من واحد منهما‪ ،‬فلا يبيت به الحاج ليلة جمع ولا ليالي منى‪.‬‬
‫و بطن عرنة برزخ بين عرفة و بين الحرم‪ ،‬فليس من الحرم ولا من عرفة‪.‬‬
‫وكذلك ما بين طلوع الفجر وطلوع الشمس برزخ بين الليل والنهار‪ ،‬فليس من الليل لتصرمه بطلوع‬
‫الفجر‪ ،‬ولا من النهار لأنه من طلوع الشمس‪ ،‬وإن دخل في اسم اليوم شرعا‪ً.‬‬
‫وكذلك منازل السير‪ ،‬بين كل منزلتين برزخ يعرفه السا ئر في تلك المنازل‪ .‬وكثير من الأحوال‬
‫والواردات تكون برازخ‪ ،‬فيظنها صاحبها غاية ً‪ .‬وهذا لم يتخلص منه إلا فقهاء الطر يق‪ ،‬والعلماء الأدلة‬
‫فيها‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬بعد ترك الحرام«‪ ،‬أي ترك الشبهة لا يكون إلا بعد ترك الحرام‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬بالحذر من المعتبة« يعني أن يكون سبب تركه للشبهة الحذر من توجه عتب الل ّٰه عليه‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬والأنفة من النقيصة«‪ ،‬أي يأنف لنفسه من نقصه عند ر به‪ ،‬وسقوطه من عينه‪ ،‬ولا أن‬
‫أنفته من نقصه عند الناس‪ ،‬وسقوطه من عيونهم‪ ،‬وإن كان ذلك ليس مذموما‪] ً،‬بل هو[ محمود أيضا‪.‬‬
‫ولـكن المذموم أن تكون أنفتهكلها من ذلك‪.‬‬
‫ساق« يعني أن الفساق يزدحمون على مواضع الرغبة في الدنيا‪ ،‬ولتلك‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬وكراهة مشاركة الف َ ّ‬
‫المواقف كظيظ من الزحام‪ .‬فالزاهد يأنف من مشاركتهم في تلك المواقف‪ ،‬و يرفع نفسه عنها لخسة‬
‫شركائه فيها‪ ،‬كما قيل لبعضهم‪ :‬ما الذي زهدك في الدنيا؟ قال‪ :‬قلة وفائها‪ ،‬وكثرة جفائها‪ ،‬وخسة‬
‫شركائها‪.‬‬

224

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

{As a poet says:
If I did not abandon the water well for fear,
I did so because of the abundance of those seeking it
When the flies gather around the food,
I hold back my hand even as my ego desires it,
The lions dislike frequenting the well
Around which the dogs begin to crowd}
He said,
The second level is abstinence from all that is extraneous, which is all that
is more than the threshold and the sufficient amount of nourishment, for
the sake of taking advantage of every unoccupied moment and filling it
[with worship], the decisiveness of determination, and adorning oneself
with the traits of the prophets and the confirmers.
The “extraneous” means what is more than one’s needs, and “threshold” means
what the body needs of nutrition and drink, clothing and dwelling, and intercourse if he needs that, in order to live. The “sufficient” means the bare necessities of life, by which the traveler sustains himself through his journey; he
should refrain from what is beyond that, in order to save time to use it profitably.
Renunciation for those of the first level is out of fear of punishment and caution against deficiency; the renunciation of the seekers of this level is higher
and loftier, as it seeks to optimize the time with God the Exalted, for when one
indulges with the extraneous measure of this world, he misses out his share of
time, failing to seize the opportunity that it provides. For time is a sword; if you
do not cut it, it cuts you.
As for “fulfillment of the time,” it means being occupied in every one of his
moments with what draws him closer to God or helps in that pursuit from
food, drink, intercourse, sleep, and rest. If he builds his strength for the sake
of attaining what God loves and avoiding what He dislikes, it is the fulfillment
of his time, even if it is something that he perfectly enjoys. The fulfillment of
time is not to be confused with the abandonment of delights and good things.
For a true lover, the journey of his heart during even his enjoyment of food,
drink, intercourse with his wife, and comfort may be stronger than his physical journey. It has been related concerning one of them that he would receive
[spiritual] illumination even as he sat on top of his woman, a state that he did
not experience other than in her.

‫‪225‬‬

‫‪chapter 16‬‬

‫و»الفضول« ما يفضل عن قدر الحاجة‪ .‬و »المسكة« ما يمسك النفس من القوت والشراب‬
‫واللباس والمسكن والمنكح إذا احتاج إليه‪ .‬و »البلاغ« هو البلغة من ذلك‪ ،‬الذي يتبلغ به في منازل‬
‫السفر كزاد المسافر‪ ،‬فيزهد فيما وراء ذلك اغتناما لً تفرغه لعمارة وقته‪.‬‬
‫ولما كان الزهد لأهل الدرجة الأولى خوفا ً من المعتبة‪ ،‬وحذرا ً من المنقصة‪ ،‬كان الزهد لأهل‬
‫هذه الدرجة أعلى وأرفع‪ .‬وهو اغتنام الفراغ لعمارة أوقاتهم مع الل ّٰه تعالى‪ ،‬لأنه إذا اشتغل بفضول‬
‫الدنيا فاته نصيبه من انتهاز فرصة الوقت‪ .‬فالوقت سيف إن لم تقطعه قطعك‪.‬‬
‫وعمارة الوقت الاشتغال في جميع آنائه بما يقرب إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬أو يعين على ذلك‪ ،‬من مأكل أو مشرب‬
‫أو منكح أو منام أو راحة‪ .‬فإنه متى أخذها بنية القوة على ما يحبه الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وتجنب ما يسخطه‪ ،‬كانت من‬
‫عمارة الوقت‪ ،‬وإن كان له فيها أتم لذة‪ ،‬فلا تحسب عمارة الوقت بهجر اللذات والطيبات‪.‬‬
‫فالمحب الصادق ر بما كان سيره القلبي في حال أكله وشر به وجماع أهله وراحته أقوى من سيره‬
‫البدني في بعض الأحيان‪.‬‬
‫وقد حكي عن بعضهم أنهكان يرد عليه—وهو على بطن امرأته—حال لا يعهدها في غيرها‪.‬‬

226

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

This has a sound reason, in fact, which is the concentration of the faculties
of the self, with no distraction by anything else, along with what he experiences
of delight, happiness, and pleasure; and that delight reminds him of the other
delight, and this pleasure of the other pleasure. The soul thus rises up from
that delight and pleasure to one that is incomparably superior in its strength
and activity and absolute concentration. This leads to a wonderful state.
Do not haste toward rejection, and look at the state of your heart at the time
when it is assailed by the one it loves most. How do you find it? This is the case
with others as well. There is no doubt that the self, when it attains a righteous
portion from this world, is strengthened and pleased, its faculties and focus are
concentrated, and its distractedness vanishes.
O God forgive, for the pen has slipped and words have overstepped, and [I
seek] refuge from Your wrath.
As for the “decisiveness of determination,” it means [the cessation] of the
turbulence of the heart that comes due to the attachment to the worldly causes,
by way of longing and fear, and love, hate, and endeavor. The renunciation of
a servant is not sound until his turbulence is severed from his heart, such that
he does not attend to [the world], nor is attached to it in both cases, whether
he experiences it or abandons it. For renunciation is the renunciation of the
heart not of the possessions of the hand, and it is to empty the heart from [the
world] not the hand.
As for “adorning oneself with the traits of the prophets and confirmers,” they
truly are the ascetics toward this world, for their determination is toward a
knowledge that raised in their eyes something other than [this world], so they
have become ascetics in it, even if they experience it.

3

Renunciation of Renunciation

He said,
The third level is the renunciation of renunciation, which consists of
three things: denigration of what you have renounced, the equality of
states for you, and the vanishing of the witnessing of what you have
earned, in consideration of the valley of realities.
The Shaykh explained what he meant by “renunciation of renunciation” with
three things. First, the denigration of what one has turned away from, for the
one whose heart is filled with the love of God and His glorification does not
deem what he has left for [God’s] sake from this world as worthy even to be

‫‪227‬‬

‫‪chapter 16‬‬

‫ولهذا سبب صحيح‪ .‬وهو اجتماع قوى النفس‪ ،‬وعدم التفاتها حينئذ إلى شيء‪ ،‬مع ما يحصل لها‬
‫من السرور والفرح واللذة‪ .‬والسرور يذكر بالسرور‪ ،‬واللذة تذكر باللذة‪ .‬فتنهض الروح من تلك الفرحة‬
‫واللذة إلى ما لا نسبة بينها و بينها بتلك الجمعية‪ ،‬والقوة والنشاط‪ ،‬وقطع أسباب الالتفات‪ ،‬فيورثه ذلك‬
‫حالا ًعجيبة ً‪.‬‬
‫ولا تعجل بالإنكار‪ ،‬وانظر إلى قلبك عند هجوم أعظم محبوب له عليه في هذه الحال‪ ،‬كيف تراه؟‬
‫فهكذا حال غيرك‪.‬‬
‫ولا ر يب أن النفس إذا نالت حظا ًصالحا ًمن الدنيا قو يت به وسرت‪ ،‬واستجمعت قواها وجمعيتها‬
‫وزال تشتتها‪.‬‬
‫اللهم غفرا ً‪ .‬فقد طغى القلم‪ ،‬وزاد الكلم‪ ،‬فعياذا ً بك من مقتك‪.‬‬
‫وأما »حسم الجأش« فهو اضطراب القلب بالتعلق بأسباب الدنيا‪ ،‬رغبة ً ورهبة ً‪ ،‬وحبا ً و بغضا ً‬
‫وسعيا‪ ً.‬فلا يصح الزهد للعبد حتى يقطع هذا الاضطراب من قلبه‪ ،‬بألا يلتفت إليها ولا يتعلق بها في‬
‫حالتي مباشرته لها وتركه‪ .‬فإن الزهد زهد القلب‪ ،‬لا زهد الترك من اليد‪ .‬فهو تخلي القلب عنها لا خلو‬
‫اليد منها‪.‬‬
‫وأما »التحلي بحلية الأنبياء والصديقين« فإنهم أهل الزهد في الدنيا حقا‪ ،‬إذ هم مشمرون إلى علم‬
‫قد رفع لهم غيرها‪ ،‬فهم فيها زاهدون‪ ،‬وإن كانوا لها مباشر ين‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬الزهد في الزهد‪ .‬وهو بثلاثة أشياء‪ :‬باستحقار ما زهدت فيه‪ ،‬واستواء الحالات‬
‫فيه عندك‪ .‬والذهاب عن شهود الاكتساب‪ ،‬ناظرا إلى وادي الحقائق«‪.‬‬
‫وقد فسر الشيخ مراده بالزهد في الزهد بثلاثة أشياء‪:‬‬
‫أحدها‪ :‬احتقاره ما زهد فيه‪ .‬فإن من امتلأ قلبه بمحبة الل ّٰه وتعظيمه لا يرى أن ما تركه لأجله من‬
‫الدنيا يستحق أن يجعل قر بانا‪ ً،‬لأن الدنيا بحذافيرها لا تساوي عند الل ّٰه جناح بعوضة‪ .‬فالعارف لا يرى‬

228

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

made an object of sacrifice. For this world in its entirety does not equal before
God the wing of a gnat. The knower does not deem his renunciation toward it
a great thing that matters or calls for congratulation. The one who has attained
renunciation truly is ashamed to consider what he has left for the sake of God
a worthy thing and a badge of his renunciation; he is ashamed to mention it
with his tongue or witness it in his heart as such.
As for the “equality of states,” it means his abandoning and partaking in what
he is renouncing are equal, for it has no value to him. This is a subtle aspect of
the understanding of renunciation. He is an ascetic whether he takes it or leaves
it, for his concern is greater than contemplating taking or leaving [the portion
of this world which he is renouncing], due to its worthlessness in his eyes.
As for the “vanishing of the witnessing of what one has earned,” it means that
he who has belittled this world with his heart, such that its taking and leaving
are the same to him, does not see that he has earned a high rank with God by
leaving it at all. It is too worthless in his eyes to be a cause of earning high ranks.
It has another meaning, which is that he witnesses the exclusiveness of God
Almighty in giving and withholding. He does not, therefore, think that he has
left or accepted anything. Rather, it is God alone who is the Giver and the Withholder. What he has taken is the path of God’s giving to him like the path of
water in a flowing river. Similarly, what he has given up for God, it is God in
reality who has withheld it from him. He goes from the witnessing of his earning or living to the witnessing of the Doer alone. When he looks at things from
the eye of union, and walks in the valley of reality, the spectacle of his own
earning [of virtue] vanishes. This is the meaning of his words “in consideration
of the valley of realities,” and this is the more appropriate of the two meanings.
This is the renunciation of the elite. A poet has said,
When your belittled me in desire, fearing ruin
It showed me what it is to be an ascetic in renunciation10

10

The lines are by the poet Abū Tammām. Madārij(Ṣ), 1380.

‫‪229‬‬

‫‪chapter 16‬‬

‫زهده فيها كبير أمر يعتد به و يحتفل له‪ ،‬فيستحي من صح له الزهد أن يجعل لما تركه لل ّٰه قدرا ً يلاحظ‬
‫زهده فيه‪ ،‬بل يفنى عن زهده فيهكما فني عنه‪ ،‬و يستحي من ذكره بلسانه وشهوده بقلبه‪.‬‬
‫وأما استواء الحالات فيه عنده فهو أن يرى ترك ما زهد فيه وأخذه متساو يين عنده‪ ،‬إذ ليس له‬
‫عنده قدر‪ ،‬وهذا من دقائق فقه الزهد‪ .‬فيكون زاهدا ً في حال أخذهكما هو زاهد في حال تركه‪ ،‬إذ‬
‫همته أعلى من ملاحظته أخذا ً وتركا لً صغره في عينه‪.‬‬
‫وأما »الذهاب عن شهود الاكتساب« فمعناه أن من استصغر الدنيا بقلبه واستوت الحالات في‬
‫أخذها وتركها عنده‪ ،‬لم ير أنه اكتسب بتركها عند الل ّٰه درجة البتة‪ ،‬لأنها أصغر في عينه من أن يرى‬
‫أنه اكتسب بتركها الدرجات‪.‬‬
‫وفيه معنى آخر‪ :‬وهو أن يشاهد تفرد الل ّٰه عز وجل بالعطاء والمنع‪ .‬فلا يرى أنه ترك شيئا ًولا أخذ‬
‫شيئا‪ ً،‬بل الل ّٰه وحده هو المعطي المانع‪ .‬فما أخذه فهو مجرى لعطاء الل ّٰه إ ياهكمجرى الماء في النهر‪ ،‬وما‬
‫تركه لل ّٰه فالل ّٰه هو الذي منعه منه‪ ،‬فيذهب بمشاهدة الفعال وحده عن شهود كسبه وتركه‪ .‬فإذا نظر إلى‬
‫الأشياء بعين الجمع وسلك في وادي الحقيقة‪ ،‬غاب عن شهود اكتسابه‪ ،‬وهو معنى قوله‪» :‬ناظرا ً إلى‬
‫وادي الحقائق«‪ ،‬وهذا أليق المعنيين بكلامه‪ .‬فهذا زهد الخاصة‪.‬‬
‫قال الشاعر‪:‬‬

‫إذا زهدتني في الهوى خشية الردى‬

‫جلت لي عن وجه يزهد في الزهد‬

chapter 17

The Station of Scrupulousness
Scrupulousness is one of the stations of the path of “You alone we worship and
you alone we supplicate for help.”
The Almighty said,
And your garment do purify. [74:4]
Commenting on this, Mujāhid and Qatāda said [that it means], “Purify your
ego of any sins,” meaning that the garment here is an allusion to the ego. This is
also the opinion of Ibrāhīm [al-Nakhaʿī], al-Ḍaḥḥāk, al-Shaʿbī, al-Zuhrī, and the
leaders of the scholars of exegesis. Ibn ʿAbbās said, “Do not clothe yourself with
disobedience and transgression,” then continued, “Have you not heard the saying of Ghaylān b. Salama al-Thaqafī? ‘I wear not the garment of the treacherous,
praise to God / Nor am I satisfied with treachery.’ ”
The Arabs say of a man known for truthfulness and loyalty that he has a pure
garment, and of a man known for treachery and transgression that his garment
is filthy or impure.
Ubayy b. Kaʿb, God be pleased with him, said, “Wear not [your garment] in
a state of treachery, oppression, and sin, but while you are good and pure.” AlḌaḥḥāk further comments, “Rectify your conduct.” Al-Suddī said, “It is said of
a righteous man that he has a pure garment and of a sinful man that he has a
filthy garment.” Saʿīd b. al-Jubayr said, “Purify your heart and intention.”
Al-Ḥasan and al-Quraẓī said, “Reform your manner and conduct.” Ibn Sīrīn
and Ibn Zayd said, “[God] commands [the Prophet] to purify his garment of
the impurities which make the prayer invalid, as the associationists used not
to purify themselves or their clothes.” Ṭāwūs said, “Shorten your garment, for
shortening the garment is part of purifying it.”
The first opinion is the most accurate one. There is no doubt that the external purification has been commanded, for it completes the reform of deeds and
manners, and that the external impurity begets inner corruption, and hence
one standing before God has been commanded to remove it.
The point is that scrupulousness is to purify the impurity and foulness of the
heart, just as water washes away the dirt and impurity of a garment. Between
the garment and the soul there is a connection, both obvious and hidden. This
is why in dreams, a man’s garment means his heart and inner state, and each
affects the other. It is because of this connection that wearing silk, gold, and

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬الورع«‪.‬‬
‫ك ف َطَهّ ِر ْ﴾ ]المدثر‪.[4:‬‬
‫قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َثيِ َاب َ َ‬
‫قال مجاهد وقتادة‪ :‬نفسك فطهر من الذنب‪ ،‬فكنى عن النفس بالثوب‪ .‬وهذا قول إ براهيم‬
‫والضحاك والشعبي والزهري‪ ،‬والمحققين من أهل التفسير‪.‬‬
‫قال ا بن عباس‪ :‬لا تلبسها على معصية ولا غدر‪ .‬ثم قال‪ :‬أما سمعت قول غيلان بن سلمة الثقفي‪:‬‬

‫وإني بحمد الل ّٰه لا ثوب غادر‬

‫لبست ولا من غدرة أتقنع‪.‬‬

‫والعرب تقول في وصف الرجل بالصدق والوفاء‪ :‬طاهر الثياب‪ .‬وتقول للغادر والفاجر‪ :‬دنس الثياب‪.‬‬
‫وقال أبو بن كعب—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—‪ :‬لا تلبسها على غدر ولا ظلم ولا إثم‪ .‬البسها وأنت بر طاهر‪.‬‬
‫وقال الضحاك‪ :‬عملك فأصلح‪.‬‬
‫قال السدي‪ :‬يقال للرجل إذا كان صالحا ً إنه لطاهر الثياب‪ .‬وإذا كان فاجرا ً إنه لخبيث الثياب‪.‬‬
‫وقال سعيد بن جبير‪ :‬وقلبك ونيتك فطهر‪.‬‬
‫وقال الحسن والقرظي‪ :‬وخلقك فحسن‪.‬‬
‫وقال ا بن سير ين وا بن ز يد‪ :‬أمر بتطهير الثياب من النجاسات التي لا تجوز الصلاة معها‪ ،‬لأن‬
‫المشركين كانوا لا يتطهرون‪ ،‬ولا يطهرون ثيابهم‪.‬‬
‫وقال طاووس‪ :‬وثيابك فقصر لأن تقصير الثياب طهرة لها‪ .‬والقول الأول أصح الأقوال‪ .‬ولا‬
‫ر يب أن تطهيرها من النجاسات وتقصيرها من جملة التطهير المأمور به‪ ،‬إذ به تمام إصلاح الأعمال‬
‫والأخلاق‪ ،‬لأن نجاسة الظاهر تورث نجاسة الباطن‪ .‬ولذلك أمر القائم بين يدي الل ّٰه بإزالتها والبعد‬
‫عنها‪.‬‬
‫والمقصود أن الورع يطهر دنس القلب ونجاسته‪ ،‬كما يطهر الماء دنس الثوب ونجاسته‪ .‬و بين الثياب‬
‫والقلوب مناسبة ظاهرة و باطنة‪ ،‬ولذلك تدل ثياب المرء في المنام على قلبه وحاله‪ ،‬و يؤثر كل منهما‬
‫في الآخر‪ .‬ولهذا نهى عن لباس الحر ير والذهب وجلود السباع‪ ،‬لما تؤثر في القلب من الهيئة المنافية‬

232

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

the hide of predators is prohibited, as it effects in the heart a form that negates
worship and humility. The effect of one’s garment on the heart and the ego is a
hidden matter; only those given discernment are aware of [the inner matters]
from the [garments’] cleanliness and filthiness and smell of the [souls’] happiness and gloominess, so much so that the garment of the righteous is known
from that of the wicked even if it is not on them.
The Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, gathered all the
meanings of scrupulousness in one statement: “Part of the excellence of one’s
Islam is to leave that which concerns him not.”1 The ambit of this statement is
inclusive of all that which does not concern or assist a believer: of words, sight,
hearing, holding, walking, thinking, and all inner or outer movements—thus
this statement is the most comprehensive definition of scrupulousness.
Ibrahīm b. Adham said, “Scrupulousness is to part from every doubtful thing
and whatever does not concern you, and that is parting from all that is beyond
your need.”
In al-Tirmidhī a tradition reported on the authority of the Prophet, God grant
him blessing and peace, says “O Abū Hurayra, be scrupulous, you will be the
most devout of men.”
Al-Shiblī, God have mercy on him, said, “Scrupulousness is that you avoid
everything other than God.”
Isḥāq b. Khalaf said, “Scrupulousness in abstaining from philosophy2 is
harder than in abstaining from gold and silver.”
Abū Sulaymān al-Dārānī said, “Scrupulousness (abstaining from that which
harms) is the onset of al-zuhd (abstinence from that which does not benefit),
just like contentment is the onset of pleasure [with God’s decree].”
Yaḥyā b. Muʿādh said, “Scrupulousness is to stop at the limit of one’s knowledge and avoid indulgence in taʾwīl (non-obvious interpretation of scripture).”
He also said, “Scrupulousness has two parts to it. The outer one is that one
make no movement except for God. The inner one is that nothing enters one’s
heart except Him.” He also said, “Whoever does not have scruples about minute
things does not gain magnificent returns.”
It has been said, “Whoever has scruples about light things in his religion shall
have a weighty status in the afterlife.”
Yūnus b. ʿUbayd (of Basra, d. 139/757) said, “Scrupulousness is to part from
any doubtful matter and keep an eye on one’s ego at every moment.”
Sufyān al-Thawrī said, “I have seen nothing simpler than scrupulousness:
avoid anything that troubles your soul.”
1 Tirmidhī #2317, graded ḥasan or weak; most likely a statement of ʿAlī b. al-Ḥusayn b. ʿAlī Zayn
al-ʿĀbidīn (d. 95/713).

‫‪233‬‬

‫‪chapter 17‬‬

‫للعبودية والخشوع‪ .‬وتأثير القلب والنفس في الثياب أمر خفي‪ ،‬يعرفه أهل البصا ئر من نظافتها ودنسها‬
‫ورائحتها‪ ،‬و بهجتها وكسفتها‪ ،‬حتى إن ثوب البر ليعرف من ثوب الفاجر‪ ،‬وليسا عليهما‪.‬‬
‫وقد جمع النبي ﷺ الورع كله في كلمة واحدة فقال‪» :‬من حسن إسلام المرء تركه ما لا يعنيه«‪.‬‬
‫فهذا يعم الترك لما لا يعني من الكلام والنظر‪ ،‬والاستماع والبطش‪ ،‬والمشي والفكر‪ ،‬وسا ئر الحركات‬
‫الظاهرة والباطنة‪ .‬فهذه الكلمةكافية شافية في الورع‪.‬‬
‫قال إ براهيم بن أدهم‪» :‬الورع ترك كل شبهة‪ .‬وترك ما لا يعنيك هو ترك الفضلات«‪ .‬وفي الترمذي‬
‫مرفوعا ًإلى النبي ﷺ‪» :‬يا أبا هر يرةكن ورعا‪ ً،‬تكن أعبد الناس«‪.‬‬
‫قال الشبلي—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪» :‬الورع أن ٺتورع عن كل ما سوى الل ّٰه«‪.‬‬
‫وقال إسحاق بن خلف‪ :‬الورع في المنطق أشد منه في الذهب والفضة‪ .‬والزهد في الر ياسة أشد منه‬
‫في الذهب والفضة‪ ،‬لأنهما يبذلان في طلب الر ياسة‪.‬‬
‫وقال أبو سليمان الداراني‪» :‬الورع أول الزهد‪ ،‬كما أن القناعة أول الرضا«‪.‬‬
‫وقال يحيى بن معاذ‪» :‬الورع الوقوف على حد العلم من غير تأو يل«‪.‬‬
‫وقال‪» :‬الورع على وجهين‪ :‬ورع في الظاهر‪ :‬ألا يتحرك إلا الل ّٰه‪ .‬وورع في الباطن‪ :‬وهو ألا يدخل‬
‫قلبك سواه«‪.‬‬
‫وقال‪» :‬من لم ينظر في الدقيق من الورع‪ ،‬لم يصل إلى الجليل من العطاء«‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪» :‬من دق في الدنيا ورعه أو نظره جل في القيامة خطره«‪.‬‬
‫وقال يونس بن عبيد‪» :‬الورع الخروج من كل شبهة‪ ،‬ومحاسبة النفس مع كل طرفة«‪.‬‬
‫وقال سفيان الثوري‪» :‬ما رأيت أسهل من الورع‪ ،‬ما حاك في نفسك تركته«‪.‬‬

‫‪2 Lit., “manṭiq” is logic or syllogism, but it stood for the type of philosophy introduced by the‬‬
‫‪translation of Greek texts.‬‬

234

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Sahl [al-Tustarī] said, “The licit is that in which God is not disobeyed, and its
refinement is that in which you do not forget God.”
Al-Ḥasan [of Basra] asked a young man, “What is the quintessence of religion?” He said, “Scrupulousness.” He then asked, “What spoils it?” “Greed,” the
young disciple replied. Upon this, al-Hasan was quite pleased with him.
Al-Ḥasan, God be pleased with him, said, “The weight of a morsel of scrupulousness is better than a thousand times the weight of fasting and praying.”
Abū Hurayra said, “Those companions of God in the morrow will be those
given to scrupulousness and abstinence.”
One Predecessor said, “A servant does not reach the essence of piety until
and unless he avoids what may be harmless fearing that it may be harmful.”3
One of the Companions said, God be pleased with them, “We used to abjure
seventy kinds of permissible things, fearing that we might fall into the illicit in
one of them.”

1

Levels of Scrupulousness

The author of al-Manāzil, God have mercy on him, said,
Scrupulousness is avoidance due to caution and hesitation inspired by
exaltation.
[The first part of this statement] means that he who possesses scrupulousness
abstains to the utmost extent possible from all that is prohibited by God, or that
which is doubtful.
Abstinence (tawaqqī) and caution (ḥaẓr) are similar in meaning, except that
the former is an act of the body while the latter is an act of the heart. One may
avoid something not because of caution but because one may regard it below
one’s status and place or other reasons. For instance, those people who do not
believe in the afterlife still sometimes avoid shameful and mean acts to protect
themselves and for their dislike of those acts, or in order to seek others’ praise
and so on.
[The second part of] his words “hesitation inspired by exaltation” means
that the motive that leads one to avoid prohibitions and doubtful matters is
either the fear of God’s warning or the exaltation or awe of God’s greatness in

3 This has been reported as a hadith with a weak chain in Tirmidhī #2451.

‫‪235‬‬

‫‪chapter 17‬‬

‫وقال سهل‪» :‬الحلال الذي لا يعصى الل ّٰه فيه‪ ،‬والصافي منه الذي لا ينسى الل ّٰه فيه«‪.‬‬
‫وسأل الحسن غلاما ًفقال له‪» :‬ما ملاك ]الدين؟ قال‪ [:‬الورع‪ .‬قال‪ :‬فما آفته؟ قال‪ :‬الطمع‪ .‬فعجب‬
‫الحسن منه«‪ .‬وقال الحسن—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—‪» :‬مثقال ذرة من الورع خير من ألف مثقال من‬
‫الصوم والصلاة«‪.‬‬
‫وقال أبو هر يرة—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—‪» :‬جلساء الل ّٰه غدا أهل الورع والزهد«‪.‬‬
‫وقال بعض السلف‪» :‬لا يبلغ العبد حقيقة التقوى حتى يدع ما لا بأس به حذرا ً مما به بأس«‪.‬‬
‫وقال بعض الصحابة—رضي الل ّٰه عنهم—‪» :‬كنا ندع سبعين بابا ًمن الحلال‪ ،‬مخافة أن نقع في باب‬
‫من الحرام«‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل رحمه الل ّٰه‪:‬‬
‫ج على تعظيم«‪.‬‬
‫»الورع‪ :‬توٍّق مستقصى على حذر‪ ،‬وتح ُر ّ ٌ‬
‫يعني أن يتوقى الحرام والشبه وما يخاف أن يضره أقصى ما يمكنه من التوقي‪ .‬والتوقي والحذر‬
‫متقار بان‪ ،‬إلا أن »التوقي« فعل الجوارح‪ ،‬و »الحذر« فعل القلب‪ .‬فقد يتوقى العبد الشيء لا على‬
‫وجه الحذر والخوف‪ ،‬ولـكن لأمور أخرى من إظهار نزاهة‪ ،‬وعزة وتصون أو أغراض أخر‪ ،‬كتوقي‬
‫الذين لا يؤمنون بمعاد‪ ،‬ولا جنة ولا نار‪ ،‬ما يتوقونه من الفواحش والدناءات تصونا ً عنها‪ ،‬ورغبة ً‬
‫بنفوسهم عن مواقعتها‪ ،‬وطلبا لً لمحمدة‪ ،‬ونحو ذلك‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬أو تحرج على تعظيم«‪ ،‬يعني أن الباعث على الورع عن المحارم والشبه‪ ،‬إما حذر حلول‬
‫الوعيد‪ ،‬وإما تعظيم الرب جل جلاله وإجلاله أن يتعرض لما نهى عنه‪.‬‬

236
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
one’s heart. Scrupulousness against sin is because of either fear or exaltation,
yet he mentioned exaltation alone and not love in addition as the motivation
for avoiding the disobedience of the beloved, for it cannot be attained except
with awe of the beloved. Love may or may not compel one to part from disobeying the beloved, such as one’s love for one’s son or slave or slave-girl. When
accompanied by awe, it compels one to cease opposition.
He said,
It is the final station of renunciation for the commoners and the first station of renunciation for the seeker.
That is, this abstinence or avoidance, characterized by caution and awe, is the
highest stage for the commoners and the beginning of the renunciation of the
seeker. This is so only because scrupulousness is the beginning of renunciation
and its prop, and the renunciation of the seeker is above that of the commoner,
and the latter’s end is the former’s beginning.
He said,
It has three levels. First, avoidance of unseemly things in order to protect
one’s soul, increase good deeds, and protect one’s faith.
These are three benefits of avoiding unseemly (i.e., ugly but not prohibited)
things. First, protection of the soul, which is to safeguard it against anything
that spoils it or makes it deficient before God and His angels and His believing
servants and the rest of His creation. He who values his soul protects it, safeguards it, purifies and beautifies it, and seeks for it the company of the great
and the pious. He who devalues his soul and thinks mean of it, throws it into
filth, lets loose its reins, corrupts it, and fails to protect it from ugliness. The
least benefit of avoiding unseemly and unrighteous acts is the protection of
one’s own soul.
As for increasing good deeds, this occurs in two ways. First, one [who avoids
doubtful things] has more time and opportunity to do good deeds, for when one
becomes occupied with unseemly things, he becomes deficient in performing
the good deeds that he was otherwise prepared to perform. Second, it helps
him do more rather than less good deeds compared to the bad deeds. As mentioned in the station of repentance, bad deeds may void good deeds either by
completely drowning them out or taking away from them, and certainly weakening them. Avoiding them expands your register of good deeds, like someone
who has a sum of capital and takes on a loan and wastes it away, thus drowning
some or all of his capital. The same is true of good and bad deeds.

‫‪237‬‬

‫‪chapter 17‬‬

‫الورع عن المعصية إما لخوف أو تعظيم‪ .‬واكتفى بذكر التعظيم عن ذكر الحب الباعث على ترك‬
‫معصية المحبوب‪ ،‬لأنه لا يكون إلا مع تعظيمه‪ .‬وإلا فلو خلا القلب من تعظيمه‪ ،‬لم تستلزم محبته ترك‬
‫مخالفته‪ ،‬كمحبة الإنسان ولده وعبده وأمته‪ .‬فإذا قارنه التعظيم أوجب ترك المخالفة‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهو آخر مقام الزهد للعامة‪ ،‬وأول مقام الزهد للمر يد«‪.‬‬
‫يعني أن هذا التوقي والتحرج—بوصف الحذر والتعظيم—هو نهاية لزهد العامة‪ ،‬و بداية لزهد المر يد‪.‬‬
‫وإنما كان كذلك لأن الورع—كما تقدم—هو أول الزهد ورديئه‪ .‬وزهد المر يد فوق زهد العامة‪ ،‬ونهاية‬
‫العامة هي بداية المر يد‪ .‬فنهاية مقام هذا هي بداية مقام هذا‪ .‬فإذا انتهى ورع العامة صار زهدا ً‪ ،‬وهو‬
‫أول ورع المر يد‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ .‬الدرجة الأولى‪ :‬تجنب القبائح لصون النفس‪ ،‬وتوفير الحسنات‪،‬‬
‫وصيانة الإ يمان«‪.‬‬
‫هذه ثلاث فوائد من فوائد تجنب القبائح‪.‬‬
‫أحدها‪ :‬صون النفس‪ .‬وهو حفظها وحمايتها عما يشينها‪ ،‬و يعيبها و يزري بها عند الل ّٰه وملائكته‬
‫وعباده المؤمنين وسا ئر خلقه‪ .‬فإن من كرمت عليه نفسه وكبرت عنده صانها وحماها‪ ،‬وزكاها وعلاها‪،‬‬
‫ووضعها في أعلى المحال‪ ،‬وزاحم بها أهل العزائم والـكمالات‪ .‬ومن هانت عليه نفسه وصغرت عنده‬
‫ألقاها في الرذائل‪ ،‬وأطلق شناقها وحل زمامها‪ ،‬ودساها ولم يصنها عن قبيح‪ .‬فأقل ما في تجنب القبائح‬
‫صون النفس‪ .‬وأما توفير الحسنات فمن وجهين‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬توفير زمانه على اكتساب الحسنات‪ .‬فإذا اشتغل بالقبائح نقصت عليه الحسنات التي كان‬
‫مستعدا لتحصيلها‪.‬‬
‫والثاني‪ :‬توفير الحسنات المفعولة عن نقصانها‪ ،‬بموازنة السيئات وحبوطها‪ ،‬كما تقدم في منزلة التو بة‬
‫أن السيئات قد تحبط الحسنات وقد تستغرقها بالكلية أو تنقصها‪ .‬فلا بد أن تضعفها قطعا‪ ً،‬فتجنبها يوفر‬
‫ديوان الحسنات‪ .‬وذلك بمنزلة من له مال حاصل واستدان عليه‪ ،‬فإما أن يستغرقه الدين أو يكثره أو‬
‫ينقصه‪ ،‬فهكذا الحسنات والسيئات‪.‬‬

238

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

As for “the protection of one’s faith,” it being the consensus of all of the Ahl
al-Sunna that it increases by acts of obedience and decreases by acts of wickedness. Al-Shāfiʿī and others, including some of the Companions, the Successors
and those after them have reported consensus on this. The weakening of faith
because of sins is known through personal taste and experience as well. As a
tradition has it,
When one commits a sin, a black dot is placed on his heart. When he
returns in repentance and seeks forgiveness, his heart is cleaned. If he
returns and commits the sin again, another dot is placed on his heart. [If
this keeps happening] the blackness overwhelms the entire heart, and it
is this rān (rust) that God has spoken of: “Nay, but their hearts have been
rusted due to what they have earned” [83:14].4
This means that bad deeds blacken the heart and extinguish its light. Faith is
the light of the heart that the sins put out or decrease. Good deeds, on the other
hand, increase the light of the heart. The Exalted has declared that the earning
of the hearts is the cause of the rust that covers them, and that God has fixed the
hypocrites upside down in their hypocrisy because of their own earning, and
said, “God has fastened them upside down because of what they have earned”
[4:88]. He also declared that their breaking of the covenant that God has made
with His servants is a cause of the hardening of the heart. He said,
But because of their breach of their covenant, We cursed them, and made
their hearts grow hard; they change the words from their [right] places
and forgot a good part of the reminder that was sent them. [5:13]
He made their sin of breaking the covenant the cause of most terrible effects,
including hardening of the heart, curse, alteration of [His] words, and forgetting of knowledge. Sins to faith are like illness and fever to strength, which is
why the Predecessors said, “Sins are the harbinger of unbelief just as fever is
the harbinger of death.” The faith of those given to sins is like the strength of
one who is ill, depending on the extent of his illness.
Hence, to the commoner there are three motivations for practicing scrupulousness: protecting the soul, increasing good deeds, and protecting faith. These
are the noblest of motivations that induce scrupulousness to the commoner:
He works to purify and protect his soul, preparing it to attain to its Lord, pro-

4 Tirmidhī #3334.

‫‪239‬‬

‫‪chapter 17‬‬

‫وأما »صيانة الإ يمان«‪ ،‬فلأن الإ يمان عند جميع أهل السنة يز يد بالطاعة و ينقص بالمعصية‪ .‬وقد‬
‫حكاه الشافعي وغيره عن الصحابة والتابعين ومن بعدهم‪ .‬وإضعاف المعاصي للإ يمان أمر معلوم‬
‫بالذوق والوجود‪ ،‬فإن العبد—كما جاء في الحديث—إذا أذنب نكت في قلبه نكتة سوداء‪ .‬فإن تاب‬
‫واستغفر صقل قلبه‪ ،‬وإن عاد فأذنب نكت فيه نكتة أخرى‪ ،‬حتى تعلو قلبه‪ ،‬وذلك الران الذي قال‬
‫سبوُ نَ﴾ ]المطففين‪ .[14:‬فالقبائح تسود القلب وتطفيء‬
‫ل ر َانَ ع َلىَ ق ُلوُ بِه ِم َمّا ك َانوُ ا ي َْك ِ‬
‫الل ّٰه‪﴿ :‬ك َلَ ّا ۖ ب َ ْۜ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫نوره‪ ،‬والإ يمان هو نور في القلب‪ ،‬والقبائح تذهب به أو تقلله قطعا‪.‬‬
‫فالحسنات تز يد نور القلب‪ ،‬والسيئات تطفيء نور القلب‪ .‬وقد أخبر تعالى أن كسب القلوب‬
‫كس َه ُم ب ِم َا‬
‫سبب للران الذي يعلوها‪ ،‬وأخبر أنه أركس المنافقين في نفاقهم بكسبهم فقال‪﴿ :‬و َال َل ّـه ُ َأْر َ‬
‫كسَبوُ ا﴾ ]النساء‪ ،[88:‬وأخبر أن نقض الميثاق الذي أخذه على عباده سبب لتقسية القلب‪ .‬فقال‪:‬‬
‫َ‬
‫ظا م َِّم ّا ذ ُك ِّر ُوا‬
‫ح ًّ‬
‫ضع ِه ِ ۙ و َن َس ُوا َ‬
‫يحرَ ِ ّفوُ نَ ال ْك َل ِم َع َن َمّو َا ِ‬
‫سيةَ ً ۖ ُ‬
‫جع َلنْ َا ق ُلوُ بَه ُْم ق َا ِ‬
‫﴿ف َب ِم َا نقَ ْ ض ِه ِم مّ ِيث َاقهَ ُْم لعَ َ َن ّاه ُْم و َ َ‬
‫ب ِه ِ﴾ ]المائدة‪ .[13:‬فجعل ذنب النقض موجبا ً لشدة الآثار من تقسية القلب واللعنة وتحر يف الكلم‬
‫ونسيان العلم‪.‬‬
‫فالمعاصي للإ يمان كالمرض والحمى للقوة‪ ،‬سواء بسواء‪ .‬ولذلك قال السلف‪ :‬المعاصي بر يد الـكفر‬
‫كما أن الحمى بر يد الموت‪.‬‬
‫فإ يمان صاحب القبائح كقوة المر يض على حسب قوة مرضه وضعفه‪.‬‬
‫وهذه الأمور الثلاثة—هي صون النفس‪ ،‬وتوفير الحسنات‪ ،‬وصيانة الإ يمان—هي أرفع من باعث‬
‫العامة على الورع‪ ،‬لأن صاحبها أرفع همة ً‪ ،‬لأنه عامل على تزكية نفسه وصونها وتأهيلها للوصول إلى‬

240

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

tecting it from what spoils it before Him and veils it from Him; protects his good
deeds from becoming pale and deficient, as it is through them that he journeys
to his Lord and seeks His pleasure; and finally, protects his faith in his Lord due
to his love for Him, his testimony of His unicity, and his wariness against all that
puts out His light and preserves its bloom and enervates its strength.
The Shaykh, God have mercy on him, said,
These three attributes comprise the first level in the scrupulousness of the
seekers.
That is, the seekers of two other levels of scrupulousness beyond this; then he
mentions them and says,
The second level is protection of the limits wherein there is no harm to
maintain safety and piety, distance from vice, and safeguarding against
crossing the limits.
He says that in climbing from the first level to this level of scrupulousness, one
must get accustomed to abstaining from much that is permissible fearing that
it might breach his protection by God or stain its purity or decrease the light [of
God] in his heart. For indulgence in even many permissible things stains one’s
heart and decreases its light and soils its beauty and freshness.
One day, Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya, may God sanctify his soul, said to me
regarding a certain permissible thing something like this: “It violates high ranks
with God, even if its avoidance is not a condition for salvation” or something of
this sort.
The knower, then, avoids even the permissible things to protect his fortification, especially as it is a buffer zone between the licit and the illicit. That
between them is a buffer zone has been discussed earlier,5 and disregarding it
for one who aspires to this higher level is sure to cause him to violate this level.
The difference between one on the first level and this one is that the former
works to attain fortification, whereas the latter works to protect it and maintain its purity in this regard and always keeps an eye on the purity of his or her
status with God and with the light of God. This is the meaning of his saying,
“protecting his fortification.”
As for “distance from vice,” it means rising above ways and practices that lead
to it.

5 See Chapter 2 §4.

‫‪241‬‬

‫‪chapter 17‬‬

‫ر بها‪ .‬فهو يصونها عما يشينها عنده و يحجبه عنها‪ ،‬و يصون حسناته عما يسقطها و يضعها‪ ،‬لأنه يسير بها‬
‫إلى ر به‪ ،‬و يتطلب بها رضاه و يصون إ يمانه بر به‪ ،‬من حبه له‪ ،‬وتوحيده ومعرفته به‪ ،‬ومراقبته إ ياه عما‬
‫يطفيء نوره‪ ،‬و يذهب بهجته‪ ،‬و يوهي قوته‪.‬‬
‫قال الشيخ—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪:‬‬
‫»وهذه الثلاث صفات‪ :‬هي في الدرجة الأولى من ورع المر يدين«‪.‬‬
‫يعني أن للمر يدين درجتين أخر يين من الورع فوق هذه‪ .‬ثم ذكرهما فقال‪:‬‬
‫»الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬حفظ الحدود عند ما لا بأس به‪ ،‬إ بقاء ً على الصيانة والتقوى‪ ،‬وصعودا ً عن‬
‫الدناءة‪ ،‬وتخلصا ًعن اقتحام الحدود«‪.‬‬
‫يقول‪ :‬إن من صعد عن الدرجة الأولى إلى هذه الدرجة من الورع‪ ،‬فهو يترك كثيرا ًمما لا بأس به‬
‫من المباح‪ ،‬إ بقاء ً على صيانته وخوفا ًعليها أن يتكدر صفوها‪ ،‬و يطفأ نورها‪ .‬فإن كثيرا ً من المباح يكدر‬
‫صفو الصيانة‪ ،‬و يذهب بهجتها و يطفيء نورها‪ ،‬و يخلق حسنها و بهجتها‪.‬‬
‫وقال لي يوما ًشيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية—قدس الل ّٰه روحه—في شيء من المباح‪ :‬هذا ينافي المراتب‬
‫العالية‪ ،‬وإن لم يكن تركه شرطا ًفي النجاة أو نحو هذا من الكلام‪.‬‬
‫فالعارف يترك كثيرا ًمن المباح إ بقاء ً على صيانته‪ ،‬ولا سيما إذا كان ذلك المباح برزخا بً ين الحلال‬
‫والحرام‪ .‬فإن بينهما برزخا ً—كما تقدم—‪ .‬فتركه لصاحب هذه الدرجةكالمتعين الذي لا بد منه لمنافاته‬
‫لدرجته‪.‬‬
‫والفرق بين صاحب الدرجة الأولى وصاحب هذه أن ذاك يسعى في تحصيل الصيانة‪ ،‬وهذا يسعى‬
‫في حفظ صفوها أن يتكدر‪ ،‬ونورها أن يذهب‪ ،‬وهو معنى قوله‪» :‬إ بقاء ً على الصيانة«‪.‬‬
‫وأما الصعود عن الدناءة فهو الترفع عن طرقاتها وأفعالها‪.‬‬

242

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

As for “safeguarding against crossing the limits,” by “limits” he means the separation between the licit and the illicit, when one ends and the other begins,
that is the limit. Whoever dabbles in them ends up in disobedience. God has
prohibited crossing His limits and even getting close to them, and said, “Those
are the limits of God, do not get near them” [2:187], and said, “Those are the
limits of God, do not transgress them” [2:229]. By limits is meant at times the
onset of the licit and also the onset of the illicit. When He prohibited crossing
the limits, what is meant is the final limits of the licit; when He prohibited getting close to the limits, what is meant is the onset of the illicit. The Exalted says
[in other words] that do not transgress the limits of what I have permitted for
you, nor get close to what I have not permitted.
[Al-Harawī] said,
The third level is to be scrupulous against every motive that calls to the
division of time, attachment to separation, and any occurrence that contradicts the state of communion.
The difference between “the division of time” and “attachment to separation”
is that between cause and effect, for when he divides his time [in different pursuits], he necessarily finds himself attached some of the time to that which is
other than his true pursuit, and there can be no vacuum in either the soul or
the will. Whoever’s pursuit is not God, it is something other than Him; whoever
does not worship God alone, worships someone else; whoever does not work
for God, works for someone else. This has been said before.
The sincere one is he whom God fortifies within His worship alone, the will
to His Being and His fear and His hope alone, seeking from Him alone, meekness to Him alone, neediness to Him alone, against the worship, will, fear, hope,
meekness, neediness, and seeking of help of anyone else.
This is higher than the second level only because the people [of the second
level] are occupied with protection against any impurity, and that according
to the people of the third level they are distracted from the truth and occupied with the examination of their own selves, but the etiquette of the men
of one level is presence whereas the etiquette of the men of the other level is
absence.
As for scrupulousness against “any occurrence that contradicts one’s state of
union,” it means that the servant is drowned in the experiential witnessing of
annihilation in divine unicity, and his communion with God Almighty, against
any occurrence that contradicts this annihilation and communion.
According to the Shaykh [al-Harawī] this is the final objective beyond which
there is no other goal; he turned away from every state that opposes it and sev-

‫‪243‬‬

‫‪chapter 17‬‬

‫و»أما التخلص عن اقتحام الحدود«‪ ،‬فالحدود هي النهايات‪ .‬وهي مقاطع الحلال والحرام‪ ،‬فحيث‬
‫ينقطع و ينتهي فذلك حده‪ .‬فمن اقتحمه وقع في المعصية‪ .‬وقد نهى الل ّٰه عن تعدي حدوده وعن‬
‫ك ح ُد ُود ُ ال َل ّـه ِ ف َل َا تعَ ْت َد ُوهاَ ﴾‬
‫ك ح ُد ُود ُ ال َل ّـه ِ ف َل َا تقَ ْ ر َبوُ هاَ ﴾ ]البقرة‪ .[187:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬ت ِل ْ َ‬
‫قر بانها فقال‪﴿ :‬ت ِل ْ َ‬
‫]البقرة‪ .[229:‬فإن الحدود يراد بها أواخر الحلال‪] ،‬وأول الحرام‪ .‬فحيث نهى عن التعدي فالحدود‬
‫هناك أوائل الأواخر[‪ ،‬وحيث نهى عن القر بان فالحدود هناك أوائل الحرام‪.‬‬
‫يقول سبحانه‪ :‬لا ٺتعدوا ما أبحت لـكم‪ ،‬ولا تقر بوا ما حرمت عليكم‪ .‬فالورع يخلص العبد من قر بان‬
‫هذه وتعدي هذه‪ .‬وهو اقتحام الحدود‪.‬‬
‫ض‬
‫وقال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬التورع عن كل داعية تدعو إلى شتات الوقت‪ ،‬والتعلق بالتفرق‪ ،‬وعار ٍ‬
‫يعارض حال الجمع«‪.‬‬
‫الفرق بين شتات الوقت والتعلق بالتفرق‪ ،‬كالفرق بين السبب والمسبب‪ ،‬والنفي والإثبات‪ .‬فإنه‬
‫يتشتت وقتهَ فلا يجد بدا ً من التعلق بما سوى مطلو به الحق‪ ،‬إذ لا تعطيل في النفس ولا في الإرادة‪.‬‬
‫فمن لم يكن الل ّٰه مراده أراد ما سواه‪ .‬ومن لم يكن هو وحده معبوده عبد ما سواه‪ .‬ومن لم يكن عمله‬
‫لل ّٰه فلا بد أن يعمل لغيره‪ .‬وقد تقدم هذا‪.‬‬
‫فالمخلص يصونه الل ّٰه بعبادته وحده‪ ،‬وإرادة وجهه وخشيته وحده‪ ،‬ورجائه وحده‪ ،‬والطلب‬
‫منه والذل له والافتقار إليه ]عن عبادة غيره وإرادته‪ ،‬وخشيته ورجائه‪ ،‬والطلب منه‪ ،‬والذل له‪،‬‬
‫والافتقار إليه[‪.‬‬
‫وإنما كان هذا أعلى من الدرجة الثانية لأن أر بابها مشتغلون بحفظ الصيانة من الـكدر وملاحظتها‪.‬‬
‫وذلك عند أهل الدرجة الثالثة تفرق عن الحق‪ ،‬واشتغال عن مراقبته بحال نفوسهم‪ .‬فأدب أهل هذه‬
‫الدرجة أدب حضور‪ ،‬وأدب أولئك أدب غيبة‪.‬‬
‫وأما »الورع عن كل حال يعارض حال الجمع«‪ .‬فمعناه أن يستغرق العبد شهود فنائه في التوحيد‪،‬‬
‫وجمعيته على الل ّٰه تعالى فيه عن كل حال يعارض هذا الفناء والجمعية‪ .‬وهذا عند الشيخ لما كان هو‬
‫الغاية التي ليس بعدها مطلب‪ ،‬جعل كل حال يعارضها و يقطع عنها ناقصا بً النسبة إليها‪ .‬فالرغبة عنه‬

244

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

ered from it [what is] deficient compared to it, and to turn away from [such
deficient states] is the essence of scrupulousness.
You now know what is being said here [based on the preceding discussion of
annihilation],6 and that above this station there is another that is higher and
better, which is scrupulousness against any pleasure that opposes His desire
from you, even if that pleasure is annihilation and communion, or whatever
else. We have explained that annihilation and communion are the pleasure
of the servant, and the duty to the Lord lies beyond that, which is to remain
present with His will and desire both in states of separation and union. On this
view, then, the scrupulousness of the elite is against any state that contradicts
the enactment of divine command and staying with Him in both separation
and communion. God alone is sought for help.

2

The Web of Divine Stations

Fear yields scrupulousness, steadfastness, and brevity of hope.
The strength of faith in the Meeting yields renunciation.
Inner knowledge yields love, fear, and hope.
Contentment yields joyousness in God.
Remembrance yields life of the heart.
Faith in divine foreordainment yields reliance.
Constant contemplation of the divine names and attributes, in turn, yields
inner knowledge.
Scrupulousness yields renunciation as well.
Returning to God in repentance also yields love for God, as does His constant
remembrance.
Joy of contentment yields gratitude.
Resolve and patience together yield all of the states and stations.
Sincerity and truthfulness yield each other and require each other.
Inner knowledge yields good character.
Thinking yields resolve.
Self-examination prompts one to enliven his time, protect his days, and
[practice] modesty, as well as fear and penitence.
Killing of the ego and humbling it and breaking it rejuvenates the heart, its
might and endurance.

6 See Chapter 9 §1.

‫‪245‬‬

‫‪chapter 17‬‬

‫غير ورع صاحبها‪ ،‬وقد عرفت ما فيه وأن فوق هذا مقام أرفع منه وأعلى‪ ،‬وهو الورع عن كل حظ‬
‫يزاحم مراده منك‪ ،‬ولو كان الحظ فناء ً وجميعة ً‪ ،‬أو كائنا ًما كان‪.‬‬
‫و بينا أن »الفناء« و»الجمعية« حظ العبد‪ ،‬وأن حق الرب وراء ذلك‪ ،‬وهو البقاء بمراده فرقا ًوجمعا ً‬
‫به وله‪.‬‬
‫وعلى هذا فالورع الخاص‪ :‬الورع عن كل حال يعارض حال القيام بالأمر والبقاء به فرقا ًوجمعا‪ً.‬‬
‫والل ّٰه المستعان‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫الخوف يثمر الورع والاستقامة‪ ،‬وقصر الأمل‪ .‬وقوة الإ يمان باللقاء تثمر الزهد‪ .‬والمعرفة تثمر المحبة‪،‬‬
‫والخوف والرجاء‪ .‬والقناعة تثمر الرضاء‪ .‬والذكر يثمر حياة القلب‪ .‬والإ يمان بالقدر يثمر التوكل‪ .‬ودوام‬
‫تأمل الأسماء والصفات يثمر المعرفة‪ .‬والورع يثمر الزهد أيضا‪ ً.‬والتو بة تثمر المحبة أيضا‪ ً،‬ودوام الذكر يثمرها‪.‬‬
‫والرضا يثمر الشكر‪ .‬والعز يمة والصبر يثمران جميع الأحوال والمقامات‪ .‬والإخلاص والصدق كل منهما‬
‫يثمر الآخر و يقتضيه‪ .‬والمعرفة تثمر الخلق‪ .‬والفكر يثمر العز يمة‪ .‬والمراقبة تثمر عمارة الوقت‪ ،‬وحفظ الأيام‬
‫والحياء‪ ،‬والخشية والإنابة‪ .‬وإماتة النفس وإذلالها وكسرها يوجب حياة القلب وعزه وجبره‪ .‬ومعرفة‬

246

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Knowledge of the ego and recognition of its worthlessness yield bashfulness
before God Almighty, and the recognition of the Abundance of His bounty and
inadequacy of one’s righteousness.
The erasure of any remnant of self-importance from the heart and the
tongue and sound discernment together yield certitude.
Sound contemplation of what you see and hear of the manifest sins as well
as the recited signs yields sound discernment.
The pivot of all of these are two things.
First, that you transfer your heart from the earthly abode and settle it in the
abode of the hereafter, and then you approach with this [whole and undistracted heart] the meanings of the Qurʾan, seek the light of the Qurʾan and its
wisdom, and the understanding of what is meant by it and what it has been
revealed for. Furthermore, you take your portion of the understanding and benefit from each one of His signs and verses, and apply it to the ailments of your
heart.
This is a path that is short and easy, leading to the company of the Highest
Companion. Safe, without undue fear or self-affliction, starvation or thirst; altogether safe from all the snares. Upon [the path] is a guard and protector from
God, who defends and guards those who tread it. Only he who has known the
paths of men and their entrapments and brigands knows its worth. God help
us.

‫‪247‬‬

‫‪chapter 17‬‬

‫النفس ومقتها يوجب الحياء من الل ّٰه تعالى واستكثار ما منه واستقلال ما منك من الطاعات‪ .‬ومحو‬
‫أ ثر الدعوى من القلب واللسان وصحة البصيرة تثمر اليقين‪ .‬وحسن التأمل لما ترى وتسمع من الآيات‬
‫المشهودة والمتلوة يثمر صحة البصيرة‪.‬‬
‫وملاك ذلك كله أمران‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬أن تنقل قلبك من وطن الدنيا فتسكنه في وطن الآخرة‪ ،‬ثم تقبل بهكله على معاني القرآن‬
‫واستجلائها وتدبرها‪ ،‬وفهم ما يراد منه وما نزل لأجله‪ .‬وأخذ نصيبك وحظك من كل آية من آياته‬
‫تنز يلهُ ا على أدواء قلبك‪ .‬فهذه طر يق مختصرة قر يبة سهلة‪ ،‬موصلة إلى الرفيق الأعلى‪ ،‬آمنة لا يلحق‬
‫سالـكها خوف ولا عطب‪ ،‬ولا فيها آفة من آفات سا ئر الطر يق البتة‪ ،‬وعليها من الل ّٰه حارس وحافظ‬
‫يكلأ السالـكين فيها و يحميهم‪ ،‬و يدفع عنهم‪ .‬ولا يعرف قدر هذه الطر يق إلا من عرف طرق الناس‬
‫وغوائلها وقطاعها‪ .‬والل ّٰه المستعان‪.‬‬

chapter 18

The Station of Devotion
Among the stations of “You alone we worship and You alone we supplicate for
help” is the station of devotion.
God Almighty said,
And remember the name of your Lord and devote yourself to Him in
exclusive devotion. [73:8]
[The Arabic word] tabattul literally means to be severed.1 It is the tafaʿʿul [form]
of the root b-t-l, which means to cut off. Mary, the mother of Jesus, was named
al-batūl because of her being severed from marriage as well as from the eyes of
the people of her time.
The noun of tabattala is tabattulan on the pattern of taʿʿallum and tafahhum,
yet, [in the aforementioned verse] the emphatic noun comes on the pattern
of tafʿīl, the noun of tafaʿʿala, to indicate a fine point. For in this form there
is indication of graduality, striving, exertion, abundance, and exaggeration. He
thus brought the verb from one form and the noun from another. As if saying,
“Devote yourself to Him so as to cut off from all else, and cut yourself off from
all else so as to devote yourself.” Thus, both meanings are understood from the
verb of one form and the noun of another. This is frequent in the Qurʾan, and
it is the most beautiful expression of concision and brevity.
The author of al-Manazil says:
Devotion means exclusive and total isolation for God, as in His Majesty’s
saying, “And His alone is the Call of truth” [13:14]—that is, total exclusivity.
By total exclusivity, he means cutting off from any concern for compensation,
in the sense that one who is devoted is not like a salaried employee to God,
who works only for the compensation, and once paid, he or she leaves the
employer’s door. Rather, such a seeker is like a slave-servant who serves without
condition and does not leave the door of his master, unless he were a renegade. And a renegade is he who has relinquished the honor of servitude and yet

1 The form batala/yabtilu and battala/yubattilu/tabtīlan are both transitive verbs that mean
to sever or cut off something; the form tabattala/yatabattalu/tabattulan means to seclude

‫فصل‬
‫ومن ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬التبتل«‪.‬‬
‫ل ِإل َي ْه ِ ت َب ْت ِيل ًا﴾ ]المزمل‪ .[8:‬و»التبتل« الانقطاع‪ .‬وهو تف ُع ّل‬
‫ك و َت َب ََت ّ ْ‬
‫قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َاْذكرُ ِ اس ْم َ ر َب ِّ َ‬
‫من البتل وهو القطع‪ .‬وسميت مريم »البتول« لانقطاعها عن الأزواج‪ ،‬وعن نظراء زمانها‪ ،‬ففاقت‬
‫نساء الزمان شرفا ًوفضلا ًوقطعت منهن‪ .‬ومصدر »تبتل« »تبتلا ً« كالتعلم والتفهم‪ ،‬ولـكن جاء على‬
‫التفعيل—مصدر تفعل—لسر لطيف‪ .‬فإن في هذا الفعل إ يذانا بً التدريج والتكلف والتعمل والتكثر‬
‫والمبالغة‪ .‬فأتى بالفعل الدال على أحدهما بالمصدر الدال على الآخر‪ .‬فكأنه قيل‪ :‬بتل نفسك إليه تبتيلا‪ً،‬‬
‫]وتبتل أنت إليه تبتلا[ً ‪ ،‬ففهم المعنيان من الفعل ومصدره‪ .‬وهذا كثير في القرآن‪ ،‬وهو من أحسن‬
‫الاختصار والإ يجاز‪.‬‬
‫قال صاحب »المنازل« رحمه الل ّٰه‪:‬‬
‫ق﴾ ]الرعد‪ ،[14:‬أي‬
‫»التبتل‪ :‬الانقطاع إلى الل ّٰه تعالى بالكلية‪ .‬وقوله عز وجل‪﴿ :‬ل َه ُ د َْعو َة ُ اْلح َ ّ ِ‬
‫التجر يد المحض«‪.‬‬
‫ومراده بالتجر يد المحض تجر يد التبتل عن ملاحظة الأعواض‪ ،‬بحيث لا يكون المتبتل كالأجير‬
‫الذي لا يخدم إلا لأجل الأجرة‪ ،‬فإذا أخذها انصرف عن باب المستأجر‪ .‬بخلاف العبد‪ ،‬فإنه يخدم‬
‫سيده بمقتضى عبوديته لا للأجرة‪ .‬فهو لا ينصرف عن بابه إلا إذا كان آبقا‪ ً.‬والآبق قد خرج من شرف‬

‫‪oneself or become a celibate; batūl is a shoot of a palm-tree cut off from its mother tree, and‬‬
‫‪also a virgin girl, secluded from men. See Lisān, s.v. b-t-l. The primary meaning of tabattul,‬‬
‫‪then, is celibacy or virginity. The Qurʾan evidently employs it to mean the exclusive devotion‬‬
‫‪of a celibate monk or virgin, like those devoted to temples, but without actually becoming‬‬
‫‪celibate.‬‬

250

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

cannot boast freedom either, thus becoming deficient both to his master and
to his servants. The ultimate honor of the soul indeed is to enter the bond of
servitude to God willingly and lovingly.
The nobility of souls lies in entering the bond
A slave embraces the pride of being owned
[Al-Harawī’s] reference to the verse “His is the Call of truth,” is fitting since
the Exalted deserves exclusive devotion in and of Himself without offering any
reward in return. He deserves to be worshipped and called upon alone; sought,
thanked, praised, and loved, hoped for, feared, relied upon, invoked for help,
turned to and held on to for succor. Whosoever acquires a heart with this kind
of devotion, acquiring the requisite knowledge, taste, and state, has indeed
reached the station of devotion—exclusive devotion.
The early predecessors have explained [the Qurʾanic phrase] “the Call of
Truth” as referring to the affirmation of the unicity of God with sincerity and
truth; they too mean what we have just explained. For instance, ʿAlī, God be
pleased with Him, said, “The Call of Truth means affirmation of unicity.” Ibn
ʿAbbās said [that it means,] “witnessing that there is no god but God.” Another
meaning is any supplication to God with sincerity, for a sincere supplication
can be addressed to none but God.
“The Call of Truth” is the divine call, its duties, its purification and exclusivity
[for God].
[Al-Harawī] said,
There are three levels of [devotion]. The first level is exclusively cutting off
from the pleasures of or concern for the world, in fear, hope, or concern
with one’s spiritual state.
I say that devotion combines two things, and cannot be complete without
either, one act of detachment and the other of attachment.
The detachment is that of the heart from the pleasures of the ego that
obstruct it from what God requires of it, and from the inclination of his heart to
all other than God, either in fear or desire or concern and preoccupation with
it, inasmuch as it distracts the heart from God Almighty.
The attachment, which is not possible without first attaining the detachment just mentioned, is the connection of the heart to God, turning to Him,
facing Him, in love, fear, hope, penitence, and reliance.
The Shaykh then goes on to mention the means of attaining this exclusive
devotion. He says,

‫‪251‬‬

‫‪chapter 18‬‬

‫العبودية‪ ،‬ولم يحصل له إطلاق الحر ية‪ ،‬فصار بذلك موكوسا ً عند سيده وعند عبيده‪ .‬وغاية شرف‬
‫النفس دخولها تحت رق العبودية طوعا ًواختيارا ً ومحبة ً‪ ،‬لا كرها ًوقهرا ً‪ .‬كما قيل‪:‬‬

‫شرف النفوس دخولها في رقهم‬

‫والعبد يحوي الفخر بالتملك‬

‫ق﴾ في هذا الموضع‪ ،‬إرادة هذا المعنى‪ ،‬وأنه سبحانه‬
‫والذي حسن استشهاده بقوله‪﴿ :‬ل َه ُ د َْعو َة ُ اْلح َ ّ ِ‬
‫صاحب دعوة الحق لذاته وصفاته‪ ،‬وإن لم يوجب لداعيه بها ثوابا‪ ً،‬فإنه يستحقها لذاته‪ .‬فهو أهل أن‬
‫يعبد وحده‪ ،‬و يدعى وحده‪ ،‬و يقصد و يشكر و يحمد‪ ،‬و يحب و يرجى و يخاف‪ ،‬و يتوكل عليه و يستعان‬
‫به‪ ،‬و يستجار به و يلجأ إليه‪ ،‬و يصمد إليه‪ .‬فتكون الدعوة الإلهية الحق له وحده‪.‬‬
‫ومن قام بقلبه—هذا معرفة ً وذوقا ًوحالا ً—صح له مقام التبتل والتجر يد المحض‪ .‬وقد فسر السلف‬
‫رضي الل ّٰه عنهم »دعوة الحق« بالتوحيد والإخلاص فيه والصدق‪ ،‬ومرادهم هذا المعنى‪ .‬فقال علي—‬
‫رضى الل ّٰه عنه—‪» :‬دعوة الحق‪ :‬التوحيد«‪.‬‬
‫وقال ا بن عباس‪» :‬شهادة ألا إله إلا الل ّٰه«‪ .‬وقيل‪ :‬الدعاء بالإخلاص‪ ،‬والدعاء الخالص لا يكون‬
‫إلا لل ّٰه‪] .‬ودعوة الحق[ هي دعوة الإلهية وحقوقها وتجر يدها وإخلاصها‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ .‬الدرجة الأولى‪ :‬تجر يد الانقطاع عن الحظوظ والُّلحوظ إلى العالم‪،‬‬
‫خوفا ًأو رجاء ً أو مبالاة ً بحال«‪.‬‬
‫قلت‪ :‬التبتل يجمع أمرين‪ ،‬اتصالا ًوانفصالا ًلا يصح إلا بهما‪.‬‬
‫فالانفصال انقطاع قلبه عن حظوظ النفس المزاحمة لمراد الرب منه‪ ،‬وعن التفات قلبه إلى ما‬
‫سوى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬خوفا ًمنه أو رغبة ً فيه‪ ،‬أو مبالاة ً وفكرا ً فيه‪ ،‬بحيث يشغل قلبه عن الل ّٰه تعالى‪.‬‬
‫والاتصال لا يصح إلا بعد هذا الانفصال‪ .‬وهو اتصال القلب بالل ّٰه‪ ،‬وإقباله عليه وإقامة وجهه له‪،‬‬
‫حبا ًوخوفا ًورجاء ً وإنابة ً وتوكلا‪ً.‬‬
‫ثم ذكر الشيخ—رحمه الل ّٰه—ما يعين على هذا التجر يد‪ ،‬و بأي شيء يحصل‪.‬‬

252

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

By terminating expectation through joyous contentment, severing fear
through surrendering, and refusing worldly worries through witnessing
the Reality.
He implies that what terminates any expectations from the creation from your
heart is joyous contentment with the decree of God the Exalted and His apportionment of your destiny. Whoever is pleased with God’s decree and apportionment for him has no room for expectations from the creation in his heart.
What puts an end to the substance of fear is surrendering to God, for whosoever submits and surrenders to God, and knows that what came to him could
not have missed him and what spared him could not have afflicted him, and
that nothing will afflict him except what God has written for him, no room is
left for fearing creation in his heart. It is so because he submits the ego for which
he fears to its Master and Patron, and knows that nothing other than what has
been written for it can afflict him and what has been written cannot be avoided.
There is, after this, no meaning of fear for any other than God. In surrendering
to Him there is a subtle benefit, which is that when one submits [the ego] to
God, He deposits it with Him for safekeeping in His protection where no enemy,
no brigand can lay his hands on it.
What severs the substance of one’s concern for men is the witnessing of the
Reality, which is to see all things as being from God and through God, in His
control and under His authority; nothing moves except by His power and might,
nor benefits or harms except by His leave and will. What, then, is the reason for
worrying about creation?
He said,
The second level is to purify the devotion from being distracted by the
ego, by curbing vain desire, breathing in the air of intimacy, and seeking
the flash of unveiling.
The difference between this level and the one before this is that the first seeks
seclusion from the created things while the second seeks seclusion from one’s
ego. He prescribes three means to achieving it. The first is to repel and oppose
one’s vain desires, for that prevents devotion. The second is to breathe, after
repelling desire, in the breath of intimacy. This breath is to the soul what the
soul is to the body; it is its delight and comfort, and is attained when one has
overcome one’s vain desires and whims. For the ego cannot but be attached and
devoted to a thing, and when its attachment to its desires is severed, it discovers
the breath of intimacy in the presence of God, and is blessed with its fragrance
and bestows life and bliss on it.

‫‪253‬‬

‫‪chapter 18‬‬

‫فقال‪» :‬بحسم الرجاء بالرضا‪ ،‬وقطع الخوف بالتسليم‪ ،‬ورفض المبالاة بشهود الحقيقة«‪.‬‬
‫يقول‪ :‬إن الذي يحسم مادة رجاء المخلوقين من قلبك هو الرضا بحكم الل ّٰه عز وجل وقسمه لك‪ .‬ومن‬
‫رضي بحكم الل ّٰه وقسمه لم يبق لرجاء الخلق في قلبه موضع‪.‬‬
‫والذي يحسم مادة الخوف هو التسليم لل ّٰه‪ .‬فإن من سلم لل ّٰه واستسلم له وعلم أن ما أصابه لم يكن‬
‫ليخطئه‪ ،‬وما أخطأه لم يكن ليصيبه‪ ،‬وعلم أنه لن يصيبه إلا ما كتب الل ّٰه له‪ ،‬لم يبق لخوف المخلوقين‬
‫في قلبه موضع أيضا‪ ً.‬فإن نفسه التي يخاف عليها قد سلمها إلى وليها ومولاها‪ ،‬وعلم أنه لا يصيبها إلا ما‬
‫كتب لها‪ ،‬وأن ما كتب لها لابد أن يصيبها‪ ،‬فلا معنى للخوف من غير الل ّٰه بوجه‪ .‬وفي التسليم أيضا ًفائدة‬
‫لطيفة‪ ،‬وهي أنه إذا سلمها لل ّٰه فقد أودعها عنده وأحرزها في حرزه‪ ،‬وجعلها تحت كنفه‪ ،‬حيث لا‬
‫تناله يد عاد ولا بغي باغ‪.‬‬
‫والذي يحسم مادة المبالاة بالناس شهود الحقيقة‪ .‬وهو رؤ ية الأشياء كلها من الل ّٰه و بالل ّٰه وفي قبضته‬
‫وتحت قهر سلطانه‪ .‬لا يتحرك منها شيء إلا بحوله وقوته‪ ،‬ولا ينفع ولا يضر إلا بإذنه ومشيئته‪ .‬فما وجه‬
‫المبالاة بالخلق بعد هذا الشهود؟‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬تجر يد الانقطاع عن التعريج على النفس بمجانبة الهوى‪ ،‬وتنسم روح الأنس‪،‬‬
‫وشيم برق الـكشف«‪.‬‬
‫الفرق بين هذه الدرجة والتي قبلها أن الأولى انقطاع عن الخلق‪ ،‬وهذه انقطاع عن النفس‪ .‬وجعله‬
‫بثلاثة أشياء‪:‬‬
‫أولها‪ :‬مجانبة الهوى ومخالفته‪ ،‬ونهي نفسه عنه‪ ،‬لأن اتباعه يصد عن التبتل‪.‬‬
‫وثانيها‪—:‬وهو بعد مخالفة الهوى—تنسم روح الأنس‪ ،‬والروح كال َر ّوح للبدن‪ ،‬فهو روحها‬
‫وراحتها‪ .‬وإنما حصل له هذا الروح لما أعرض عن هواه‪ .‬فحينئذ تنسم روح الأنس بالل ّٰه‪ ،‬ووجد‬
‫رائحته‪ ،‬إذ النفس لا بد لها من التعلق فلما انقطع تعلقها من هواها‪ ،‬وجدت روح الأنس بالل ّٰه‪،‬‬
‫وهبت عليها نسماته فر يحتها وأحيتها‪.‬‬

254

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The third, “the flash of unveiling,” is the first glimpse of the divine unveiling,
its first sighting, from which the sources of the rain [of spiritual blessings] and
the cascades of mercy are discovered.
The unveiling here does not mean partial and base unveiling, one that is
shared by the pious and the impious, the believer and the unbeliever, like disclosure of secrets and private affairs of people. Rather, it is the unveiling of three
things that are the ultimate aim of the truthful and the wise. First, the unveiling
of the stations of the path, the unveiling of the flaws of one’s ego and afflictions of one’s deeds, and the unveiling of the meanings of God’s names and
attributes, and the realities of His unicity and gnosis. It is these three things
that are the axis of all the knowledge of the People [of Sufism], and the focus
and the goal of all their efforts. Some among them focus on describing the path
and its characterization, others on the afflictions and threats that obstruct this
path, and yet others on Testimony of divine unicity and gnosis, and the realities
of the names and attributes.
An intelligent and sincere person takes from each what he has of the truth
and goodness and seeks his help in attaining one’s goal, and should not reject or
waste away what he finds of the truth in him simply because of his shortcomings in other respects. For perfection belongs to God alone, and every servant
possesses but an appointed status.
He said,
The third level [of devotion] is the purification of divestment toward
progress, by setting right the determination and immersion in the pursuit
of attainment and sighting the beginnings of communion.
Having declared divestment from creation the first of the levels and divestment
from one’s ego the second level, he reserves the third level for the quest for further progress, which he says is attained by improving steadfastedness, which is
to avoid all other than the Truth, adherence to Him, and occupation with that
which He loves. It further requires immersion in the pursuit of the final attainment, which is to be so preoccupied in the quest that all his concerns, worries,
intentions, resolutions, and moments are devoted exclusively to it alone, and
this can only be attained after the flash of the aforementioned unveiling.
As for “sighting the beginnings of communion,” communion means the creation’s concentration on the Truth alone and His provision and ordainment
of their affairs. To sight the beginnings of that is to notice its premises and
beginnings, and it is the pass through which one passes into the valley of annihilation. It has also been said that it is a pause that occurs to one who crosses the
valley of separation to communion and observes it from his place. This pause

‫‪255‬‬

‫‪chapter 18‬‬

‫وثالثها‪ :‬شيم برق الـكشف‪ .‬وهو مطالعته واستشرافه والنظر إليه‪ ،‬ليعلم به مواقع الغيث ومساقط‬
‫الرحمة‪.‬‬
‫وليس مراده بالـكشف هاهنا الـكشف الجزئي السفلي‪ ،‬المشترك بين البر والفاجر‪ ،‬والمؤمن‬
‫والكافر‪ ،‬كالـكشف عن مخبآت الناس ومستورهم‪ .‬وإنما هو الـكشف عن ثلاثة أشياء‪ ،‬هي منتهى‬
‫كشف الصادقين أر باب البصا ئر‪.‬‬
‫أحدها‪ :‬الـكشف عن منازل السير‪.‬‬
‫والثاني‪ :‬الـكشف عن عيوب النفس وآفات الأعمال ومفسداتها‪.‬‬
‫والثالث‪ :‬الـكشف عن معاني الأسماء والصفات‪ ،‬وحقائق التوحيد والمعرفة‪.‬‬
‫وهذه الأبواب الثلاثة هي مجامع علوم القوم وعليها يحومون‪ ،‬وإليها يشمرون‪ .‬فمنهم من ج ُل كلامه‬
‫ومعظمه في السير وصفة المنازل‪ ،‬ومنهم من جل كلامه في الآفات والقواطع‪ ،‬ومنهم من جل كلامه‬
‫في التوحيد والمعرفة وحقائق الأسماء والصفات‪.‬‬
‫والصادق الذكي يأخذ من كل منهم ما عنده من الحق‪ ،‬فيستعين به على مطلبه‪ ،‬ولا يرد ما يجده‬
‫عنده من الحق لتقصيره في الحق الآخر‪ ،‬و يهدره به‪ .‬فالـكمال المطلق لل ّٰه رب العالمين‪ ،‬وما من العباد‬
‫إلا من له مقام معلوم‪.‬‬
‫ق في قصد‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬تجر يد الانقطاع إلى السبق بتصحيح الاستقامة‪ ،‬والاستغرا ُ‬
‫الوصول‪ ،‬والنظر ُإلى أوائل الجمع«‪.‬‬
‫لما جعل الدرجة الأولى انقطاعا ً عن الخلق‪ ،‬والثانية انقطاعا ً عن النفس‪ .‬جعل الثالثة لطلب‬
‫السبق‪ ،‬وجعله بتصحيح الاستقامة‪ .‬وهي الإعراض عما سوى الحق‪ ،‬ولزوم الإقبال عليه‪ ،‬والاشتغال‬
‫بمحابه‪ ،‬ثم بالاستغراق في قصد الوصول‪ .‬وهو أن يشغله طلب الوصول عن كل شيء‪ ،‬بحيث يستغرق‬
‫همومه وعزائمه وإراداته أوقاته‪ .‬وإنما يكون ذلك بعد بد ُو برق الـكشف المذكور له‪.‬‬
‫وأما النظر إلى أوائل الجمع‪ ،‬فالجمع هو قيام الخلق كلهم بالحق وحده‪ ،‬وقيامه عليهم بالر بو بية والتدبير‪.‬‬
‫والنظر إلى أوائل ذلك‪ ،‬الالتفات إلى مقدماته و بداياته‪ ،‬وهي العقبة التي ينحدر منها على وادي‬
‫الفناء‪.‬‬
‫وقد قيل‪ :‬إنها وقفة تعترض ]القاطع لأودية التفرقة قبل وصوله إلى الجمع ومنها يشرف عليه‪.‬‬

256

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

occurs to every seeker who seeks higher ends, and from it he turns away or continues on to his ultimate goal. It has been said,
A lover cannot but pause ere crossing
The barrier between forgetfulness and the madness of love
There, his feet move him
Either onward or away
The apparent meaning of his words is that the beginnings of communion are its
premises, glimpses, and flashes. After this follows another, fourth level, which
is divestment of his desire from the Lord and annihilation into the desire of
his Lord from him. He does not want of Him, but wants what He wants, having
abjured any other will. He sights in the beginning of communion His normative
command for what He loves.
Most of the seekers deem “You we worship” as separation [between the servant and the creator] and “You we supplicate for help” as communion.
Some among them hold that to abjure the separation is heresy and unbelief,
and such a one avoids any communion in favor of separation. Others hold that
the station of separation is deficient and to be shunned, denigrating those who
adhere to it, turning to communion wherever its caravan takes them.
The steadfast among them say that a servant must experience both states,
communion and separation, and the true servanthood cannot be attained
except through them both; he who does not experience separation cannot worship, and he who does not experience communion cannot acquire gnosis and
spiritual states; “You we worship” is, therefore, separation and “You we supplicate for help” is communion.
The truth is that each of “You we worship” and “You we supplicate for help”
include both separation and communion, and soundness of worship requires
both.
The separation in “You we worship” comes from the variety of the kinds of
worship and their accoutrements; its communion is the testimony of the unicity of Him who is worshipped by all these means, and the will to attain His Face
alone, and the annihilation of any pleasure or desire that opposes His right and
desire. This perspective, therefore, is separation in communion and multiplicity in unicity, and its seeker moves from one worship to the next even as his
object of worship is one.
The separation in “You we supplicate for help” comes from his witnessing of
that in which he seeks help, and its levels and stations, its benefit and harm, its
beginning and end, its connection and separation, and what results from this
connection and separation.

‫‪257‬‬

‫‪chapter 18‬‬

‫وهذه الوقفة تعترض[ كل طالب مجد في طلبه‪ .‬فمنها يرجع على عقبه‪ ،‬أو يصل إلى مطلبهكما قيل‪:‬‬

‫لابد للعاشق من وقفة‬

‫ما بين سلوان و بين غرام‬

‫وعندها ينقل أقدامه‬

‫إما إلى خلف وإما أمام‬

‫والذي يظهر لي من كلامه أن أوائل الجمع مباديه ولوائحه و بوارقه‪ .‬و بعد هذا درجة رابعة‪ ،‬وهي‬
‫الانقطاع عن مراده من ر به‪ ،‬والفناء عنه إلى مراد ر به منه والفناء به‪ .‬فلا ير يد منه بل ير يد ما ير يده‪،‬‬
‫منقطعا بً ه عن كل إرادة‪ .‬فينظر في أوائل الجمع في مراده الديني الأمري الذي يحبه و يرضاه‪.‬‬
‫وأكثر أر باب السلوك عندهم ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ﴾ فرق ﴿و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ جمع‪.‬‬
‫ثم منهم من يرى أن ترك الفرق زندقة وكفر‪ .‬فهو يعرض عن الجمع إلى الفرق‪.‬‬
‫ومنهم من يرى أن مقام »التفرقة« مقام ناقص مرغوب عنه‪ .‬و يرى سوء حال أهله وتشتتهم‪.‬‬
‫و يرغب عنه عاملا على الجمع‪ ،‬يتوجه معه حيث توجهت ركائبه‪.‬‬
‫والمستقيمون منهم يقولون‪ :‬لابد للعبد السالك من جمع وفرق‪ ،‬وقيام العبودية بهما‪ .‬فمن لا تفرقة له‬
‫لا عبودية له‪ .‬ومن لا جمع له لا معرفة له ولا حال‪.‬‬
‫ف ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ﴾ فرق‪﴿ .‬و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ جمع‪.‬‬
‫والحق أن كلا ًمن مشهد ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ ]متضمن للفرق والجمع‪ ،‬وكمال العبودية‬
‫بالقيام بهما في كل مشهد‪.‬‬
‫ففرق ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ﴾[ تنوع ما يعبد به‪ ،‬وكثرة تعلقاته وضرو به‪ .‬وجمعه توحيد المعبود بذلك كله‪،‬‬
‫وإرادة وجهه وحده‪ ،‬والفناء عن كل حظ ومراد يزاحم حقه ومراده‪.‬‬
‫فتضمن هذا المشهد فرقا ًفي جمع‪ ،‬وكثرة ً في وحدة‪ .‬فصاحبه ينتقل في منازل العبودية من عبادة‬
‫إلى عبادة‪ ،‬ومعبوده واحد‪.‬‬
‫وأما فرق ﴿و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾‪ ،‬فشهود ما يستعين به عليه‪ ،‬ومرتبته ومنزلته‪ ،‬ومحله من النفع والضر‪،‬‬
‫و بدايته وعاقبته‪ ،‬واتصاله—بل وانفصاله—وما يترتب عليه من هذا الاتصال والانفصال‪.‬‬

258

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

He witnesses, along with that, the poverty and neediness of him who asks
and his need for the wholeness for which he seeks his Lord’s help, and the afflictions against which he seeks help. He witnesses the reality of seeking help, the
self-sufficiency of Him from whom help is sought, and all this constitutes separation that brings this perspective to fruition. As for its communion, it consists
in singling out the Exalted as the author of all acts and beings, and His sole
dispensation of them by His will and judgment. His lack of attention to this
perspective of separation is deficiency in worship, just as his separation in the
previously mentioned is also a deficiency. Soundness lies in giving each of communion and separation their right in both perspectives. The inclusion of “You
we worship and You we supplicate for help” has, thus, been demonstrated. May
God help.

‫‪259‬‬

‫‪chapter 18‬‬

‫فيشهد—مع ذلك—فقر المستعين وحاجته ونقصه‪ ،‬وضرورته إلى كمالاته التي يستعين ر به في‬
‫تحصيلها‪ ،‬وآفاته التي يستعينه في دفعها‪ ،‬و يشهد حقيقة الاستعانة وكفاية المستعان به‪ ،‬وهذا كله فرق‬
‫يثمر عبودية هذا المشهد‪.‬‬
‫وأما جمعه فشهود تفرده سبحانه بالأفعال‪ ،‬وصدور الكائنات بأسرها عن مشيئته‪ ،‬وتصر يفها‬
‫بإرادته وحكمته‪.‬‬
‫فغيبته بهذا المشهد عما قبله من الفرق نقص في العبودية‪ ،‬كما أن تفرقه في الذي قبله دون ملاحظته‬
‫نقص أيضا‪ ً.‬والـكمال إعطاء الجمع والفرق حقهما في هذا المشهد والمشهد الأول‪.‬‬
‫فتبين تضمن ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ للجمع والفرق‪ .‬و بالل ّٰه المستعان‪.‬‬

chapter 19

The Station of Hope
Among the stations of “You alone we worship and You alone we supplicate for
help” is the station of hope.
God Almighty says:
Those whom the [associationists] worship seek the means to their Lord,
seeking to be nearest to Him, hoping for His Mercy, fearing His Wrath: for
the Wrath. [17:57]
“Seeking the means to Him” in this verse means seeking nearness to Him
through worship and love. In this verse He mentioned the three stations of
faith, and the pillars upon which it is built: love, fear, and hope. The Almighty
says, “Whosoever hopes for the meeting of God: the appointment of God is
nigh” [29:5]. And he said, “Whosoever hopes for the meeting of his Lord, let
him do righteous works and not associate with His Lord anyone” [18:110].
It is recorded in the Ṣaḥīḥ of Muslim on the authority of Jābir, God be pleased
with him, reported that he heard the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace say, “Let none of you die except with good expectation ( yuḥsinu
al-ẓann) toward his Lord.”1 Also in the Ṣaḥīḥ on his authority, God grant him
blessing and peace, “God, Mighty and Exalted, says, ‘I am where my servant’s
estimation of Me is. So let him expect of Me whatever he wishes.’ ”2
Hope is the caravan leader that urges the hearts forward to God and the
abode of the afterlife, and which makes this journey pleasant.
It is said that [hope in God] is the state of being gladdened by the generosity and grace of the Lord Almighty, and comforted by the observation of God’s
munificence. Another saying is that it is to be certain of God’s generosity.
The difference between [hope] and wishful thinking is that the latter is characterized by laziness rather than by industriousness and struggle, while the
former is accompanied by hard work and proper reliance upon God. The latter, for instance, is to merely expect that one had a piece of land that one could
seed and harvest, whereas hopefulness is to work hard with one’s land, till and
inseminate it, and then expect that the crops will grow for the harvest.
1 Muslim #3877.
2 Aḥmad 3:491, 4:106. This narration is sound, but it does not appear in the Ṣaḥīḥ of Muslim, as
implied by Ibn al-Qayyim’s words.

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬الرجاء«‬
‫جونَ ر َْحم َتهَ ُ‬
‫ب و َيرَ ْ ُ‬
‫ن ي َْدع ُونَ ي َب ْتغَ ُونَ ِإل َى ٰ ر َ ّبِه ِم ُ ال ْو َ ِ‬
‫ك ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪ُ﴿ :‬أول َٰئ ِ َ‬
‫سيلةَ َ َأُّيه ُْم َأق ْر َ ُ‬
‫يخ َافوُ نَ ع َذ َابهَ ُ﴾ ]الإسراء‪ .[57:‬فابتغاء الوسيلة إليه طلب القرب منه بالعبودية والمحبة‪ .‬فذكر مقامات‬
‫وَ َ‬
‫ل‬
‫ن َأج َ َ‬
‫جو لقِ َاء َ ال َل ّـه ِ ف ِ َإ َ ّ‬
‫الإ يمان الثلاثة التي عليها بناؤه الحب والخوف والرجاء‪ .‬قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬م َن ك َانَ يرَ ْ ُ‬
‫ك بعِ بِ َاد َة ِ‬
‫صاِلحاً و َل َا ي ُش ْر ِ ْ‬
‫ل عمَ َل ًا َ‬
‫جو لقِ َاء َ ر َب ِّه ِ ف َليْ عَ ْم َ ْ‬
‫ت﴾ ]العنكبوت‪ .[5:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬ف َم َن ك َانَ يرَ ْ ُ‬
‫ال َل ّـه ِ ل َآ ٍ‬
‫ر َب ِّه ِ َأح َدًا﴾ ]الـكهف‪.[110:‬‬
‫وفي صحيح مسلم عن جا بر—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—قال‪ :‬سمعت رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ يقول—قبل موته‬
‫بثلاث—‪» :‬لا يموتن أحدكم إلا وهو يحسن الظن بر به«‪ .‬وفي الصحيح عنه ﷺ‪» :‬يقول الل ّٰه عز وجل‪:‬‬
‫أنا عند ظن عبدي بي فليظن بي ما شاء«‪.‬‬
‫»الرجاء« حاٍد يحدو القلوب إلى الل ّٰه والدار الآخرة‪ ،‬و يطيب لها السير‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬هو الاستبشار بجود فضل الرب تعالى‪] ،‬والارتياح لمطالعةكرمه سبحانه‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬هو الثقه بجود الرب[‪.‬‬
‫والفرق بينه و بين »التمني« أن »التمني« يكون مع الـكسل‪ ،‬ولا يسلك بصاحبه طر يق الجد‬
‫والاجتهاد‪ .‬و»الرجاء« يكون مع بذل الجهد وحسن التوكل‪.‬‬
‫فالأول كحال من يتمنى أن يكون له أرض يبذرها‪ ،‬و يأخذ زرعها‪ .‬والثاني كحال من يشق أرضه‬
‫و يفلحها و يبذرها‪ ،‬و يرجو طلوع الزرع‪.‬‬

262

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

That is why scholars are agreed that hope is not valid without proper action.
Shāh [b. Shujāʿ] al-Kirmānī3 said, “The evidence of the validity of hope is the
excellence of obedience to God.”
Hope can be of three kinds; two are praiseworthy while one is deceptive and
blameworthy.
The first two are that a man acts in obedience to God, guided by the light
from God, hoping for the reward; or, that a man commits a sin and follows it
with repentance, and hopes for God’s forgiveness, generosity, favor, and forbearance.
The third, blameworthy kind of hope is to wallow in sin and error and hope
for God’s mercy without works. Such is deception, wishful thinking, and false
hope.
The seeker has his eye on two things: one, on this ego, its shortcomings, and
deficiencies of his actions—and this observation opens upon him the door of
fear; and the other is on the vastness of God’s grace, generosity, and kindness,
which opens to him the door of hope. This is why it has been said that the definition of hope is to have an eye on the vastness of God’s mercy.
Abū ʿAlī al-Rūdhbārī [d. 403/1012], God have mercy on him, said, “Fear and
hope are like the two wings of a bird; when they are balanced, so is the bird and
it can fly. If one of them is deficient, its flight is deficient, and if they are lost
altogether, the bird dies.”
Aḥmad b. ʿĀṣim [al-Anṭākī]4 was asked, “What is the sign of hope in a servant?” He said, “When God’s favor is given one, he is inspired with gratitude,
hoping for the completion of God’s blessings and forgiveness upon him in this
life and the completion of His forgiveness in the afterlife.”
They have disagreed about which of the two hopes is closer to perfection:
that of a righteous person who hopes for reward or that of one who has committed a sin and hopes for forgiveness and exoneration? One group has given
preference to the hope of the righteous person, for it is accompanied by good
deeds which justify hope. Others have preferred the hope of the repentant sinner, for his hope is free from the defect that comes from seeing one’s good
works, and is accompanied by humble recognition of his sin.
Yahyā b. Muʿādh said, “My hope for You that accompanies my sins nearly
outdoes my hope for You from my works, for in the former I find myself relying
upon the sincerity of my actions—and how can I ever protect them, knowing
well their deficiencies?—but in the latter I find myself relying upon Your forgiveness, and how could You not forgive when You are generous?”

3 A third/ninth-century Sufi who died before 300/913; see al-Sulamī, Ṭabaqāt al-ṣūfiyya, 156.

‫‪263‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫ولهذا أجمع العارفون على أن »الرجاء« لا يصح إلا مع العمل‪.‬‬
‫قال شاه الـكرماني‪ :‬علامة صحة الرجاء حسن الطاعة‪.‬‬
‫والرجاء ثلاثة أنواع‪ :‬نوعان محمودان ونوع غرور مذموم‪.‬‬
‫فالأولان رجاء رجل عمل بطاعة الل ّٰه على نور من الل ّٰه فهو راج لثوابه‪ ،‬ورجل أذنب ذنبا ًثم تاب‬
‫منه إلى الل ّٰه تعالى‪ ،‬فهو راج لمغفرته‪.‬‬
‫والثالث رجل متماد في التفر يط والخطايا‪ ،‬يرجو رحمة الل ّٰه بلا عمل‪ .‬فهذا هو الغرور والتمني والرجاء‬
‫الكاذب‪.‬‬
‫وللسالك نظران‪ :‬نظر إلى نفسه وعيو به وآفات عمله‪ ،‬يفتح عليه باب الخوف‪ .‬ونظر إلى سعة فضل‬
‫ر به وكرمه و بره‪ ،‬يفتح عليه باب الرجاء‪ .‬ولهذا قيل في حد »الرجاء«‪ ،‬هو النظر إلى سعة رحمة الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وقال أبو علي الروذباري—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪ :‬الخوف والرجاء كجناحي الطا ئر إذا استو يا استوى الطير‬
‫وتم طيرانه‪ ،‬وإذا نقص أحدهما وقع فيه النقص‪ ،‬وإذا ذهبا صار الطا ئر في حد الموت‪.‬‬
‫وسئل أحمد بن عاصم‪ :‬ما علامة الرجاء في العبد؟ فقال‪ :‬أن يكون إذا أحاط به الإحسان ألهم‬
‫الشكر‪ ،‬راجيا لً تمام النعمة من الل ّٰه عليه في الدنيا‪ ،‬وتمام عفوه عنه في الآخرة‪.‬‬
‫واختلفوا أي الرجائين أكمل‪ ،‬رجاء المحسن ثواب إحسانه‪ ،‬أو رجاء المذنب المسيء التائب مغفرة‬
‫ر به وعفوه؟‬
‫فطائفة رجحت رجاء المحسن لقوة أسباب الرجاء معه‪ ،‬وطائفة رجحت رجاء المذنب لأن رجاءه‬
‫مجرد عن علة رؤ ية العمل‪ ،‬مقرون بذلة رؤ ية الذنب‪.‬‬
‫قال يحيى بن معاذ‪ :‬يكاد رجائي لك مع الذنوب يغلب رجائي لك مع الأعمال‪ ،‬لأني أجدني أعتمد‬
‫في الأعمال على الإخلاص وكيف أحرزها‪ ،‬وأنا بالآفات معروف‪ .‬وأجدني في الذنوب أعتمد على‬
‫عفوك‪ ،‬وكيف لا تغفرها وأنت بالجود موصوف؟‬

‫‪4 For more on him, see al-Sulamī, al-Ṭabaqāt, 118; a contemporary of Sarī al-Saqaṭī and known‬‬
‫‪as jāsūs al-qulūb (the inspector of the hearts).‬‬

264

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

He also said: “My Lord, the dearest of Thy gifts in my heart is hope in You,
the sweetest words upon my tongue are Your praise, the loveliest of my hours
is one in which I meet You.”

1

The Excellence of Hope

The author of al-Manāzil said,
Hope is the weakest of the stations of the seeker, for it is opposition [to the
divine command] from one perspective, and objection from another. In
the school of this group, it is tantamount to frivolity. The Revelation and
the Sunna have spoken of it only for one benefit, which is that it cools the
heat of fear and prevents it from causing despair.
Shaykh al-Islam [al-Harawī] is dear to us, but the truth is dearer to us than he,
and everyone’s opinion can be accepted or rejected except the protected one
[i.e., the Prophet]. We will interpret his words in the best light possible, then
proceed to explain its meaning.
His saying “Hope is the weakest of the stations of the seeker” means it is so
with respect to stations higher than it, such as gnosis, love, sincerity, truthfulness, and reliance, not that this weakness pertains to this station in itself or that
it is a deficient station.
His saying “for it is opposition from one perspective, and objection from
another” means that it pertains to the servant’s desire from his Lord, such as
favor, reward, and grace, whereas the Lord’s desire from the servant might be
fulfillment of His right and judging him in justice, because of some wisdom in
it. If the servant demands to be given grace it is a kind of opposition, as though
the hopeful servant had attached his heart to that which belongs to the Master
of all things, in contradiction to the demand for total surrender and submission,
and he threw himself before his Lord. His hope, then, is a kind of opposition to
His decree and will and to his standing with his Lord’s will, even if that includes
his chastisement. As for “objection,” it is that when the heart becomes attached
to hope yet fails to attain what it hoped for, it objects to his non-attainment. If
he does attain it, he still objects to other things that he has not attained, for
everyone hopes for God’s grace and his ego suggests this to him.
There is another way in which this objection can be understood, which is
that he objects to his Lord in what he hopes for, for to want and desire something one does not possess is to object to divine decree and is contradictory
to submission and joyous contentment. For if one knows for certain that the

‫‪265‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫وقال أيضا‪ ً:‬إلهي أحلى العطايا في قلبي رجاؤك‪ ،‬وأعذب الكلام على لساني ثناؤك‪ ،‬وأحب الساعات‬
‫إلي ساعة يكون فيها لقاؤك‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪:‬‬
‫»الرجاء أضعف منازل المر يد‪ ،‬لأنه معارضة من وجه‪ ،‬واعتراض من وجه‪ .‬وهو وقوعٌ في الرعونة‬
‫في مذهب هذه الطائفة‪ ،‬ولفائدة واحدة نطق به التنز يل والسنة‪ .‬وتلك الفائدة هي كونه يبرد حرارة‬
‫الخوف‪ ،‬حتى لا يفضي بصاحبه إلى الإ ياس«‪.‬‬
‫شيخ الإسلام حبيب إلينا‪ ،‬والحق أحب إلينا منه‪ .‬وكل من عدا المعصوم فمأخوذ من قوله ومتروك‪.‬‬
‫ونحن نحمل كلامه على أحسن محامله ثم نبين ما فيه‪.‬‬
‫أما قوله‪» :‬الرجاء أضعف منازل المر يد«‪ ،‬فيعني بالنسبة إلى ما فوقه من المنازل‪ ،‬كمنزلة المعرفة‬
‫والمحبة والإخلاص والصدق والتوكل‪ ،‬أن مراده ضعف حال هذه المنزلة في نفسها‪ ،‬وأنها منزلة‬
‫ناقصة‪.‬‬
‫وأما قوله‪» :‬لأنه معارضة من وجه‪ ،‬واعتراض من وجه«‪ ،‬فلأنه تعلق بمراد العبد من ر به من‬
‫الإحسان والثواب والإفضال‪ .‬وقد يكون مراده تعالى من عبده استيفاء حقه ومعاملته بحكم عدله‪،‬‬
‫لما له في ذلك من الحكمة‪ .‬فإذا أراد العبد منه معاملته بحكم الفضل دخل في نوع معارضة‪ ،‬فكأن‬
‫الراجي تعلق قلبه بما يعارض تصرف المالك في ملـكه‪ .‬وذلك ينافي حكم استسلامه وانقياده وانطراحه‬
‫بين يدي ر به مستسلما لً ما يحكم به فيه‪ .‬فرجاؤه معارضة لحكمه وإرادته‪ ،‬ووقوف مع مراده من سيده‪،‬‬
‫وذلك يعارض مراد سيده منه‪ .‬والمحب الصادق من فني بمراد محبو به عن مراده منه ولو كان فيه‬
‫تعذيبه‪.‬‬
‫وأما وجه الاعتراض فهو أن القلب إذا تعلق بالرجاء ولم يظفر بمرجوه‪ ،‬اعترض حيث لم يحصل‬
‫له مرجوه ولم يظفر به‪ .‬وإن ظفر به اعترض حيث فات غير ذلك المرجو‪ ،‬لأن كل أحد يرجو فضل‬
‫الل ّٰه‪ ،‬و يحدث نفسه به‪.‬‬
‫وفيه وجه آخر من الاعتراض‪ ،‬وهو أن يعترض على ر به بما يرجو منه‪ ،‬لأن الراجي متمن لما يرجو‬
‫مؤثر له‪ ،‬وذلك اعتراض على القدر‪ ،‬مناف لـكمال الاستسلام والرضا بما سبق به القضاء‪ .‬فإذا تيقن أنه‬

266

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

divine decree has been decided on a thing and that it will necessarily occur to
him, and yet he attaches his heart to what is more than it, it is as if he objects
to the decree, and fails to give submission to divine decree its due. This is tantamount to falling into frivolity, which is to enjoy the pleasure of one’s ego, just
as hope is to stop enjoy the pleasure, as it consists in attachment to pleasures.
For the adherents of this path, the beginning is to part from their selves, let
alone its pleasures, for their struggle is to be with God not their selves. The
ultimate desire of a lover is to be pleased with the commands of his beloved
whether he likes or dislikes them, until this state takes him to a condition
wherein he says,
I love you not for a reward
Rather, I love you for a punishment
All my needs have been met by her
Except for my pleasure in punishment
If the pleasure itself were his aim from the punishment, he would still have
stopped at his own pleasure, but he meant that his pleasure in fulfilling the
desire of the beloved from him, even if it were his pain, leaves no room for either
hope or fear. Rather, he said, I love what you want of me, even if it were my pain.
One of those who is deceived by this expresses it in the following saying,
My pain with separation is to me
Dearer than the bliss of attainment
For in attainment I am slave to my pleasure
Whereas in separation I serve my master’s5
He says here that his suffering of separation is dearer to him than the pleasure
of attainment because the attainment smacks of the desire of the ego, whereas
the ego has no share in the suffering of pain.
Then [al-Harawī] declares that in the Qurʾan and the Sunna no benefit has
been attributed to it except one, which is cooling off the heat of fear, lest one
fall into despair.
It is said in response to all this: These are [absurd] ecstatic outbursts from
which forgiveness is sought by abundant good deeds, and the [outbursts] are
drowned by total sincerity, soundness of dealing, strength of purity, and the
exclusive devotion to monotheism [of the author], for none is protected from
error after the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace!
These ecstatic outbursts constitute a trial for two groups of people.
5 See Muḥyī al-Dīn b. al-ʿArabī, al-Fuṭūḥāt al-Makkiyya, 1981.

‫‪267‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫سبق القضاء بشيء وأنه لابد أن يناله‪ ،‬فعلق قلبه برجاء شيء من الفضل‪ ،‬فقد اعترض على القضاء ولم‬
‫يعرف للاستسلام للحكم حقه‪ .‬وذلك وقوع في الرعونة في مذهب السا ئر ين على درب الفناء الناظر ين‬
‫إلى عين الجمع‪ .‬إذ الرعونة هي الوقوف مع حظ النفس‪ .‬والرجاء هو الوقوف مع الحظ‪ ،‬لأنه يتعلق‬
‫بالحظوظ‪.‬‬
‫وأصحاب هذه الطر يقة أول طر يقهم الخروج عن نفوسهم‪ ،‬فضلا ًعن حظوظها‪ ،‬لأنهم عاملون‬
‫على أن يكونوا بالل ّٰه لا بنفوسهم‪ .‬فغاية المحب أن يرضى بأحكام محبو به عليه‪ ،‬ساءته أم سرته‪ ،‬حتى يبلغ‬
‫بأحدهم هذه الحال إلى أن ينشد‪:‬‬

‫أحبك‬

‫للعقاب‬

‫أحبك لا أحبك للثواب‬

‫ولـكني‬

‫وكل مآر بي قد نلت منها‬

‫سوى ملذوذ وجدي بالعذاب‬

‫ولو كان نفس تلذذه بالعذاب مقصوده من العذاب لكان أيضا ًواقفا ًمع حظه‪ ،‬ولـكن أراد أن رضاه‬
‫بمراد محبو به منه‪—،‬ولو كان عذابه—لم يدع فيه للرجاء موضعا ًولا للخوف‪ ،‬بل يقول‪ :‬أنا أحب ما‬
‫تر يده بي لو أنه عذابي‪ .‬وقد كشف بعض المغرور ين عن هذا بقوله‪:‬‬

‫وتعذيبي مع الهجران عندي‬

‫أحب إلي من طيب الوصال‬

‫لأني في الوصال عبيد حظي‬

‫وفي الهجران عبد للموالي‬

‫فأخبر أن التعذيب بالهجران أحب إليه من طيب الوصال‪ ،‬لـكون الوصال فيه ما تشتهيه النفس‪ .‬وأما‬
‫التعذيب فليس للنفس فيه مقصود‪.‬‬
‫ثم أخبر أنه لم يأت في القرآن والسنة إلا لفائدة واحدة‪ ،‬وهي تبر يده لحرارة الخوف حتى لا يفضي‬
‫بصاحبه إلى الإ ياس‪ .‬فهذا وجهكلامه وحمله على أحسن محامله‪.‬‬
‫فيقال‪ :‬هذا ونحوه من الشطحات التي ترجى مغفرتها بكثرة الحسنات‪ .‬و يستغرقها كمال الصدق‬
‫وصحة المعاملة وقوة الإخلاص وتجر يد التوحيد‪ ،‬ولم تضمن العصمة لبشر بعد رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪ .‬وهذه‬
‫الشطحات أوجبت فتنة على طائفتين من الناس‪:‬‬

268

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

First, because of these the virtues of this group of people (i.e., the Sufis) are
hidden from the people, as are the gentleness of their selves and truthfulness of
their dealings, they have abandoned this group because of these ecstatic outbursts, rejected them in the strongest possible manner, and attributed the worst
thoughts to them. All this is transgression and exaggeration. For if everyone
who has erred or fallen into mistake were to be abandoned entirely, and his
virtues entirely discarded, all sciences, crafts, and stores of wisdom would be
wasted away, their marks erased.
The second group has been veiled by the goodness that they see in this group,
the purity of their hearts, soundness of their resolve, and virtuousness of their
dealings from seeing the flaws and error of their ecstatic outbursts, covering
them up with the veneer of their virtues and declaring them all to be acceptable and worthy of endorsement and adoption in their own path. These are also
transgressors and deficient.
Those of insight and fairness give each its right and station, neither declare
the wholesome to be diseased nor the diseased to be wholesome. They accept
what is acceptable and reject what is not.
Such ecstatic outbursts are precisely the kinds of things that the leading
authorities of the People cautioned against, warning against their consequences and disavowing them. So much so that Abū al-Qāsim al-Qushayrī has
written in his al-Risāla,
Abū Sulaymān al-Dārānī was seen shortly after his death and it was said
to him, “What did your Lord do with you?” He said, “I was forgiven,
and yet nothing was more harmful to me than the allusions of the People.”
Abū al-Qāsim also reported that he heard Abū Saʿīd al-Shaḥḥām say,
I saw Master Abū Sahl al-Ṣuʿlūkī in my dream and asked him, “O Shaykh,”
and he said, “Stop calling me Shaykh!” I said, “And all those states?” He
said, “They did us no good!” I said, “What did He do with you?” He said, “I
was forgiven by virtue of [my answering] the questions old women used
to ask me.”
It is reported on the authority of al-Jurayrī [al-Junayd’s successor] that he saw
al-Junayd in a dream after the latter’s death and asked, “How are you, O Abū
al-Qāsim?” He said, “All those allusions got lost, all those expressions came to
naught, and nothing helped us except those litanies we used to say in the morning.”

‫‪269‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫إحداهما حجبت بها عن محاسن هذه الطائفة ولطف نفوسهم وصدق معاملتهم‪ ،‬فأهدروها لأجل‬
‫هذه الشطحات وأنكروها غاية الإنكار‪ ،‬وأساؤوا الظن بهم وهذا عدوان وإسراف‪ .‬فلو كان كل من‬
‫أخطأ أو غلط ترك جملة ً وأهدرت محاسنه‪ ،‬لفسدت العلوم والصناعات والحكم وتعطلت معالمها‪.‬‬
‫والطائفة الثانية حجبوا بما رأوه من محاسن الطائفة وصفاء قلو بهم وصحة عزائمهم وحسن معاملاتهم‬
‫عن رؤ ية عيوب شطحاتهم ونقصانها‪ ،‬فسحبوا عليها ذيل المحاسن وأجروا عليها حكم القبول والانتصار‬
‫لها‪ ،‬واستظهروا بها في سلوكهم‪ .‬وهؤلاء أيضا معتدون مفرِ ّطون‪.‬‬
‫وأهل البصيرة والإنصاف الذين أعطوا كل ذي حق حقه‪ ،‬وأ نزلوا كل ذي منزلة منزلته‪ ،‬فلم‬
‫يحكموا للصحيح بحكم السقيم المعلول‪ ،‬ولا للمعلول السقيم بحكم الصحيح‪ ،‬بل قبلوا ما يقبل وردوا ما‬
‫يرد‪.‬‬
‫وهذه الشطحات ونحوها هي التي حذر منها سادات القوم وذموا عاقبتها وتبرؤوا منها‪ .‬حتى ذكر أبو‬
‫القاسم القشيرى في »رسالته«‪ :‬أن أبا سليمان الداراني رؤي بعد موته فقيل له‪ :‬ما فعل الل ّٰه بك؟ فقال‪:‬‬
‫غفر لي وما كان شيء أضر علي من إشارات القوم‪.‬‬
‫وقال أبو القاسم‪ :‬سمعت أبا سعيد الشحام يقول‪ :‬رأيت الأستاذ أبا سهل الصعلوكي في المنام‪ ،‬فقلت‬
‫له‪ :‬أيها الشيخ‪ ،‬فقال‪ :‬دع التشييخ‪ .‬فقلت‪ :‬وتلك الأحوال؟ فقال‪ :‬لم تغن عنا شيئا‪ ً.‬فقلت‪ :‬ما فعل الل ّٰه‬
‫جز ُ‪.‬‬
‫بك؟ قال‪ :‬غفر لي بمسائل كانت تسأل عنها الع ُ َ ّ‬
‫وذكر عن الجر يري أنه رأى الجنيد في المنام بعد موته فقال‪ :‬كيف حالك يا أبا القاسم؟ قال‪ :‬طاحت‬
‫تلك الإشارات و بادت تلك العبارات‪ ،‬وما نفعنا إلا تسبيحات كنا نقولها بالغدوات‪.‬‬

270

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

As for [al-Harawī’s] saying that “Hope is the weakest of the stations of the seekers,” that is not the case. Rather, it is one of the most exalted and noblest of
stations.
The journey to God depends upon it and upon love and fear. God has praised
its people,
Indeed, there is for you in the Messenger of God a beautiful example—for
any who hopes for God and the Last Day and mentions God much. [33:21]
In a sound divine tradition, the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace,
reports that His Lord, Almighty and Exalted, says,
O son of Adam, if you call upon Me and hope for Me, I shall forgive whatsoever you have incurred and I shall not care.6
Abū Hurayra narrated that the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and
peace, said:
Says God the Exalted: I am where my servant’s estimation of Me is. I am
with him. Whenever he mentions Me to himself, I mention him to Myself.
When he mentions Me in a company, I mention him in a company better
than them. If he draws near to Me by a hand-span, I draw near to him by
an arm-length. If he draws near to Me by an arm-length, I draw near to
him by a fathom (the length of outspread arms). And if he comes to Me
walking, I come to him running.7
When commenting on the associationists’ worship of God’s chosen servants,
about whom they claim that they will bring them closer to God, the Almighty
says that far from having any power of their own, these servants stand in hope
and fear before Him.
Say: “Call on those whom you fancy besides Him: they have neither the
power to remove your troubles from you nor to change them.” Those
whom they call upon do desire [for themselves] means of access to their
Lord—even those who are nearest: they hope for His Mercy and fear His
Wrath: for the Wrath of thy Lord is something to take heed of. [17:56–57]

6 Tirmidhī #3540.
7 Part of the tradition in Bukhārī #6502.

‫‪271‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫فأما قوله‪» :‬الرجاء أضعف منازل المر يدين« فليس كذلك‪ ،‬بل هو من أجل منازلهم وأعلاها‬
‫وأشرفها‪ ،‬وعليه وعلى الحب والخوف مدار السير إلى الل ّٰه‪ .‬وقد مدح الل ّٰه أهله وأثنى عليهم‪ ،‬فقال‪:‬‬
‫خر َ﴾ ]الأحزاب‪.[21:‬‬
‫جو ال َل ّـه َ و َاليْ وَ ْم َ اْلآ ِ‬
‫حسَنةَ ٌ لمّ ِ َن ك َانَ يرَ ْ ُ‬
‫ل ال َل ّـه ِ ُأْسو َة ٌ َ‬
‫سو ِ‬
‫﴿ َل ّق َْد ك َانَ لـ َك ُْم ف ِي ر َ ُ‬
‫وفي الحديث الصحيح الإلهي عن النبي ﷺ فيما يروي عن ر به عز وجل‪» :‬ا بن آدم‪ ،‬إنك ما‬
‫دعوتني ورجوتني غفرت لك على ما كان منك ولا أبالي«‪ .‬وقد روى الأعمش عن أبي صالح عن‬
‫أبي هر يرة—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—عن النبي ﷺ قال‪» :‬يقول الل ّٰه عز وجل‪ :‬أنا عند ظن عبدي بي‪ ،‬وأنا‬
‫معه إذا ذكرني‪ .‬فإن ذكرني في نفسه ذكرته في نفسي‪ .‬وإن ذكرني في ملأ ذكرته في ملأ خير منهم‪ .‬وإن‬
‫اقترب إلي شبرا ً اقتر بت إليه ذراعا‪] ً.‬وإن اقترب إلي ذراعا ًاقتر بت إليه باعا[ً ‪ ،‬وإن أتاني يمشي أتيته‬
‫هرولة ً«‪ .‬رواه مسلم‪.‬‬
‫وقد أخبر تعالى عن خواص عباده الذين كان المشركون يزعمون أنهم يتقر بون ]بهم[ إلى الل ّٰه‬
‫ف ال ُض ّر ِّ‬
‫ش َ‬
‫ك ْ‬
‫ن ز َعمَ ْت ُم مّ ِن د ُون ِه ِ ف َل َا ي َم ْلـ ِكُونَ َ‬
‫ل اْدع ُوا ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫أنهم كانوا راجين له خائفين منه‪ .‬فقال‪﴿ :‬ق ُ ِ‬
‫يخ َافوُ نَ‬
‫جونَ ر َْحم َتهَ ُ و َ َ‬
‫ب و َيرَ ْ ُ‬
‫ن ي َْدع ُونَ ي َب ْتغَ ُونَ ِإل َى ٰ ر َ ّبِه ِم ُ ال ْو َ ِ‬
‫ك ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫تح ْوِ يل ًا ُأول َٰئ ِ َ‬
‫ع َنك ُْم و َل َا َ‬
‫سيلةَ َ َأُّيه ُْم َأق ْر َ ُ‬
‫ع َذ َابهَ ُ﴾ ]الإسراء‪.[57–56:‬‬

272

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

God thus says that those whom they worship instead of Me are but My slave
servants who seek to get close to Me through obedience, hoping for My mercy
and fearing My punishment. How, then, do you call upon them instead of Me?
He also praised [His righteous servants] for the loftiest of their states and stations, namely, love, fear, and hope.
To [al-Harawī’s] saying that “Because it is opposition from one perspective,
objection from another,” it is said in response: Rather, it is worship, and attaching to God through His names the Bounteous and the Benevolent. It is our
connection and worship through these attributes of God and their inner awareness that gives birth to hope in ways he knows and in ways he does not yet know.
The strength of one’s hope is proportional to the strength of one’s inner awareness of God’s names and attributes, and the triumph of His mercy over His
wrath. Were it not for hope, neither the heart nor the body would worship God,
and monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques, in which God’s name is
frequently mentioned, would have been brought down. In fact, were it not for
hope, our limbs would not have the strength to as much as move in obedience
to God. If not for its auspicious winds, the boats of deeds would not sail through
the ocean of wills. I have the following lines in this regard,
If not for attachment to hope
the soul of the lover would rend asunder and perish
Were it not for its coolness
the heat within would dissolve the veil and consume
A lover veiled from the beloved: what can he cling to
If not for the hope of the beloved?
The stronger his love for Him
The stronger his hope, his desire
Were it not for hope stirring you on, you would not
Hasten and carry on to the abode of the beloved
The extent of one’s hope is in accordance to the strength of one’s love; every
lover is necessarily in fear and hope at the same time; he hopes for his beloved
and holds him dear. Similarly, he must fear falling from the eyes of the beloved,
and being rejected by, distanced from, or veiled from the beloved. The fear of
the lover is the greatest of fears. His hope is also very much part of his love.
He hopes for his beloved before he meets Him, and when he meets his beloved
and tastes the delight of His company, his hope increases. For now his heart
becomes ever more filled with vitality because of the gifts and favors of His
beloved Lord, as He receives his loving servant and looks at him with the eye of
approval and pleasure. If not for this, a true lover has no life, no pleasure, and
no delight.

‫‪273‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫يقول تعالى‪ :‬هؤلاء الذين تدعونهم من دوني ]هم عبادي يتقر بون إلي بطاعتي و يرجون رحمتي‬
‫و يخافون عذابي‪ ،‬فلماذا تدعونهم دوني؟[‪ ،‬فأثنى عليهم بأفضل أحوالهم ومقاماتهم من الحب والخوف‬
‫والرجاء‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬لأنه معارضة من وجه واعتراض من وجه«‪.‬‬
‫يقال‪ :‬بل هو عبودية‪ ،‬وتعلق بالل ّٰه من حيث اسمه »المحسن البر«‪ .‬فذلك التعلق والتعبد بهذا الاسم‬
‫والمعرفة بالل ّٰه هو الذي أوجب له الرجاء من حيث يدري ومن حيث لا يدري‪ .‬فقوة الرجاء على‬
‫حسب قوة المعرفة بالل ّٰه وأسمائه وصفاته‪ ،‬وغلبت رحمتهُ غضبه‪ .‬ولولا روح الرجاء لعطلت عبودية‬
‫القلب والجوارح وهدمت صوامع و بيع ]وصلوات ومساجد[ يذكر فيها اسم الل ّٰه كثيرا ً‪ .‬بل لولا روح‬
‫الرجاء لما تحركت الجوارح بالطاعة‪ ،‬ولولا ر يحه الطيبة لما جرت سفن الأعمال في بحر الإرادات‪.‬‬
‫ولي من الأبيات‪:‬‬

‫لولا التعلل بالرجاء تقطعت‬

‫نفس المحب تحسرا وتمزقا‬

‫وكذاك لولا برده لحرارة ال‬

‫أكباد ذابت بالحجاب تحرقا‬

‫أيكون قط حليف حب لا يرى‬

‫برجائه‬

‫متعلقا‬

‫أم كلما قو يت محبته له‬

‫قوي الرجاء فزاد فيه تشوقا‬

‫ي لما‬
‫لولا الرجا يحدو المط َ ّ‬

‫بحمولها لديارهم ترجو اللقا‬

‫لحبيبه‬

‫وعلى حسب المحبة وقوتها يكون الرجاء‪ .‬وكل محب راج خائف بالضرورة‪ ،‬فهو أرجى ما يكون لحبيبه‬
‫أحب ما كان إليه‪ .‬وكذلك خوفه‪ ،‬فإنه يخاف سقوطه من عينه وطرد محبو به له وإبعاده واحتجابه‬
‫عنه‪ ،‬فخوفه أشد خوف ورجاؤه لمحبو به ذاتي للمحبة‪ .‬فإنه يرجوه قبل لقائه والوصول إليه‪ .‬فإذا لقيه‬
‫ووصل إليه اشتد الرجاء له لما يحصل لبه حياة روحه‪ ،‬ونعيم قلبه من ألطاف محبو به و بره وإقباله عليه‪،‬‬
‫ونظره إليه بعين الرضى وتأهيله لمحبته وغير ذلك مما لا حياة للمحب ولا نعيم ولا فوز إلا بوصوله إليه‬
‫من محبو به‪ .‬فرجاؤه أعظم رجاء وأجله وأتمه‪.‬‬

274

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

If you reflect upon this as one should, great secrets of worship and love will
dawn upon you. Every love is accompanied by fear and hope, and the more the
heart is overwhelmed by that love, the more intensely it experiences fear and
hope.
However, the fear of a lover is different from the fear of an evildoer, for the
fear of a lover is not accompanied by loneliness and hopelessness. The hope of
a lover is not deficient, unlike the hope of a wage-worker. The two are worlds
apart; they are as different as their states.
To sum up then, hope is a necessity for the seeker seeker. A seeker of God
would nearly perish if he lost hope even for a moment, for he revolves around
sins that he hopes to be forgiven, shortcomings he hopes to be corrected, righteous deeds he hopes to be accepted, steadfastedness in God’s path he hopes to
cleave to perpetually, and nearness to God and a high rank with Him he hopes
to attain—and no seeker can ever afford to lose sight of these. How, then, can
hope be the weakest of stations when this is the case?
As for the talk of opposition and objection, it is invalid, for one who hopes is
not in opposition nor does he object, but rather, he desires and fears, wishing
for his Lord’s grace, thinking the best of Him, attaching his hope to His charity
and munificence, worshipping Him through His beautiful names: the Bounteous, the Benevolent, the Giver, the Forgiving, the Munificent, the Bestower of
Gifts, the Provider. God loves that His servant looks to Him in hope, and that is
why He is where the servant’s hope and estimation of Him lies.
Hope is one of the causes by which the servant attains what he attains from
his Lord, rather, it is one of the strongest causes. If it were tantamount to opposing or objecting [to divine decree], the same would be even more true of supplicating and asking of God. The supplication and beseeching of a servant to
his Lord to grant him success and strengthen him, help him in obedience, save
him from His disobedience, forgive his sins, enter him into the Garden and save
him from hellfire, would also constitute opposition and objection, for the supplicant is hoping and asking for what he hopes for. Such a one is even more
guilty of opposition and objection.
What has caused the Shaykh [al-Harawī] to come to this extreme is his unrestrained approach to predestination and annihilation in the experience of the
existential reality. He is deeply committed to it, heeding no one’s blame or
objection in its respect, extreme in denying causality. This is a place where the
steps of the leading luminaries have lost balance.
Were it not that the right of the Truth is greater than the right of the creation,
silence at this point would have been courteous.
There is nothing in the concept of hope or supplication that contradicts the
Master’s absolute power in His dominion, for one simply hopes for His dispo-

‫‪275‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫فتأمل هذا الموضع حق التأمل يطلعك على أسرار عظيمة من أسرار العبودية والمحبة‪ .‬فكل محبة فهي‬
‫مصحو بة بالخوف والرجاء‪ .‬وعلى قدر تمكنها من قلب المحب يشتد خوفه ورجاؤه‪ .‬لـكن خوف المحب‬
‫لا يصحبه وحشه بخلاف خوف المسيء‪ .‬ورجاء المحب لا يصحبه علة بخلاف رجاء الأجير‪ .‬فأ ين‬
‫رجاء المحب من رجاء الأجير؟ و بينهما كما بين حاليهما‪ .‬و بالجملة‪ ،‬فالرجاء ضروري للمر يد السالك‪،‬‬
‫والعارف لو فارقه لحظة ً لتلف أو كاد‪ .‬فإنه دا ئر بين ذنب يرجو غفرانه وعيب يرجو صلاحه وعمل‬
‫صالح يرجو قبوله‪ ،‬واستقامة يرجو حصولها أو دوامها وقرب من الل ّٰه ومنزلة عنده يرجو وصوله إليها‪،‬‬
‫ولا ينفك أحد من السالـكين عن هذه الأمور أو عن بعضها‪ .‬فكيف يكون الرجاء من أضعف منازله‬
‫]وهذا حاله؟‬
‫وأما حديث المعارضة والاعتراض فباطل‪ ،‬فإن الراجي[ ليس معارضا ً ولا معترضا‪ ً،‬بل راغبا ً‬
‫راهبا ًمؤملا لً فضل ر به‪ ،‬محسن الظن به متعلق الأمل ببره وجوده‪ ،‬عابدا ً له بأسمائه »المحسن‪ ،‬البر‪،‬‬
‫المعطي‪ ،‬الحليم‪ ،‬الغفور‪ ،‬الجواد‪ ،‬الوهاب‪ ،‬الرزاق«‪ .‬والل ّٰه يحب من عبده أن يرجوه‪ .‬ولذلك كان عند‬
‫رجاء العبد له وظنه به‪.‬‬
‫و »الرجاء« من الأسباب التي ينال بها العبد ما يرجوه من ر به‪ ،‬بل هو من أقوى الأسباب‪.‬‬
‫ولو تضمن معارضة ً واعتراضا ً لكان ذلك في الدعاء والمسألة أولى‪ .‬فكان دعاء العبد ر به وسؤاله—‬
‫أن يهديه و يوفقه و يسدده و يعينه على طاعته و يجنبه معصيته و يغفر ذنو به و يدخله الجنة و ينجيه من‬
‫النار—معارضة ًواعتراضا‪ ً،‬لأن الداعي راج وطالب‪] ،‬فمعه رجاء‪ ،‬وطلب[ ما يرجوه‪ .‬فهو أولى حينئذ‬
‫بالمعارضة والاعتراض‪.‬‬
‫والذي أوجب للشيخ هذا القدر الاسترسال في القدر والفناء في شهود الحقيقة الـكونية‪ .‬فإنه من‬
‫الراسخـين فيه الذين لا تأخذهم فيه لومة لائم‪ .‬وهو شديد في إنكار الأسباب‪ .‬وهذا موضع زلت فيه‬
‫أقدام أئمة أعلام‪.‬‬
‫ولولا أن حق الحق أوجب من حق الخلق‪ ،‬لكان في الإمساك فسحة ومتسع‪ .‬وليس في الرجاء‬
‫ولا في الدعاء معارضة لتصرف المالك في ملـكه‪ .‬فإنه إنما يرجو تصرفه في ملـكه أيضا ً بما هو أحب‬

276

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

sition of His dominion in a way that is dearer to Him, for charity is dearer to
Him than justice, forgiveness dearer than retribution, tolerance dearer to Him
than execution, forbearance dearer to Him than reckoning, and His mercy has
overwhelmed His wrath.
The hopeful servant attaches his hope to the act of the Beloved that is dear to
Him; his hope does not cause Him to relinquish His control over His dominion.
Rather, it fulfills his servitude to Him and the attainment of the dearer of the
two outcomes to Him. The Almighty does not benefit from exacting revenge
or administering punishments for the hope of a servant to contradict that. It
is only the servant himself who brought punishment unto himself, by denying God His right, ascribing partners to God, rejecting Him in unbelief, and
striving to anger Him; His wrath has causes, effects, and requirements, and the
servant is the one who chooses them, strives to attain them, and works toward
them by preferring its causes; he is the one who brings ruin to himself. His
Lord all this while warns him, shows him His signs and calls to him, “Come
to Me, I will protect you and shelter you, save you from what you fear.” Yet he
stops at nothing but rebellion and desertion, making peace with His enemy,
joining hands with him against his Lord, seeking the pleasure of His creation
against Him. The pleasure of the creation is more preferable and certain to him
than His right, the fear, hope, and love of [the creation] greater in his heart. He
closes off all doors to the grace, charity, and reward of his Lord to him, working
hard instead to obstruct all such paths, handing them all to his enemy, making
peace with him, obeying and loving him instead, wronging himself in the most
odious of ways. He is the one who obstructs his own way toward success by
the excess of his lust, desire, and caprice, and [who] objects to that which He
loves by pushing it away, refusing to let it in, thus losing his share and wronging his own self, opposing his lover and befriending his enemy, angering the
One in whose pleasure is his life, and pleasing the one in angering Him is his
life. He is generous to his enemies but niggardly to his Loving Lord and Protector.
The Lord Most High has no self-serving motive to chastise His servants, nor
does that heal Him or increase His dominion by even the weight of a grain. Nor
does His forgiveness decrease anything from His power, even if he forgave all
of the dwellers of this Earth. And how could it? For His mercy indeed is more
encompassing and far-reaching than wrath and punishment. He has written
mercy unto Himself.
The hope of a servant to Him, therefore, takes away nothing from His wisdom, His dominion, and His omnipotence, nor does that require anything
opposed to perfection, nor denial of any of His attributes or names. Were it
not for the servant himself closing all of the doors of God’s mercy and turning

‫‪277‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫الأمرين إليه‪] .‬فإن الفضل أحب إليه من العدل‪ ،‬والعفو أحب إليه[ من الانتقام‪ ،‬والمسامحة أحب‬
‫إليه من الاستقصاء‪ ،‬والترك أحب إليه من الاستيفاء‪ ،‬ورحمته غلبت غضبه‪.‬‬
‫فالراجي علق رجاءه بتصرفه المحبوب له المرضي له‪ ،‬فلم يوجب رجاؤه خروجه عن تصرفه في ملـكه‪،‬‬
‫بل اقتضى عبوديته وحصول أحب التصرفين إليه‪ .‬وهو سبحانه لا ينتفع باستيفاء حقه وعقو بة عبده‬
‫حتى يكون رجاؤه مبطلا لً ذلك‪ .‬وإنما العبد استدعى العقو بة وأخذ الحق منه لشركه بالل ّٰه وكفره به‬
‫واجتهاده في غضبه‪ .‬ولغضبه موجبات وآثار ومقتضيات‪ ،‬والعبد مؤثر لها ساع في تحصيلها عامل عليها‬
‫بإ يثاره وسعيه في أسبابها‪ .‬فهو المهلك لنفسه ور به يحذره و يبصره و يناديه‪ :‬هلم إلي أحمك وأصنك‪،‬‬
‫وأنجك مما تحذر‪ ،‬وأؤمنك من كل ما تخاف‪ .‬وهو يأبى إلا شرودا ً عليه ونفارا ً عنه ومصالحة ً لعدوه‬
‫ومظاهرة ً له على ر به‪ ،‬ومتطلبا ًلمرضاة خلقه بمساخطه‪ .‬رضا المخلوق آ ثر عنده من رضاه وحقه آكد‬
‫عنده من حقه‪ ،‬وخوفه ورجاؤه وحبه في قلبه أعظم‪ .‬فلم يدع لفضل ر به وكرامته وثوابه إليه طر يقا‪ً،‬‬
‫بل سد دونه طرق مجار يها بجهده وأعطى بيده لعدوه‪ ،‬فصالحه وسمع له وأطاع‪ ،‬وانقاد إلى مرضاته‪.‬‬
‫فجاء من الظلم بأقبحه وأشده‪.‬‬
‫فهو الذي عارض مراده ر به منه بمراده وهواه وشهوته‪ .‬واعترض لمحابه ومراضيه بالدفع‪ ،‬ولم يأذن‬
‫لها في الدخول عليه‪ .‬فأضاع حظه و بخس حقه وظلم نفسه‪ ،‬وعادى حبيبه ووالى عدوه‪ ،‬وأسخط من‬
‫حياته في رضاه وأرضى من حياته في سخطه‪ ،‬وجاد بنفسه لعدوه و بخل بها عن حبيبه ووليه‪ .‬والرب‬
‫وتعالى ليس له ثأر عند عبده فيدركه بعقو بته‪ ،‬ولا يتشفى بعقابه‪ ،‬ولا يز يد ذلك في ملـكه مثقال ذرة‪،‬‬
‫ولا ينقص مغفرته‪ .‬لو غفر لأهل الأرض كلهم لما نقص مثقال ذرة من ملـكه‪ ،‬كيف والرحمة أوسع‬
‫من العقو بة وأسبق من الغضب وأغلب له؟ وهو قد كتب على نفسه الرحمة فرجاء العبد له لا ينقص‬
‫شيئا ًمن حكمته ولا ينقص ذرة ً من ملـكه‪ ،‬ولا يخرجه عن كمال تصرفه ولا يوجب خلاف كمال‪،‬‬

278

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

away from all of the various ways of righteousness, his Lord [would never have
punished him and] would always give him more than he could ever hope and
wish for.
As for the total surrender of the servant to his Lord, his throwing of himself
before Him and His pleasure, it is nothing but hope that He will have mercy
on him, lessen his burdens, forgive him, and accept his good deeds despite
their deficiencies and ailments, and overlook his bad deeds. It is nothing but
the strength of his hope that causes this surrender and submission, and brings
him before the door of His Lord, for hope is the life of asking, its soul being
intention.
As for his claim of joyous contentment with what God has willed even if it
is his punishment, this is frivolity, pure and simple. For what the Exalted has
willed includes two kinds, that for which He loves and praises and befriends its
doer, and the servant’s agreement with this object of God’s will is the essence
of love, and the servant’s will to oppose it is frivolity, opposition, and objection.
The other kind of the object of God’s will is that which He dislikes, hates, and
punishes its doer, and to agree with this object of His will is to rebel against and
declare hostility to God and open oneself to His wrath and displeasure.
This is a place of discretion, and agreement with God consists in and requires
opposing this kind of divine will by the other kind of divine will.
True worship, then, is to oppose His decree with His decree and resist His
judgment with His judgment.
To surrender to an ontological decree is wrong and what results from it is
the very essence of frivolity, abandonment of worship, and adherence to a false
claim. If it truly were surrender and congruence, and parting from objection
and opposition, it would be limited to that which He loves, is pleased with, and
commands: surrendering to and parting from resistance to it is the essence of
love and friendship.
As for annihilation in the will of his Lord from his own will, the praiseworthy
part of it, as mentioned earlier, is the annihilation in His religious, deontological command, not the ontological decree, since all that is in existence, good or
evil, is the object of His will [regardless].
As for attachment to hope for his own desideratum rather than the desideratum of his Master, [this objection against hope is invalid because] the servant
hopes for only that divine will that is loved by God, fleeing from that which He
dislikes. And even if something is liked by Him, such as retribution, then forgiveness and charity are even more liked by Him, and so his hope ought to be
attached to the more liked of two liked things.
As for the claim that hope is an objection to the divine decree that has been
issued, it is not so. Rather, it is attachment to another decree that may have also

‫‪279‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫ولا تعطيل أوصافه وأسمائه‪ .‬ولولا أن العبد هو الذي سد على نفسه طرق الخـيرات وأغلق دونها أبواب‬
‫الرحمة بسوء اختياره لنفسه‪ ،‬لكان ر به له فوق رجائه وفوق أمله‪.‬‬
‫وأما استسلام العبد لر به واستسلامه بانطراحه بين يديه ورضاه بمواقع حكمه فيه‪ ،‬فما ذاك إلا رجاء‬
‫منه أن يرحمه و يقيله عثرته‪ ،‬و يعفو عنه و يقبل حسناته مع عيوب أعماله وآفاتها‪ ،‬و يتجاوز عن سيئاته‪.‬‬
‫فقوة رجائه أوجبت له هذا الاستسلام والانقياد والانطراح بالباب‪ .‬ولا يتصور هذا بدون الرجاء‬
‫البتة‪ .‬فالرجاء حياة الطلب‪ ،‬والإرادة روحها‪.‬‬
‫وأما رضاه بمراده منه وإن كان عذابه‪ ،‬فهذا هو الرعونةكل الرعونة‪ .‬فإن مراده سبحانه نوعان‪:‬‬
‫مراد يحبه و يرضاه و يمدح فاعله و يواليه‪ .‬فموافقته في هذا المراد ]هي عين محبته‪ ،‬وإرادة خلافه رعونة‬
‫ومعارضة واعتراض‪ .‬ومراد يبغضه و يكرهه و يمقت فاعله و يعاديه‪ ،‬فموافقته في هذا المراد[ عين مشاقته‬
‫ومعاداته ومخالفته والتعرض لمقته وسخطه‪.‬‬
‫فهذا الموضع موضع فرقان‪ .‬فالموافقةكل الموافقة معارضة هذا المراد‪ ،‬واعتراضه بالدفع والرد بالمراد‬
‫الآخر‪.‬‬
‫فالعبودية الحق معارضة مراده بمراده ومزاحمة أحكامه بأحكامه‪ .‬فاستسلامه لهذا المراد المكروه‬
‫المسخوط وما يوجبه و يقتضيه عين الرعونة والخروج عن العبودية‪ ،‬وهو عين الدعوى الكاذبة‪ .‬إذ‬
‫لو كان مصدر ذلك الاستسلام والموافقة وترك الاعتراض والمعارضة‪ ،‬لكان ذلك مخصوصا ً بمحابه‬
‫ض عليها هو عين المحبة‬
‫ومراضيه‪ ،‬وأوامره التي الاستسلام لها والموافقة فيها وترك معارضتها والاعترا ِ‬
‫والموالاة‪.‬‬
‫وأما الفناء بمراد ر به عن مراده‪ ،‬فقد تقدم أن المحمود من ذلك الفناء بمراده الديني الأمري لا‬
‫الـكوني القدري‪ .‬فإن الـكون كله مراده القدري خيره وشره‪.‬‬
‫وأما تعلق الرجاء بمراده دون مراد سيده فهو إنما علقه بمراده المحبوب له هار با ًمن مراده المسخوط‬
‫المكروه له‪ .‬وعلى تقدير أن يكون محبو با لً ه—إذا كان انتقاما ً—فالعفو والفضل أحب إليه منه‪ .‬فهو إنما‬
‫علق رجاءه بأحب المرادين إليه‪.‬‬
‫وأما كون الرجاء اعتراضا ً على ما سبق به الحكم فليس كذلك‪ ،‬بل تعلقا ً بما سبق به الحكم‪ .‬فإنه‬

280

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

been issued: he only hopes for charity and bounty and mercy that has been
decreed and destined, and He has made hope one of the causes of its attainment. Hope, then, is not an objection to divine decree nor opposition to it, but
rather seeking that which has been decreed.
As for [the servant’s] objection that results if he fails to attain that for which
he hoped: if it occurs, it would be a deficiency in worship and ignorance of the
right of divine providence, for the one who hopes and calls asks for a grace that
he does not deserve, nor is he paying for it in an equal exchange. If he is given
it, it is pure bounty and charity upon him, and if he is refused, it was not his
right to begin with. His objection, hence, is frivolous and ignorant. Therefore,
the failure to attain what one hoped and prayed for does not necessitate opposition or objection for a sincere servant.
The Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, asked God for
three distinctions for his community; He granted him two and refused one, and
he was pleased with what He gave and did not object to what was not given, and
rather was pleased in submission.8
As for [the claim] that hope is self-indulgence, and since the seekers of this
path have parted from their egos, how could they engage in self-indulgence?
[I say:] How strange, by God! What is frivolous about the servant hoping and
desiring his Lord’s charity, bounty, and grace, and begging for it by his heart
and tongue? Hope is the heart’s expectation to attain its object, and if the servant is ever-expecting in his heart and begging in his tongue the grace of his
Lord, what is frivolous about it? Is frivolity anything but the opposite of it?
Strange also is their claim to part from their egos, when they are the greatest
of men in worshipping their egos! Only he who binds his ego to God’s religious,
normative, and prophetic command has parted from it. Such a one spends it in
establishing His religion and upholding it among its opponents and rejecters;
he finds them tearing apart his honor, casting great aspersions at him, frightening him with all kinds of threats, seeking his blood, but he is not deterred
by their blame in his struggle with them for the sake of God. His clarion call of
truth is to anyone who fears and hopes for Him, being in no need of their praise
and admiration, their reverence and being called a great “shaykh” by them, their
kissing of his hands or fulfillment of his needs. He cries out among them his
sincere advice aloud, announcing it for them as well as offering it to them in
private. He is stripped of formalities and limitations and has attached himself
to the pleasure of the Ever-living, the Sustainer. His station in an hour of struggle against the enemies of God and his endurance for a night on the frontier of

8 Based on the narration in Muslim #2890.

‫‪281‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫إنما يرجو فضلا ًوإحسانا ًورحمة ً سبق بها القضاء والقدر‪ ،‬وجعل الرجاء أحد أسباب حصولها‪ .‬فليس‬
‫الرجاء اعتراضا ًعلى القدر ولا معارضة ً للقدر‪ ،‬بل طلبا لً ما سبق به القدر‪.‬‬
‫وأما اعتراضه إذا لم يحصل له مرجوه فهذا نقص في العبودية‪ ،‬وجهل بحق الر بو بية‪ .‬فإن الراجي‬
‫والداعي يرجو و يدعو فضلا ً لا يستحقه ولا يستوجبه بمعاوضة‪ ،‬فإن أعطيه فمحض المنة والصدقة‬
‫عليه‪ ،‬وإن منعه فلم يمنع حقا ًهو له‪ ،‬فاعتراضه رعونة وجهالة‪ .‬ولا يلزم من فوات المرجو وعدم حصول‬
‫المدعو به في حق العبد الصادق معارضة ولا اعتراض‪.‬‬
‫وقد سأل رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ ر به ثلاث خصال لأمته‪ .‬فأعطاه اثنتين ومنعه واحدة ً‪ .‬فرضي بما أعطاه‬
‫ولم يعترض فيما منعه‪ ،‬بل رضي وسلم‪.‬‬
‫وأما كون الرجاء وقوفا ً مع الحظ‪ ،‬وأصحاب هذه الطر يقة قد خرجوا عن نفوسهم فكيف‬
‫حظوظهم؟‬
‫فيا لل ّٰه العجب! أي رعونة فيمن يجعل رجاء العبد ر به‪ ،‬وطمعه في بره وإحسانه وفضله‪ ،‬وسؤاله‬
‫ذلك بقلبه ولسانه؟ فإن الرجاء هو استشراف القلب لنيل ما يرجوه‪ .‬فإذا كان العبد دائما ًمستشرفا ً‬
‫بقلبه سائلا بً لسانه طالبا لً فضل ر به‪ ،‬فأي رعونة هاهنا؟ وهل الرعونةكل الرعونة إلا خلاف ذلك؟‬
‫ومن العجب دعواهم خروجهم عن نفوسهم‪ ،‬وهم أعظم الناس عبادة لنفوسهم‪ .‬وليس الخارج‬
‫عن نفسه إلا من جعلها حبسا ًعلى مراد الل ّٰه الديني الأمري النبوي‪ ،‬و بذلها لل ّٰه في إقامة دينه وتنفيذه‬
‫بين أهل العناد والمعارضة والبغي‪ ،‬فانغمس فيهم يمزقون أديمه و يرمونه بالعظائم‪ ،‬و يخيفونه بأنواع‬
‫المخاوف و يتطلبون دمه بجهدهم‪ ،‬لا تأخذه في جهادهم في الل ّٰه لومة لائم‪ .‬يصدع بالحق عند من‬
‫يخافه و يرجوه‪ .‬قد زهد في مدحهم وثنائهم وتعظيمهم وتشييخهم له‪ ،‬وتقبيل يده وقضاء حوائجه‪.‬‬
‫يصيح فيهم بالنصائح جهارا ًو يعلن لهم بها و يسر لهم إسرارا ً‪ ،‬وقد تجرد عن الأوضاع والقيود والرسوم‬
‫وتعلق بمراضي الحي القيوم‪ .‬مقامه ساعة في جهاد أعداء الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ور باطه ليلة على ثغر الإ يمان‪ ،‬آ ثر عنده‬

282

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

faith is dearer to him than annihilation, epiphanies, and states that are indeed
the greatest source of the life of the ego, its nourishment and delight. How
can this latter one claim that he has parted from the delight of his ego? Perhaps he has parted from the decree of his Lord and worship to his own desire
and pleasure! If he were to examine himself, he would see it with his own
eyes.
Is it anything but utter frivolity to claim that he loves his Lord for his punishment, not his reward? And his claim that if he loved and obeyed Him for reward
that would be pleasure and preference of his ego as opposed to if he loved and
obeyed him for His punishment, for that has no delight for his ego?
By God, in the entire class of frivolity and stupidity there is nothing uglier
and more revolting than this! Why would the devil now play with the egos anymore? The ego that the devil’s trickery has brought to such a state is in sure
need of begging for protection.
Compare the states of the prophets, messengers, and truth-lovers, and their
beseeching of their Lord with the states of these lost souls, and witness the difference.
Where is all this from the supplication of the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace,
O God, I beg for the protection of Your pleasure from Your displeasure,
and I beg the protection of Your safety from Your punishment, and I beg
Your protection from You.9
And his saying to his uncle,
O ʿAbbās, O uncle of the Messenger of God, beg God for his safety!10
And his saying to the greatest Truth-lover (Abū Bakr), when the latter asked
him to teach him a supplication to say during his prayers,
Say: O God, I have wronged myself a great deal, and none forgives sins but
You, so forgive me a forgiveness from You, and have mercy on me, for You
are the Most Forgiving, the Ever Merciful.11

9
10
11

Muslim #486.
Bukhārī, Adab al-mufrad #726.
Bukhārī #834; Muslim #2705.

‫‪283‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫وأحب إليه من فناء ومشاهدات وأحوال هي أعظم عيش النفس‪ ،‬وأعلى قوتها وأوفر حظها‪ .‬و يزعم‬
‫أنه قد خرج عن نفسه فكيف حظها؟ ولعله قد خرج عن مراد ر به من عبوديته إلى عين مراده هو‬
‫وحظه‪ .‬ولو فتش نفسه لرأى ذلك فيها عيانا‪ً.‬‬
‫وهل الرعونةكل الرعونة إلا دعواه أنه يحب ر به لعذابه لا لثوابه‪ ،‬وأنه إذا أحبه وأطاعه للثواب‬
‫كان ذلك حظا ً وإيثارا ً لمراد النفس بخلاف ما إذا أحبه وأطاعه ليعذبه‪ ،‬فإنه لا حظ للنفس في‬
‫ذلك؟‬
‫فوالله ليس في أنواع الرعونة والحماقة أقبح من هذا ولا أسمج‪ .‬وماذا يلعب الشيطان بالنفوس؟ وإن‬
‫نفسا ًوصل بها تلبيس الشيطان إلى هذه الحالة لمحتاجة إلى سؤال المعافاة‪.‬‬
‫فزن أحوال الأنبياء والرسل والصديقين وسؤالهم ر بهم على أحوال هؤلاء الغالطين ثم قايس بينهما‬
‫وانظر التفاوت‪.‬‬
‫فأ ين هذا من دعاء النبي ﷺ‪» :‬اللهم إني أعوذ برضاك من سخطك‪ ،‬وأعوذ بمعافاتك من عقو بتك‪،‬‬
‫وأعوذ بك منك«‪.‬‬
‫وقوله لعمه‪» :‬يا عباس! يا عم رسول الل ّٰه‪ ،‬سل الل ّٰه العافية«‪.‬‬
‫وقوله للصديق الأكبر وقد سأله أن يعلمه دعاء يدعو به في صلاته‪» .‬قل‪ :‬اللهم إني ظلمت نفسي‬
‫ظلما ًكثيرا ً‪ ،‬ولا يغفر الذنوب إلا أنت‪ .‬فاغفر لي مغفرة من عندك‪ ،‬وارحمني إنك أنت الغفور الرحيم«‪.‬‬

284

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

And his saying to the most truth-loving among women (ʿĀʾisha), when she
asked him for a supplication to say if she found the Night of Destiny,
Say: O God, You are Most-lenient, You love lenience, so be lenient with
me!12
And his saying in his [Qurʾanic] supplication that he never neglected it and if
he made any supplication he ended it with it:13
Our Lord, give us all that is good in this life and all that is good in the
afterlife and save us from the hellfire. [2:201]
The Almighty heaped praise upon His elite among the wise for begging Him
to save them from the punishment of the hellfire, saying, “And they reflect on
the creation of the heavens and the earth: Our Lord, You have not created this
in vain, Glory to You, so save us from the hellfire!” [3:191]. He also said to [his
wife] Umm Ḥabība, God be pleased with her, “If you ask God to save you from
the punishment of the hellfire, it would be better for you.”14 He used to beg for
protection from the punishment of the hellfire frequently, and from the punishment of the grave.15 He also commanded the Muslims to beg for protection
in their final sitting [during the regular prayers] from the punishment of the
hellfire, from the punishment of the grace, from the trial of life and death, and
the trial of the Antichrist,16 so much so that it has been said that this supplication is an obligation during the prayer and that prayer is not valid without it.
The examples of this are too many for us to list them exhaustively.
The Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, entered upon a
sick person and found him [shriveled] like a chick, so he asked him, “What have
you been praying for?” He said, “I was saying, O God, that for which You will take
me to account in afterlife, do it in this world.” So he said, “Glory to God! You cannot bear that. Why did you not ask for lenience and safety?”17 It is reported in
al-Musnad [of Aḥmad] on his authority, “No supplication is dearer to God than
being asked for lenience and safety.”18
He said to one of his companions, “What do you say when you pray?” He
said, “I ask God for the Garden and beg for protection from the hellfire, but I do
not understand your murmuring, nor the murmuring of Muʿādh.” So the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, said, “It is about those that
we murmur.”19

12

Tirmidhī #3513.

‫‪285‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫وقوله لصديقة النساء—وقد سألته دعاء تدعو به‪ ،‬إن وافقت ليلة القدر—فقال‪» :‬قولي‪ :‬اللهم إنك‬
‫عفو تحب العفو فاعف عني«‪.‬‬
‫وقوله في دعائه الذي كألا يدعه‪ ،‬وإن دعا بدعاء أردفه به‪» :‬ر بنا آتنا في الدنيا حسنة ً وفي الآخرة‬
‫حسنة ً وقنا عذاب النار«‪.‬‬
‫وقد أثنى الل ّٰه تعالى على خاصته أولي الألباب بأنهم سألوه أن يقيهم عذاب النار‪ .‬فقال‪﴿ :‬و َي َت َف َ َك ّر ُونَ‬
‫ب ال َن ّارِ﴾ ]آل عمران‪:‬‬
‫سب ْحاَ ن َ َ‬
‫ت هَٰ ذ َا باَ طِل ًا ُ‬
‫ض ر َ َب ّن َا م َا خ َلقَ ْ َ‬
‫ت و َاْلَأْر ِ‬
‫سم َاو َا ِ‬
‫ق ال َ ّ‬
‫ف ِي خ َل ْ ِ‬
‫ك فقَ ِن َا ع َذ َا َ‬
‫‪ .[191‬وقال ﷺ لأم حبيبة—رضي الل ّٰه عنها—‪» :‬لو سألت الل ّٰه أن يجـيرك من عذاب النار لكان خيرا ً‬
‫لك«‪ .‬وكان يستعيذ كثيرا ًمن عذاب النار ومن عذاب القبر‪ ،‬وأمر المسلمين أن يستعيذوا في تشهدهم‬
‫من عذاب النار وعذاب القبر وفتنة المحيا والممات وفتنة المسيح الدجال‪ ،‬حتى قيل‪ :‬إن هذا الدعاء‬
‫واجب في الصلاة لا تصح إلا به‪ ،‬وهذا أعظم من أن نستقصيه‪.‬‬
‫ودخل رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ على مريض يعوده فرآه مثل الفرخ فقال‪» :‬ما كنت تدعو به؟ فقال‪ :‬كنت‬
‫أقول‪ :‬اللهم ما كنت معاقبني به في الآخرة فعاقبني به في الدنيا‪ .‬فقال‪ :‬سبحان الل ّٰه إنك لا تطيق ذلك‪.‬‬
‫ألا سألت الل ّٰه العفو والعافية؟«‬
‫وفي المسند عنه‪» :‬ما سئل الل ّٰه شيئا ًأحب إليه من سؤال العفو والعافية«‪ .‬وقال لبعض أصحابه‪» :‬ما‬
‫تقول إذا صليت؟ فقال‪ :‬أسأل الل ّٰه الجنة وأعوذ به من النار‪ ،‬أما إني لا أحسن دندنتك ولا دندنة‬
‫معاذ‪ .‬فقال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪ :‬حولها ندندن«‪.‬‬

‫‪Bukhārī #6389; Muslim #2690.‬‬
‫‪Muslim #2663.‬‬
‫‪Bukhārī #832; Muslim #589.‬‬
‫‪Muslim #588.‬‬
‫‪Muslim #2688.‬‬
‫‪Tirmidhī #3515, 3548, deemed weak. See Madārij(Ṣ), 1444.‬‬
‫‪Abū Dāwūd #792.‬‬

‫‪13‬‬
‫‪14‬‬
‫‪15‬‬
‫‪16‬‬
‫‪17‬‬
‫‪18‬‬
‫‪19‬‬

286

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

How far is all this from the case of one who says, “I do not love You for Your
reward, for that would be self-indulgence, and I only love for Your punishment,
for that has nothing in it for me; hope is the essence of self-indulgence; and we
have parted from our egos and have nothing to do with hope”? The best that can
be said about this is that it is an ecstatic outburst for which one can be excused
if his mind was overwhelmed as in the state of inebriation or the like, and that
his good deeds, conduct, states, and piety are not all demolished as a result.
However, the one who denies [hopefulness] being from the sound states and
lofty stations that the servant seeks and aspires to is one who has no guise to
cover him up, nor can the scholars endure him, and the masters and leading
authorities of the People are far and away from these frivolities, rather, they are
the most distant of all people from such things.
True, one of them may experience a state in which his ego speaks to him
and says that if He punished him, he would be content with it, like the contentment of the one who received His reward, and his heart becomes resolute on
this. However, such resolve and wishing in reality have no effect at all, and if He
tests him in the slightest of ways he begins to scream and beg for help and ask
for safety, as occurred to one who said,
I cannot but desire you
You may test me however you wish!
So, He tested him by constricting his urine. His claim vanished in no time, no
trace of it to be found, and he went around saying to little schoolchildren, “Call
your uncle a liar!”
The resolve to be joyfully content is one thing, and its reality something different altogether.
As for [al-Harawī’s] saying, “The Revelation has spoken of it for one benefit
alone, and that is that it cools the heat of fear.”
It would be said that rather, it has many other benefits.
One among them is that it is an expression of servitude, and need and desperation towards what he hopes for from God and expects from His bounty,
and that he is not self-sufficient even for the wink of an eye.
Another one is that He the Glorified loves that his servants look to Him in
hope and ask of His grace, for He is the King, the Truth, the Generous—the
Most Generous of all who are asked, the Most Munificent of those who give—
and to the generous, the most beloved thing is to be asked. One tradition says,
“One who does not ask God, He is angry with him.” Since the one who asks is
hopeful, it means that God is angry with those do not have hope in Him. This
is, then, another benefit of hope, which is the avoidance of God’s anger.

‫‪287‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫فأ ين هذا من حال من قال‪ :‬لا أحبك لثوابك لأنه عين حظي‪ ،‬وإنما أحبك لعقابك لأنه لاحظ‬
‫لي فيه‪ ،‬والرجاء عين الحظ‪ ،‬ونحن قد خرجنا عن نفوسنا فما لنا وللرجاء؟ فهذا وأمثاله أحسن ما يقال‬
‫فيهم‪ :‬إنه شطح قد يعذر فيه صاحبه إذا كان مغلو با ً على عقله كالسكران ونحوه‪ ،‬ولا تهدر محاسنه‬
‫ومعاملاته وأحواله وزهده‪.‬‬
‫ولـكن الذي ينكر كون هذا من الأحوال الصحيحة والمقامات العلية التي يتعاطاها العبد و يشمر‬
‫إليها‪ ،‬فهذا الذي لا تلبس عليه الثياب ولا تصبر عليه نفوس العلماء‪ .‬وحاشا سادات القوم وأئمتهم من‬
‫هذه الرعونات‪ ،‬بل هم أبعد الناس منها‪.‬‬
‫نعم قد يعرض لأحدهم حال يحدث نفسه فيه بأنه لو عذبه لكان راضيا ً بعذابهكرضا صاحب‬
‫الثواب بثوابه و يعزم على ذلك بقلبه‪ .‬ولـكن هذا عزم وأمنية‪ ،‬وعند الحقيقة لا يكون لذلك أ ثر البتة‪،‬‬
‫ولو امتحنه بأدنى محنة لصاح واستغاث وسأل العافيةكما جرى للقائل‪:‬‬

‫وليس لي من هواك بد‬

‫فكيفما شئت فامتحني‬

‫فامتحنه بعسر البول‪ ،‬فطاحت هذه الدعوى عنه واضمحل خيالها وجعل يطوف على صبيان المكاتب‬
‫و يقول‪ :‬ادعوا لعمكم الـكذاب‪.‬‬
‫فالعزم على الرضا لون‪ ،‬وحقيقته لون آخر‪.‬‬
‫وأما قوله‪» :‬أن التنز يل نطق به لفائدة وهي كونه يبرد حرارة الخوف«‪.‬‬
‫فيقال‪ :‬بل لفوائد كثيرة أخر سوى هذه‪.‬‬
‫منها إظهار العبودية والفاقة والحاجة إلى ما يرجوه من ر به‪ ،‬و يستشرفه من إحسانه‪ ،‬وأنه لا يستغني‬
‫عن فضله طرفة عين‪.‬‬
‫ومنها أنه سبحانه يحب من عباده أن يؤملوه و يرجوه و يسألوه من فضله‪ ،‬لأنه الملك الحق الجواد‪،‬‬
‫أجود من سئل وأوسع من أعطى‪ .‬وأحب ما إلى الجواد أن يرجى و يؤمل و يسأل‪ .‬وفي الحديث‪» :‬من‬
‫لم يسأل الل ّٰه يغضب عليه«‪ .‬والسائل راج وطالب‪ .‬فمن لم يرج الل ّٰه يغضب عليه‪ .‬فهذه فائدة أخرى من‬
‫فوائد الرجاء‪ ،‬وهي التخلص به من غضب الل ّٰه‪.‬‬

288

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Another is that hope is the caravan leader that goads one to God, and makes
the journey more palatable and encourages him to keep on and adhere to it. If
not for hope, no one would take up this journey, for fear alone does not motivate anyone: it is love that motivates, fear that spurs, and hope that leads.
Another one is that hope throws one at the terrace of love, at its doorstep.
The more he hopes and receives from God what he hopes for, the more his love
for God increases, as do his gratitude for and pleasure with God.
Another is that it motivates him to attain the highest of stations, which is
the station of gratitude, which is summation of all worship, and when what he
hoped for is attained, it becomes a cause for gratitude.
Another is that it increases his awareness of His names and their meanings
and attachment to them. For hope is connected to His names of benevolence
and worship and supplication through them, as the Almighty said, “And God’s
are the beautiful names, so call upon Him through them” [7:180]. Calling upon
Him through His beautiful names ought never to be neglected, as they are the
greatest means by which one can call upon Him, and to find faults with the
station of hope is to abjure worship through these names and calling through
them.
Another one is that love, as stated earlier, cannot be separated from hope;
each of the two expects and strengthens the other.
Another one is that fear requires hope and vice versa, for everyone who
entertains a hope is fearful and every fearful person is hopeful, which is why a
sound attainment of hope makes one’s attainment of fear sound. God Almighty
said, “What is with you that you do not call upon God in awe?” [71:13]. Many of
the exegetes said that the meaning is, Why do you not fear God for His greatness?, and said, Hope here means fear.
In reality, one entails the other, for every hopeful one fears to lose what he
hopes for, and fear without hope is despair and dejection. The Almighty said,
“Say to those who believe to forgive those who do not hope for the Days of God”
[45:14]. They said in its exegesis, “They are those who do not fear God’s afflictions upon them like the afflictions upon those of the nations before them.”
Another one is that if God gives the servant when the servant hopes for
something, it is dearer and sweeter to the servant than if he receives it without
hoping for it. This is one of God’s wisdoms in prescribing for the believers a balance of hope and fear in this world, for their reward and their pleasure with that
reward will be commenSūrate with the level and extent of their fear and hope.
Another one is that God Exalted and Almighty wishes for his servants to
complete all ranks of worship, including humility and humbleness, of reliance
and seeking succor, of fear and hope, of patience and gratitude, and of pleasure
and penitence, and so on. That is why, for instance, God decreed for his servants

‫‪289‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫ومنها أن الرجاء حاٍد يحدو به في سيره إلى الل ّٰه و يطيب له المسير‪ ،‬و يحثه عليه و يبعثه على ملازمته‪.‬‬
‫فلولا الرجاء لما سرى أحد‪ .‬فإن الخوف وحده لا يحرك العبد وإنما يحركه الحب‪ ،‬و يزعجه الخوف‬
‫و يحدوه الرجاء‪.‬‬
‫ومنها أن الرجاء يطرحه على عتبة المحبة و يلقيه في دهليزها‪ .‬فإنهكلما اشتد رجاؤه وحصل له ما‬
‫يرجوه ازداد حبا لً ل ّٰه وشكرا لً ه ورضا ًعنه‪.‬‬
‫ومنها أنه يبعثه على أعلى المقامات وهو مقام الشكر الذي هو خلاصة العبودية‪ .‬فإنه إذا حصل له‬
‫مرجوهكان ذلك أدعى لشكره‪.‬‬
‫ومنها أنه يوجب له المز يد من معرفته بأسمائه ومعانيها والتعلق بها‪ .‬فإن الرجاء تعلق بأسماء الإحسان‬
‫سن َى ف َاْدع ُوه ُ بِه َا﴾ ]الأعراف‪ .[180:‬فلا‬
‫وتعبد بها ودعاء بها‪ ،‬وقد قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َل َِل ّـه ِ اْلَأْسم َاء ُ اْلح ُ ْ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ينبغي أن يعطل دعاؤه بأسماء الإحسان التي هي أعظم ما يدعو بها الداعي‪ .‬فالقدح في مقام الرجاء‬
‫تعطيل لعبودية هذه الأسماء وتعطيل للدعاء بها‪.‬‬
‫ومنها أن المحبة لا تنفك عن الرجاء—كما تقدم—فكل واحد منهما يمد الآخر و يقو يه‪.‬‬
‫ومنها أن الخوف مستلزم للرجاء والرجاء مستلزم للخوف‪ .‬فكل راج خائف وكل خائف راج‪.‬‬
‫جونَ‬
‫ولأجل هذا حسن وقوع الرجاء في موضع يحسن فيه وقوع الخوف‪ .‬قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪َ ﴿ :‬مّا لـ َك ُْم ل َا ترَ ْ ُ‬
‫ل َِل ّـه ِ و َق َار ًا﴾ ]نوح‪ .[13:‬قال كثير من المفسر ين‪ :‬المعنى مالـكم لا تخافون لل ّٰه عظمة؟ قالوا‪ :‬والرجاء بمعنى‬
‫الخوف‪.‬‬
‫والتحقيق‪ :‬أنه ملازم له‪ .‬فكل راج خائف من فوات مرجوه‪ .‬والخوف بلا رجاء يأس وقنوط‪.‬‬
‫جونَ َأ َي ّام َ ال َل ّـه ِ﴾ ]الجاثية‪ .[14:‬قالوا في تفسيرها‪ :‬لا‬
‫ن ل َا يرَ ْ ُ‬
‫ن آم َنوُ ا يغَ ْف ِر ُوا ل َ ِل ّذ ِي َ‬
‫وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬ق ُل ل َّ ِل ّذ ِي َ‬
‫يخافون وقائع الل ّٰه بهم كوقائعه بمن قبلهم من الأمم‪.‬‬
‫ومنها أن العبد إذا تعلق قلبه برجاء ر به فأعطاه ما رجاه‪ ،‬كان ذلك ألطف موقعا ًوأحلى عند العبد‬
‫وأبلغ من حصول ما لم يرجه‪ .‬وهذا أحد الأسباب والحكم في جعل المؤمنين بين الرجاء والخوف في‬
‫هذه الدار‪ .‬فعلى قدر رجائهم وخوفهم يكون فرحهم في القيامة بحصول مرجوهم واندفاع مخوفهم‪.‬‬
‫ومنها أن الل ّٰه سبحانه وتعالى ير يد من عباده تكميل مراتب عبوديته ]من الذل والانكسار والتوكل‬
‫والاستعانة والخوف والرجاء والصبر والشكر والرضى والإنابة وغيرها‪ .‬ولهذا قدر عليه الذنب وابتلاه‬

290

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

the capacity to commit sins and made them indulge in them, in order to perfect
the mode of worship through repentance, which is the dearest of all forms of
worship to Him. Similar is God’s perfection of worship through hope and fear.
Another one is that hoping in God involves waiting, looking for, and expecting God’s grace, all of which lead to the constant connection of the heart with
God, and thus the heart begins to experience the marvelous gardens of divine
names and attributes and take from each his share, as described earlier. If he
neglects or lacks [hope], he would lose his share of the meanings of these
names and attributes. There are many other benefits that that [the seeker] may
derive from his contemplation and reflection. And success is from God.
May God recognize the Shaykh al-Islam [al-Harawī] for his efforts, raise his
ranks and reward him the highest of reward, and gather him and us in the
dwellings of honor. If his seeker (that is, Ibn al-Qayyim himself) could find a
way to avoid objecting to him and his teachings, he would have. Why, when
God has benefited him with his speech, and he has sat before him like a pupil
and he was one of those upon whose hands he was awakened from his sleep?
This is the utmost that can be said on this; whoever has distinction of knowledge should produce it or excuse himself and not rush to reject it. Consider the
difference in rank between Solomon, the prophet of God, God grant him blessing and peace, and the hoopoe, when the latter said, “I have come to know what
you have not” [27:22]; the Shaykh al-Islam [al-Harawī] is not more knowledgeable than the prophet of God nor the objector more ignorant than the hoopoe,
and God alone is sought for help.

2

Levels of Hope

The author of al-Manāzil, God have mercy on him, said,
Hope has three levels. First, hope that stirs the worker to strive hard, bears
pleasure in service, and awakens the dispositions to tolerance by parting
from forbidden things.
That is, it quickens him to do his best to attain what he hopes for, for one who
knows the value of what he seeks, his sacrifice to attain it becomes easy. As for
its giving birth to pleasure in service, the more his heart looks at the fruit to
be attained at the end and the delightful outcome, the more delight it seeks in
it. This is the case of one who hopes for great profit in his voyage for business
and suffers the hardship of the journey for its sake. Whenever he depicts the
outcome to his heart, the hardship becomes easy and he takes delight in it. The

‫‪291‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫به لتكميل مراتب عبوديته[ بالتو بة التي هي من أحب عبوديات عبده إليه‪ .‬فكذلك يكملها بالرجاء‬
‫والخوف‪.‬‬
‫ومنها أن في الرجاء—من الانتظار والترقب والتوقع لفضل الل ّٰه—ما يوجب تعلق القلب بذكره‬
‫ودوام الالتفات إليه بملاحظة أسمائه وصفاته‪ ،‬وتنقل القلب في ر ياضها الأنيقة وأخذه بنصيبه من‬
‫كل اسم وصفة—كما تقدم بيانه‪ ،‬فإذا فني عن ذلك وغاب عنه فاته حظه ونصيبه من معاني هذه‬
‫الأسماء والصفات‪ ،‬إلى فوائد أخرى كثيرة يطالعها من أحسن تأمله وتفكره في استخراجها‪ .‬و بالل ّٰه‬
‫التوفيق‪.‬‬
‫والل ّٰه يشكر لشيخ الإسلام سعيه و يعلي درجته و يجز يه أفضل جزائه‪ ،‬و يجمع بيننا و بينه في محل‬
‫كرامته‪ .‬فلو وجد مريده سعة ً وفسحة ً في ترك الاعتراض عليه واعتراض كلامه لما فعل‪ ،‬كيف وقد‬
‫نفعه الل ّٰه بكلامه وجلس بين يديه مجلس التلميذ من أستاذه وهو أحد من كان على يديه فتحه يقظة ً‬
‫ومناما ً؟‬
‫وهذا غاية جهد المقل في هذا الموضع‪ .‬فمن كان عنده فضل علم فليجد به أو فليعذر ولا يبادر‬
‫تح ِْط ب ِه ِ﴾ ]النمل‪.[22:‬‬
‫ت ب ِم َا ل َْم ُ‬
‫حط ُ‬
‫إلى الإنكار‪ .‬فكم بين الهدهد و بين سليمان نبي الل ّٰه وهو يقول‪َ ﴿ :‬أ َ‬
‫وليس شيخ الإسلام أعلم من نبي الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ولا المعترض عليه بأجهل من هدهد‪ .‬و بالل ّٰه المستعان‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪:‬‬
‫»والرجاء على ثلاث درجات‪ .‬الدرجة الأولى‪ :‬رجاء يبعث العامل على الاجتهاد و يولد التلذذ‬
‫بالخدمة‪ ،‬و يوقظ الطباع للسماحة بترك المناهي«‪.‬‬
‫أي ينشطه لبذل جهده لما يرجوه من ثواب ر به‪ .‬فإن من عرف قدر مطلو به هان عليه ما يبذل‬
‫فيه‪.‬‬
‫وأما توليده للتلذذ بالخدمة فإنهكلما طالع قلبه ثمرها وحسن عاقبتها التذ بها‪ .‬وهذا كحال من يرجو‬
‫الأر باح العظيمة في سفره و يقاسي مشاق السفر لأجلها‪ .‬فكلما صورها لقلبه هانت عليه تلك المشاق‬

292

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

same is true of the true lover, the one who undertakes arduous work for the
sake of the pleasure of his beloved, and whenever he contemplates the fruit
of his happiness with Him and acceptance of his effort, he feels delight. The
stronger a servant’s knowledge that this effort will lead to the desired end, and
the stronger his knowledge of the greatness of the end and the nearness of the
means to it, the greater his delight in seeking it.
As for “awakening the dispositions to tolerance by parting from forbidden
things,” dispositions have customs and forms they require from the servant
and do not permit him to part from them except in return for something that
is more likeable, better, and beneficial. When the connection of hope to this
higher and nobler return becomes strong, human disposition permits parting
from those forms and those customs and forms. The ego does not part from a
thing it loves except for a thing it loves more, or for a fear that is greater than
the original love. Its fleeing from that feared thing is nothing but its preference for its opposite. It does not part from a thing it loves except for a thing
it loves more. If one is presented a meal that causes him harm and sickness,
he gives it up for his love of good health which is dearer to him than that
meal.
The author of al-Manāzil said,
The second level is the hope of those given to disciplining exercises to
attain a place where their concerns are purified by refusing the delights,
adherence to the conditions of knowledge, and exhausting the limits of
protection.
By “those given to disciplining exercises” is meant those who strive to give up
that which is comfortable to their egos for those things that are better and
more wholesome. Their hope is to attain their goal by purifying their time and
determination from adulteration by indulgences, and by adherence to the conditions imposed by knowledge, which is to adhere to the limits of religious commandments, for their hope is dependent on the attainment of that. In “exhausting the limits of protection,” “protection” means protection and defense against
consuming that whose harm is feared in the short or the long term, and it has
limits which, when transgressed, frustrate the attainment of his goal. “Exhausting” of those limits is attained by two things, doing one’s best in acquiring their
knowledge and holding one’s ego to their adherence by way of desire and intention.
He said,

‫‪293‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫والتذ بها‪ .‬وكذلك المحب الصادق الساعي في مراضي محبو به الشاقة عليه‪ ،‬كلما تأمل ثمرة رضاه عنه‬
‫وقبوله سعيه وقر به منه تلذذ بتلك المساعي‪ ،‬وكلما قوي علم العبد بإفضاء ذلك السبب إلى المسبب‬
‫المطلوب وقوي علمه بقدر المسبب وقرب السبب منه ازداد التذاذا ً بتعاطيه‪.‬‬
‫وأما إ يقاظ الطباع للسماحة بترك المناهي‪ ،‬فإن الطباع لها معلوم ورسوم ٺتقاضاها من العبد ولا‬
‫تسمح له بتركها إلا بعوض هو أحب إليها من معلومها ورسومها‪ ،‬وأجل عنده منه وأنفع لها‪ .‬فإذا قوي‬
‫تعلق الرجاء بهذا العوض الأفضل والأشرف سمحت الطباع بترك تلك الرسوم وذلك المعلوم‪ .‬فإن‬
‫النفس لا تترك محبو با ً إلا لمحبوب هو أحب إليها منه أو حذرا ً من مخوف هو أعظم مفسدة لها من‬
‫حصول مصلحتها بذلك المحبوب‪ .‬وفي الحقيقة ففرارها من ذلك المخوف إ يثار لضده المحبوب لها‪ .‬فما‬
‫تركت محبو با إً لا لما هو أحب إليها منه‪ .‬فإن من قدم إليه طعام يضره و يوجب له السقم فإنما يتركه محبة ً‬
‫للعافية التي هي أحب إليه من ذلك الطعام‪.‬‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل‪:‬‬
‫»الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬رجاء أر باب الر ياضات أن يبلغوا موقفا ً تصفو فيه هممهم برفض الملذوذات‪،‬‬
‫ولزوم شروط العلم واستقصاء حدود الحم َ ِية«‪.‬‬
‫أر باب الر ياضات هم المجاهدون لأنفسهم بترك مألوفها والاستبدال بها مألوفات هي خير وأكمل‪.‬‬
‫فرجاؤهم أن يبلغوا مقصودهم بصفاء الوقت والهمة من تعلقها بالملذوذات‪ ،‬وتجر يد الهمم عن‬
‫الالتفات إليها و بلزوم شروط العلم‪ ،‬وهو الوقوف عند حدود الأحكام الدينية‪ .‬فإن رجاءهم متعلق‬
‫بحصول ذلك لهم واستقصاء حدود الحمية‪.‬‬
‫و»الحمية« هي العصمة والامتناع من تناول ما يخشى ضرره آجلا أً و عاجل ًا‪ ،‬ولها حدود متى خرج‬
‫العبد عنها انتقض عليه مطلو به‪ ،‬والوقوف على حدودها بلزوم شروط العلم‪،‬‬
‫والاستقصاء في تلك الحدود بأمرين‪ :‬بذل الجهد في معرفتها علما‪ ً،‬وأخذ النفس بالوقوف عندها‬
‫طلبا ًوقصدا ً‪.‬‬

294

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The third level is the hope of the men of heart, which is the hope of meeting the Truth that rouses the longing, renders this life unsatisfying, and
suffices against the need for the creation.
This is the highest and noblest kind of hope. The Almighty said, “Whosoever,
then, hopes in the meeting of his Lord, let him work righteously” [18:110], and
the Almighty said, “Whosoever hopes for the meeting of God, the time set by
God is near” [29:5].
This hope is pure faith, and its choicest kind, and on it the eyes of the longing
lovers are fixed. This is why God has consoled them by the coming of His meeting and has set a time for it that settles and gives peace to their souls. “Longing”
is the journey of the heart in its quest for the beloved. The lovers differ as to
whether this feeling will survive the meeting of the Beloved or will come to an
end. One group says that it will end, as it is possible only in absence, as it is
the journey of the heart to Him, and when the journey is over, so is the longing, and it turns into intimacy and delight in His nearness. Another group says
that it will instead increase rather than end upon meeting. This is so, they say,
because love increases manifold by witnessing the beauty of the Beloved. For
the power of his annihilation and awe will prevent him from seeing the Beloved
and the longing for Him will persist. This is why it has been said,
The longing is the greatest on the day
When the tents are pitched closest to the tents
We have mentioned this issue and its corollaries exhaustively in our extensive
treatise on love The Garden of Lovers and the Promenade of Those Who Yearn20
and in the book The Journey of the Two Migrations.
We shall return to it when we arrive at its station, God willing.
As for his words “it renders this life unsatisfying”: no doubt, that life of the
lover is unsatisfied until he meets his Beloved and where his eyes find coolness
and its dissatisfaction ends. Similarly, he has no need of the creation, for his
quest is intimacy with and nearness to God, and he is least in need of others
except one who helps him in it, and such a one is the dearest of creation to him.
He finds no one else of the creation worthy of his intimacy nor finds peace with
anyone else. You must strive hard to seek this companion of your struggle, and
if you do not find him, leave all men aside.

20

The reference is to the author’s Rawḍāt al-muḥibbīn, for which see Glossary.

‫‪295‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬رجاء أر باب القلوب‪ .‬وهو رجاء لقاء الحق الباعث على الاشتياق المنغص‬
‫للعيش المزهد في الخلق«‪.‬‬
‫ل‬
‫جو لقِ َاء َ ر َب ِّه ِ ف َليْ عَ ْم َ ْ‬
‫هذا الرجاء أفضل أنواع الرجاء وأعلاها قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬ف َم َن ك َانَ يرَ ْ ُ‬
‫ت﴾‬
‫ل ال َل ّـه ِ ل َآ ٍ‬
‫ن َأج َ َ‬
‫جو لقِ َاء َ ال َل ّـه ِ ف ِ َإ َ ّ‬
‫صاِلحاً﴾ ]الـكهف‪ ،[110:‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬م َن ك َانَ يرَ ْ ُ‬
‫عمَ َل ًا َ‬
‫]العنكبوت‪ .[5:‬وهذا الرجاء هو محض الإ يمان وز بدته وإليه شخصت أبصار المشتاقين‪ .‬ولذلك سلاهم‬
‫الل ّٰه بإتيان أجل لقائه‪ ،‬وضرب لهم أجلا لً ه يسكن نفوسهم و يطمئنها‪.‬‬
‫و»الاشتياق« هو سفر القلب في طلب محبو به‪.‬‬
‫واختلف المحبون‪ ،‬هل يبقى عند لقاء المحبوب أم يزول على قولين‪:‬‬
‫فقالت طائفة‪ :‬يزول لأنه إنما يكون مع الغيبة وهو سفر القلب إليه‪ .‬فإذا انتهى السفر وضع الاشتياق‬
‫عن عاتقه وصار الاشتياق أنسا بً ه ولذة ً بقر به‪.‬‬
‫وقالت طائفة‪ :‬بل يز يد ولا يزول باللقاء‪.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬لأن الحب يقوى بمشاهدة جمال المحبوب أضعاف ما كان حال غيبته وإنما يواري سلطانه‬
‫فناؤه ودهشته بمعاينة محبو به‪ ،‬حتى إذا توارى عنه ظهر سلطان شوقه إليه‪ ،‬ولهذا قيل‪:‬‬

‫وأعظم ما يكون الشوق يوما‬

‫إذا دنت الخيام من الخيام‪.‬‬

‫وقد ذكرنا هذه المسألة مستقصاة ً وتوابعها في كتابنا الـكبير في المحبة‪ ،‬وفي كتاب سفر الهجرتين‪ .‬وسنعود‬
‫إليها إذا انتهينا إلى منزلتها إن شاء الل ّٰه تعالى‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬المنغص للعيش«‪ ،‬فلا ر يب أن عيش المشتاق منغص حتى يلقى محبو به‪ ،‬فهناك تقر عينه‬
‫و يزول عن عيشه تنغيصه‪ .‬وكذلك يزهد في الخلق غاية التزهيد لأن صاحبه طالب للأنس بالل ّٰه والقرب‬
‫منه‪ ،‬فهو أزهد شيء في الخلق إلا من أعانه على هذا المطلوب لقاه منهم وأوصله إليه‪ .‬فهو أحب خلق‬
‫الل ّٰه إليه ولا يأنس من الخلق بغيره ولا يسكن إلى سواه‪ .‬فعليك بطلب هذا الرفيق جهدك‪ ،‬فإن لم‬
‫تظفر به فاتخذ الل ّٰه صاحبا ًودع الناس كلهم جانبا‪ً.‬‬

296

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Die of the ailment of desire, or take a risk
And leave your surrounding as stares follow you
Fear not the loneliness of the path when you come
Take the journey looking for love
Hold your ego from them just for a moment
If it does not respond to patience, be more patient
Fast today and break your fast
On the day you meet the Beloved with the glad tiding, well-pleased
Wean your ego from everything but Him
All life after the weaning is Yours alone
Watch the secrets of your heart and be ashamed
To face God on the day all secrets are tried
Make your worry one, for God is sufficient
For all your worries, your Lord can do all things
Watch out for the day when the creation is called
to God, their Lord, from the bellies of their graves
Listen to where you stand vis-à-vis
The virtue you were shown amidst sermons
And the salient traits of the most distinguished of creation
Evident to everyone who saw him
O wise brother, this voyage is nothing but resolve
Then perseverance, aided by insight
O those three who will receive
The flash of light on the Day of Increase on their thrones
Strive in that which will be said to you, the glad tiding
On that day when the tidings are circulated
Sincere work, good by the standard of revelation
Along with a secret present in your heart

‫‪297‬‬

‫‪chapter 19‬‬

‫مت بداء الهوى وإلا فخاطر‬

‫واطرق الحي والعيون نواظر‬

‫لا تخف وحشة الطر يق إذا جئ‬

‫ت وكن في خفارة الحب سا ئر‬

‫واصبر النفس ساعة عن سواهم‬

‫فإذا لم تجب لصبر فصا بر‬

‫وصم اليوم واجعل الفطر يوما‬

‫فيه تلقى الحبيب بالبشر شاكر‬

‫وافطم النفس عن سواه فكل ال‬

‫عيش بعد الفطام نحوك صا ئر‬

‫وتأمل سر يرة القلب واستح‬

‫ي من الل ّٰه يوم تبلى السرا ئر‬

‫واجعل الهم واحدا يكفك الل ّٰه‬

‫هموما‬

‫شتى‬

‫فر بك‬

‫قادر‬

‫وانتظر يوم دعوة الخلق إلى الل ّٰه‬

‫ر بهم‬

‫من‬

‫بطون‬

‫المقا بر‬

‫واستمع ما الذي به أنت تدعي‬

‫به من صفات تلوح وسط المحاضر‬

‫وسمات تبدو على أوجه الخل‬

‫ق عيانا تجلى على كل ناظر‬

‫يا أخا اللب إنما السير عزم‬

‫بالبصا ئر‬

‫يالها‬

‫ينلها‬

‫يرق يوم المز يد فوق المنا بر‬

‫فاجتهد في الذي يقال لك ال‬

‫بشرى بذا يوم ضرب البشا ئر‬

‫وحي‬

‫مع سر هناك في القلب حاضر‬

‫عمل‬

‫من‬

‫ثلاثة‬

‫خالص‬

‫من‬

‫ثم‬

‫صبر‬

‫مؤ ي د‬

‫بميزان‬

chapter 20

The Station of Desire
Among the stations of “You alone we worship and You alone we supplicate for
help” is the station of desire. God Almighty has said, “And they call upon Us,
desiring and fearing” [21:90]. The difference between hope and desire is that
hope is the drive, while desire is the quest, and it is the fruit of hope, for when
one hopes for something, he seeks it. Desire is to hope what fleeing is to fear,
for one flees from what one fears.
The author of al-Manāzil said,
Desire, in reality, is from hope, for hope is a craving that needs actualizing,
and desire is the path to that actualization.
That is, desire is born of hope, but it is a kind of craving and consists of a path of
conduct and quest. His saying, “hope is a craving that needs actualizing,” means
craving for what he lacks and is unsure about its attainment, even if it is a reality
beyond doubt. For instance, the servant’s hope to enter the Garden; the Garden
itself is a reality without doubt, and doubt only attaches to his entering into it,
fearing that he will meet his Lord with works that will prevent him from entering it. In contrast, desire attaches to only those things that exist in actuality; his
faith in the state of desire, therefore, is stronger than in the state of hope, which
is why he said, “desire is the path to that actualization.” This is the meaning of
his statement.
This, however, is open to debate. For desire too is the quest for that which is
absent and of whose attainment one is unsure; a believer longs for entering the
Garden and is uncertain whether he will. The correct distinction between the
two, then, is that hope is a craving whereas desire is a quest; when the craving
becomes strong, it becomes a quest.
He said,
Desire is of three ranks. First, the desiring of the people of report that is
born of knowledge and that incites diligence that is dependent on witnessing, it protects the seeker against the weakness of exhaustion, and
prevents him from receding into licenses.
By “report” he means the faith that comes from reports, which is why he made
its source knowledge. But this faith is connected to the station of excellence,

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬الرغبة«‪.‬‬
‫قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َي َْدع ُون َن َا ر َغ َب ًا و َر َهبَ ًا﴾ ]الأنبياء‪ .[90:‬والفرق بين الرجاء والرغبة أن الرجاء‬
‫طمع‪ ،‬والرغبة طلب فهي ثمرة الرجاء‪ ،‬فإنه إذا رجا الشيء طلبه‪ .‬والرغبة من الرجاء كالهرب من‬
‫الخوف‪ ،‬فمن رجا شيئا ًطلبه ورغب فيه ومن خاف شيئا ًهرب منه‪.‬‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل‪:‬‬
‫»الرغبة هي من الرجاء بالحقيقة‪ ،‬لأن الرجاء طمع يحتاج إلى تحقيق‪ ،‬والرغبة سلوك على‬
‫التحقيق«‪ .‬أي الرغبة ٺتولد من الرجاء لـكنه طمع‪ .‬وهي سلوك وطلب‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬الرجاء طمع يحتاج إلى تحقيق«‪ ،‬أي طمع في مغيب عنه مشكوك في حصوله وإن كان‬
‫متحققا ًفي نفسه‪ ،‬كرجاء العبد دخول الجنة‪ .‬فإن الجنة متحققة لا شك فيها وإنما الشك في دخوله‬
‫إليها‪ ،‬وهل يوافي ر به بعمل يمنعه منها أم لا‪ .‬بخلاف الرغبة‪ ،‬فإنها لا تكون إلا بعد تحقيق ما يرغب‬
‫فيه‪ .‬فالإ يمان في الرغبة أقوى منه في الرجاء‪ ،‬فلذلك قال‪» :‬والرغبة سلوك على التحقيق«‪.‬‬
‫هذا معنى كلامه وفيه نظر‪.‬‬
‫فإن الرغبة أيضا طلب مغيب‪ ،‬هو على شك من حصوله‪ .‬فإن المؤمن يرغب في الجنة وليس بجازم‬
‫بدخولها‪ .‬فالفرق الصحيح أن الرجاء طمع والرغبة طلب‪ ،‬فإذا قوي الطمع صار طلبا‪ً.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬والرغبة على ثلاث درجات‪ .‬الدرجة الأولى‪ :‬رغبة أهل الخـبر ٺتولد من العلم‪ ،‬فتبعث على‬
‫الاجتهاد المنوط بالشهود‪ ،‬وتصون السالك عن وهن الفترة‪ ،‬وتمنع صاحبها من الرجوع إلى غثاثة‬
‫الرخص«‪.‬‬
‫أراد بالخـبر هاهنا الإ يمان الصادر عن الأخبار‪ ،‬ولهذا جعل تولدها من العلم‪ .‬ولـكن هذا الإ يمان‬
‫متصل بمنزلة الإحسان منه يشرف عليه‪ ،‬و يصل إليه‪ .‬ولهذا قال‪» :‬المنوط بالشهود« أي المقترن‬

300

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

such that he studies the latter from the vantage point of the former and attains
it. This is why he said “it is dependent on witnessing,” that is, it accompanies
witnessing, and the object of that experience is the station of excellence, which
is that you worship God as if you see Him, and there is no experience for the
servant in this world loftier than that.
True, the praiseworthy annihilation is precisely the actualization of the station of excellence, which is that through his love, fear, hope, reliance, worship,
and devotion to Him to the exclusion of all else, one is annihilated. There is no
station above this, only obstructions on the path.
His saying, “It safeguards the seeker from the weakness of exhaustion,”
means protecting him from fatigue and laziness that is caused by the absence
or deficiency of desire.
His saying, “It prevents him from receding into licenses”1 [means] the people of resolve are committed to putting their best effort and sincerity, and
relying on licenses on their part would be tantamount to receding and laziness.
This issue needs explication, as [this statement] is not true without qualification. For God Almighty loves that His licenses be accepted just as He loves that
His commands be observed with exactitude. A report in al-Musnad [of Aḥmad]
on the authority of the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, has it, “God
loves that His licenses be taken just as He detests to be disobeyed.”2 He thus
made the taking of licenses the opposite of partaking in sin, making one the
cause of love and the other of dislike. Also, “No two matters were posed to the
Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, but that he opted for the easier of
them so long as it was not sin.”3 Accepting the license, clearly, is easier than the
original form. This is how he conducted himself in breaking the fast, traveling,
combining his prayers and shortening four-unit prayers to their halves, and so
on.
We say, therefore, that the taking of license is of two kinds. The first is that
which is established and known from the divine law through a clear text, such
as the eating of carrion, blood, and pork at the time of dire necessity, and even
if it is said that doing these things is the original, required form since it is the
command and it is a duty, it is still a license inasmuch as it is essentially a permission and relaxation of the original rule [of prohibition]. In addition, the
abstention of the sickly and the traveler from fasting, shortening the prayers
during a journey and the prayer of the sick sitting when standing up is hard for
him, and the abstention of the pregnant and nursing women for fear of their

1 In Islamic Law, a license (rukhṣa) allows one to suspend or ease a legal ruling based under

‫‪301‬‬

‫‪chapter 20‬‬

‫بالشهود‪ .‬وذلك الشهود هو مشهد مقام الإحسان‪ .‬وهو أن تعبد الل ّٰه كأنك تراه‪ ،‬ولا مشهد للعبد في‬
‫الدنيا أعلى من هذا‪.‬‬
‫وعند كثير من الصوفية أن فوقه مشهدا ً أعلى منه‪ ،‬وهو شهود الحق مع غيبته عن كل ما سواه‪.‬‬
‫وهو مقام الفناء وقد عرفت ما فيه‪.‬‬
‫ولو كان فوق مقام الإحسان مقام آخر لذكره النبي ﷺ لجـبر يل ولسأله عنه‪ .‬فإنه جمع مقامات‬
‫الدين كلها في الإسلام والإ يمان والإحسان‪.‬‬
‫نعم‪ ،‬الفناء المحمود هو تحقيق مقام الإحسان‪ .‬أن يفنى بحبه وخوفه ورجائه‪ ،‬والتوكل عليه‬
‫وعبادته‪ ،‬والتبتل إليه عن غيره‪ .‬وليس فوق ذلك مقام يطلب إلا ما هو من عوارض الطر يق‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬وتصون السالك عن وهن الفترة«‪ ،‬أي تحفظه عن ضعف فتوره وكسله الذي سببه عدم‬
‫الرغبة أو قلتها‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬وتمنع صاحبها من الرجوع إلى غثاثه الرخص«‪.‬‬
‫أهل العزائم بناء أمرهم على الجد والصدق‪ .‬والسكون منهم إلى الرخص رجوع و بطالة‪.‬‬
‫وهذا موضع يحتاج إلى تفصيل‪ ،‬ليس على إطلاقه‪ .‬فإن الل ّٰه عز وجل يحب أن يؤخذ برخصهكما‬
‫يحب أن يؤخذ بعزائمه‪ .‬وفي المسند مرفوعا إً لى النبي ﷺ‪» :‬إن الل ّٰه يحب أن يؤخذ برخصهكما يكره أن تؤتى‬
‫معصيته«‪ .‬فجعل الأخذ بالرخص قبالة إتيان المعاصي‪ ،‬وجعل حظ هذه المحبة َ‪ .‬وحظ هذه الـكراهية َ‪،‬‬
‫و»ما عرض للنبي ﷺ أمران إلا اختار أيسرهما‪ ،‬ما لم يكن إثما ً«‪ .‬والرخصة أيسر من العز يمة‪ ،‬وهكذا‬
‫كانت حاله في فطره وسفره وجمعه بين الصلاتين‪ ،‬والاقتصار من الر باعية على شطرها وغير ذلك‪.‬‬
‫فنقول‪ :‬الرخصة نوعان‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما الرخصة المستقرة المعلومة من الشرع نصا‪ ً،‬كأكل الميتة والدم ولحم الخـنز ير عند الضرورة‪،‬‬
‫وإن قيل لها عزيمة باعتبار الأمر والوجوب‪ .‬فهي رخصة باعتبار الإذن والتوسعة‪ .‬وكفطر المر يض‬
‫والمسافر وقصر الصلاة في السفر‪ ،‬وصلاة المر يض إذا شق عليه القيام قاعدا ً‪ ،‬وفطر الحامل والمرضع‬

‫‪certain circumstances. In Sufism, however, it refers to dispensations in the ethical or spiritual‬‬
‫‪domain that are usually utilized by the weaker initiates. See R. Peters and J. Haar, “Rukhṣa” in‬‬
‫‪EI2.‬‬
‫‪2 Aḥmad 2:108.‬‬
‫‪3 Bukhārī #3560; Muslim #2327.‬‬

302
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
children, and marrying the slave-girl for fear of the difficulty [of marrying a
free woman], and the like. There is nothing in the pursuit of these licenses that
weakens his desire, causes recession, or retards his quest or will whatsoever.
For some of it is an obligation, such as the eating of carrion in the time of dire
need; and some of it is preferred in its benefit, such as the abstention of the
sick from fasting, and the same in addition to the shortening of the prayers
for the traveler; and some of it is beneficial for the one taking the license as
well as for others, thus including two benefits, one to the ego and the other to
others, such as the abstention of the pregnant and nursing women from fasting.
The partaking of these licenses is more beneficial and preferred than leaving
them.
The second kind are the licenses that come from [incorrect] interpretations of the texts and differences among schools, and to follow such is prohibited and indeed the cause of deficiency in longing and weakness of the
quest, and recession of the one who indulges in them. This includes those
who accept the license of the people of Mecca in [the exchange of] currency,
the people of Iraq in drinking [of nabīdh, an alcoholic drink], the people of
Medina in permitting the eating [of worms, black beetle, cockroaches, beetle, mice, geckos, chameleons, rats, scorpions, and snakes, etc.], the people
of casuistic stratagems in transactions, the saying attributed to Ibn ʿAbbās in
temporary marriages, the flesh of donkeys, the opinion that permits marrying
prostitutes known for their prostitution, marriage to a harlot, and the playing of lute, drums, and flute, and the opinion of those who permit singing,
the saying of those who permit sharing one’s slave girl for intercourse, and
the opinion that permits a fasting person to eat snow on the ground that it
is neither food nor drink, and the opinion that permits eating [while fasting] between dawn and sunrise, and the opinion that permits praying by “two
[gardens of] dark green” [55:64] in Persian language, and [permits praying
in haste,] bowing like the wink of an eye, standing up quickly like the edge
of a sword, without properly standing up, sitting up between two prostrations in similar haste, without reciting the testimony or invoking blessings
upon the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, completing the prayer
in a rush, the opinion that permits anal intercourse with women, and marrying a woman who is one’s daughter, from his issue, if she was born from an
illicit intercourse [on the ground that an illicit act does not affect a licit relationship], and other such licentious opinions in various schools. Such are the
kind of licenses that decrease one’s longing for the path, weaken the search,
and retard his progress on the path. This is entirely different from the first
kind.

‫‪303‬‬

‫‪chapter 20‬‬

‫خوفا ً على ولديهما‪ ،‬ونكاح الأمة خوفا ً من العنت ونحو ذلك‪ .‬فليس في تعاطي هذه الرخص ما‬
‫يوهن رغبته ولا يرد إلى غثاثة ولا ينقص طلبه وإرادته البتة‪ .‬فإن منها ما هو واجب كأكل الميتة عند‬
‫الضرورة‪ ،‬ومنها ما هو راجح المصلحةكفطر المر يض وقصر المسافر وفطره‪ ،‬ومنها ما مصلحته للمترخص‬
‫وغيره‪ ،‬ففيه مصلحتان‪ ،‬قاصرة ومتعدية‪ ،‬كفطر الحامل والمرضع‪ .‬ففعل هذه الرخص أرجح وأفضل‬
‫من تركها‪.‬‬
‫النوع الثاني‪ :‬رخص التأو يلات واختلاف المذاهب‪ .‬فهذه ٺتبعها حرام ينقص الرغبة و يوهن‬
‫الطلب و يرجع بالمترخص إلى غثاثة الرخص‪.‬‬
‫فإن من ترخص بقول أهل مكة في الصرف‪ ،‬وأهل العراق في الأشر بة‪ ،‬وأهل المدينة في الأطعمة‪،‬‬
‫وأصحاب الحيل في المعاملات‪ ،‬وقول ا بن عباس في المتعة‪ ،‬وإباحة لحوم الحمر‪ ،‬وقول من جوز نكاح‬
‫البغايا المعروفات بالبغاء‪ ،‬وجوز أن يكون زوج قحبة‪ ،‬وقول من أباح آلات اللهو والمعازف من اليراع‬
‫والطنبور والعود والطبل والمزمار‪ ،‬وقول من أباح الغناء‪ ،‬و]قول من جوز استعارة الجواري الحسان‬
‫للوطء[‪ ،‬وقول من جوز للصائم أكل البرد وقال‪ :‬ليس بطعام ولا شراب‪ ،‬وقول من جوز الأكل ما‬
‫ن﴾ ]الرحمان‪[64:‬‬
‫بين طلوع الفجر وطلوع الشمس للصائم‪ .‬وقول من صحح الصلاة ب ﴿م ُْدهاَ َمّت َا ِ‬
‫بالفارسية وركع كلحظة الطرف‪ ،‬ثم فصل كحد السيف‪ ،‬ثم هوى من غير اعتدال ]وفصل بين‬
‫السجدتين بارتفاع كحد السيف ولم يتشهد[ ولم يصل على النبي ﷺ‪ ،‬وخرج من الصلاة بحبقة وقول‬
‫من جوز وطء النساء في أعجازهن‪ ،‬ونكاح بنته المخلوقة من مائه الخارجة من صلبه حقيقة ً‪ .‬إذا كان‬
‫ذلك الحمل من زنا وأمثال ذلك من رخص المذاهب وأقوال العلماء المرجوحة‪ ،‬فهذا الذي ينقص‬
‫ترخصه ورغبته و يوهن طلبه و يلقيه في غثاثة الرخص‪ .‬فهذا لون والأول لون‪.‬‬

304

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

He said,
The second level is the desire of those who have attained experiential
states, and it is a desire that leaves no stone unturned, no slack in the
determination, and no hope other than the desired goal.
That is, the desire that is attained by men of spiritual states is beyond that
attained by the people of report, for the former no longer chooses but is compelled toward his object of desire and will, like moths to a flame. His desire is
such that he puts forth absolutely every last ounce of effort into attaining it, and
his determination suffers from no fatigue or dampening; his resolve increases
with every breath. His heart can hold nothing but that which he desires, overwhelmed as he is by his experiential state.
The one who attains such a state cannot be deterred by anything other than
a stronger state; if uninterrupted by such a state, he remains under the effect of
this state.
He said,
The third level is the desire of those who witness, which is an encounter
accompanied by dissimulation, to which he is carried by unadulterated
resolve, and with it there remains no separation.
The Shaykh, God have mercy on him, alludes here to the state of annihilation
that is attained through purification from attention to any other than the Truth
until there remains no separation, rather, the witness is lost and only the witnessed remains.
By witnessing he means the witnessing of reality.
By encounter he means encountering the unseen in the state of annihilation.
By dissimulation that accompanies this encounter, he may mean abstaining
from publicly divulging one’s inner state, protecting and guarding it jealously.
He may also mean caution against attending to anything other than the presence of the witnessed; he fears such a distraction to the utmost.
He then mentions what causes such a desire, and it is a subtle, longing sense
that has been purified before attaining this end, and it is the purified determination; if not purified, there remains in it something that will prevent it from
attaining this level.
God the Exalted knows best.

‫‪305‬‬

‫‪chapter 20‬‬

‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬رغبة أر باب الحال‪ .‬وهي رغبة لا تبقي من المجهود مبذولا‪ ً،‬ولا تدع للهمة‬
‫ذبول ًا‪ ،‬ولا تترك غير القصد مأمولا ً«‪.‬‬
‫يعني أن الرغبة الحاصلة لأر باب الحال فوق رغبة أصحاب الخـبر‪ ،‬لأن صاحب الحال كالمضطر‬
‫إلى رغبته وإرادته‪ ،‬فهو كالفراش الذي إذا رأى النور ألقى نفسه فيه ولا يبالي ما أصابه‪ .‬فرغبته لا‬
‫تدع من مجهوده مقدورا لً ه إلا بذله‪ ،‬ولا تدع لهمته وعزيمته فترة ً ولا خمودا ً‪ .‬فهمته وعزيمته في مزيد‬
‫بعدد الأنفاس‪ ،‬ولا تترك في قلبه نصيبا لً غير مقصوده‪ ،‬وذلك لغلبة سلطان الحال‪.‬‬
‫وصاحب هذه الحال لا يقاومه إلا حال مثل حاله أو أقوى منه‪ .‬ومتى لم تصادفه حال تعارضه‬
‫فله من النفوذ والتأثير بحسب حاله‪.‬‬
‫ف تصحبه تقية‪ ،‬وتحمله عليها همة نقية‪ ،‬لا تبقي‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬رغبة أهل الشهود‪ .‬وهي تش ُر ّ ٌ‬
‫معه من التفرق بقية«‪.‬‬
‫يشير الشيخ—رحمه الل ّٰه—بذلك إلى حالة الفناء التي يحمله عليها همة ً نقية ً من أدناس الالتفات إلى‬
‫ما سوى الحق‪ ،‬بحيث لا يبقى معه بقية ً من تفرقة‪ .‬بل قد اجتمع شاهدهكله وانحصر في مشهوده‪.‬‬
‫وأراد بالشهود هاهنا شهود الحقيقة‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬تشرف« أي استشراف للغيبة في الفناء‪ .‬و يحتمل أن ير يد به تشرفا ًعن التفاته إلى ما سوى‬
‫مشهوده‪.‬‬
‫و»التقية« التي تصحب هذا التشرف‪ ،‬يحتمل أن ير يد بها التقية من إظهار الناس على حاله‬
‫واطلاعهم عليها‪ ،‬صيانة ً لها وغيرة ً عليها‪ .‬و يحتمل أن ير يد بها الحذر من التفاته في شهوده إلى ما سوى‬
‫حضرة مشهوده‪ .‬فهو يتقي ذلك الالتفات و يحذرهكل الحذر‪.‬‬
‫ثم ذكر الحامل له على هذه الرغبة‪ ،‬وهي اللطيفة المدركة المر يدة التي قد تطهرت قبل وصولها إلى‬
‫هذه الغاية‪ .‬وهي الهمة النقية‪ ،‬ولو لم يحصل لها كمال الطهارة لبقيت عليها بقية منها تمنعها من وصولها‬
‫إلى هذه الدرجة‪ .‬والل ّٰه سبحانه وتعالى أعلم‪.‬‬

chapter 21

The Station of Shepherding
Among the stations of “You we worship and You we supplicate for help” is the
station of shepherding.
It means the shepherding of knowledge and its protection through works,
the shepherding of works through excellence and sincerity and their protection
from pollution, and the shepherding of the experiential state through adherence to the law and protecting it from the interruption of separation. Shepherding, then, is to safeguard and protect.
The ranks of knowledge and action are three. The first is transmission, which
is mere reporting and conveying that which has been reported. [The second is]
comprehension, which is grasping its meanings, and finally shepherding, which
is practicing what that knowledge requires.
The concern of the reporters is transmission, that of the scholars is comprehension, and that of the knowers is fulfilment.
God Almighty has censured those who do not truly live even by acts of worship or renunciation they have imposed upon themselves, as He Almighty says,
Then we continued their legacy with Our messengers, and continued with
Jesus, son of Mary, and gave him the Gospel, and made in the hearts of
those who followed him compassion and mercy and monasticism that
they invented and that We had not obligated upon them, seeking only
God’s good pleasure—except that they did not fulfil it as was its due.
[56:27]
“Monasticism” here is subjunctive to “they invented it,” either to this very verb,
according to the Kufans, or another omitted verb explained by this verb, according to the Basrans. That is, “they invented monasticism,” not “We made in their
hearts [monasticism],” for the proper pause in recitation is after “compassion
and mercy,” then [the new sentence] begins with “and monasticism that they
invented,” which means He did not make it a duty upon them, it is they, rather,
who invented it from their own will.
In the subjunction of His saying, “Then we continued their legacy,”1 there are
three possibilities.
1 This seems to be an error; the discussion that follows in fact pertains to the phrase: [illā]
ibtighāʾa riḍwān illāh, which is in the subjunctive mood.

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬الرعاية«‪.‬‬
‫وهي مراعاة العلم وحفظه بالعمل‪ ،‬ومراعاة العمل بالإحسان والإخلاص وحفظه من‬
‫المفسدات‪ ،‬ومراعاة الحال بالموافقة وحفظه بقطع التفر يق‪ .‬فالرعاية صيانة وحفظ‪.‬‬
‫ومراتب العلم والعمل ثلاثة‪» :‬رواية« وهي مجرد النقل وحمل المروي‪ ،‬و»دراية« وهي فهمه وتعقل‬
‫معناه‪ ،‬و»رعاية« وهي العمل بموجب ما عمله ومقتضاه‪.‬‬
‫فالنقلة همتهم الرواية والعلماء همتهم الدراية والعارفون همتهم الرعاية‪ .‬وقد ذم الل ّٰه تعالى من لم يرع ما‬
‫سل ِن َا و َقفَ ّي ْن َا بعِ يِ س َى ا ب ِْن‬
‫اختاره وابتدعه من الرهبانية حق رعايته‪ .‬فقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬ث ُ َم ّ قفَ ّي ْن َا ع َلىَ آثاَ رِه ِم برِ ُ ُ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫كت َب ْن َاهاَ ع َليَ ْه ِْم‬
‫ن ا َت ّب َع ُوه ُ ر َ ْأفةَ ً و َر َْحم َة ً و َر َه ْب َان َيِ ّة ً اب ْت َد َع ُوهاَ م َا َ‬
‫ب ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫جع َلنْ َا ف ِي ق ُلوُ ِ‬
‫ل وَ َ‬
‫م َْري َم َ و َآت َي ْن َاه ُ اْلِإنج ِي َ‬
‫حَّق رِع َايتَ ِه َا﴾ ]الحديد‪ ،[27:‬و»رهبانية ً« منصوب »بابتدعوها« على‬
‫ن ال َل ّـه ِ ف َم َا ر َع َو ْهاَ َ‬
‫ضو َا ِ‬
‫ِإ َلّا اب ْتغِ َاء َ رِ ْ‬
‫الاشتغال‪ .‬إما بنفس الفعل المذكور ]على قول الـكوفيين—وإما بمقدر محذوف مفسر بهذا المذكور[‬
‫على قول البصر يين—أي وابتدعوا رهبانية ً‪ ،‬وليس منصو با بً وقوع الجعل عليه‪ .‬فالوقف التام عند قوله‪:‬‬
‫﴿ر َ ْأفةَ ً و َر َْحم َة ً﴾‪ ،‬ثم يبتديء‪﴿ :‬و َر َه ْب َان َيِ ّة ً اب ْت َد َع ُوهاَ ﴾ أي لم يشرعها لهم‪] ،‬بل هم ابتدعوها من عند‬
‫أنفسهم ولم يكتبها عليهم[‪.‬‬
‫وفي نصب قوله‪﴿ :‬ث ُ َم ّ قفَ ّي ْن َا ع َلىَ آثاَ رِه ِم﴾ ]ثلاثة أوجه‪:‬‬
‫ٰ‬

308

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

First, it is its object, thus: “We did not prescribe it upon them except to seek
God’s pleasure,” and this is invalid; for He did not prescribe it upon them: why,
when He informed them that they invented it. It was invented, not prescribed.
Furthermore, the object of reason (i.e., the cause of the act) must be deemed
the cause of the act of the subject mentioned closest to it [which, in this case
is, “they invented it”], thus uniting the cause and the purpose. Such as saying,
“I stood up, honoring him,” the one who stands, then, is the one who gives the
honor. Here, the act whose cause is being given is “the prescription” whereas
the purpose is “seeking God’s pleasure;” the latter being their act, not God’s. It
is not proper, therefore, that “the act of prescribing” be attributed to God.
[Second,] it has been said that it is a substitution of the object of “we prescribed it,” meaning, “We did not prescribe upon them except that they seek
God’s pleasure.” This too is invalid, for “the seeking of God’s pleasure” is not
identical to “monasticism,” for it to qualify as substitute, or a partial substitute,
or a substitute of part of the original.2
The correct opinion is that it is subjunctive due to being a severed exception. That is, they did not do it or invent it except in quest of God’s pleasure.
This is evidenced by the following of “they invented it” with the mention of the
motivation that caused them to invent this monasticism, which is the quest for
God’s pleasure.
Next, He reprimands them for failing to fulfill it. For if one obligates upon
himself some form of worship not originally required but only for the purpose
of getting closer to God, fulfilling it and living by it becomes incumbent. That
is why many of the jurists have considered it an obligation to complete acts
that are voluntarily undertaken, just like the shepherding of vows. This is the
opinion of Abū Ḥanīfa, Mālik, and Aḥmad in one of the two reports from him.
They say that the obligation from having initiated an act is stronger than the
obligation that comes from merely vowing to do it, and just as the shepherding
of the vows that one has undertaken is an obligation, so is he obligated to fulfill
and complete the act of worship he has started.
This is not the occasion to exhaustively discuss this issue.
The point is that God the Exalted has reprimanded those who fail to fulfill a
devotion that one invented in order to draw near to God; all the more blameworthy is, therefore, one who fails to fulfill the devotional acts that God has
made a duty and is pleased with.

2 That is, the verse says, “and monasticism they invented We did not prescribe it upon them
except seeking God’s pleasure”: for the second option to be correct, the reference of “it” would
have to mean both “monasticism” as well as “seeking God’s pleasure,” which is absurd.

‫‪309‬‬

‫‪chapter 21‬‬

‫أحدها‪ :‬أنه مفعول له‪ ،‬أي لم يكتبها عليهم إلا ابتغاء رضوان الل ّٰه[‪ ،‬وهذا فاسد‪ .‬فإنه لم يكتبها عليهم‬
‫سبحانه‪ .‬كيف وقد أخبر أنهم هم ابتدعوها؟ فهي مبتدعة غير مكتو بة‪ .‬وأيضا ً فإن المفعول لأجله‬
‫يجب أن يكون علة ً لفعل الفاعل المذكور معه‪ ،‬فيتحد السبب والغاية‪ ،‬نحو‪ :‬قمت إكراما لً ه‪ .‬فالقائم هو‬
‫المكرم وفعل الفاعل المعلل هاهنا هو »الكتابة«‪ ،‬و»ابتغاء رضوان الل ّٰه« فعلهم لا فعل الل ّٰه‪ .‬فلا يصلح‬
‫أن يكون علة ً لفعل الل ّٰه لاختلاف الفاعل‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬هو بدل من مفعول »كتبناها«‪ ،‬أي ما كتبنا عليهم إلا ابتغاء رضوان الل ّٰه‪ .‬وهو فاسد أيضا‪ً،‬‬
‫إذ ليس ابتغاء رضوان الل ّٰه عين الرهبانية‪ ،‬فيكون بدل الشيء من الشيء‪ ،‬ولا بعضها فيكون بدل بعض‬
‫من كل‪ ،‬ولا أحدهما مشتمل على الآخر‪ ،‬فيكون بدل اشتمال وليس بدل غلط‪.‬‬
‫فالصواب أنه منصوب نصب الاستثناء المنقطع‪ .‬أي لم يفعلوها ولم يبتدعوها إلا لطلب رضوان‬
‫الل ّٰه‪ .‬ودل على هذا قول »ابتدعوها«‪ ،‬ثم ذكر الحامل لهم والباعث على ابتداع هذه الرهبانية‪ ،‬وأنه‬
‫طلب رضوانه تعالى‪ .‬ثم ذمهم بترك رعايتها إذ من التزم لل ّٰه شيئا ً لم يلُزمه الل ّٰه إ ياه من أنواع القرب‬
‫لزمه رعايته وإتمامه‪ ،‬حتى ألزم كثير من الفقهاء من شرع في طاعة مستحبة بإتمامها‪ ،‬وجعلوا التزامها‬
‫بالشروع كالتزامها بالنذر‪ ،‬كما قاله أبو حنيفة ومالك وأحمد في إحدى الروايتين عنه‪ ،‬وهو إجماع—أو‬
‫كالإجماع—في أحد النسكين‪.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬والالتزام بالشروع أقوى من الالتزام بالقول‪ .‬فكما يجب عليه رعاية ما التزمه ]بالنذر وفاء ً‪،‬‬
‫يجب عليه رعاية ما التزمه[ بالفعل إتماما‪ ً.‬وليس هذا موضع استقصاء هذه المسألة‪.‬‬
‫والقصد أن الل ّٰه سبحانه ذم من لم يرع قر بة ً ابتدعها لل ّٰه حق رعايتها‪ ،‬فكيف بمن لم يرع قر بة ً شرعها‬
‫الل ّٰه ورضيها لعباده‪.‬‬

310
1

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Levels of Shepherding

The author of al-Manāzil said,
Shepherding is the guarding of attention. It has three levels. First, shepherding of deeds, second, shepherding of states, and third, shepherding
of time.
The shepherding of deeds is attained through economizing them by
belittling them, upholding them without looking at them, and conducting them upon knowledge rather than adorning oneself with them.
“Guarding of attention” means protecting one’s focus and fulfilling the rights of
the thing that one seeks to fulfill; this is whence the word for shepherd comes.
As for his statement “shepherding of deeds is by economizing them through
belittling them,” economizing here means soundness from the two extremes
of deficiency and excess, on the way legislated, fulfilling its limits, attributes,
conditions, and times.
“Belittling them” means to see them as being of little value, insufficient, for
what behooves the greatness and magnificence of God is a worship of a different tenor altogether, knowing that one has failed to fulfill His right, and that
He is never pleased with his deeds or anything else that he has prepared for his
Lord.
It has been said that the sign of God’s good pleasure towards you is your
displeasure toward your ego, and the sign of acceptance of your deeds is your
belittling of them, so much so that the true knower repents right after his act of
obedience. The Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, used to
seek God’s forgiveness thrice after obligatory prayers. Similarly, God has commanded His servants to seek forgiveness after performing the Pilgrimage, and
has praised His servants for seeking forgiveness in the early morning after a
night of worship, and the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, has legislated for the Community the seeking of repentance and forgiveness after acts
of purification. Whosoever witnesses the right of his Lord against the measure
of his works and the flaws of his soul is compelled to seek forgiveness of Him
and belittle himself.
As for “upholding them,” that means upholding its rights, making them hold
up like a testimony is upheld, or the prayer is upheld, or how a tree holds up
on its stem, rather than one that lays fallen to the ground. His saying “without
looking at them” means without focusing on his works, counting and remembering them, out of fear of self-admiration and boastfulness, causing one to fall
from the eyes of God and losing one’s works.

‫‪311‬‬

‫‪chapter 21‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪:‬‬
‫»الرعاية صون بالعناية‪ ،‬وهي على ثلاث درجات‪ .‬الدرجة الأولى رعاية الأعمال‪ .‬والثانية رعاية‬
‫الأحوال‪ .‬والثالثة رعاية الأوقات‪ .‬فأما رعاية الأعمال فتوفيرها بتحقيرها‪ ،‬والقيام بها من غير نظر إليها‪،‬‬
‫وإجراؤها على مجرى العلم لا على التز ين بها«‪.‬‬
‫أما قوله‪» :‬صون بالعناية« أي حفظ بالاعتناء‪ ،‬والقيام بحق الشيء الذي يرعاه‪ ،‬ومنه راعي الغنم‪.‬‬
‫أما قوله‪» :‬رعاية الأعمال‪ ،‬فتوفيرها بتحقيرها«‪ ،‬فالتوفير سلامة من طرفي التفر يط بالنقص‪،‬‬
‫والإفراط بالز يادة على الوجه المشروع في حدودها وصفاتها وشروطها وأوقاتها‪.‬‬
‫وأما تحقيرها‪ ،‬فاستصغارها في عينه واستقلالها‪ .‬وأن ما يليق بعظمة الل ّٰه وجلاله وحقوق عبوديته‬
‫أمر آخر‪ ،‬وأنه لم يوفه حقهن وأنه لا يرضى لر به بعمله ولا بشيء منه‪.‬‬
‫وقد قيل‪ :‬علامة رضا الل ّٰه عنك سخطك على نفسك‪ .‬وعلامة قبول عملك احتقاره واستقلاله وصغره‬
‫في قلبك‪ .‬حتى إن العارف ليستغفر الل ّٰه عقيب طاعاته‪ .‬وقد كان رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ إذا سلم من الصلاة‬
‫استغفر الل ّٰه ثلاثا‪ ً.‬وأمر الل ّٰه عباده بالاستغفار عقيب الحج‪ ،‬ومدحهم على الاستغفار عقيب قيام الليل‬
‫بالأسحار‪ .‬وشرع النبي ﷺ عقيب الطهور التو بة والاستغفار‪.‬‬
‫فمن شهد واجب ر به ومقدار عمله وعيب نفسه لم يجد بدا ً من استغفار ر به منه واحتقاره إ ياه‬
‫واستصغاره‪.‬‬
‫وأما »القيام بها« فهو توفيتها حقها وجعلها قائمة ًكالشهادة القائمة والصلاة القائمة والشجرة القائمة‬
‫على ساقها التي ليست ساقطة ً‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬من غير نظر إليها«‪ ،‬أي من غير أن يلتفت إليها و يعددها و يذكرها مخافة العجب والمنة بها‪.‬‬
‫فيسقط من عين الل ّٰه وتحبط أعماله‪.‬‬

312

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

His words, “conducting them upon knowledge rather than adorning oneself
with them” means that one’s conduct must be in adherence to the knowledge
taken from the niche of prophethood, in total sincerity, seeking His face and
pleasure, not to look good before people.
He then said,
The shepherding of the states means one counts one’s striving hard as
ostentation, certitude as hollow, and one’s state merely a claim.
That is, he questions his soul in its hard work, for perhaps it is only to show off
to people, and so one must not become rebellious on account of his works, nor
feel settled and assured. As for his certitude being a hollow claim: tashabbuʿ
means to take pride in what one has not done [or given in charity], and the
Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, has a saying,
He who makes a hollow claim to something he has not given is like one
who dons a garb of false testimony.3
To count one’s certitude as a hollow claim can have two meanings. First, that
what one has acquired of certitude is not his own acquisition, nor has he done
anything to deserve it. Rather, it is God’s grace and gift; pure favor upon him, a
robe that the Lord has bestowed upon the servant, and the servant as well as
his robe both are in His ownership. The servant has no claim on his belief; he
merely claims that which belongs to God, His grace, and His favor. The second
meaning could be that one deems one’s certitude suspect, thinking that he has
not attained it as is its due, but rather, he possesses it like one possesses a rented
property that one claims to be his, but in reality, it is not quite his yet. This is not
particular to certitude, but with all of the states. The same is true of one who
is counted as sincere, or a scholar; he must suspect his truthfulness, sincerity,
and knowledge, and that his feet are not quite firm yet, that he has not quite
mastered it, and his claim is hollow. He singled out certitude only because it is
the soul of all works, their pillar and their summit.
The point is that one must suspect one’s certitude, and that if it is attained,
it is not of his own nor from himself, he can claim no credit for it. He blames
himself for having failed to attain it and desists from praising himself when he
does attain it.

3 Bukhārī #5219; Muslim #2129.

‫‪313‬‬

‫‪chapter 21‬‬

‫وقوله‪» :‬وإجراؤها على مجرى العلم« أن يكون العمل على مقتضى العلم المأخوذ من مشكاة النبوة‪،‬‬
‫إخلاصا ًوإرادة ً لوجهه وطلبا لً مرضاته‪ ،‬لا على وجه التز ين بها عند الناس‪.‬‬
‫ى«‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وأما رعاية الأحوال‪ ،‬فهو أن يعد الاجتهاد مراءاة ً واليقين تشبعا ًوالحال دعو ً‬
‫أي يتهم نفسه في اجتهاده أنه ر ياء للناس‪ ،‬فلا يطغى به ولا يسكن إليه ولا يعتد به‪.‬‬
‫وأما عده اليقين تشبعا‪] ً.‬التشبع افتخار الإنسان بما لا يملـكه‪ ،‬ومنه قول النبي ﷺ‪» :‬المتشبع بما لم‬
‫يعط كلابس ثو بي زور«‪.‬‬
‫وعد اليقين تشبعا[ً يحتمل وجهين‪ :‬أحدهما أن ما حصل له من اليقين لم يكن به ولا منه ولا‬
‫استحقه بعوض‪ ،‬وإنما هو فضل الل ّٰه وعطاؤه ووديعته عنده‪ ،‬ومجرد منته عليه‪ .‬فهو خلعة خلعها على‬
‫عبده‪ ،‬والعبد وخلعتهكل ملـكه وله‪ .‬فما للعبد في اليقين مدخل‪ ،‬وإنما هو متشبع بما هو ملك لل ّٰه وفضل‬
‫منه ومنته على عبده‪.‬‬
‫والوجه الثاني‪ :‬أن يتهم يقينه‪ ،‬وأنه لم يحصل له اليقين على الوجه الذي ينبغي‪ ،‬بل ما حصل له‬
‫منهكالعار ية غير الملك المستقر‪ ،‬فهو متشبع به‪ ،‬تزعم نفسه أن اليقين ملـكة له‪ ،‬وليس كذلك‪ .‬وهذا‬
‫لا يختص باليقين‪ ،‬بل بسا ئر الأحوال‪ .‬فالصادق يعد صدقه تشبعا‪ ً،‬وكذا المخلص‪ ،‬وكذا العالم لاتهامه‬
‫لصدقه وإخلاصه وعلمه‪ ،‬وأنه لم ترسخ قدمه في ذلك ولم يحصل له فيه ملـكة‪ ،‬فهو كالمتشبع به‪.‬‬
‫ولما كان اليقين روح الأعمال وعمودها وذروة سنامها‪ ،‬خصه بالذكر تنبيها على ما دونه‪.‬‬
‫والحاصل أنه يتهم نفسه في حصول اليقين‪ .‬فإذا حصل فليس به ولا منه ولا له فيه شيء‪ .‬فهو يذم‬
‫نفسه في عدم حصوله ولا يحمدها عند حصوله‪.‬‬

314

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

To count one’s “spiritual state a claim” means a false claim, suspecting one’s
ego in order to purify the ego from frivolous claims and the heart from the
devil’s share, for such a claim is the devil’s share in it.

2

Shepherding of Time

He said,
The shepherding of time is to pause at every step, then vanish from every
step through the erasure of one’s form, then let go of the witnessing of
one’s erasure.
That is, one pauses to rectify the intention and purpose of every outwardly
and inwardly movement, aiming for purification as well as correct observance
rather than moving on mindlessly, advancing the steps of his resolve with deliberation, and moving ahead only after it is rectified. This is achieved by ceasing to witness it; he must not witness the progress of his self, for his form is
his self/ego. When he erases his self/ego from being witnessed, he attains the
essence of purification from the form. The ego being the site of filth, parting
from it is called purification. Grasping things requires a keen sense and preparedness, and these are attained through divine favor alone.
To let go of his witnessing of his purification means that he does not recall
it into his heart and witness his attainment of purity, for that is a remnant of
the ego, a type of impurity that he must avoid. He must purify himself from the
form and let go of this purification by witnessing exclusively the highest goal,
the noblest objective.

‫‪315‬‬

‫‪chapter 21‬‬

‫وأما عد الحال دعوى‪ ،‬أي دعوى كاذبة ً اتهاما لً نفسه وتطهيرا ً لها من رعونة الدعاوى‪ ،‬وتخليصا ً‬
‫للقلب من نصيب الشيطان‪] ،‬فإن الدعوى من أنصباء الشيطان منه[‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬وأما رعاية الأوقات‪ :‬فأن يقف مع كل خطوة‪ ،‬ثم أن يغيب عن خطوه بالصفاء من رسمه‪ ،‬ثم‬
‫أن يذهب عن شهود صفوه«‪.‬‬
‫أي يقف مع كل حركة ظاهرة و باطنه بمقدار ما يصححها‪ ،‬نية ً وقصدا ً وإخلاصا ً ومتابعة ً‪ .‬فلا‬
‫يخطو هجما‪ ً،‬بل يقف قبل الخطوة حتى يصحح الخطوة ثم ينقل قدم عزمه‪ .‬فإذا صحت له ونقل قدمه‬
‫انفصل عنها‪ ،‬وقد صحت بالغيبة عن شهودها ورؤ يتها‪ ،‬فيغيب عن شهود تقدمه بنفسه‪ .‬فإن رسمه هو‬
‫نفسه‪ .‬فإذا غاب عن شهوده نفسه ]وتقدمه بها في كل خطوة‪ ،‬فذلك عين الصفاء من رسمه الذي هو‬
‫نفسه[‪ .‬ولما كانت النفس محل الأكدار سمي انفصاله عنها صفاء ً‪ .‬وهذه الأمور تستدعي لطف إدراك‬
‫واستعدادا ً من العبد‪ ،‬وذلك عين المنة عليه‪.‬‬
‫وأما ذهابه عن شهود صفوه‪ ،‬أي لا يستحضر في قلبه و يشهد ذلك الصفو المطلوب و يقف عنده‪،‬‬
‫فإن ذلك من بقايا النفس وأحكامها‪ ،‬وهو نوع كدر‪ .‬فإذا تخلص من الـكدر لا ينبغي له الالتفات‬
‫والرجوع إليه‪ .‬فيصفو من الرسم و يغيب عن الصفو بمشاهدة المطلب الأعلى والمقصد الأسنى‪.‬‬

chapter 22

The Station of Watchfulness
Among the stations of “You we worship and You alone we supplicate for help”
is the station of watchfulness.
God Almighty said, “And know that God knows what is in your hearts, so take
heed of Him” [2:235], and the Almighty said: “And God watches over all things”
[33:52], and the Almighty said, “And He is with you wherever you are” [57:4].
The Almighty said, “Does [the rebellious man] not know that God does see?”
[96:14], and He said, “Verily you are before our eyes” [52:48], and God Almighty
says, “He knows what the eyes steal and the hearts conceal” [40:19], and there
are many other such verses.
In the Hadith of Gabriel, upon him be peace, he asked the Prophet, God grant
him blessing and peace, about excellence, to which he said, “[It is] to worship
God as if you see Him, for even though you see Him not, He does see you.”1
Watchfulness is the servant’s perpetual knowledge and certainty of the
knowledge of the Exalted Truth of his appearance as well as his secrets. The
perpetuity of this recognition and certainty is watchfulness. It is the fruit of his
knowledge that God is watching over him, observing him, hearing his words,
aware of his deeds at every moment, and the one who is heedless of this is
unworthy of even the first of inner states, let alone the states of the seekers and
knowers.
Al-Jurayrī (Abū Muḥammad, d. 312/925), God have mercy on him, said, “One
who does not fortify the piety and vigilance between himself and God cannot
attain unveiling and witnessing.”
It has been said, “Whosoever is aware of God in his thoughts, He protects
him in respect of his body.” It was said to one of them, “When does a shepherd
repel his flock from deadly pastures?” He said, “When he knows that he is being
watched.”
Al-Junayd said, “Whosoever has attained watchfulness fears losing his share
only with his Lord and none else.”
Dhū al-Nūn, God have mercy on him, said, “The sign of watchfulness is to
prefer what God has revealed, honoring what God has honored, and belittling
what God has belittled.”

1 Bukhārī #50; Muslim #8.

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬المراقبة«‪.‬‬
‫سك ُْم ف َاحْذ َر ُوه ُ﴾ ]البقرة‪ .[235:‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َك َانَ‬
‫ن ال َل ّـه َيعَ ْل َم ُ م َا ف ِي َأنف ُ ِ‬
‫قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َاع ْل َموُ ا َأ َ ّ‬
‫كنت ُم ْ﴾ ]الحديد‪.[4:‬‬
‫ن م َا ُ‬
‫يء ٍ َرّقيِ ب ًا﴾ ]الأحزاب‪ .[52:‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َه ُو َ م َع َك ُْم َأ ي ْ َ‬
‫لشَ ْ‬
‫ال َل ّـه ُ ع َلىَ ك ُ ّ ِ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫وفي حديث جبر يل—عليه السلام—‪ :‬أنه سأل النبي ﷺ عن الإحسان فقال‪» :‬أن تعبد الل ّٰه كأنك‬
‫تراه فإن لم تكن تراه فإنه يراك«‪.‬‬
‫المراقبة دوام علم العبد وتيقنه باطلاع الحق سبحانه على ظاهره و باطنه‪ .‬فاستدامته لهذا العلم واليقين‬
‫هي المراقبة‪ .‬وهي ثمرة علمه بأن الل ّٰه سبحانه رقيب عليه‪ ،‬ناظر إليه‪ ،‬سامع لقوله‪ ،‬مطلع على عملهكل‬
‫وقت وكل لحظة‪ .‬والغافل عن هذا بمعزل عن حال أهل البدايات‪ ،‬فكيف بحال المر يدين؟ فكيف‬
‫العارفين؟‬
‫قال الجر يري—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪ :‬من لم يحكم بينه و بين الل ّٰه التقوى والمراقبة‪ ،‬لم يصل إلى الـكشف‬
‫والمشاهدة‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬من راقب الل ّٰه في خواطره عصمه في جوارحه‪.‬‬
‫وقيل لبعضهم‪ :‬متى يهش الراعي غنمه بعصاه عن مراتع الهلـكة؟ فقال‪ :‬إذا علم أن عليه رقيبا‪ً.‬‬
‫قال الجنيد‪ :‬من تحقق في المراقبة خاف على فوت حظه من ر به لا غير‪.‬‬
‫وقال ذو النون—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪ :‬علامة المراقبة إ يثار ما أ نزل الل ّٰه وتعظيم ما عظم الل ّٰه وتصغير ما‬
‫صغر الل ّٰه‪.‬‬

318

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

It has been said, “Hope moves you to act in obedience, fear distances you
from sins, and watchfulness leads you to the path of realities.”
It has been said, “Watchfulness is to heed the Truth with every thought and
every step.”
Al-Jurayrī said, “This affair of ours is based on two parts, that you bind your
ego to watchfulness for God and that you subdue your outer self to the knowledge [of the Law].”
Ibrāhīm al-Khawwāṣ, God have mercy on him, said, “Watchfulness is purifying the outwardly and the inwardly for God Almighty.”
It has been said, “The best thing one can commit oneself to in this path is
self-evaluation, watchfulness, and wise management of his actions by knowledge.”
Abū Ḥafṣ counseled Abū ʿUthmān al-Naysābūrī thus, “Be a preacher to your
heart whenever you sit before the people [to teach or preach], let not their large
numbers and attention to you deceive you, for they see your outside while God
sees your inside.”
The masters of this path are unanimous that being vigilant of one’s thoughts
is the means of securing His protection in deeds, for whosoever heeds God in
secret God protects his outwardly deeds and states.
Watchfulness is to worship God through His names the Ever-vigilant, the
Protector, the Omniscient, All-hearing, and All-seeing. Whosoever grasps these
names and worships God by their meaning and implications, attains the station
of watchfulness.

1

Ranks of Watchfulness

The author of al-Manāzil, God have mercy on him, said,
Watchfulness is to keep a perpetual eye on the goal. It has three levels.
First, keep the eyes fixed perpetually on the Truth Almighty in your journey to Him, between intoxicating glorification, rewarding proximity, and
motivating bliss.
His saying, “keep a perpetual eye on the goal” means constant attention of the
heart to Him.
His saying “intoxicating glorification” means the filling of the heart with His
glory, to the point that the heart becomes disinclined to glorify any other or
turn to anyone else. One must never forget this recognition of God’s glory and
majesty even in moments of ecstatic closeness to God, and God’s reverence

‫‪319‬‬

‫‪chapter 22‬‬

‫وقيل‪ :‬الرجاء يحركك إلى الطاعة‪ ،‬والخوف يبعدك عن المعاصي‪ ،‬والمراقبة تؤديك إلى طر يق‬
‫الحقائق‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬المراقبة مراعاة القلب لملاحظة الحق مع كل خطرة وخطوة‪.‬‬
‫قال الجر يري‪ :‬أمرنا هذا مبني على فصلين‪ :‬أن تلزم نفسك المراقبة لل ّٰه و يكون العلم على ظاهرك قائما‪ً.‬‬
‫وقال إ براهيم الخواص—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪ :‬المراقبة خلوص السر والعلانية لل ّٰه عز وجل‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬أفضل ما يلزم الإنسان نفسه في هذه الطر يق‪ ،‬المحاسبة والمراقبة وسياسة عمله بالعلم‪.‬‬
‫وقال أبو حفص لأبي عثمان النيسابوري رحمهما الل ّٰه‪ :‬إذا جلست للناس فكن واعظا ً لقلبك‬
‫ونفسك‪ .‬ولا يغرنك اجتماعهم عليك‪ ،‬فإنهم يراقبون ظاهرك والل ّٰه يراقب باطنك‪.‬‬
‫وأر باب الطر يق مجمعون على أن مراقبة الل ّٰه تعالى في الخواطر سبب لحفظه في حركات الظواهر‪.‬‬
‫فمن راقب الل ّٰه في سره حفظه الل ّٰه في حركاته في سره وعلانيته‪.‬‬
‫والمراقبة هي التعبد باسمه الرقيب الحفيظ العليم السميع البصير‪ ،‬فمن عقل هذه الأسماء وتعبد‬
‫بمقتضاها حصلت له المراقبة‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪:‬‬
‫»المراقبة دوام ملاحظة المقصود‪ ،‬وهي على ثلاث درجات‪ :‬الدرجة الأولى‪ :‬مراقبة الحق تعالى‬
‫في السير إليه على الدوام‪ ،‬بين تعظيم مذهل‪ ،‬ومداناة حاملة وسرور باعث«‪.‬‬
‫فقوله‪» :‬دوام ملاحظة المقصود«‪ ،‬أي دوام حضور القلب معه‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬بين تعظيم مذهل«‪ ،‬وهو امتلاء القلب من عظمته‪ ،‬بحيث يذهله ذلك عن تعظيم غيره‬
‫وعن الالتفات إليه‪ .‬فلا ينسى هذا التعظيم عند حضور قلبه مع الل ّٰه‪ ،‬بل يستصحبه دائما‪ ً.‬فإن الحضور‬

320

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

must always accompany one in worship, for if one feels drowned in the feeling
of God’s love and intimacy but does not complement them with reverence, he
is led to transgress the boundaries of worship and into frivolity. Every love that
is not accompanied by respect for the beloved leads to separation from him
and falling from his grace.
Thus, his statement includes five things: journey towards God, constancy of
this journey, attentiveness of the heart with it, His reverence, and such absorption in His majesty that none else is remembered.
As for “rewarding proximity,” it means the nearness that earns for the seeker
these five things.
“Motivating bliss” means the pleasure that one finds in that nearness, for the
bliss and serenity of the heart and the coolness of the eyes that come from it
have no equal whatsoever in the pleasures of this world. There is nothing even
remotely comparable to it. It is one of the states of the people of the Garden,
so much so that one of the knowers has said, “There are times in which I say
to myself that if the residents of the Garden feel anything like this, they indeed
will enjoy a good life!”2
This bliss doubtless motivates one towards constancy in journey to God
Almighty and encourages one to put in greater effort in seeking God’s good
pleasure. One who does not experience this bliss or anything like it ought to
blame his faith and deeds, for faith sure has a sweetness and whoever fails to
taste it should retrace his steps and start over in order to capture the light that
will enable him to taste the sweetness of faith.
The Prophet of God, God grant him blessing and peace, mentioned the taste
of faith and its sweetness and connected them to faith, saying,
One who is pleased with God as his Lord, Islam as his religion, and
Muhammad as his Messenger has experienced the taste of faith.3
He, God grant him blessing and peace, also said:
Whoever possesses three things has found the sweetness of faith. One
who loves God and His Messenger more than all else; one who loves someone for nothing but God, and one who hates to return to unbelief after
God has saved him from it as much as he hates to be thrown into the fire.4

2 This is a statement of Ibn Taymiyya, MF 10:647.
3 Muslim #34.
4 Bukhārī #16; Muslim #43.

‫‪321‬‬

‫‪chapter 22‬‬

‫مع الل ّٰه يوجب أنسا ًومحبة ً‪ ،‬إن لم يقارنهما تعظيم أورثاه خروجا ًعن حق العبودية ورعونة ً‪ .‬فكل حب‬
‫لا يقارنه تعظيم المحبوب كان سببا لً لبعد عنه والسقوط من عينه‪.‬‬
‫فقد تضمن كلامه خمسة أمور‪ :‬سير إلى الل ّٰه واستدامة هذا السير وحضور القلب معه وتعظيمه‬
‫والذهول بعظمته عن غيره‪.‬‬
‫وأما قوله‪» :‬ومداناة حاملة«‪ ،‬ير يد دنوا ً وقر با ًحاملا ًعلى هذه الأمور الخمسة‪.‬‬
‫وهذا الدنو يحمله على التعظيم الذي يذهله عن نفسه وعن غيره‪ ،‬فإنهكلما ازداد قر با ًمن الحق ازداد‬
‫تعظيما لً ه وذهولا ًعن سواه و بعدا ً عن الخلق‪.‬‬
‫وأما »السرور الباعث« فهو الفرحة واللذة التي يجدها في تلك المداناة‪ .‬فإن سرور القلب من الل ّٰه‬
‫وفرحه به وقرة العين به‪ ،‬لا يشبهه شيء من نعيم الدنيا البتة‪ ،‬وليس له نظير يقاس به‪ .‬وهو حال من‬
‫أحوال أهل الجنة حتى قال بعض العارفين‪ :‬إنه ليمر بي أوقات أقول فيها‪ :‬إن كان أهل الجنة في مثل‬
‫هذا‪ ،‬إنهم لفي عيش طيب‪.‬‬
‫ولا ر يب أن هذا السرور يبعثه على دوام السير إلى الل ّٰه و بذل الجهد في طلبه وابتغاء مرضاته‪.‬‬
‫ومن لم يجد هذا السرور ولا شيئا ًمنه‪ ،‬فليتهم إ يمانه وأعماله‪ ،‬فإن للإ يمان حلاوة ً من لم يذقها فليرجع‪،‬‬
‫وليقتبس نورا ً يجد به حلاوة الإ يمان‪.‬‬
‫وقد ذكر النبي ﷺ ذوق طعم الإ يمان ووجد حلاوته‪ .‬فذكر الذوق والوجد وعلقه بالإ يمان‪ ،‬فقال‪:‬‬
‫»ذاق طعم الإ يمان من رضي بالل ّٰه ر با ًو بالإسلام دينا ًو بمحمد رسولا ً«‪ .‬وقال‪» :‬ثلاث من كن فيه‬
‫وجد حلاوة الإ يمان‪ :‬من كان الل ّٰه ورسوله أحب إليه مما سواهما‪ ،‬ومن كان يحب المرء لا يحبه إلا‬
‫لل ّٰه‪ ،‬ومن يكره أن يرجع في الـكفر—بعد إذ أنقذه الل ّٰه منه—كما يكره أن يلقى في النار«‪.‬‬

322

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

I have heard the Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya, may God sanctify his soul,
say, “If you do not find sweetness and serenity in a deed, consider it deficient,
for the Lord Almighty is Most Grateful.” In other words, He Almighty surely
rewards a good deed in this world immediately with a sweetness that he finds
in his heart, by way of strength, expansion of his chest, and coolness of his eyes,
and if one fails to experience this, his deed must be adulterated.
The point is that bliss and coolness of the eyes in God and in His nearness
encourages one to increase his works and goads him on in his journey.
He said,
The second level is be vigilant of the eye of the Truth upon you, by rejecting all opposition, avoiding objection, and undoing the frivolity of opposition.
This amounts to being vigilant about God’s watch over you, and it is a particular kind of watchfulness that requires the protection of the inwardly as well as
the outwardly. The protection of the outwardly is through the protection of outwardly acts, whereas the safeguarding of the inwardly is through the protection
of fleeting thoughts, intentions, and inner movements. This includes rejecting
opposition to His command as well as His report, thus stripping off the inner
being from every desire and every will that opposes His command and His will
and from every doubt that opposes His teachings, and from every love that goes
against His love. This is the reality of the sound heart without which none can
be saved before God, and this is the reality of the purification of the righteous,
the near ones, the knowers. Every purification other than this is deficient, this
being the purification of the people of resolve.
The Shaykh then explains the cause of opposition and how to reject it by
saying, “by avoiding objecting” because opposition is born of objection. Three
kinds of objection are common among men, and only those whom God protects are safe.
The first kind is objection to His names and attributes through false doubts
that they call rational necessities but in reality are nothing more than ignorant
fancies and intellectual impossibilities brought to oppose and judge against
His names and attributes. Because of them, they negate what He has posited
concerning Himself, as has His Messenger, God grant him blessing and peace,
and they posit what He has negated. They go further than that, befriending
His enemies and opposing His friends, diverting His words from their proper
places, abandoning [for the sake of these fancies] much of what they have been
reminded of, dividing themselves up in many groups for their sake, each being
pleased with what it has.

‫‪323‬‬

‫‪chapter 22‬‬

‫وسمعت شيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية—قدس الل ّٰه روحه—يقول‪ :‬إذا لم تجد للعمل حلاوة ً في قلبك‬
‫وانشراحا ًفاتهمه‪ ،‬فإن الرب تعالى شكور‪ .‬يعني أنه لابد أن يثيب العامل على عمله في الدنيا‪ ،‬من حلاوة‬
‫يجدها في قلبه‪ ،‬وقوة وانشراح وقرة عين‪ .‬فحيث لم يجد ذلك فعمله مدخول‪ .‬والقصد أن السرور بالل ّٰه‬
‫وقر به وقرة العين به تبعث على الازدياد من طاعته وتحث على السير إليه‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬مراقبة نظر الحق إليك برفض المعارضة‪ ،‬بالإعراض عن الاعتراض‪،‬‬
‫ونقض رعونة التعر ّض«‪.‬‬
‫هذه مراقبة لمراقبة الل ّٰه لك‪ .‬فهي مراقبة لصفة خاصة معينة‪ ،‬وهي توجب صيانة الباطن والظاهر‪.‬‬
‫فصيانة الظاهر بحفظ الحركات الظاهرة‪ ،‬وصيانة الباطن بحفظ الخواطر والإرادات والحركات‬
‫الباطنة‪ ،‬التي منها رفض معارضة أمره ]وخبره‪ ،‬فيتجرد الباطن من كل شهوة وإرادة تعارض أمره[‪،‬‬
‫وإرادة تعارض إرادته‪ ،‬ومن كل شبهة تعارض خبره‪ ،‬ومن كل محبة تزاحم محبته‪ .‬وهذه حقيقة‬
‫القلب السليم الذي لا ينجو إلا من أتى الل ّٰه به‪ .‬وهذا هو حقيقة تجر يد الأ برار المقر بين العارفين‪ .‬وكل‬
‫تجر يد سوى هذا فناقص‪ ،‬وهذا تجر يد أر باب العزائم‪.‬‬
‫ثم بين الشيخ سبب المعارضة‪ ،‬و بماذا يرفضها العبد‪ .‬فقال‪» :‬بالإعراض عن الاعتراض«‪ .‬فإن‬
‫المعارضة ٺتولد من الاعتراض‪.‬‬
‫و»الاعتراض« ثلاثة أنواع سار ية في الناس‪ .‬والمعصوم من عصمه الل ّٰه منها‪.‬‬
‫النوع الأول‪ :‬الاعتراض على أسمائه وصفاته بالشبه الباطلة التي يسميها أر بابها قواطع عقلية ً‪ .‬وهي‬
‫في الحقيقة خيالات جهلية ومحالات ذهنية اعترضوا بها على أسمائه عز وجل وصفاته‪ ،‬وحكموا بها‬
‫عليه ونفوا لأجلها ما أثبته لنفسه وأثبته له رسوله ﷺ‪ ،‬وأثبتوا ما نفاه ووالوَ ا بها أعداءه وعاد َوا بها‬
‫أولياءه وحرفوا بها الكلم عن مواضعه‪ ،‬وتركوا لها نصيبا ًكثيرا مما ذ ُكروا به‪ ،‬وتقطعوا لها أمرهم بينهم‬
‫ز برا ً‪ ،‬كل حزب بما لديهم فرحون‪.‬‬

324

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The only protection from this objection is utter submission to the revelation;
when his heart submits to it, he sees the soundness of what it has brought, and
that it is the truth both in clear reason as well as sound nature.
The second kind of objection is against His law and command, and such
people are of three kinds.
First, those who object on account of their own opinions and analogies, and
amount to permitting what God has prohibited and prohibiting what God has
permitted, dropping His duties and imposing things He has permitted, falsifying what He has declared sound and declaring sound what He has deemed
false, taking into consideration what He has set aside and setting aside what
He has taken into consideration, qualifying what He has left unqualified and
leaving unqualified what He has qualified.
These are the opinions and analogies on whose dispraise and caution against
which the Predecessors have agreed, screaming and cautioning against their
partisans across the regions of the earth.
The second kind are those who object to the realities of faith and the Law
by means of personal experiences, ecstasies, fancies, and unveilings that are
false and devilish, tantamount to initiating a religion God has not authorized
and falsifying His religion that He has authorized on the tongue of His Messenger, God grant him blessing and peace. They replace the realities of faith with
deceptions of the devil and pleasures of their own egos.
What’s strange is the fact that they find faults with the people of experiential pleasures but all what they possess is little more than their own pleasure,
but a pleasure that consists of opposition to the will of God and His religion,
believing that that constitutes nearness to God. How much worse is this than
the pleasures of the men of sinful pleasures who acknowledge their evil, seek
forgiveness for them, and admit to their faults and flaws and that what they do
is opposed to religion?
These people take their own pleasures as their religion, preferring them over
God’s law and religion, ensnaring people’s hearts and obstructing them from
God’s path. The intellects of some, the opinions of the others, and the false
analogies of yet others are the cause of the ruin of the world and demolishing of the pillars of religion. The matter would have been far worse had God
not guaranteed the presence of those who protect [the religion], elucidating
its markers and protecting it against their snares.
The third kind comprises those who object to [divine laws and religion] by
means of oppressive policies, those who possess authority, and who raise their
policies above the rulings of God and His messenger, and by them they judge
among the people and for the sake of which they set aside His law, His justice,
and His limits.

‫‪325‬‬

‫‪chapter 22‬‬

‫والعاصم من هذا الاعتراض التسليم المحض للوحي‪ .‬فإذا سلم له القلب رأى صحة ما جاء به‪ ،‬وأنه‬
‫الحق بصريح العقل والفطرة‪ .‬فاجتمع له السمع والعقل والفطرة‪ ،‬وهذا أكمل الإ يمان‪ .‬ليس كمن‬
‫الحرب قائم بين سمعه وعقله وفطرته‪.‬‬
‫النوع الثاني‪ :‬الاعتراض على شرعه وأمره‪ ،‬وأهل هذا الاعتراض ثلاثة أنواع‪:‬‬
‫أحدها‪ :‬المعترضون عليه بآرائهم وأقيستهم المتضمنة تحليل ما حرمه الل ّٰه وتحر يم ما أباحه‪ ،‬وإسقاط‬
‫ما أوجبه وإيجاب ما أسقطه‪ ،‬وإبطال ما صححه وتصحيح ما أبطله‪ ،‬واعتبار ما ألغاه وإلغاء ما اعتبره‪،‬‬
‫وتقييد ما أطلقه وإطلاق ما قيده‪.‬‬
‫وهذه هي الآراء والأقيسة التي اتفق السلف قاطبة على ذمها والتحذير منها‪ ،‬وصاحوا على أصحابها‬
‫من أقطار الأرض‪ ،‬وحذروا عنهم‪.‬‬
‫النوع الثاني‪ :‬الاعتراض على حقائق الإ يمان والشرع‪ ،‬بالأذواق والمواجيد والخيالات‬
‫والـكشوفات الباطلة الشيطانية‪ ،‬المتضمنة شرع دين لم يأذن به الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وإبطال دينه الذي شرعه على‬
‫لسان رسوله ﷺ‪ ،‬والتعوض عن حقائق الإ يمان بخدع الشيطان وحظوظ النفوس‪.‬‬
‫والعجب أن أر بابها ينكرون على أهل الحظوظ‪ .‬وكل ما هم فيه فحظ‪ ،‬ولـكن حظ تضمن مخالفة‬
‫مراد الل ّٰه والإعراض عن دينه‪ ،‬واعتقاد أنه قر بة إلى الل ّٰه‪ .‬أ ين هذا من حظوظ أصحاب الشهوات‬
‫المعترفين بذمها‪ ،‬المستغفر ين منها‪ ،‬المقر ين بنقصهم وعيبهم‪ ،‬وأنها منافية للدين؟‬
‫وهؤلاء في حظوظ اتخذوها دينا ًوقدموها على شرع الل ّٰه ودينه‪ ،‬واجتالوا بها القلوب واقتطعوها‬
‫عن طر يق الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فتولد من معقول أولئك وآراء الآخر ين وأقيستهم الباطلة وأذواق هؤلاء‪ ،‬خراب‬
‫العالم وفساد الوجود وهدم قواعد الدين وتفاقم الأمر وكاد‪ ،‬لولا أن الل ّٰه ضمن أنه لا يزال يقوم به من‬
‫يحفظه و يبين معالمه و يحميه من كيد من كاده‪.‬‬
‫النوع الثالث‪ :‬الاعتراض على ذلك بالسياسات الجا ئرة‪ ،‬التي لأر باب الولايات التي قدموها على‬
‫حكم الل ّٰه ورسوله وحكموا بها بين عباده‪ ،‬وعطلوا لها شرعه وعدله وحدوده‪.‬‬

326

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The first kind says: When reason and revelation contradict, we give preference to reason.
Others say: When transmitted reports and analogy contradict, we prefer
analogy.
The people of experience say: When spiritual taste, unveiling, and ecstatic
state contradict the apparent meaning of the law, we prefer the results of [spiritual] taste and unveiling.
The men of politics say: When politics and divine law contradict, we prefer
politics.
Every group has made a false god to whom it turns for judgment to compete
with the religion of God.
Thus, some people say [to those who defend the revelation]: For you is revelation, and for us reason; others say: You are the people of reports, and we are
the people of opinions, analogies, and thoughts of our own; yet others say: You
are the people of the outwardly revelation of God, while we have the Reality;
and yet others say: You have your law and we our politics. What a calamity,
endemic and blinding, a catastrophe that has hurled itself and left dumbfounded, a trial that has seduced the hearts and every sick heart has responded,
winds that have blown hard and deafened ears and blinded eyes! Due to them
the clearest markers of religion have been abandoned and the attributes of
the Magnificent and the Munificent have been given lie! Every group has, as a
result, turned to the darkness of their opinions, judging between God’s servants
against His will by means of their false opinions and desires, leaving revelation
subject to all kinds of misinterpretation, and the religion open to all kinds of
corruption and change!
The third kind of objection is against God’s actions, decrees, and predestination. This is the objection of the ignorant. The objections of this kind, both open
and secret, are too many to enumerate. This objection surreptitiously enters
and corrupts the soul, running like fever in a sick body. Were man to reflect
his own words, wishes, intentions, and circumstances, he would see this objection installed in his heart, for egos are sick with this objection to God’s decrees,
divisions, and actions except the one that has found tranquility in God and has
come to truly know God to the extent that the human being can attain that.
The reward of such souls is a sweet surrender and submission, and every bit of
delight in God and His decrees.
As for “undoing the frivolity of opposition,” he alludes by it to another meaning without which watchfulness cannot be completed in his view, which is the
sensing of the servant of his ego, his fleeting thoughts and ideas in the moments
of watchfulness and presence before God. These constitute a kind of opposition, and evidence of Truth’s veiling of Himself from him and depriving him

‫‪327‬‬

‫‪chapter 22‬‬

‫فقال الأولون‪ :‬إذا تعارض العقل والنقل قدمنا العقل‪.‬‬
‫وقال الآخرون‪ :‬إذا تعارض الأ ثر والقياس قدمنا القياس‪.‬‬
‫وقال أصحاب الذوق‪ :‬إذا تعارض الذوق والـكشف والوجد وظاهر الشرع‪ ،‬قدمنا الذوق‬
‫والـكشف‪.‬‬
‫وقال أصحاب السياسة‪ :‬إذا تعارضت السياسة والشرع قدمنا السياسة‪.‬‬
‫فجعلت كل طائفة قبالة دين الل ّٰه وشرعه طاغوتا يً تحاكمون إليه‪ .‬فهؤلاء يقولون لـكم النقل ولنا العقل‪.‬‬
‫والآخرون يقولون أنتم أصحاب أخبار وآثار ونحن أصحاب أقيسة وآراء وأفكار‪ .‬وأولئك يقولون أنتم‬
‫أر باب الظاهر ونحن أهل الحقيقة‪ .‬والآخرون يقولون‪ :‬لـكم الشرع ولنا السياسة‪ .‬فيا لها من بلية عمت‬
‫فأعمت‪ ،‬ورز ية رمت فأصمت‪ ،‬وفتنة دعت القلوب فأجابها كل قلب مفتون‪ ،‬وأهو ية عصفت‬
‫فصمت منها الآذان وعميت منها العيون‪ .‬عطلت لها—والل ّٰه—معالم الأحكام كما نفيت لها صفات‬
‫ذي الجلال والإكرام‪ ،‬واستند كل قوم إلى ظلم آرائهم‪ ،‬وحكموا على الل ّٰه و بين عباده بمقالاتهم‬
‫الفاسدة وأهوائهم‪ ،‬وصار لأجلها الوحي عرضة ً لكل تحر يف وتأو يل‪ ،‬والدين وقفا ًعلى كل إفساد‬
‫وتبديل‪.‬‬
‫النوع الرابع‪ :‬الاعتراض على أفعاله وقضائه وقدره‪ .‬وهذا اعتراض الجهال‪.‬‬
‫وهو ما بين جلي وخفي‪ ،‬وهو أنواع لا تحصى‪ ،‬وهو سار في النفوس سر يان الحمى في بدن المحموم‪.‬‬
‫ولو تأمل العبد كلامه وأمنيته وإرادته وأحواله لرأى ذلك في قلبه عيانا‪ ً.‬فكل نفس معترضة على قدر‬
‫الل ّٰه وقسمه وأفعاله‪ ،‬إلا نفسا ًقد اطمأنت إليه وعرفته حق المعرفة التي يمكن وصول البشر إليها‪ ،‬فتلك‬
‫حظها التسليم والانقياد‪ ،‬والرضا كل الرضا‪.‬‬
‫وأما »نقض رعونة التعرض« فيشير به إلى معنى آخر‪ ،‬لا تتم المراقبة عنده إلا بنقضه‪ ،‬وهو إحساس‬
‫العبد بنفسه وخواطره وأفكاره حال المراقبة والحضور مع الل ّٰه‪ .‬فإن ذلك تعرض منه لحجاب الحق له‬

328

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

of perfection of witnessing, for the persistence of a servant’s senses, feelings,
ideas, and thoughts when present before God, witnessing, is a kind of veil.
Watchfulness must purify itself of these maladies. This is attained by drowning
yourself in remembrance, leaving you unaware of your ego and your conduct,
preparing yourself to be annihilated from your being and from all other beings
except the Exalted.
This preparation and readiness is not attained except by undoing the frivolity, and remembrance that makes you forget all sensory data; whoever is cognizant of the eye of the Truth upon him when he senses anything of his inner
thoughts and ideas has indeed turned away and summoned his ego and the
veil just mentioned, for the presence of the Exalted Truth does not accept the
presence of another.
This is a level that a servant cannot attain except through a strong capacity to focus and concentrate the heart with all his being upon God the Exalted.

2

Watchfulness of the Elite of the Elite

He said,
The third level is to watch the eternal past with an eye on that which
precedes all things, seeking the sign of monotheism, and to watch the
allusions of the eternal past to the times of eternal future, and to watch
the purification from the conundrum of watching.
His saying “watch the eternal past” means witnessing the meaning of preeternity, which is a past that has no beginning; “with an eye on that which
precedes all things” means by witnessing the precedence in time of the Exalted
Truth before all else, for He is the First before whom there is nothing. When the
heart studies the essence of this precedence, it witnesses the meaning of preeternity, and the knowledge of divine unicity accrues to him, and he welcomes it
as he would welcome notables of the city or the military, rising up to it and setting his eyes on it. He witnesses the absolute uniqueness and exclusiveness of
the Truth in His preeternity, that He was when nothing else was, and all other
than Him exists after having been non-existent, and all beings must be nonexistent in his witnessing just as they were once non-existent in preeternity.
He casts the eye of precedence and is annihilated in the witnessing of the eternal from the witnessing of all that was once not, thus welcoming the knowledge
of divine unicity.

‫‪329‬‬

‫‪chapter 22‬‬

‫عن كمال الشهود‪ ،‬لأن بقاء العبد مع مداركه وحواسه ومشاعره وأفكاره وخواطره‪ ،‬عند الحضور‬
‫والمشاهدة‪ ،‬هو تعرض للحجاب‪ .‬فينبغي أن تتخلص مراقبة نظر الحق إليك من هذه الآفات‪ .‬وذلك‬
‫يحصل بالاستغراق في الذكر‪ ،‬فتذهل به عن نفسك وعما منك‪ ،‬لتكون بذلك متهيئا‪ ً،‬مستعدا ً للفناء‬
‫عن وجودك وعن وجود كل ما سوى المذكور سبحانه‪.‬‬
‫وهذا التهيؤ والاستعداد لا يكون إلا بنقض تلك الرعونة‪ .‬والذكر يوجب الغيبة عن الحس‪ .‬فمن‬
‫كان ذاكرا ًلنظر الحق إليه من إقباله عليه‪ ،‬ثم أحس بشيء من حديث نفسه وخواطره وأفكاره‪ ،‬فقد‬
‫تعرض واستدعى عوالم نفسه واحتجاب المذكور عنه‪ ،‬لأن حضرة الحق تعالى لا يكون فيها غيره‪.‬‬
‫وهذه الدرجة لا يقدر عليها العبد إلا بملـكة قو ية من الذكر‪ ،‬وجمع القلب فيه بكليته على الل ّٰه عز‬
‫وجل‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬مراقبة الأزل بمطالعة عين السبق استقبالا لً علم التوحيد‪ ،‬ومراقبة ُظهور إشارات‬
‫الأزل على أحايين الأبد‪ ،‬ومراقبة ُ الإخلاص من ورطة المراقبة«‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬مراقبة الأزل« أي شهود معنى الأزل‪ ،‬وهو القدم الذي لا أول له‪ ،‬ب »مطالعة عين‬
‫السبق«‪ ،‬أي بشهود سبق الحق تعالى لكل ما سواه‪ .‬إذ هو الأول الذي ليس قبله شيء‪ .‬فمتى طالع‬
‫العبد عين هذا السبق شهد معنى الأزل وعرف حقيقته‪ ،‬فبدا له حينئذ علم التوحيد فاستقبلهكما تستقبل‬
‫أعلام البلد وأعلام الجيش‪ ،‬ورفع له فشمر إليه‪ .‬وهو شهوده انفراد الحق بأزليته وحده‪ ،‬وأنهكان ولم‬
‫يكن شيء غيره البتة‪ ،‬فكل ما سواه فكا ئن بعد عدمه‪ .‬فإذا عدمت الكائنات من شهودهكما كانت‬
‫معدومة في الأزل‪ ،‬فطالع عين السبق وفني بشهود من لم يزل عن شهود من لم يكن‪ ،‬فقد استقبل علم‬
‫التوحيد‪.‬‬

330

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

As for “watching the allusions of the eternal past to the times of eternal
future,” it has been stated that all that will appear in the eternal future is known
since preeternity, and only its times are renewed, which are the times of its
appearance. This is the correct meaning in my view.
Other people, however, see another meaning in this, which is the connection
of the eternal future to the eternal past in witnessing, because the universe is
rolled up from his witnessing altogether and he witnesses only the persistence
of the existence of the Exalted Truth alone, exclusively, thus, through this witnessing, the eternal past meets up with the eternal future, becoming one thing,
which is nothing but the perpetuity of His Exalted being to the exclusion of all
created things.
The first kind of witnessing is more perfect and sound, as it is connected to
His names and attributes, and the preexistence of His knowledge of all things
and their occurrence in the eternal future in accordance with His preeternal
knowledge. This witnessing leads to faith and gnosis, positing His knowledge,
power, act, decree, and predestination. The second kind of witnessing furnishes
neither gnosis nor faith, nor does it affirm a name or an attribute, nor any beneficial worship. It is, rather, a shared belief, common to all those who affirm a
creator, Muslim as well as the unbeliever. If he is immersed in the witnessing of
His eternity and exclusivity, and evanescence of all beings, he connects the eternal future with the eternal past: what is the big deal in this? What faith and what
certitude is obtained from this? We do not deny its experience, nor do we question its existence. We only question its rank and claim of superiority over earlier
levels of watchfulness, making it for the elite of the elite, leaving what came
before it to lesser ranks. This is nothing but caprice. God alone grants success.
If in the witnessing of the seeker the preeternity that has no beginning is
connected to the times whose beginning can be imagined, the times of created
things or accidents, then it is connected to that which has no end, thus the
three time periods become one, with no past, present, or future, and that cannot happen unless one witnesses the annihilation of all accidents absolutely,
their utter non-existence. All of this [in the present] is a capricious judgment
that opposes reality, a mere mental abstraction, that takes one to a dark ocean
that has no shore, a dark night that has no dawn.
Where is this in worth compared to the witnessing of the diversity of names
and attributes and their connection to the variety of beings, and their connection to all of the accidents, giving each of the divine names and attributes its
due through experiential witnessing and worship, and by looking at their influence in creation as well as command, and the higher as well as the lower worlds,
the outwardly and the inwardly, and the abodes of this world and the abode of
afterlife? His upholding of his state, furthermore, in the states of separation as
well as communion, in his knowledge, gnosis, and state? Only God can help.

‫‪331‬‬

‫‪chapter 22‬‬

‫وأما »مراقبة ظهور إشارات الأزل على أحايين الأبد« فقد تقدم أن ما يظهر في الأبد هو عين ما‬
‫كان معلوما ًفي الأزل‪ ،‬وأنه إنما تجددت أحايينه‪ ،‬وهي أوقات ظهوره‪ .‬فقد ظهرت إشارات الأزل‬
‫وهي ما يشير إليه العقل بالأزلية من المقدرات العلمية على أحايين الأبد‪ .‬هذا معناه الصحيح عندي‪.‬‬
‫والقوم ير يدون به معنى آخر‪ ،‬وهو اتصال الأبد بالأزل في الشهود‪ ،‬وذلك بأن يطوى بساط الكائنات‬
‫عن شهوده طيا ًكليا‪ ً،‬و يشهد استمرار وجود الحق سبحانه وحده مجردا ً عن كل ما سواه‪ ،‬فيصل—‬
‫بهذا الشهود—الأزل بالأبد‪ ،‬و يصيران شيئا ًواحدا ً‪ ،‬وهو دوام وجوده سبحانه‪ ،‬بقطع النظر عن كل‬
‫حادث‪.‬‬
‫والشهود الأول أكمل وأتم‪ .‬وهو متعلق بأسمائه وصفاته‪ ،‬وتقدم علمه بالأشياء ووقوعها في الأبد‬
‫مطابقة لعلمه الأزلي‪ .‬فهذا الشهود يعطي إ يمانا ًومعرفة ً وإثباتا لً لعلم والقدرة والفعل والقضاء والقدر‪.‬‬
‫وأما الشهود الثاني فلا يعطي صاحبه معرفة ً ولا إ يمانا ًولا إثباتا ًلاسم ولا صفة ً ولا عبودية ً نافعة ً‪ ،‬وهو‬
‫أمر مشترك يشهدهكل من أقر بالصانع من مسلم وكافر‪ .‬فإذا استغرق في شهود أزليته وتفرده بالقدم‬
‫وغاب عن الكائنات‪ ،‬اتصل في شهوده الأزل بالأبد‪ .‬فأي كبير أمر في هذا؟ وأي إ يمان و يقين يحصل‬
‫به؟ ونحن لا ننكر ذوقه ولا نقدح في وجوده‪ ،‬وإنما نقدح في مرتبته وتفضيله على ما قبله من المراقبة‪،‬‬
‫بحيث يكون لخاصة الخاصة‪ ،‬وما قبله لمن هم دونهم‪ ،‬فهذا عين الوهم‪ .‬والل ّٰه الموفق‪.‬‬
‫فإذا اتصل في شهود الشاهد الأزل الذي لا بداية له بالأزمنة التي تعُ قل لها بداية—وهي أزمنة‬
‫الحوادث—‪ ،‬ثم اتصل ذلك بما لا نهاية له‪ ،‬بحيث صارت الأزمنة الثلاثة واحدا ً‪ ،‬لا ماضي فيه ولا‬
‫حاضر ولا مستقبل‪ ،‬وذلك لا يكون إلا إذا شهد فناء الحوادث فناء ً مطلقا ًوعدمها عدما ًكليا‪ ً.‬وذلك‬
‫تقدير وهمي مخالف للواقع‪ ،‬وهو تجر يد خيالي يوقعه في بحر طامس لا ساحل له‪ ،‬وليل دامس لا فجر‬
‫له‪.‬‬
‫فأ ين هذا من مشهد تنوع الأسماء والصفات وتعلقها بأنواع الكائنات‪ ،‬وارتباطها بجميع الحادثات‪،‬‬
‫وإعطاء كل اسم منها وكل صفة حقها من الشهود والعبودية والنظر إلى سر يان آثارها في الخلق والأمر‪،‬‬
‫والعالم العلوي والسفلي‪ ،‬والظاهر والباطن‪ ،‬ودار الدنيا ودار الآخرة‪ ،‬وقيام ِه بالفرق والجمع في ذلك‬
‫علما ًومعرفة ً وحالا ً؟ والل ّٰه المستعان‪.‬‬

332

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

In his saying, “to watch the purification from the conundrum of watching,”
he alludes to the annihilation of the witnessing of the seeker who is vigilant of
his ego as well as his works, and that he is annihilated into the One he is watching for. If he persisted in witnessing his own vigilance, he is stuck in it rather
than having gone past it, for he cannot witness unless he subsists, whereas
the goal is to be annihilated and rid oneself of one’s ego and its attributes and
works.
You now know that there is another level above this level that is loftier and
nobler, which is to watch for the sites of the pleasure of the Lord as well as His
displeasure in every movement, and pass away from all that displeases Him
into all that He loves. Similarly, the state of separation is also by Him, through
Him, and in Him. The eyes of the seeker fixed on the essence of communion,
annihilated from His desire from his Lord, no matter how lofty, into His Lord’s
desire from him.

‫‪333‬‬

‫‪chapter 22‬‬

‫قوله‪» :‬ومراقبة الإخلاص من ورطة المراقبة«‪.‬‬
‫يشير إلى فناء شهود المراقب نفسه وما منها‪ ،‬وأنه يفني بمن يراقبه عن نفسه وما منها‪ .‬فإذا كان باقيا ً‬
‫بشهود مراقبته فهو في ورطتها لم يتخلص منها‪ ،‬لأن شهود المراقبة لا يكون إلا مع بقائه‪ .‬والمقصود إنما‬
‫هو الفناء والتخلص من نفسه ومن صفاتها وما منها‪.‬‬
‫وقد عرفت أن فوق هذا درجة أعلى منها وأرفع وأشرف‪ ،‬وهي مراقبة مواقع رضى الرب‬
‫ومساخطه في كل حركة‪ ،‬والفناء عما يسخطه بما يحب‪ ،‬والتفرق له و به وفيه‪ ،‬ناظرا ً إلى عين جمع‬
‫العبودية‪ ،‬فانيا ًعن مراده من ر به—ولو علا—بمراد ر به منه‪.‬‬

chapter 23

The Station of Venerating God’s Prohibitions
Among the stations of “You alone we worship and You alone we supplicate for
help” is venerating the prohibitions of God.
God Almighty has said, “And whoever venerates God’s prohibitions, that is
good for him before His Lord” [22:30].
A group of exegetes, God have mercy on them, have explained “God’s prohibitions” as objects of His disobedience, those He has forbidden, and venerating them means abandoning them. Al-Layth (b. Saʿd, the jurist of Egypt,
d. c. 174/790), God have mercy on him, said that God’s prohibitions are those
limits that must not be violated. Another group says that they mean commanding [right] and forbidding [wrong]. Al-Zajjāj (Abū l-Qāsim, the grammarian, d. 337/949) says that it means observing whatever has been obligated
and neglecting which has been prohibited. One group says that in the context
of this verse the phrase means rites, times, and places related to the Pilgrimage.
The fact is that the word ḥurumāt includes all of these meanings, being
the plural form of ḥurma, which means “that which must be revered and protected,” be it rights, persons, times, or places. Revering these means fulfilling
their rights, protecting them from neglect.
The author of al-Manāzil, God have mercy on him, said,
[Upholding] prohibition means to shun acts of opposition and defiance.
By “shunning” (taḥarruj) he means to exit from the discomfort and shame
of opposition; the form tafaʿʿul is used to indicate entry into a thing; e.g.,
tamannā means “he entered into desires,” or tawallaja al-amr (he entered into
an affair), and the like. It is also used to indicate exit from something, such as
taḥarruj itself, and taḥawwub (to abstain from sin) and taʿaththum (to avoid
sin).
He means that prohibition means to exit from the state of discomfort and
shame that attaches to opposing or defying. Since the one who opposes could
be either defiant or afraid, he mentioned both acts of opposition and defiance.
He said,

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬تعظيم حرمات الل ّٰه«‪.‬‬
‫ت ال َل ّـه ِ فهَ ُو َ خ َي ْر ٌ ل َ ّه ُ عِند َ ر َب ِّه ِ﴾ ]الحج‪ .[30:‬قال جماعة من‬
‫ظ ِْم ح ُر ُم َا ِ‬
‫قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َم َن يعُ َ ّ‬
‫المفسر ين—رحمهم الل ّٰه—‪» :‬حرمات الل ّٰه« هاهنا معاصيه وما نهى عنه‪ ،‬وتعظيمها ترك ملابستها‪ .‬قال‬
‫الليث—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪ :‬حرمات الل ّٰه ما لا يحل انتهاكها‪ .‬وقال قوم‪ :‬الحرمات هي الأمر والنهي‪ .‬وقال‬
‫الزجاج‪ :‬الحرمة ما وجب القيام به وحرم التفر يط فيه‪ .‬وقال قوم الحرمات هاهنا المناسك ومشاعر‬
‫الحج زمانا ًومكانا‪ً.‬‬
‫والصواب أن »الحرمات« تعم هذا كله‪ .‬وهي جمع »حرمة«‪ ،‬وهي ما يجب احترامه وحفظه من‬
‫الحقوق والأشخاص والأزمنة والأماكن‪ .‬فتعظيمها توفيتها حقها وحفظها من الإضاعة‪.‬‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪:‬‬
‫»الحرمة هي التحرج عن المخالفات والمجاسرات«‪.‬‬
‫»التحرج« الخروج من حرج المخالفة‪ .‬و بناء تف ُع ّل يكون للدخول في الشيء‪ ،‬كتم َن ّى إذا دخل في‬
‫لج في الأمر ونحوه‪ .‬وللخروج منه‪ ،‬كتحرج وتحوب وتأثم‪ ،‬إذا أراد الخروج من الحرج‬
‫الأمنية‪ ،‬وتو َ ّ‬
‫والحوب والإثم‪.‬‬
‫أراد أن الحرمة هي الخروج من حرج المخالفة‪ ،‬وجسارة الإقدام عليها‪ .‬ولما كان المخالف قسمين‬
‫جاسرا ً وهائبا‪ ً،‬قال عن المخالفات والمجاسرات‪.‬‬

336

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

It has three levels. The first level is the reverence of the command and the
prohibition, not for the fear of punishment, as that would amount to belligerence on behalf of one’s ego; nor for the sake of reward, as that would
be in expectation of a wage; nor to show anyone, as that would be ostentation. All of these traits are part of the worship of one’s ego.
This is an issue on which the People have discoursed profusely, divided as they
are between those who honor and extol this opinion and its adherents, believing that one does not worship God and uphold His command and prohibition
out of the fear of His punishment or greed for His reward. One who does so
is hostage to his own needs and pleasure of his ego, not divine love. A lover
does not seek his own pleasure in the beloved, and such a preoccupation is a
deficiency in his love. His eagerness for the reward is an expectation that God
will owe him his wages because of his deeds. This has two defects. His expectation of wages and sense of the worthiness of his works, and his expectation of
being worthy of the reward. His fear of punishment is, similarly, a disputation
on behalf of his ego. For he disputes with his ego if it disobeys the command,
saying: Do you not fear the fire and its punishment and what God has prepared
for those who will enter it? His disputation between him and his ego amounts to
this. In another sense, he is disputing on behalf of his ego, protecting it against
its enemy that wishes to ruin it. All this is nothing but concern for the ego and its
pleasures, disputation on its behalf, and seeking that which it takes delight in.
This disputation and expectation cannot be gotten rid of except by divesting
one’s performance of command and prohibition from every defect. One must,
rather, perform them out of awe for the One who commands and prohibits, as
He deserves to be worshipped and His prohibitions deserve to be upheld even
if He had not created the Garden and the Fire, and He deserves worship, reverence, and exaltation in His being. As one Israelite report says, “Had I not created
the Garden or Hellfire, would I not be deserving of worship?”
Someone has said in the same vein,
Suppose that the resurrection had not been prophesied
Nor the flame of the Fire set ablaze
Is it not a duty upon mortals
To thank their benefactor?
The noble, pure souls worship Him because He deserves to be worshipped,
exalted, loved, and magnified.
They further say that the servant must not be like a mediocre wage-earner
who works only so long as he is paid, for he is the slave of the wage not a servant
filled with love and aspiration.

‫‪337‬‬

‫‪chapter 23‬‬

‫قال‪» :‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ :‬الدرجة الأولى تعظيم الأمر والنهي لا خوفا ًمن العقو بة‪ ،‬فيكون‬
‫خصومة ً للنفس‪ .‬ولا طلبا ً للمثو بة‪ ،‬فيكون مستشرفا ً للأجرة‪ .‬ولا مشاهدا ً لأحد‪ ،‬فيكون متز ينا ً‬
‫بالمراءاة‪ .‬فإن هذه الأوصاف كلها من شعب عبادة النفس«‪.‬‬
‫هذا الموضع يكثر في كلام القوم‪ .‬والناس بين معظم له ولأصحابه‪ ،‬معتقد أن هذا أرفع درجات‬
‫العبودية‪ ،‬ألا يعبد الل ّٰه و يقوم بأمره ونهيه‪ ،‬خوفا ًمن عقابه ولا طمعا ًفي ثوابه‪.‬‬
‫فإن هذا واقف مع غرضه وحظ نفسه‪ ،‬وأن المحبة تأبى ذلك‪ .‬فإن المحب لا حظ له مع محبو به‪.‬‬
‫فوقوفه مع حظه علة في محبته‪ ،‬وأن طمعه في الثواب تطلع إلى أنه يستحق بعمله على الل ّٰه أجرة‪ .‬ففي‬
‫هذا آفتان‪ :‬تطلعه إلى الأجرة وإحسان ظنه بعمله‪ .‬إذ تطلعه إلى استحقاق الأجر وخوفه من العقاب‬
‫خصومة للنفس‪ .‬فإنه لا يزال يخاصمها إذا خالفت و يقول‪ :‬أما تخافين النار وعذابها‪ ،‬وما أعد الل ّٰه‬
‫لأهلها؟ فلا تزال الخصومة بذلك بينه و بين نفسه‪.‬‬
‫ومن وجه آخر أيضا‪ ً،‬وهو أنهكالمخاصم عن نفسه‪ ،‬المدافع عنها خصمه الذي ير يد هلاكه‪ .‬وهو عين‬
‫الاهتمام بالنفس والالتفات إلى حظوظها‪ ،‬مخاصمة عنها واستدعاء ما تلتذ به‪.‬‬
‫ولا يخلصه من هذه المخاصمة وذلك الاستشراف إلا تجر يد القيام بالأمر والنهي من كل علة‪ ،‬بل‬
‫يقوم به تعظيما لً لآمر الناهي‪ ،‬وأنه أهل أن يعبد وتعظم حرماته ولو لم يخلق جنة ً ولا نارا ً‪] ،‬فهو يستحق‬
‫العبادة والتعظيم والإجلال لذاته‪ ،‬كما في الأ ثر الإسرائيلي‪ :‬لو لم أخلق جنة ً ولا نارا ً‪ ،‬أما كنت أهلا ً‬
‫أن أعبد[‪.‬‬
‫ومنه قول القائل‪:‬‬

‫النار‬

‫لم‬

‫تضرم‬

‫هب البعث لم تأتنا رسله‬

‫وجاحمة‬

‫أليس من الواجب المستح‬

‫ق على ذي الورى الشكر للمنعم‬

‫فالنفوس العلية الزكية تعبده لأنه أهل أن يعبد و يجل و يحب و يعظم‪ .‬فهو لذاته مستحق للعبادة‪ .‬قالوا‪:‬‬
‫ولا يكون العبد كأجير السوء‪ ،‬إن أعطي أجره عمل وإلا لم يعمل‪ .‬فهذا عبد الأجرة لا عبد المحبة‬
‫والإرادة‪.‬‬

338

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

They also say that workers can be divided into two ranks, the wage-earners
and the seekers of nearness to the One whom they obey.
The Exalted Truth has said concerning His prophet David, upon him be
peace, “For him we have nearness as well as a goodly end” [38:25]. The word
zulfā here means nearness, and the goodly end is the good reward. The Exalted
also said, “To those who do good is good, and more” [10:26]. The “good” here is
the reward, and “more” is the station of nearness, which is why it has been interpreted as the seeing of the Face of God, Almighty and Magnificent. These two
are also what Pharaoh promised to the magicians if they defeated Moses. When
they said to him, “Shall we be repaid if we win?” “He said, ‘Indeed, and you will
be among the near ones’ ” [7:113–114]. The Exalted also said, “God promises to
the believers, men and women, Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein
they will abide—blessed dwellings in Gardens of Eden. And far greater is the
pleasure of God!” [9:72].
They further argue that the knowers’ quest is higher in rank and status
[before God], whereas ordinary workers are concerned with reward and wages,
and the two could not be more different.

1

Is God Worshipped for Fear of the Fire and Love for the Garden?

The second group considers this saying [of al-Harawī] among the ecstatic outbursts and frivolities of the People, and argues by the states of the prophets,
messengers, and the truth-lovers, how they supplicated and entreated, and
how they are praised for their fear of the Fire and hope for the Garden. As the
Almighty says in regard to His elite servants who were [wrongly] worshipped by
the associationists, “They hope for His mercy and fear His punishment” [17:57].
Concerning His prophets and messengers, he said, “And Zechariah, when he
cried unto his Lord: My Lord! Leave me not childless, and You are the Best of
inheritors. Then We heard his prayer, and bestowed upon him John, and made
good his wife for him. Lo! they used to vie one with the other in good deeds,
and they cried unto Us in longing and in fear, and were submissive unto Us”
[21:89–90]. That is, they longed for what We have prepared for them, feared
Our punishment. The pronoun “they,” according to the scholars of interpretation, refers here to all the prophets mentioned in this Sūra according to the
generality of the exegetes. Furthermore, raghaban wa-rahaban mean hope of
mercy and fear of the Fire according to them all.
The Exalted Lord mentions and praises His choicest servants for the noblest
of their deeds, and He includes among such deeds their fear of the Fire and
seeking protection from it: “And those who say: ‘O Our Lord, save us from the

‫‪339‬‬

‫‪chapter 23‬‬

‫قالوا‪ :‬والعمال شاخصون إلى منزلتين‪ :‬منزلة الأجرة ومنزلة القرب من المطاع‪.‬‬
‫ب﴾ ]ص‪ .[25:‬فالزلفى‬
‫ن م َآ ٍ‬
‫س َ‬
‫ح ْ‬
‫ن ل َه ُ عِند َناَ ل َزلُ ْفَى و َ ُ‬
‫قال تعالى في حق نبيه داود ﷺ‪﴿ :‬و َِإ َ ّ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫سن َى و َزِ ياَ د َة ٌ﴾‬
‫حسَنوُ ا اْلح ُ ْ‬
‫ن َأ ْ‬
‫منزلة القرب‪ .‬وحسن المآب حسن الثواب والجزاء‪ .‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬ل َّ ِل ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫يونس‪ .[26:‬ف »الحسنى« الجزاء‪ ،‬و»الز يادة« منزلة القرب‪ .‬ولهذا فسرت بالنظر إلى وجه الل ّٰه عز‬
‫جر ًا ِإن ك ُ َن ّا‬
‫ن ل َن َا ل ََأ ْ‬
‫وجل‪ .‬وهذان هما اللذان وعدهما فرعون للسحرة إن غلبوا موسى‪ ،‬فقالوا له‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َ ّ‬
‫ن ال ْم ُق َ َر ّب ِينَ﴾ ]الأعراف‪ .[114–113:‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َع َد َ ال َل ّـه ُ ال ْمؤُ ْم ِن ِينَ‬
‫ل نعَ َْم و َِإ َن ّك ُْم لم َ ِ َ‬
‫ن ال ْغ َال ِب ِينَ ق َا َ‬
‫نح ْ ُ‬
‫َ‬
‫ن‬
‫ن مّ ِ َ‬
‫ضو َا ٌ‬
‫ن ۚ و َرِ ْ‬
‫ت ع َْد ٍ‬
‫ج َن ّا ِ‬
‫ن َطي ِّبةَ ً ف ِي َ‬
‫ك َ‬
‫ن فيِ ه َا و َم َسَا ِ‬
‫تح ْت ِه َا اْلَأْنه َار ُ خ َال ِد ِي َ‬
‫تج ْرِي م ِن َ‬
‫ت َ‬
‫ج َن ّا ٍ‬
‫ت َ‬
‫و َال ْمؤُ ْم ِن َا ِ‬
‫كبرَ ُ﴾ ]التو بة‪.[72:‬‬
‫ال َل ّـه ِ َأ ْ‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬والعارفون عملهم على المنزلة والدرجة‪ ،‬والعمال عملهم على الثواب والأجرة‪ ،‬وشتان ما بينهما‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫وطائفة ثانية تجعل هذا الكلام من شطحات القوم ورعوناتهم‪ ،‬وتحتج بأحوال الأنبياء والرسل‬
‫والصديقين‪ ،‬ودعائهم وسؤالهم‪ ،‬والثناء عليهم بخوفهم من النار‪ ،‬ورجائهم للجنة‪ ،‬كما قال تعالى في حق‬
‫خواص عباده الذين عبدهم المشركون‪» :‬إنهم يرجون رحمته و يخافون عذابه«—كما تقدم—وقال‬
‫جب ْن َا ل َه ُو َو َهبَ ْن َا‬
‫ت خ َي ْر ُ ال ْو َارِث ِينَ ف َاْست َ َ‬
‫ب ل َا ت َذ َْرن ِي فرَ ْد ًا و َ َأن َ‬
‫عن أنبيائه ورسله‪﴿ :‬و َز َكرَ ِ َي ّا ِإْذ ناَ د َ‬
‫ى ر َ َب ّه ُ ر َ ِّ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ت و َي َْدع ُون َن َا ر َغ َب ًا و َر َهبَ ًاۖ ﴾ ]الأنبياء‪–89:‬‬
‫صل َْحن َا ل َه ُ ز َْوج َه ُ ۚ ِإَّنه ُْم ك َانوُ ا ي ُس َارِع ُونَ ف ِي اْلخـ َي ْر َا ِ‬
‫يح ْي َى و َ َأ ْ‬
‫ل َه ُ َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫‪ .[90‬أي رغبا ًفيما عندنا ورهبا ًمن عذابنا‪ .‬والضمير في قوله‪» :‬إنهم«‪ ،‬عائد على الأنبياء المذكور ين في‬
‫هذه السورة عند عامة المفسر ين‪.‬‬
‫و»الرغب والرهب« رجاء الرحمة والخوف من النار عندهم أجمعين‪.‬‬
‫وذكر سبحانه عباده الذين هم خواصه‪ ،‬وأثنى عليهم بأحسن أعمالهم‪ ،‬وجعل منها استعاذتهم به من‬
‫ت‬
‫ساء َ ْ‬
‫ن ع َذ َابَه َا ك َانَ غ َرَام ًا ِإَّنه َا َ‬
‫جه َ َن ّم َۖ ِإ َ ّ‬
‫ب َ‬
‫ن يقَ ُولوُ نَ ر َ َب ّن َا اص ْر ِ ْ‬
‫النار‪ ،‬فقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ف ع َ َن ّا ع َذ َا َ‬

340

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

punishment of the Fire, for its punishment indeed is grievous. What a wretched
abode and station!’ ” [25:65–66].
He also reports that they call upon Him in the name of their faith in Him that
He save them from the Fire, “Those who say: ‘Our Lord, We have truly believed,
so forgive us our sins and save us from the punishment of the Fire’ ” [3:16].
Thus, they considered their faith their best intercessor and asked for salvation from the Fire. Here the Almighty has informed us about the knowers, those
possessed of wisdom and thinking, that they would ask for His Garden and seek
His protection from His Fire:
Lo! In the creation of the heavens and the earth and the difference of night
and day are tokens for men of understanding. Those who remember God,
standing, sitting, and reclining, and consider the creation of the heavens
and the earth:
Our Lord! You have not created this in vain. Glory be to You! Preserve
us from the doom of Fire.
Our Lord! Whomsoever You cause to enter the Fire: him indeed You
have confounded. For evil-doers there will be no helpers.
Our Lord! Lo! we have heard a crier calling unto Faith: “Believe you in
your Lord!” So we believed.
Our Lord! Therefore forgive us our sins, and remit from us our evil
deeds, and make us die the death of the righteous.
Our Lord! And give us that which You have promised to us by Your messengers. Confound us not upon the Day of Resurrection. Lo! You break not
the trust. [3:190–194]
There is no disagreement about what He promised through the tongue of His
messengers: what they asked for is the Garden.
God mentions the supplication of His dearest friend [Abraham], God grant
him blessing and peace:
And He it is who I hope will forgive my error on the Day of Recompense.
O Lord, grant me wisdom and join me with the company of the righteous. And ordain for me a goodly mention among posterity. And make
me among those who will inherit the Garden of Bliss. And forgive my
father, he indeed was among those who have gone astray. And disgrace
me not on the Day they [all] will be raised. [26:82–87]
He asked God for the Garden and sought protection from the fire on the Day of
Resurrection.

‫‪341‬‬

‫‪chapter 23‬‬

‫ستقَ َ ًر ّا و َم ُق َام ًا﴾ ]الفرقان‪ ،[66–65:‬وأخبر عنهم أنهم توسلوا إليه بإ يمانهم أن ينجيهم من النار ]فقال‪:‬‬
‫مُ ْ‬
‫ب ال َن ّارِ﴾ ]آل عمران‪ ،[16:‬فجعلوا أعظم وسائلهم‬
‫﴿ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ن يقَ ُولوُ نَ ر َ َب ّن َا ِإ َن ّن َا آم َ َن ّا ف َاْغف ِر ْ ل َن َا ذ ُنوُ ب َن َا و َقنِ َا ع َذ َا َ‬
‫إليه وسيلة الإ يمان أن ينجيهم من النار‪ .‬وأخبر تعالى عن العارفين أولي الألباب والفكر أنهم كانوا‬
‫ف‬
‫ختلِ َا ِ‬
‫ض و َا ْ‬
‫ت و َاْلَأْر ِ‬
‫سم َاو َا ِ‬
‫ق ال َ ّ‬
‫ن ف ِي خ َل ْ ِ‬
‫يسألونه جنته‪ ،‬و يتعوذون به من ناره[‪ ،‬فقال تعالى‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َ ّ‬
‫ق‬
‫جنوُ بِه ِْم و َي َت َف َ َك ّر ُونَ ف ِي خ َل ْ ِ‬
‫ن ي َْذكرُ ُونَ ال َل ّـه َ قيِ َام ًا و َقعُ ُود ًا و َع َلىَ ُ‬
‫ب ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ت لّ ُِأول ِي اْلَألبْ َا ِ‬
‫ل و َال َنّه َارِ ل َآياَ ٍ‬
‫ال َل ّي ْ ِ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ك م َن ت ُْد ِ‬
‫ب ال َن ّارِ ر َ َب ّن َا ِإ َن ّ َ‬
‫سب ْحاَ ن َ َ‬
‫ت هَٰ ذ َا باَ طِل ًا ُ‬
‫ض ر َ َب ّن َا م َا خ َلقَ ْ َ‬
‫ت و َاْلَأْر ِ‬
‫سم َاو َا ِ‬
‫ال َ ّ‬
‫خ ِ‬
‫ل ال َن ّار َ‬
‫ك فقَ نِ َا ع َذ َا َ‬
‫ن َأْن آم ِنوُ ا برِ بَ ِّك ُْم فآَ م َ َن ّا ۚ ر َ َب ّن َا‬
‫صاٍر َرّ َب ّن َا ِإ َن ّن َا سَم ِعْن َا م ُن َادِياً ي ُن َادِي ل ِل ِْإ يم َا ِ‬
‫ظال ِم ِينَ م ِْن َأن َ‬
‫خز َي ْت َه ُ ۖ و َم َا ل ِل َ ّ‬
‫فقَ َْد َأ ْ‬
‫ك و َل َا ُ‬
‫سل ِ َ‬
‫سي ِّئ َاتنِ َا و َتوَ فَ َ ّن َا م ََع اْلَأ ب ْراَ رِ ر َ َب ّن َا و َآتنِ َا م َا و َع َد َت ّن َا ع َلىَ ر ُ ُ‬
‫ك ّف ِر ْ ع َ َن ّا َ‬
‫ف َاْغف ِر ْ ل َن َا ذ ُنوُ ب َن َا و َ َ‬
‫تخ ْزِناَ يوَ ْم َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ف ال ْميِعاَ د َ﴾ ]آل عمران‪ .[194–190:‬ولا خلاف أن الموعود به على لسان رسله‬
‫تخ ْل ِ ُ‬
‫ك ل َا ُ‬
‫ال ْق ِي َام َة ِ ۗ ِإ َن ّ َ‬
‫الذين سألوه هو الجنة‪.‬‬
‫ب ل ِي ح ًُمْك ا‬
‫وقال عن خليله إ براهيم ﷺ‪﴿ :‬و َال َ ّذ ِي َأْطم َُع َأن يغَ ْف ِر َ ل ِي َ‬
‫ب هَ ْ‬
‫خط ِيئتَ ِي يوَ ْم َ الد ِّيِن ر َ ِّ‬
‫ج َن ّة ِ ال َن ّع ِيِم و َاْغف ِر ْ لأِ َ ب ِي ِإ َن ّه ُ‬
‫جع َلنْ ِي م ِن و َر َثةَ ِ َ‬
‫ن و َا ْ‬
‫خر ِ ي َ‬
‫ق ف ِي اْلآ ِ‬
‫صْد ٍ‬
‫جع َل ل ِ ّي ل ِسَانَ ِ‬
‫صاِلحـ ِينَ و َا ْ‬
‫و َ َأْلح ِْقن ِي باِ ل َ ّ‬
‫تخ ْزِن ِي يوَ ْم َ ي ُب ْع َثوُ نَ﴾ ]الشعراء‪ ،[87–82:‬فسأل الل ّٰه الجنة واستعاذ به من خزي‬
‫ضال ِّينَ و َل َا ُ‬
‫ن ال َ ّ‬
‫ك َانَ م ِ َ‬
‫يوم البعث‪.‬‬

342

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

He the Exalted declares the Garden to be a promise much asked for, that is,
one which His servants and allies asked for.
The Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, commanded his Community to ask for the highest station in the Garden at the propitious times of
acceptance of supplications such as immediately after the call to prayers, and
said that whoever does so, “My intercession is guaranteed him.”1
When Sulaym of the Helpers [of Medina] said to him, “As for me, I ask God
for the Garden and seek protection from the Fire, even though I am no good
at what you and Muʿādh murmur about.” The Prophet replied, “It is about the
very same thing that I and Muʿādh murmur!”2
It appears in the Ṣaḥīḥ [of al-Bukhārī and Muslim] in the tradition of the
angels who go around and report to God about the writ of men,
God asks the angels about His servants, even though He Almighty and
Blessed is All-knowing. They reply, “We have come to You from the company of Your slaves who were engaged in tahlīl (saying lā ilāha illa allāh,
there is no god but God), takbīr (God is the Greatest), taḥmīd (Praise is
for God), and tamjīd (God is Most Honorable).”
God says to them, “Have they seen Me?”
“No O Lord. They haven’t seen You,” the Angels reply.
God says, “What would it be like if they were to see Me?”
They reply, “If they were to see you, they would glorify you ever more
fervently.”
They further say, “O Lord, they ask You for Your Garden.”
He says, “Have they seen it?”
They say, “No, by Your Might, they haven’t.”
He says, “What would it be like if they were to see it?”
They say, “Were they to see it, they would ask for it ever more fervently.”
The Angels then say, “O Lord, they seek Your protection from the Fire.”
He says, “Have they seen it?”
They say, “No, by Your Might, they haven’t.”
He says, “What would it be like if they were to see it?”
They say, “Were they to see it, they would fear it ever more fervently.”
He says, “I make you witness that I have forgiven them and granted
them what they have asked for and saved them from what they sought
protection.”3
1 Bukhārī #614 and Muslim #384 with slight variation.
2 Abū Dāwūd #792.
3 Bukhārī #6408; Muslim #2689.

‫‪343‬‬

‫‪chapter 23‬‬

‫وأخبر سبحانه عن الجنة أنها كانت وعدا ً عليه مسئولا‪ ً،‬أي يسأله إ ياها عباده وأولياؤه‪.‬‬
‫وأمر النبي ﷺ أمته أن يسألوا له في وقت الإجابة—عقيب الأذان—أعلى منزلة ً في الجنة‪.‬‬
‫وأخبرهم أن من سألها له »حلت عليه شفاعته«‪.‬‬
‫وقال له سليم الأنصاري‪ :‬أم َا إني أسأل الل ّٰه الجنة وأعوذ به من النار‪ ،‬لا أحسن دندنتك ولا دندنة‬
‫معاذ‪ ،‬فقال‪» :‬أنا ومعاذ حولها ندندن«‪.‬‬
‫ضل عن كتاب الناس‪» :‬إن الل ّٰه تعالى يسألهم عن‬
‫وفي الصحيح—في حديث الملائكة السيارة الف ُ َ ّ‬
‫عباده فيقولون‪ :‬أتيناك من عند عباد لك‪ ،‬يهللونك و يكبرونك و يحمدونك و يمجدونك‪ .‬فيقول عز وجل‪:‬‬
‫وهل رأوني؟ فيقولون‪ :‬لا يا رب‪ ،‬ما رأوك‪ .‬فيقول عز وجل‪ :‬فكيف لو رأوني؟ فيقولون‪ :‬لو رأوك‬
‫لكانوا أشد تمجيدا ً‪ .‬قالوا‪ :‬يا رب‪ ،‬و يسألونك جنتك‪ .‬فيقول‪ :‬هل رأوها؟ فيقولون‪ :‬لو رأوها لكانوا لها‬
‫أشد طلبا‪ ً.‬قالوا‪ :‬و يستعيذونك من النار‪ ،‬فيقول عز وجل‪ :‬وهل رأوها؟ فيقولون‪ :‬لا وعزتك ما رأوها‪.‬‬
‫فيقول‪ :‬فكيف لو رأوها؟ فيقولون‪ :‬لو رأوها لكانوا أشد منها هر با‪ ً.‬فيقول‪ :‬أشهدكم أني قد غفرت لهم‬
‫وأعطيتهم ما سألوا وأعذتهم مما استعاذوا منه«‪.‬‬

344

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The Qurʾan and the Sunna are both filled with praise for those servants and
ally-saints for their asking and hoping for the Garden and seeking protection
from and fearing the Fire.
They also say that the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, has commanded his Companions, “Seek protection of God from the Fire”4 and said to
those who asked for His companionship in the Garden, “Help me in your case
by prostrating frequently.”5
They further argue that the work to seek the Garden and salvation from the
Fire is one of the objectives of the lawgiver from his Community, to remember them both at all times and never forget, faith in them being a condition for
salvation. To work to attain the Garden and salvation from the Fire is pure faith.
They argue that the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, motivated
his Companions and his Community by describing [the Garden] and glorified
it for them so they would seek it. He said,
“Who rolls up his sleeves for the Garden? By the Lord of the Kaʿba, it is
a glimmering light, a restive fragrance, a beautiful spouse, a ripe fruit, a
lofty palace, a flowing river …” So the Companions, God be pleased with
them, said, “O Messenger of God, We have rolled up our sleeves for it.” He
said, “Say: If God wills.”6
If we go on counting every time it appears in the Sunna, “Whosoever does suchand-such, God will enter him into the Garden,” in order to encourage working
for its sake, and to make it the motivation for action, the list would be very long
indeed, for it is the case in every kind of action.
They ask how can working for the sake of reward and fear of punishment be
defective when the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, has
encouraged it, saying, “Whoever does such-and-such, each of the eight doors
of the Garden are opened;”7 and “Whosoever says, ‘Glory to God and Praise,’
a date-palm tree is planted for him in the Garden;”8 and “Whoever dresses a
Muslim who had nothing to wear God will dress him in the robes of the Garden,”9 and “One who visits a sick person will have a robe of the Garden,”10 and
the prophetic tradition is filled with such? Do you think he has motivated his
Community to a goal that is deficient and flawed, setting aside a goal that is
high and without any tinge of defect?

4 Muslim #588.
5 Muslim #489.

‫‪345‬‬

‫‪chapter 23‬‬

‫والقرآن والسنة مملوءان من الثناء على عباده وأوليائه بسؤال الجنة ورجائها‪ ،‬والاستعاذة من النار‬
‫والخوف منها‪.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬وقد قال النبي ﷺ لأصحابه‪» :‬استعيذوا بالل ّٰه من النار«‪ .‬وقال لمن سأله مرافقته في الجنة‪:‬‬
‫»أعني على نفسك بكثرة السجود«‪.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬والعمل على طلب الجنة والنجاة من النار مقصود الشارع من أمته‪ ،‬ليكونا دائما على ذكر منهم‬
‫فلا ينسونهما‪ ،‬ولأن الإ يمان بهما شرط في النجاة‪ .‬والعمل على حصول الجنة والنجاة من النار هو‬
‫محض الإ يمان‪.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬وقد حض النبي ﷺ عليها أصحابه وأمته بوصفها‪ ،‬وجلاها لهم ليخطبوها‪ ،‬وقال‪» :‬ألا مشمر‬
‫للجنة؟ فإنها—ورب الـكعبة—نور يتلألأ‪ ،‬ور يحانة تهتز‪ ،‬وزوجة حسناء‪ ،‬وفاكهة نضيجة‪ ،‬وقصر‬
‫مشيد‪ ،‬ونهر مطرد«‪ .‬الحديث‪ .‬فقال الصحابة—رضي الل ّٰه عنهم—‪ :‬يا رسول الل ّٰه‪ ،‬نحن المشمرون لها‪،‬‬
‫فقال‪» :‬قولوا‪ :‬إن شاء الل ّٰه«‪.‬‬
‫ولو ذهبنا نذكر ما في السنة من قوله‪» :‬من عمل كذا وكذا أدخله الل ّٰه الجنة« تحر يضا ًعلى عمله من‬
‫أجلها‪ ،‬وأن تكون هي الباعثة على العمل‪ ،‬لطال ذلك جدا ً‪ ،‬وذلك في جميع الأعمال‪.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬فكيف يكون العمل لأجل الثواب وخوف العقاب معلولا‪ ً،‬ورسول الل ّٰه ﷺ يحرض عليه‬
‫و يقول‪» :‬من فعل كذا فتحت له أبواب الجنة الثمانية«‪ ،‬و»من قال سبحان الل ّٰه و بحمده غرست له‬
‫نخلة في الجنة«‪ ،‬و»من كسا مسلما ًعلى عري كساه الل ّٰه من حلل الجنة«‪ ،‬و»عائد المر يض في مخرفة‬
‫الجنة«‪ .‬والحديث مملوء من ذلك؟ أفتراه يحرض الأمة على مطلب معلول ناقص‪ ،‬و يدع المطلب العالي‬
‫البريء من شوائب العلل لا يحرضهم عليه؟‬

‫‪Ibn Māja #4332.‬‬
‫‪See, for example, Muslim #28, #234.‬‬
‫‪Tirmidhī #3464 with slight variation.‬‬
‫‪Abū Dāwūd #1682 with slight variation.‬‬
‫‪Muslim #2568.‬‬

‫‪6‬‬
‫‪7‬‬
‫‪8‬‬
‫‪9‬‬
‫‪10‬‬

346

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

They say that the Glorified loves from His servants that they ask for His Garden and seek refuge from His Fire. He loves to be asked and is displeased with
those who do not ask, and the greatest thing He is asked for is the Garden and
the greatest thing He is sought for protection from is the Fire.
Works that seek the Garden are dear to the Lord, pleasing to Him, and seeking it constitutes a kind of worship to Him. To enact all kinds of worship is
better than omitting some of them.
They further argue that when a worker fails to keep his eyes on the Garden
and Hellfire, seeking the Garden and its hope, his determination suffers from
fatigue, his resolve weakens, his motivation dissipates. The stronger he is in
seeking the Garden and working for it, the stronger his motivation, the greater
his resolve, the more complete his struggle, and this is a matter well-known
through [spiritual] taste.
They say that if this were not required by the lawgiver, he would not have
described, beautified, and presented the Garden to the servants, informing
them of its details in ways that their intellects can grasp; what is beyond that,
however, he has informed them of it only briefly. All of this is only to whet their
appetite, encouraging them to do what it takes to get to it.
They say that God Almighty has said, “And God calls to the Abode of Peace”
[10:25], which is an encouragement to respond to this call, hasten to it, and
strive for it.
The truth [taking both opinions into consideration] is that the Garden is
not the name for merely trees and fruit, food and drink, wide-eyed women,
and rivers and palaces; most people are mistaken in what is signified by
“the Garden.” It is, rather, the nature of absolute, unqualified bliss. The greatest of the blessings of the Garden is the delight of looking at the Face of
the Noble Lord, hearing His words, and the coolness of the eyes that will
be obtained in His company and His good pleasure. There is no comparison between the pleasure that will come from the delightful food, drink,
clothing, and faces and the ultimate bliss of being in divine presence; for the
smallest of God’s good pleasure is greater than the greatest of the Gardens
and whatever is in it. God Almighty says, “Good pleasure of God is greater”
[9:72]. In fact, He mentions it in indefinite form in an affirmative statement,
which means that anything that is part of His pleasure is greater than the Garden!
Even a little from you pleases me except that
A little from you is not called a little!

‫‪347‬‬

‫‪chapter 23‬‬

‫قالوا‪ :‬وأيضا ً فالل ّٰه سبحانه يحب من عباده أن يسألوه جنته و يستعيذوا به من ناره‪ .‬فإنه يحب أن‬
‫يسأل ومن لم يسأله يغضب عليه‪ .‬وأعظم ما سئل الجنة‪ ،‬وأعظم ما استعيذ به منه النار‪.‬‬
‫فالعمل لطلب الجنة محبوب للرب مرضي له‪ .‬وطلبها عبودية للرب‪ ،‬والقيام بعبوديتهكلها أولى من‬
‫تعطيل بعضها‪.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬وإذا خلا العامل ملاحظة الجنة والنار وطلب الجنة ورجائها فترت عزائمه وضعفت همته‬
‫ووهى باعثه‪ ،‬وكلما كان أشد طلبا ً للجنة وعملا ً لها‪ ،‬كان الباعث له أقوى والهمة أشد والسعي أتم‪،‬‬
‫وهذا أمر معلوم بالذوق‪.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬ولو لم يكن هذا مطلو با لً لشارع لما وصف الجنة للعباد‪ ،‬وز ينها لهم وعرضها عليهم‪ ،‬وأخبرهم‬
‫عن تفاصيل ما تصل إليه عقولهم منها‪ ،‬وما عداه أخبرهم به مجملا‪ ً.‬كل هذا تشو يقا ًلهم إليها‪ ،‬وحثا ً‬
‫لهم على السعي لها سعيها‪.‬‬
‫سل َاِم﴾ ]يونس‪ .[25:‬وهذا حث على إجابة هذه‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬وقد قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َال َل ّـه ُ ي َْدع ُو ِإل َى ٰ د َارِ ال َ ّ‬
‫الدعوة‪ ،‬والمبادرة إليها والمسارعة في الإجابة‪.‬‬
‫والتحقيق أن يقال‪ :‬الجنة ليست اسما ً لمجرد الأشجار والفواكه والطعام والشراب‪ ،‬والحور العين‬
‫والأنهار والقصور‪ ،‬وأكثر الناس يغلطون في مسمى الجنة‪ .‬فإن الجنة اسم لدار النعيم المطلق الكامل‪.‬‬
‫ومن أعظم نعيم الجنة التمتع بالنظر إلى وجه الرب الـكر يم‪ ،‬وسماع كلامه‪ ،‬وقرة العين بالقرب منه‬
‫ورضوانه‪ .‬فلا نسبة للذة ما فيها من المأكول والمشروب والملبوس والصور إلى هذه اللذة أبدا ً‪ .‬فأيسر‬
‫كبرَ ُ﴾‬
‫ن ال َل ّـه ِ َأ ْ‬
‫ن مّ ِ َ‬
‫ضو َا ٌ‬
‫يسير من رضوانه أكبر من الجنان وما فيها من ذلك‪ ،‬كما قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َرِ ْ‬
‫]التو به‪ ،[72:‬وأتى به منكرا ًفي سياق الإثبات‪ ،‬أي‪ :‬أي شيء كان من رضاه عن عبده فهو أكبر من‬
‫الجنة‪.‬‬

‫قليل منك يقنعني ولـكن‬

‫قليلك لا يقال له قليل‪.‬‬

348

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

In a sound tradition, the tradition of the Sighting [God], it has it, “By God, He
never blessed them with anything dearer to them than the Look at His Face.”11
In another tradition, “When He Almighty shows Himself to them and they see
His Face with their eyes, they will forget all the pleasures and disregard them
and not turn to them anymore.”12 There is no doubt in this, yet it is greater than
what thought can capture or fancy can grasp. Especially when the lovers attain
the company of love, for “A man is with whom he loves,”13 and there is no qualification of this judgment, and it is true for those who were present [with the
Prophet when he said it] and those who were not.
What blessing, what delight, what coolness of the eye, what success can
match the blessing of that divine with-ness and its delight? Is there anything
above the coolness of the eye and bliss that comes from the company of the
Beloved, more magnificent, perfect, and beautiful than whom there is none?
This, by God, is the signpost to which the lovers are headed, the banner to
which the masters have guided, and it is the soul and the life of the signifier
“the Garden.” It is because of it that the Garden is good, and it is upon this that
it is built.
How, then, can it be said that God is not worshipped for the sake of His Garden or fear of His Fire?
The same is true of the Fire. What its denizens suffer of being veiled from
God, of His denigration of them, His wrath, displeasure, and loathing is far
greater than the blaze of the Fire in their bodies and souls. Rather, it is the blaze
of the Fire in their hearts first, which has caused its blaze in their bodies and
whence it begins.
The quest of the prophets, the messengers, and the truth-lovers, and the martyrs and the righteous is nothing but the Garden, and their fear is the Fire. God
alone we seek for help and reliance; there is no power to change or resist except
through Him, and He is sufficient for us, and the best of Guarantors is He!
The object of the People [in belittling the Garden and Hellfire] is that the
servant ought to worship his Lord as is His right; a slave who asks for wages
to serve his master is a fool, fallen from the eyes of the master, if not outright
worthy of chastisement, and his servitude requires service to the master. Only
one who denies his servitude serves for wages either because he is free or slave
of another. But all creation is His slave in reality, His ownership of them is the
reality; there are no freemen among them or slaves to another master. Their
service to Him, then, is the duty of their servitude, and their asking for wages
is their abandoning of servitude.

11

Muslim #181; al-Dārimī counts twenty-some reports to this effect and claims that there

‫‪349‬‬

‫‪chapter 23‬‬

‫وفي الحديث الصحيح—حديث الرؤ ية—‪» :‬فوالله ما أعطاهم الل ّٰه شيئا ًأحب إليهم من النظر إلى‬
‫وجهه«‪ .‬وفي حديث آخر‪» :‬أنه سبحانه إذا تجلى لهم ورأوا وجهه عيانا‪ ً،‬نسوا ما هم فيه من النعيم‬
‫وذهلوا عنه‪ ،‬ولم يلتفوا إليه«‪ .‬ولا ر يب أن الأمر هكذا‪ ،‬وهو أجل مما يخطر بالبال أو يدور في الخيال‪،‬‬
‫ولا سيما عند فوز المحبين هناك بمعية المحبة‪ .‬فإن المرء مع من أحب‪ .‬ولا تخصيص في هذا الحكم‪ ،‬بل‬
‫هو ثابت شاهدا ً وغائبا‪ً.‬‬
‫فأي نعيم وأي لذة وأي قرة عين‪ ،‬وأي فوز يداني نعيم تلك المعية ولذتها وقرة العين بها؟‬
‫وهل فوق نعيم قرة العين بمعية المحبوب‪ ،‬الذي لا شيء أجل منه ولا أكمل ولا أجمل قرة البتة؟‬
‫وهذا—والل ّٰه—هو العلم الذي شمر إليه المحبون‪ ،‬واللواء الذي أمه العارفون‪ ،‬وهو روح مسمى الجنة‬
‫وحياتها‪ .‬و به طابت الجنة وعليه قامت‪.‬‬
‫فكيف يقال‪ :‬لا يعبد الل ّٰه طلبا ًلجنته‪ ،‬ولا خوفا ًمن ناره؟‬
‫وكذلك النار‪ ،‬فإن ما لأر بابها من عذاب الحجاب عن الل ّٰه وإهانته‪ ،‬وغضبه وسخطه‪ ،‬والبعد عنه‬
‫أعظم من ]التهاب النار في أجسامهم وأرواحهم[‪ ،‬بل التهاب هذه النار في قلو بهم‪ .‬هو الذي أوجب‬
‫التهابها في أبدانهم ومنها سرت إليها‪.‬‬
‫فمطلوب الأنبياء والمرسلين والصديقين والشهداء والصالحـين هو الجنة‪ .‬وهر بهم من النار‪ .‬والل ّٰه‬
‫المستعان وعليه التكلان‪ .‬ولا حول ولا قوة إلا به‪ ،‬وهو حسبنا الل ّٰه ونعم الوكيل‪.‬‬
‫ومقصد القوم أن العبد يعبد ر به بحق العبودية‪ .‬والعبد إذا طلب من سيده أجرة ً على خدمته له‬
‫كان أحمق ساقطا ًمن عين سيده‪ ،‬إن لم يستوجب عقو بته‪ .‬إذ عبوديته تقتضي خدمته له‪ .‬وإنما يخدم‬
‫بالأجرة من لا عبودية للمخدوم عليه‪ .‬إما أن يكون حرا ً في نفسه أو عبدا ً لغيره‪ .‬وأما من الخلق عبيده‬
‫حقا‪ ً،‬وملـكه على الحقيقة‪ ،‬ليس فيهم حر ولا عبد لغيره‪ ،‬فخدمتهم له بحق العبودية‪ .‬فاقتضاؤهم للأجرة‬
‫خروج عن محض العبودية‪.‬‬

‫‪are still others, and that the reports of the Sighting of God in the Garden have reached‬‬
‫‪the level of tawātur (recurrence). Al-Dārimī, al-Radd ʿalā al-jahmiyya (Kuwait: Dār ibn al‬‬‫‪Athīr, 1995), 124–130.‬‬
‫‪There is no Hadith with this wording, but it has been recorded as the words of al-Ḥasan‬‬
‫‪al-Baṣrī. See Kitāb al-sharīʿa 2:982. See Madārij(Ṣ), 1531.‬‬
‫‪Tirmidhī #3535.‬‬

‫‪12‬‬
‫‪13‬‬

350

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

This cannot be denied without qualification, nor can it be accepted without
qualification; it requires discrimination.
We have mentioned in the beginning of this book the various perspectives
that people have on this question [of worship], and we have explained the path
of the rightly guided among them.
People are of four kinds.
First, those who want neither their Lord nor His reward, and they are his enemies in truth, and such are the people of perpetual punishment. Their failure
to desire His reward, either because they do not affirm His existence or because
they prefer the short-term over Him even if it causes His displeasure.
Second, those who desire Him and His reward, and such are the elite of His
creation. The Almighty said, “If you [women] desire God and His Messenger
and the Abode of Hereafter: God, then, has truly prepared for the righteous
women among you a great recompense” [24:29]. This is how He addresses the
best of the women of the world, the wives of His Prophet. The Almighty also
said, “Whosoever desires the hereafter and puts forth its due struggle while
believing: the works of such will be fruitful” [17:19]. He thus declaimed that the
fruitful works are those through which afterlife is sought.
Even more explicit are His words to the elite among His ally-saints, the Companions of His Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, on the Day of Uḥud,
“Among you there are those who desire this world and among you there are
those who desire the hereafter [3:152],” thus dividing them between these two
types with no third. Those who say to this, “Where is he who desires God?” are
in error. For desiring the Hereafter is the way to desiring God and His reward,
for the desire for His reward does not negate desiring God.
Third, those who desire from God but do not desire God, and such a one is
utterly deficient. This is the state of him who is ignorant of his Lord, who heard
that there is the Garden and Hellfire, and there is nothing in his heart but the
desire for the created pleasures of the Garden, nor occurs there to him anything
else whatsoever. This is the case even of most of the theologians, such as those
who deny the Sighting of God, the delight in looking at His face in the hereafter, the hearing of His words, and His love. They find faults in those who say
that they love God: such are the slaves of the wages, incapable of desiring God
Almighty.
Some among them even explicitly declare that the desire for God is impossible.
They say that the will pertains only to accidents; the preeternal cannot be
desired, and they deny the desire for God in the extreme. The highest desire
in their view is for the food, drink, intercourse, and robes of the Garden, and
things like that. Such are in error, as are those who say that we do not worship

‫‪351‬‬

‫‪chapter 23‬‬

‫وهذا لا ينكر على الإطلاق ولا يقبل على الإطلاق‪ ،‬وهو موضع تفصيل وتمييز‪.‬‬
‫وقد تقدم في أول الكتاب ذكر طرق الخلق في هذا الموضع‪ .‬و بينا طر يق أهل الاستقامة‪.‬‬
‫فالناس أر بعة أقسام‪:‬‬
‫أحدهم‪ :‬من لا ير يد ر به ولا ير يد ثوابه‪ .‬فهؤلاء أعداؤه حقا ً وهم أهل العذاب الدائم‪ .‬وعدم‬
‫إرادتهم لثوابه إما لعدم تصديقهم به‪ ،‬وإما لإ يثار العاجل عليه ولو كان فيه سخطه‪.‬‬
‫كنت َُّن ترُ ِْدنَ ال َل ّـه َ‬
‫والقسم الثاني‪ :‬من ير يده و ير يد ثوابه‪ .‬وهؤلاء خواص خلقه‪ .‬قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َِإن ُ‬
‫جر ًا ع َظ ِيم ًا﴾ ]الأحزاب‪ .[29:‬فهذا خطابه‬
‫ت م ِنكَُّن َأ ْ‬
‫سن َا ِ‬
‫ن ال َل ّـه َ َأع ََّد للِ ْم ُْح ِ‬
‫خر َة َ ف ِ َإ َ ّ‬
‫سول َه ُ و َال َد ّار َ اْلآ ِ‬
‫و َر َ ُ‬
‫ك ك َانَ‬
‫ن ف َُأول َٰئ ِ َ‬
‫سعْي َه َا و َه ُو َ م ُؤ ْم ِ ٌ‬
‫سع َى ل َه َا َ‬
‫خر َة َ و َ‬
‫لخـير نساء العالم أزواج نبيه‪ .‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َم َْن َأر َاد َ اْلآ ِ‬
‫َ ٰ‬
‫شكُور ًا﴾ ]الإسراء‪ ،[19:‬فأخبر أن السعي المشكور سعي من أراد الآخرة‪.‬‬
‫سعْي ُه ُم َمّ ْ‬
‫َ‬
‫وأصرح من هذا قوله لخواص أوليائه—وهم أصحاب نبيه ﷺ في يوم أحد‪﴿ :‬م ِنك ُم َمّن يرُ ِيد ُ ال ُد ّن ْي َا‬
‫خر َة َ﴾ ]آل عمران‪ .[152:‬فقسمهم إلى هذين القسمين اللذين لا ثالث لهما‪.‬‬
‫و َم ِنك ُم َمّن يرُ ِيد ُ اْلآ ِ‬
‫وقد غلط من قال‪ :‬فأ ين من ير يد الل ّٰه؟ فإن إرادة الآخرة عبارة عن إرادة الل ّٰه وثوابه‪ ،‬فإرادة‬
‫الثواب لا تنافي إرادة الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫والقسم الثالث‪ :‬من ير يد من الل ّٰه ولا ير يد الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فهذا ناقص غاية النقص‪ .‬وهو حال الجاهل بر به‪،‬‬
‫الذي سمع أن ثم جنة ً ونارا ً‪ ،‬فليس في قلبه غير إرادة نعيم الجنة المخلوقة‪ ،‬ولا يخطر بباله سواه البتة‪،‬‬
‫بل هذا حال أكثر المتكلمين المنكر ين رؤ ية الل ّٰه ]والتلذذ بالنظر إلى وجهه في الآخرة‪ ،‬وسماع كلامه‬
‫وحبه‪ ،‬والمنكر ين على من يزعم أنه يحب الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وهم عبيد الأجرة المحضة‪ ،‬فهؤلاء لا ير يدون الل ّٰه تعالى[‪.‬‬
‫ومنهم من يصرح بأن إرادة الل ّٰه محال‪ .‬قالوا‪ :‬لأن الإرادة إنما ٺتعلق بالحادث‪ .‬فالقديم لا يراد‪.‬‬
‫فهؤلاء منكرون لإرادة الل ّٰه غاية الإنكار‪ ،‬وأعلى الإرادة عندهم إرادة الأكل والشرب والنكاح‬
‫واللباس في الجنة وتوابع ذلك‪ .‬فهؤلاء في شق‪ ،‬وأولئك—الذين قالوا‪ :‬لم نعبده طلبا ً لجنته ولا هر با ً‬

352

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Him seeking the Garden or fearing the Fire; they are two opposite extremes, farther than each other than the two easts. [Those who deny the desire for God]
are blinded by the most impenetrable veil, the most stubborn in nature and
hardest in heart and farthest from the soul of love and devotion and bliss of
the souls and the hearts. They declare as unbelievers the people of love and
desire for God, who seek their delight in Him and affirm the delight of the look
at His Face and the unmediated hearing of His words. Such are not humans
except in appearance, their rank [in the other party’s view] being that of the
inanimate objects and irrational beasts, veiled and blinded behind a thick veil
against the knowledge of their own selves and its perfection as well as against
the knowledge of their deity and the secret of His service.
Both groups are bizarre to anyone who cares to examine them.
The fourth kind, which is impossible, is those who desire God but do not
desire from Him, and this is what [the mystics in question] claim: their quest,
any other than which is defective, for all knowers must end up here, is that God
becomes one’s desire such that he wishes for nothing from God. As it is reported
from Abū Yazīd, God be pleased with him, when he said, “I was asked, ‘What do
you desire?’ I said ‘I desire to not desire.’”
This in fact is absolutely impossible by reason as well as nature, by sense as
well as divine law. Desire is a necessity for the living, and one can be stripped
of it only if one loses reason and sense, as when inebriated, unconscious, or
asleep. They do not deny the vanishing of will on the part of anyone other than
Him, the created being whose will opposes His will. But is not the seeker of this
state desiring of His nearness and delight, of perpetually being in His watch
and presence? What will is greater than this?
True, one who abstains from one desire in favor of another loftier than it has
not in fact left desire, but simply transferred from one desire to another, and
from one object of desire to another. As for one’s parting from the attribute
of desire altogether while being in his senses, that is impossible, even if we
judge such a person to be befuddled, absent from his ego. We do not deny such
symptoms, but such a state is temporary, not permanent, and certainly not the
ultimate goal and quest of the seekers, nor possible for the human being, nor
a command, nor a high station so that one would be required to seek it. This is
the explanation of this issue. God knows best.

‫‪353‬‬

‫‪chapter 23‬‬

‫من ناره—في شق‪ .‬وهما طرفا نقيض بينهما أعظم من بعد المشرقين‪ .‬وهؤلاء من أكثف الناس‬
‫حجابا‪ ً،‬وأغلظهم طباعا‪ ً،‬وأقساهم قلو با‪ ً،‬وأبعدهم عن روح المحبة والتأله ونعيم الأرواح والقلوب‪.‬‬
‫وهم يكفرون أصحاب المحبة والشوق إلى الل ّٰه والتلذذ بحبه‪ ،‬والتصديق بلذة النظر إلى وجهه وسماع‬
‫كلامه منه بلا واسطة‪.‬‬
‫وأولئك لا يعدونهم من البشر إلا بالصورة‪ ،‬ومرتبتهم عندهم قر يبة من مرتبة الجماد والحيوان‬
‫البهيم‪ .‬وهم عندهم في حجاب كثيف عن معرفة نفوسهم وكمالها‪ ،‬ومعرفة معبودهم وسر عبوديته‪.‬‬
‫وحال الطائفتين عجب لمن اطلع عليه‪.‬‬
‫والقسم الرابع—وهو محال—أن ير يد الل ّٰه ولا ير يد منه‪ .‬فهذا هو الذي يزعم هؤلاء أنه مطلو بهم‪،‬‬
‫وأن من لم يصل إليه ففي سيره علة‪ ،‬وأن العارف ينتهي إلى هذا المقام‪ ،‬أن يكون الل ّٰه مراده ولا‬
‫ير يد منه شيئا‪ ً،‬كما يحكى عن أبي يز يد—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—أنه قال‪ :‬قيل لي‪ :‬ما تر يد؟ فقلت‪ :‬أر يد ألا‬
‫أر يد‪ .‬وهذا في التحقيق عين المحال الممتنع‪ ،‬عقلا ًوفطرة ً وحسا ًوشرعا‪ ً.‬فإن الإرادة من لوازم الحي‪.‬‬
‫وإنما يعرض له التجرد عنها بالغيبة عن عقله وحسه‪ ،‬كالسكر والإغماء والنوم‪ .‬فنحن لا ننكر التجر يد‬
‫عن إرادة ما سواه من المخلوقات التي تزاحم إرادتها إرادته‪ .‬أفليس صاحب هذه الحال مريدا ً لقر به‬
‫ورضاه ودوام مراقبته والحضور معه؟ وأي إرادة فوق هذه؟‬
‫نعم‪ ،‬قد زهد في مراد لمراد أجل منه وأعلى‪ ،‬فما خرج عن الإرادة‪ ،‬وإنما انتقل من إرادة إلى‬
‫إرادة‪ ،‬ومن مراد إلى مراد‪ .‬وأما خلوه عن صفة الإرادة بالكلية مع حضور عقله وحسه فمحال‪ .‬وإن‬
‫ن عن عوالمها‪ ،‬لم ننكر ذلك‪ .‬لـكن هذه‬
‫حاكمنا في ذلك محاكم إلى ذوق مصطلم مأخوذ عن نفسه‪ ،‬فا ٍ‬
‫حال عارضة غير دائمة‪ ،‬ولا هي غاية مطلو بة للسالـكين‪ ،‬ولا مقدورة للبشر‪ ،‬ولا مأمور بها‪ ،‬ولا هي‬
‫أعلى المقامات فيؤمر باكتساب أسبابها‪ .‬فهذا فصل الخطاب في هذا الموضع‪ .‬والل ّٰه أعلم‪.‬‬

354
2

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Conditions of Displaying One’s Good Deeds

[To continue with the explanation of the first level of Venerating God’s Prohibitions:] His words “nor display to anyone and be adorned with ostentation”
also require explanation. To display one’s works to any other than God is of two
kinds. One is the like of display that causes or strengthens one’s motivation, and
this can be pure or adulterated, just as the display that severs [the motivation]
is also among the maladies and veils.
The display [of good works] that does not cause or aid his motivation, but
rather, its presence and absence makes no difference to him, does not qualify
as ostentation, especially if it has a preponderant benefit, either to protect and
care for someone, such as to display [one’s act of visiting] to a patient or someone who is about to fall into a calamity [here, the essence of the good work is
to connect with someone else]. Or, to show the enemy whose attack is feared,
like performing the Prayer of Fear14 when facing the enemy. or to show the one
looking up to you to learn from you, and you do a favor to him and to yourself
by teaching him, or you may show him intentionally so he may follow you, or
to teach those who do not know.
This is praiseworthy showing, and God is where the intention and purpose
of the heart is.
Blameworthy showing is when it becomes the motivation to seek veneration
and praise and other benefits from the one to whom one shows off or for fear of
another person. As for what we mentioned earlier, the purpose of cause, education and teaching of the prophetic practice, or to watch for the attack of the
enemy and the like, none of this counts as ostentation, but rather it may be a
charity to show as an example and his charity may be better than the charity of
one who does his works in secret.
An example of that is a man in need asking some people for help, one of
whom realizes that if he gave this man in secret so that no one will see him, no
one will follow him [in donating] and the man will not get except his donation,
but if he gave him in public, he would be followed, as others would dislike to
have him be alone in giving charity. Therefore, he displays his charity to encourage others, his motive being to increase the benefit of the one in need. Such is a
praiseworthy ostentation, as its purpose was not to seek veneration and praise,
and such a one deserves his reward as well as of those who follow him.
[Al-Harawī’s] saying “all such attributes are part of the worship of the ego”
14

The Prayer of Fear, the shortened form of daily prayers to be said when confronting the
enemy in battle, is mentioned in the Qurʾan 4:102, and expanded upon in the Hadith; for
a summary, see G. Monnot, “Ṣalāt al-Khawf,” in EI2, 8:934.

‫‪355‬‬

‫‪chapter 23‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قوله‪» :‬ولا مشاهدا ً لأحد‪ ،‬فيكون متز ينا بً المراءاة«‪.‬‬
‫هذا فيه تفصيل أيضا‪ ً.‬وهو أن المشاهدة في العمل لغير الل ّٰه نوعان‪:‬‬
‫مشاهدة تبعث عليه أو تقوي باعثه‪ .‬فهذه مراءاة خالصة أو مشو بة‪ .‬كما أن المشاهدة القاطعة عنه‬
‫أيضا ًمن الآفات والحجب‪.‬‬
‫ومشاهدة لا تبعث عليه ولا تعين الباعث‪ ،‬بل لا فرق عنده بين وجودها وعدمها‪ .‬فهذه لا تدخله‬
‫في التز ين بالمراءاة‪ ،‬ولا سيما عند المصلحة الراجحة في هذه المشاهدة‪ ،‬إما ًحفظا له ورعاية ً‪ ،‬كمشاهدة‬
‫مريض أو مشرف على هلـكة يخاف وقوعه فيها‪ ،‬أو مشاهدة عدو يخاف هجومه كصلاة الخوف‬
‫عند المواجهة‪ ،‬أو مشاهدة ناظر إليك ير يد أن يتعلم منك‪ ،‬فتكون محسنا ً إليه بالتعليم وإلى نفسك‬
‫بالإخلاص‪ ،‬أو قصدا ًمنك للاقتداء وتعر يف الجاهل‪ .‬فهذا ر ياء محمود‪ ،‬والل ّٰه عند نية القلب وقصده‪.‬‬
‫فالر ياء المذموم أن يكون الباعث قصد التعظيم والمدح‪ ،‬والرغبة فيما عند من يرائيه أو الرهبة منه‪.‬‬
‫وأما ما ذكرنا من—قصد رعايته أو تعليمه‪ ،‬أو إظهار السنة وملاحظة هجوم العدو‪ ،‬ونحو ذلك—‬
‫فليس في هذه المشاهدة ر ياء‪ ،‬بل قد يتصدق العبد ر ياء ً مثلا ًوتكون صدقته فوق صدقة صاحب‬
‫السر‪.‬‬
‫مثال ذلك رجل مضرور سأل قوما ًما هو محتاج إليه‪ ،‬فعلم رجل منهم أنه إن أعطاه سرا ً حيث‬
‫لا يراه أحد‪ ،‬لم يقتد به أحد ولم يحصل له سوى تلك العطية‪ ،‬وأنه إن أعطاه جهرا ً اقتدي به واتبع‪،‬‬
‫وأنف الحاضرون من تفرده عنهم بالعطية‪ ،‬فجهر له بالعطاء‪ .‬فكان الباعث له على الجهر إرادة سعة‬
‫العطاء عليه من الحاضر ين‪ ،‬فهذه مراءاة محمودة‪ ،‬حيث لم يكن الباعث عليها قصد التعظيم والثناء‪،‬‬
‫وصاحبها جدير بأن يحصل له مثل أجور أولئك المعطين‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬فإن هذه الأوصاف كلها من شعب عبادة النفس«‪.‬‬

356

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

means that the one who fears [Hellfire] is occupied with protecting his own
ego from the punishment, which is worship of one’s own ego, for he is directed
to it, seeking benefits and delights for it, which is a kind of servitude to it.
One who shows off his worship to the people is similarly engaged in a kind
of self-worship, for he seeks their veneration, praise, and adulation. If [the ego]
is killed through struggle, attention to God, occupation with Him alone, and
perpetuity of vigilance for Him, these parts of it also die.
Doubtless, the foundation of the quest of this Group is the abandoning of
the ego.
You now know, however, that fear and search for reward have nothing to do
with self-worship.
True, self-adornment by showing off is nothing but the worship of one’s ego
and of other men, and the discourse on such is greater than this. The one who
shows off is too worthless, too mean, and his concerns too base to be conflated
with the discourse of the truthful.

3

Venerating Scripture on Divine Attributes

He said,
The second level is to accept the report on its face value, meaning to allow
the signposts of the monotheism of the commoners [to be] fixed in their
apparent sense, to not pretentiously veer off to question its modalities,
nor try to find an alternative interpretation for it, nor exceed its apparent
meaning through analogy, nor claim its full knowledge or imagination.
The Shaykh, God have mercy on him, alludes here to the need to uphold the
veneration of the divine names and attributes by letting the scriptural texts be
understood in their apparent sense, which is the meaning that immediately
comes to the minds of the commoners; he does not mean here the ignoramus
masses, but the commonality of the Community. As Mālik, God have mercy on
him, said when asked about “The Merciful settled on the Throne” [20:5] “How
did He settle?”, Mālik bowed his head down and sat until he began to sweat,
then he said, “The settling is known, its modality (i.e., how such attribute comes
to be for God) is unknown, believing in it is an obligation, and asking about it
is a heretical innovation!”
The difference between the known meaning in this phrase and between the
modality that the human being cannot know, and this response of Mālik, God
have mercy on him, is general and sufficient in all questions concerning divine
attributes.

‫‪357‬‬

‫‪chapter 23‬‬

‫يعني أن الخائف مشتغل بحفظ نفسه من العذاب‪ ،‬ففيه عبادة لنفسه‪ ،‬إذ هو متوجه إليها وطالب‬
‫المثو بة‪ ،‬متوجه إلى طلب حظ نفسه وذلك شعبة من عبوديتها‪ .‬والمشاهد للناس في عبادته فيه شعبة‬
‫من عبودية نفسه‪ ،‬إذ هو طالب لتعظيمهم وثنائهم ومدحهم‪ .‬فهذه شعب من شعب عبادة النفس‪.‬‬
‫والأصل الذي هذه الشعب فروعه هي النفس‪ ،‬فإذا ماتت بالمجاهدة والإقبال على الل ّٰه والاشتغال به‬
‫ودوام المراقبة له‪ ،‬ماتت هذه الشعب‪.‬‬
‫فلا جرم أن بناء أمر هذه الطائفة على ترك عبادة النفس‪ ،‬وقد علمت أن الخوف وطلب الثواب‬
‫ليس من عبادة النفس في شيء‪.‬‬
‫نعم‪ ،‬التز ين بالمراءاة عين عبادة النفس والناس‪ .‬والكلام في أمر أرفع من هذا‪ .‬فإن حال المرائي‬
‫أخس ونفسه أسقط‪ ،‬وهمته أدنى من أن يدخل في شأن الصادقين‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬إجراء الخـبر على ظاهره‪ ،‬وهو أن تبقى أعلام توحيد العامة الخـبر ية على ظواهرها‪،‬‬
‫ولا يتحمل البحث عنها تعسفا‪ ً،‬ولا يتكلف لها تأو يلا‪ ً،‬ولا يتجاوز ظواهرها تمثيلا‪ ً،‬ولا يدعي عليها‬
‫إدراكا أً و توهما ً«‪.‬‬
‫يشير الشيخ—رحمه الل ّٰه—بذلك إلى أن حفظ حرمة نصوص الأسماء والصفات بإجراء أخبارها‬
‫على ظواهرها‪ ،‬وهو اعتقاد مفهومها المتبادر إلى أذهان العامة‪ ،‬ولا يعني بالعامة الجهال‪ ،‬بل عامة الأمة‬
‫ش اْستوَ َى﴾ ]طه‪ ،[5:‬كيف استوى؟‬
‫ن ع َلىَ ال ْع َر ْ ِ‬
‫كما قال مالك—رحمه الل ّٰه—وقد سئل عن ﴿ال َر ّْحمَٰ ُ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫فأطرق مالك حتى علاه الرحضاء ثم قال‪ :‬الاستواء معلوم‪ ،‬والـكيف غير معقول‪ ،‬والإ يمان به‬
‫واجب‪ ،‬والسؤال عنه بدعة‪.‬‬
‫فرق بين المعنى المعلوم من هذه اللفظة و بين »الـكيف« الذي لا يعقله البشر‪ .‬وهذا الجواب من‬
‫مالك—رحمه الل ّٰه—شاف عام في جميع مسائل الصفات‪.‬‬

358

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Whosoever asks concerning His words “I am with you both, I hear and I see”
[20:46], “How does He hear and see?” is given the same answer. He is told, “The
hearing and seeing are known, but their modality is beyond the grasp of human
reason.”
The same is true of anyone who asks about divine knowledge, life, power,
will, descent, wrath, pleasure, mercy, laugh, and so on. Their meanings are all
known and the modality is beyond human intellect, for understanding the
modality of a thing is dependent on knowing the modality and nature of a
being and its make-up. That [of God] being unknown to the human being, how
could the modality of divine attributes be understood?
The beneficial and conservative policy in this issue is that we attribute to
God what He has attributed to Himself and His Messenger has attributed to
Him, without alteration, denial, investigation of modality, or likening. Rather,
you affirm His names and attributes and deny any likeness to the creation, thus
letting your affirmation free from anthropomorphism and your negation free
from denial. He who denies the reality of [God] settling [on the throne] is a
denier, and he who likens it to the settling of the creation over creation is an
anthropomorphist, and he who says it is the settling of Him like whom there is
nothing, such [alone] is a monotheist who upholds divine transcendence. The
same applies to the [divine] attributes of hearing, seeing, life, will, knowledge,
power, hand, face, pleasure, wrath, descent, laugh, and all those with which He
has characterized Himself.
The deviants in this issue are alluded to by the Shaykh in his saying “to not
pretentiously veer off to question its modalities,” that is, he does not undertake
taʿassuf to seek the modalities [of the attributes], and taʿassuf means treading a path other than the known road. It is said, “So-and-so rode taʿāsīf in his
journey” if he rode right and left wandering about the path.
In his saying “nor does he engage in affected interpretations,” by “interpretation” he means [regarding] its literal meaning, which is to transfer the meaning
of a word from its obvious meaning to a different understanding. More than
one of the scholars have reported consensus of the Predecessors on shunning
such a practice. Those who have reported it include al-Baghawī and also Abū
al-Maʿālī al-Juwaynī, in his treatise al-Niẓāmiyya, in contrast with his approach
in his [treatises] Shāmil and Irshād. Among those who report [this consensus]
include Saʿd b. al-Zanjānī, in addition to many, many of the scholars before
them whose number is known only to God.15

15

See glossary, “Interpretation or taʾwīl.”

‫‪359‬‬

‫‪chapter 23‬‬

‫كم َا َأْسم َُع و َ َأر َى﴾ ]طه‪ ،[46:‬كيف يسمع و يرى؟ أجيب بهذا‬
‫فمن سأل عن قوله‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َن ّنِي م َع َ ُ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫الجواب بعينه فقيل له‪ :‬السمع والبصر معلوم‪ ،‬والـكيف غير معقول‪.‬‬
‫وكذلك من سأل عن العلم والحياة والقدرة والإرادة والنزول والغضب والرضا والرحمة والضحك‬
‫وغير ذلك‪ ،‬فمعانيها كلها مفهومة‪ ،‬وأما كيفيتها فغير معقولة‪ ،‬إذ تعقل الـكيف فرع العلم بكيفية الذات‬
‫وكنهها‪ .‬فإذا كان ذلك غير معقول للبشر‪ ،‬فكيف يعقل لهم كيفية الصفات؟‬
‫والعصمة النافعة في هذا الباب أن نصف الل ّٰه بما وصف به نفسه و بما وصفه به رسوله‪ ،‬من غير‬
‫تحر يف ولا تعطيل ومن غير تكييف ولا تمثيل‪ .‬بل ٺثبت له الأسماء والصفات و ينفى عنه مشابهة‬
‫المخلوقات‪ .‬فيكون إثباتك منزها ًعن التشبيه ونفيك منزها ًعن التعطيل‪ .‬فمن نفى حقيقة »الاستواء«‬
‫فهو معطل‪ ،‬ومن شبهه باستواء المخلوق على المخلوق فهو ممثل‪ ،‬ومن قال هو استواء ليس كمثله شيء‪،‬‬
‫فهو الموحد المنزه‪.‬‬
‫وهكذا الكلام في السمع والبصر والحياة والإرادة والقدرة واليد والوجه والرضا والغضب والنزول‬
‫والضحك‪ ،‬وسا ئر ما وصف به نفسه‪.‬‬
‫والمنحرفون في هذا الباب وقد أشار الشيخ إليهم بقوله‪» :‬لا يتحمل البحث عنها تعسفا ً«‪ ،‬أي‬
‫لا يتكلف التعسف عن البحث عن كيفياتها‪ .‬و»التعسف« سلوك غير الطر يق‪ .‬يقال‪ :‬ركب فلان‬
‫التعاسيف في سيره إذا كان يسير يمينا ًوشمال ًا‪ ،‬حا ئرا ً عن الطر يق‪.‬‬
‫»ولا يتكلف لها تأو يلا ً«‪ .‬أراد بالتأو يل هاهنا التأو يل الاصطلاحي‪ ،‬وهو صرف اللفظ عن‬
‫ظاهره عن المعنى الراجح إلى المفهوم المرجوح‪ .‬وقد حكى غير واحد من العلماء‪ .‬إجماع السلف على‬
‫تركه‪.‬‬
‫وممن حكاه البغوي وأبو المعالي الجو يني في رسالته »النظامية«‪ ،‬بخلاف ما سلـكه في »شامله« و‬
‫»إرشاده«‪ .‬وممن حكاه‪ :‬سعد بن علي الزنجاني‪ .‬وقبل هؤلاء خلائق من العلماء لا يحصيهم إلا الل ّٰه‪.‬‬

360

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

[Al-Harawī’s words:] “And not transgress its apparent meaning through analogy,” that is, not analogize [the attributes] to the attributes of the creation.
In his saying “do not transgress its apparent meanings” there is a subtle allusion [to the fact] that its apparent meanings do not require analogizing, as is
imagined by those who abolish and deny [the attributes], for it is analogizing that transgresses the apparent meanings to what is not implied by them
in the same fashion that the unobvious interpretation is a form of pretension,
an effort to make it mean what it does not require. The obvious meanings, in
other words, do not require analogizing nor forced interpretation, rather, [they
simply require] letting them be on their apparent meaning without reassignment of meaning or analogy. This is the path of those who take the straight path
in this respect.
As for his saying, “nor claim to comprehend or correct them,” it means he
should not claim to correct [the scriptural attributes] nor claim to understand
them, nor assign to them a meaning other than the commonly understood one,
as is claimed by the partisans of the misguided Kalam, dispraised by the consensus of the Predecessors.
“Imagining” in his words could be of two kinds. The imagining of their
modality that is not indicated by the apparent meaning, or the imagining of
meanings other than those required by their obvious meaning; both are incorrect, as they constitute either likening and analogizing on the one hand or
alteration and abolition on the other.
These words from the Shaykh al-Islam [al-Harawī] demonstrate his high
rank among the Ahl al-Sunna and the expanse of his knowledge, and that he is
free of the accusations of anthropomorphism or assimilationism hurled at him
by his enemies, the Jahmites, wont as they are to slander the People of Hadith
and Sunna in that fashion. In the same way that the Rāfiḍa accuse them of being
Nāṣibīs [haters of ʿAlī], the Muʿtazilites accuse them of being plebes and riffraff. This is the inheritance of the enemies of the Messenger of God, God grant
him blessing and peace, namely, to slander him and his companions that they
are Sabeans who have invented a new religion.16 The inheritance of the People
of Hadith and Sunna from their Prophet and His companions is, accordingly, to
be called with blameworthy names by the champions of falsehood. May God
sanctify the soul of al-Shāfiʿī when he said upon being accused of being called
a Rāfiḍī (a rejectionist):

16

Early Muslims were characterized by their detractors in Mecca as having become Sabeans,
which could mean “irreligious,” “apostates,” or “those who have abandoned the religion of
their ancestors and become irreligious.”

‫‪361‬‬

‫‪chapter 23‬‬

‫»وألا يتجاوز ظاهرها ]تمثيلا ً«‪ ،‬أي لا يمثلها بصفات المخلوقين‪ .‬وفي قوله‪» :‬لا يتجاوز ظاهرها«[ إشارة‬
‫لطيفة‪ .‬وهي أن ظواهرها لا تقتضي التمثيل كما يظنه المعطلة النفاة‪ ،‬وأن التمثيل تجاوز لظواهرها إلى‬
‫ما لا تقتضيه‪ ،‬كما أن تأو يلها تكلف وحمل لها على ما لا تقتضيه‪ ،‬فهي لا تقتضي ظواهرها تمثيل ًا ولا‬
‫تحتمل تأو يلا‪ ً،‬بل إجراء على ظاهرها بلا تأو يل ولا تمثيل‪ .‬فهذه طر يقة السالـكين بها سواء السبيل‪.‬‬
‫وأما قوله‪» :‬ولا يدعى عليها إدراكا ً«‪ ،‬أي لا يدعى عليها استدراكا ًولا فهما‪ ً.‬ولا معنى غير فهم‬
‫العامةكما يدعيه أر باب الكلام الباطل المذموم بإجماع السلف‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬ولا توهما ً«‪ ،‬أي لا يعدل عن ظواهرها إلى التوهم‪.‬‬
‫و»التوهم« نوعان‪ :‬توهم كيفية لا يدل عليه ظواهرها‪ ،‬أو توهم معنى غير ما تقتضيه ظواهرها‪.‬‬
‫وكلاهما توهم باطل‪ .‬وهما توهم تشبيه وتمثيل‪ ،‬أو تحر يف وتعطيل‪.‬‬
‫وهذا الكلام من شيخ الإسلام يبين مرتبته من السنة ومقداره في العلم‪ ،‬وأنه بريء مما رماه به‬
‫أعداؤه الجهمية من التشبيه والتمثيل على عادتهم في رمي أهل الحديث والسنة بذلك‪ ،‬كرمي الرافضة‬
‫لهم بأنهم نواصب‪ ،‬والمعتزلة بأنهم نوابت حشو ية‪ .‬وذلك ميراث من أعداء رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ في رميه‬
‫ورمي أصحابه بأنهم صبأة‪ ،‬قد ابتدعوا دينا ًمحدثا‪ ً.‬وميراث لأهل الحديث والسنة من نبيهم وأصحابه‪،‬‬
‫بتلقيب أهل الباطل لهم بالألقاب المذمومة‪ .‬وقدس الل ّٰه روح الشافعي حيث يقول‪ ،‬وقد نسب إلى‬
‫الرفض‪:‬‬

362

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

If the love of the family of Muhammad is Rāfiḍism
Let men and jinn witness that I am a Rāfiḍite
May God be pleased with our Shaykh, Abū al-ʿAbbās b. Taymiyya when he
said,
If the love of the Companions of Muhammad is Nāṣibism
Let men and jinn witness that I am a Nāṣibite
May God forgive a third when he said,
If corporealism (tajsīm) is to affirm divine attributes
And clear them of the interpretations of every liar
Thank God then that I am a corporealist (mujassim)!
Go gather witnesses and fill every assembly

4

Protecting the Divine Opening

He said,
The third level is the protection of the expansion from any hint of brazenness, the protection of bliss from contamination by complacence, and the
protection of the witnessing from opposition by any cause.
This level being limited to the people of witnessing who often encounter
expansion and bliss—being those who relate to Him by His name The Lord
of Expansion—he cautions them against impudence, which expels one from
the etiquette of worship into ecstatic outbursts, like the one who said, “Glory
to me!” and other such outbursts. The best that can be said of such a one is
that he is excused due to his loss of reason and overpowering inebriation. The
blissful expansion of experiential witness must, therefore, be accompanied by
reverence and glorification, or else one falls into impudent behavior, which is
prevented by watchfulness.
His saying “the protection of his bliss from contamination by complacence”
means that the attainer of expansion and witnessing is infused with a bliss
that is comparable to none other whatsoever. Yet, he is not safe in such a state
from deception, and must safeguard his bliss and delight with the fear of the
end, whose knowledge is inaccessible to him, so he must not become conceited.

‫‪363‬‬

‫‪chapter 23‬‬

‫إن كان رفضا حب آل محمد‬

‫فليشهد الثقلان أني رافضي‪.‬‬

‫ورضي الل ّٰه عن شيخنا أبي العباس بن تيمية حيث يقول‪:‬‬

‫إن كان نصبا حب صحب محمد‬

‫فليشهد الثقلان أني ناصبي‪.‬‬

‫وعفا الل ّٰه عن الثالث حيث يقول‪:‬‬

‫فإن كان تجسيما ثبوت صفاته‬

‫وتنز يهها عن كل تأو يل مفتري‬

‫فإني بحمد الل ّٰه ر بي مجسم‬

‫هلموا شهودا واملأوا كل محضر‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬صيانة الانبساط‪ ،‬أن تشو به جرأة‪ ،‬وصيانة السرور أن يداخله أمن‪ ،‬وصيانة‬
‫الشهود أن يعارضه سبب«‪.‬‬
‫لما كانت هذه الدرجة عنده مختصة بأهل المشاهدة—والغالب عليهم الانبساط والسرور‪ ،‬فإن‬
‫صاحبها متعلق باسمه »الباسط« حذره من شائبة الجرأة‪ .‬وهي ما يخرج به عن أدب العبودية و يدخله‬
‫في الشطح‪ ،‬كشطح من قال »سبحاني«‪ ،‬ونحو ذلك من الشطحات المعروفة المخرجة عن أدب‬
‫العبودية التي نهاية صاحبها أن يعذر بزوال عقله وغلبة سكر الحال عليه‪ .‬فلا بد من مقارنة التعظيم‬
‫والإجلال لبسط المشاهدة‪ ،‬وإلا وقع في الجرأة ولا بد‪ ،‬فالمراقبة تصونه عن ذلك‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬وصيانة السرور أن يداخله أمن«‪.‬‬
‫يعني أن صاحب الانبساط والمشاهدة يداخله سرور لا يشبهه سرور البتة‪ .‬فينبغي له ألا يأمن في‬
‫هذا الحال المكر بل يصون سروره وفرحه بخوف العاقبة المطوي عنه علم غيبها‪ ،‬ولا يغتر‪.‬‬

364

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

As for “the protection of the witnessing from opposition by any cause,” it
means that the attainer of experiential testimony may be weak in his experience of the reality of unicity and fall into thinking that what he has attained
is due to his own striving and worship, attributing it to a cause from himself,
which is a deficiency in his affirmation and gnosis of unicity. Experiential testimony, however, cannot but be a gift; it cannot be earned, and even if it were
earned, the awareness of its causality constitutes a deficiency in the affirmation
of unicity and absence from the witnessing of the reality.
By the “cause” that opposes the witnessing he may have meant the occurrence of an idea that contaminates the purity of his experience, and he must
safeguard it against any such causes, either opposition of will or doubt or both.
God knows best.

‫‪365‬‬

‫‪chapter 23‬‬

‫أما »صيانة الشهود ]أن يعارضه سبب«‪ ،‬ير يد أن صاحب[ الشهود قد يكون ضعيفا ً في شهود‬
‫حقيقة التوحيد‪ ،‬فيتوهم أنه قد حصل له ما حصل بسبب الاجتهاد التام والعبادة الخاصة‪ .‬فينسب‬
‫حصول ما حصل له من الشهود إلى سبب منه‪ .‬وذلك نقص في توحيده ومعرفته لأن الشهود لا يكون‬
‫إلا موهبة ً‪ ،‬ليس كسبيا‪ ً،‬ولو كان كسبيا ًفشهود سببه نقص في التوحيد وغيبة عن شهود الحقيقة‪.‬‬
‫و يحتمل أن ير يد بالسبب المعارض للشهود ورود خاطر على الشاهد يكدر عليه صفو شهوده‪،‬‬
‫فيصونه عن ورود سبب يعارضه‪ .‬إما معارض إرادة وإما معارض شبهة‪ ،‬وقد يعم كلامه الأمرين‪.‬‬
‫والل ّٰه سبحانه أعلم‪.‬‬

chapter 24

The Station of Purification
Among the stations of “You alone we worship and You alone we supplicate for
help” is the station of purification.1
God the Exalted has said, “And they were not commanded but that they worship God, purifying their religion for Him” [98:5]. He also said, “We have sent
down to you the Book in truth, worship God, then, purifying your religion for
Him. Lo, for God alone is the pure religion” [39:2–3]. He also said, “Say: God I
worship, purifying my religion for Him. Worship you what you wish other than
Him!” [39:14–15]. He also said to [the Prophet], “Say: Truly my prayer and my
offering, my life and my death are for God, the Provider of the worlds. No partner has He: This is what I have been commanded, and I am the first to submit”
[6:162–163].
He also said, “[He] who created death and life in order to test you: which of
you will is best in works” [67:2]. Al-Fuḍayl b. ʿIyāḍ, God be pleased with him,
said, “[That means] purest and most correct.” He asked, “O Abū ʿAlī, what is
purest and most correct?” He said, “An act that is pure but not correct is not
accepted and if it is correct but not pure it is still not accepted until it is both
pure and correct. To be pure means that it is for God alone and to be correct
means that it is in accordance with the Sunna.” Then he recited the word of the
Most High: “Whosoever hopes to meet His Lord let him work righteous works
and not include anyone in his worship of his Lord” [18:110]. The Most High also
said, “And who is better in religion than he who submits his face to God and
does good works” [4:125]. Here, “submission of the face to God the Most High”
means to purify his purpose and works for Him, and doing good means following the Messenger and his Sunna. The Most High said, “And We proceeded
to what they did of works and made them scattered dust” [25:23], these being
works that either were not upon the Sunna or that by them something other
than God’s Face was sought. The Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace,
said to Saʿd, “You shall not die yet; work, then, such works by which you seek
God’s Face that will increase your rank and status.”2
1 The triliteral root of the word ikhlāṣ, namely kh-l-ṣ, denotes purity, being free from admixture, unmixed, as in khalaṣa al-māʾ min al-kadar (water became free of turbidity). “Purity”
is a more apt translation for ikhlāṣ than the common rendition of “sincerity,” given that
the Qurʾanic verses in question always use it as a verbal noun with dīn (religion) as their
object, suggesting the meaning: ‘purify your religion for God!’, rather than the more interiorist
meaning of a general attitude of being transparent about one’s intentions. See also the discussion in Rashīd al-Dīn Maybudī, Kashf al-Asrār: The Unveiling of the Mysteries, trans. William

‫فصل‬
.«‫ »الإخلاص‬:‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‬
‫ك‬
َ ْ ‫ ﴿ِإ َن ّا َأ نز َلنْ َا ِإل َي‬:‫ وقال‬.[5:‫ن﴾ ]البينة‬
َ ‫صينَ ل َه ُالد ِّي‬
ِ ِ ‫مخ ْل‬
ُ َ ‫ ﴿و َم َا ُأم ِرُوا ِإ َلّا ل ِيعَ ْب ُد ُوا ال َل ّـه‬:‫قال الل ّٰه تعالى‬
ُ ‫صا ل َ ّه‬
ً ِ ‫مخ ْل‬
ُ ‫ن َأل َا ل َِل ّـه ِ الد ِّي‬
َ ‫صا ل َ ّه ُ الد ِّي‬
ً ِ ‫مخ ْل‬
ِ ّ َ ‫ب باِ ْلح‬
ُ ُ ‫ل ال َل ّـه َ َأْعب ُد‬
ُ َ ‫ق ف َاْعب ُدِ ال َل ّـه‬
ِ ُ ‫ ﴿ق‬:‫ وقال‬.﴾‫ص‬
ُ ِ ‫ن اْلخا َل‬
َ َ‫ال ْك ِتا‬
‫ب‬
َ ‫ن‬
ّ َ ‫ل ِإ‬
ْ ُ ‫ ﴿ق‬:‫ وقال‬.[23:‫شئ ْت ُم مّ ِن د ُون ِه ِ﴾ ]الزمر‬
ِ ‫دِينِي ف َاْعب ُد ُوا م َا‬
َ َ ‫صل َات ِي و َن ُس ُكِي و‬
ِّ َ ‫ي و َم َم َات ِي ل َِل ّـه ِ ر‬
َ ‫مح ْي َا‬
‫ق‬
َ َ ‫ ﴿ال َ ّذ ِي خ َل‬:‫ وقال‬.[163–162:‫سلمِ ِينَ﴾ ]الأنعام‬
ْ ُ ‫ل ال ْم‬
ُ ‫ت و َ َأناَ َأَّو‬
ُ ‫ك ُأم ِْر‬
َ ِ ‫ك ل َه ُ ۖ و َب ِذ َٰل‬
َ ‫ال ْعاَ لم َي ِنَ ل َا ش َر ِ ي‬
.[2:‫ن عمَ َل ًا﴾ ]الملك‬
ُ َ‫حس‬
ْ ‫ت و َاْلحيَ َاة َ ل ِي َب ْلوُ َك ُْم َأ ُي ّك ُْم َأ‬
َ ْ َ‫ال ْمو‬
‫ ما أخلصه‬،‫ يا أبا علي‬:‫ قالوا‬.‫ هو أخلصه وأصو به‬:—‫قال الفضيل بن عياض—رضي الل ّٰه عنه‬
ً ‫ وإذا كان صوابا ًولم يكن خالصا‬.‫ إن العمل إذا كان خالصا ًولم يكن صوابا ًلم يقبل‬:‫وأصو به؟ فقال‬
‫ ثم قرأ قوله‬.‫ والصواب أن يكون على السنة‬،‫ً والخالص أن يكون لل ّٰه‬.‫لم يقبل حتى يكون خالصا ًصوابا‬
.[110:‫ك بعِ بِ َاد َة ِ ر َب ِّه ِ َأح َدًا﴾ ]الـكهف‬
ْ ِ ‫صاِلحاً و َل َا ي ُش ْر‬
َ ‫ل عمَ َل ًا‬
ْ َ ‫جو لقِ َاء َ ر َب ِّه ِ ف َليْ عَ ْم‬
ُ ْ َ‫ ﴿ف َم َن ك َانَ ير‬:‫تعالى‬
‫ فإسلام الوجه لل ّٰه‬.[125:‫ن﴾ ]النساء‬
ٌ ‫س‬
ِ ْ ‫مح‬
ْ َ ‫ن دِين ًا م َِّم ّْن َأْسل َم َ و‬
ُ َ‫حس‬
ْ ‫ ﴿و َم َْن َأ‬:‫وقال تعالى‬
ُ َ ‫جه َه ُ ل َِل ّـه ِ و َه ُو‬
‫ ﴿و َق َدِْمن َا ِإل َى ٰ م َا‬:‫ وقال تعالى‬.‫ والإحسان فيه متابعة رسوله وسنته‬.‫تعالى إخلاص القصد والعمل له‬
‫ وهي الأعمال التي كانت على غير السنة أو أر يد‬.[23:‫ل فَج َع َلنْ َاه ُ هبَ َاء ً َمّنثوُ ر ًا﴾ ]الفرقان‬
ٍ َ َ‫عمَ ِلوُ ا م ِْن عم‬
‫ فتعمل عملا ًتبتغي به وجه الل ّٰه إلا ازددت‬،‫ »إنك لن تخلف‬:‫ وقال النبي ﷺ لسعد‬.‫بها غير وجه الل ّٰه‬
.«ً ‫به درجة ً ورفعة‬
C. Chittick (Louisville: Fons Vitae, 2016), xvi: “In the past I have used “sincerity” to translate
ikhlāṣ, and it works fine in most contexts. However, the moment we look at the etymology (as
Maybudī does under Q. 2:112), we realize that the root means pure, unmixed, unadulterated.
Hence, ikhlāṣ means to purify, to remove the adulteration, to restore to the original state. It
is an internal activity of the soul, tightly bound up with tawḥīd, the active assertion of God’s
unity by eliminating the association (shirk) of all others (ghayr). It is not by accident that
Sūra 112, al-Ikhlāṣ, is also known as the Sūra of al-Tawḥīd. As everyone knows and as Maybudī explains on many occasions, tawḥīd lies at the heart of Islamic thought and practice.
Although ‘sincerity’ might be understood to convey what is meant by ikhlāṣ, the word ‘selfpurification’ conveys both the literal sense and the connotation of engagement with the path
to God. One of the drawbacks of the word sincerity itself is that nowadays in English it means
honesty in expressing one’s deep feelings, but these are typically the deep feelings of a self cut
off from its divine roots. Tawḥīd would be the last thing that ‘sincerity’ calls to mind in the
average English-speaking reader. ‘Self-purification’ points us in the right direction.”
2 Bukhārī #1295.

368

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

In a sound report on the authority of Anas b. Mālik, God be pleased with him,
he said that the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, said, “The
heart of a Muslim never holds deception nor malice when it has three things:
purifying their works for God, offering advice to those in authority, and adhering to the congregation of Muslims, for their call (i.e., of Islam) surrounds their
backs [protecting against any harm].”3 That is, their hearts bear no grudge or
dishonesty when accompanied by these three, as they eliminate and expel illwill. For the heart’s greatest grudge is caused by associationism. Similarly, it
holds a grudge if it is given to deceiving others, or if it abandons the party of
Muslims for heretical innovation and misguidance. These three fill the heart
with grudges and corruption. The cure for this corruption and its adulteration
is in purification and sincerity on the one hand and following the Sunna on the
other.
The Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, was asked about a
man who fought in a battle for show, or valor, or group-feeling (i.e., patriotism,
etc.), and whether these count as being for the sake of God. He said, “Only he
who battles to raise God’s word is in the path of God.”4
He also declared that the first three to be roasted in the Hellfire would be
a reciter of the Qurʾan, a warrior, and a philanthrope, each of whom did their
work so that it will be said that he is a reciter, valiant, and generous, and not for
God.5
In a sound Divine Hadith, God Almighty and Magnificent says, “I am least
in need of partners, so whosoever performs an act [of worship] associating a
partner with Me, I reject it and leave it to the one he associated with Me.”6
Another report has it is that He will say on the Day of Resurrection, “Go, take
your reward from the one for whose sake you worked; We have nothing for you.”
Another sound Hadith has it, “God does not look at your bodies or your faces,
but only at your hearts.”7
God the Exalted has said, “Neither their flesh nor blood will reach God, but
only your piety will reach Him” [22:37]. In a Divine Report, it says, “Purity is a
secret from my secrets that I deposit in the hearts of those servants that I love.”8
They have described purification in a variety of ways but their meaning is
the same. It has been said, “It is to single out the Truth Almighty as your sole
purpose in obedience (i.e., worship).” Also, it is “Cleansing of the act from [the
effects of] being witnessed by the creation.” It was said, “[Purity is] protection
3
4
5
6

Aḥmad, Musnad 4:80; Ibn Ḥibbān, Ṣaḥīḥ #67.
Bukhārī #2810.
Muslim #1905.
Muslim #2985.

‫‪369‬‬

‫‪chapter 24‬‬

‫وفي الصحيح من حديث أنس بن مالك رضي الل ّٰه عنه قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬ثلاث لا يغل‬
‫عليهن قلب مسلم‪ ،‬إخلاص العمل لل ّٰه ومناصحة ولاة الأمر ولزوم جماعة المسلمين‪ .‬فإن دعوتهم تحيط‬
‫من ورائهم«‪.‬‬
‫أي لا يبقى فيه غل‪ .‬لا يحمل الغل مع هذه الثلاثة‪ ،‬بل ينفي عنه غله و يخرجه‪ .‬فإن القلب يغل‬
‫على الشرك أعظم غل‪ .‬وكذلك يغل على الغش وعلى خروجه عن جماعة المسلمين بالبدعة والضلالة‪.‬‬
‫فهذه الثلاثة تملؤه غلا ًودغلا‪ ً.‬ودواء هذا الغل واستفراغ أخلاطه بتجر يد الإخلاص والنصح ومتابعة‬
‫السنة‪ .‬وسئل رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ عن الرجل يقاتل ر ياء ً و يقاتل شجاعة ً و يقاتل حمية ً‪ ،‬فأي ذلك في سبيل‬
‫الل ّٰه؟ فقال‪» :‬من قاتل لتكون كلمة الل ّٰه هي العليا فهو في سبيل الل ّٰه«‪.‬‬
‫وأخبر عن أول ثلاثة تسعر بهم النار‪ :‬قارىء القرآن والمجاهد والمتصدق بماله الذين فعلوا ذلك ليقال‬
‫فلان قاريء وشجاع ومتصدق‪ ،‬ولم تكن أعمالهم خالصة لل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وفي الحديث الصحيح الإلهي يقول الل ّٰه تعالى‪» :‬أنا أغنى الشركاء عن الشرك‪ .‬من عمل عملا ًأشرك‬
‫فيه غيري فهو للذي أشرك به وأنا منه بريء«‪.‬‬
‫وفي أ ثر آخر‪ ،‬يقول له يوم القيامة‪» :‬اذهب فخذ أجرك ممن عملت له‪ .‬لا أجر لك عندنا«‪.‬‬
‫وفي الصحيح عنه‪» :‬إن الل ّٰه لا ينظر إلى أجسامكم ولا إلى صوركم‪ ،‬ولـكن ينظر إلى قلو بكم«‪ .‬وقال‬
‫كن ي َن َال ُه ُال َت ّْقو َى م ِنك ُْم﴾ ]الحج‪.[37:‬‬
‫ل ال َل ّـه َ لُح ُوم ُه َا و َل َا دِم َاؤ ُهاَ و َل َٰ ِ‬
‫تعالى‪﴿ :‬ل َن ي َن َا َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫وفي أ ثر مروري إلهي‪» :‬الإخلاص سر من سري‪ ،‬استودعته قلب من أحببته من عبادي«‪.‬‬
‫وقد تنوعت عبارتهم في »الإخلاص« والقصد واحد‪.‬‬
‫فقيل‪ :‬هو إفراد الحق سبحانه بالقصد في الطاعة‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬تصفية الفعل عن ملاحظة المخلوقين‪.‬‬

‫‪7 Muslim #2564.‬‬
‫‪8 Qushayrī, 208, graded variously, from acceptable to weak.‬‬

370

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

from the watch of the creation, and truthfulness is to be unstained by selfviewing, for the pure one has no ostentation and the truthful has no conceit.
Purity is not complete without truthfulness nor truthfulness without purity;
and the two cannot be accomplished without perseverance.”
It was said, “Whoever witnesses purification in his purification, his purification needs purification.”
Every purity-seeker’s deficiency lies in fixation on his purity; only when his
view of his own purity ends does he become truly pure and among the elect.
It has been said, “Purity is when a servant’s outwardly and inwardly actions
are the same,” whereas ostentation is that one’s outward is better than one’s
inward, and truthfulness in purity is that one’s inward is more full of spiritual
life than one’s outward.
It has been said, also, “Purification is to forget the watching gaze of the creation [owing to one’s constant preoccupation with the Creator] and [forget] to
adorn for the people in respects that cause one to fall in the sight of God.”
The words of al-Fuḍayl, God have mercy on him, “Giving up acting for the
sake of others is ostentation, and acting for the sake of others is associationism, and purification is that God saves you from both.”
Al-Junayd, God be pleased with him, said, “Purification is a secret between
God and the servant, not known to the angel who inscribes the act, nor to the
Devil so he may spoil it, nor to one’s own desire so it may lead it astray.”
Sahl [b. ʿAbdallāh al-Tustarī] was asked, “What is the most difficult challenge
for the ego?” He said, “Purification, for the ego has no share in it.”
Another said, “Purification is that you seek no witness to your action other
than God nor any reward but from Him.”
Makḥūl (a Successor) said, “A servant cannot seek purification for forty days
without springs of wisdom issuing forth from his tongue.”
Yūsuf b. al-Ḥusayn (of Rayy, d. 304/916) said, “The hardest thing in the world
is purification; however much I try to eliminate ostentation from my heart, it
sprouts back in a different form.”
Abū Sulaymān al-Dārānī, “When a servant attains purification he is rid of the
barrage of whispers and ostentation.”

‫‪371‬‬

‫‪chapter 24‬‬

‫وقيل‪ :‬التوقي من ملاحظة الخلق‪ .‬والصدق التنقي من مطالعة النفس‪ .‬فالمخلص لا ر ياء له‬
‫والصادق لا إعجاب له‪ .‬ولا يتم الإخلاص إلا بالصدق ولا الصدق إلا بالإخلاص‪ ،‬ولا يتمان إلا‬
‫بالصبر‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬من شهد في إخلاصه الإخلاص احتاج إخلاصه إلى إخلاص‪ .‬فنقصان كل مخلص في‬
‫إخلاصه رؤ ية إخلاصه‪ .‬فإذا سقط عن نفسه رؤ ية إخلاصه صار مخل ِصا ًمخل َصا‪ً.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬الإخلاص استواء أعمال العبد في الظاهر والباطن‪ .‬والر ياء أن يكون ظاهره خيرا ًمن باطنه‪.‬‬
‫والصدق في الإخلاص أن يكون باطنه أعمر من ظاهره‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬الإخلاص نسيان رؤ ية الخلق ]بدوام النظر إلى الخالق[‪ .‬ومن تز ين للناس بما ليس فيه سقط‬
‫من عين الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫ومن كلام الفضيل—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪ :‬ترك العمل من أجل الناس ر ياء‪ .‬والعمل من أجل الناس‬
‫شرك‪ .‬والإخلاص أن يعافيك الل ّٰه منهما‪.‬‬
‫وقال الجنيد—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—‪ :‬الإخلاص سر بين الل ّٰه و بين العبد‪ ،‬لا يعلمه ملك فيكتبه ولا‬
‫شيطان فيفسده ولا هوى فيميله‪.‬‬
‫وقيل لسهل‪ :‬أي شيء أشد على النفس؟ فقال‪ :‬الإخلاص‪ ،‬لأنه ليس لها فيه نصيب‪.‬‬
‫وقال بعضهم‪ :‬الإخلاص ألا تطلب على عملك شاهدا ً غير الل ّٰه ولا مجاز يا ًسواه‪.‬‬
‫وقال مكحول‪ :‬ما أخلص عبد قط أر بعين يوما ًإلا ظهرت ينابيع الحكمة من قلبه على لسانه‪.‬‬
‫وقال يوسف بن الحسين‪ :‬أعز شيء في الدنيا الإخلاص‪ .‬وكم أجتهد في إسقاط الر ياء عن قلبي‪،‬‬
‫فكأنه ينبت على لون آخر‪.‬‬
‫وقال أبو سليمان الداراني‪ :‬إذا أخلص العبد انقطع عنهكثرة الوساوس والر ياء‪.‬‬

372
1

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Levels of Purification

The author of al-Manāzil, God have mercy on him, said,
Purification is cleansing the action from any adulteration.
That is, no impurity of the intentions or purposes of the ego, either by seeking
admiration in the hearts of the creation or avoiding their disapproval, seeking
greatness in their view, or their wealth or service, their fulfilment of one’s needs
or their love, and other such defects and impurities, whose essence despite
their various types is that they all fall under seeking other than God by one’s
acts, whoever that may be.
He said,
It is three levels. The first level: ridding one’s works of self-admiration,
purifying them from seeking its reward, and dismounting [the highhorse] of satisfaction.
Every worker faces three maladies in his action: his view of the act [of worship as being admirable], quest of its reward, and satisfaction and pleasure as
a result.
In this level, the seeker rids himself of these three; what removes his view of
his works is his witnessing of the favor and grace of God upon him and granting
of success, and recognition that it is from God and not from himself, and that
it is God who causes his good works: it is God’s will, not his, as God the Exalted
said, “And you do not will except if God wills” [81:29].
Here, it is beneficial to witness the Divine Compelling, and that one is merely
an instrument, and that his works are like movements of trees and the wind
whose Mover and Doer is someone else; that he is as good as dead, and the
dead perform no act. Furthermore, were he left to his own devices, none of his
acts would be sound, for the ego is ignorant and transgressive, its natural inclination being laziness and preference for desires and procrastination. It is the
source of all evil, the refuge for all that is wicked, and good does not issue from
such a source.
The good that does issue from it, therefore, is only from God the Exalted and
through him, not from the servant nor through his power. As the Exalted said,
“Were it not for God’s grace and mercy upon you, not one of you would ever
be pure, but it is God who purifies whomsoever He wills” [24:21]. The people
of the Garden said, “Praised be God who has guided us to this: we could not
be guided were it not that God guided us” [7:43], and God the Exalted said to

‫‪373‬‬

‫‪chapter 24‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪» :‬الإخلاص‪ :‬تصفية العمل من كل شوب«‪.‬‬
‫أي لا يمازج عمله ما يشو به من شوائب إرادات النفس‪ ،‬إما طلب التز ين في قلوب الخلق وإما‬
‫طلب مدحهم والهرب من ذمهم‪ ،‬أو طلب تعظيمهم أو طلب أموالهم‪ ،‬أو خدمتهم وقضائهم حوائجه‪،‬‬
‫أو طلب محبتهم له أو غير ذلك من العلل والشوائب‪ ،‬التي عقد متفرقاتها هو إرادة ما سوى الل ّٰه بعمله‪،‬‬
‫كائنا ًما كان‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ .‬الدرجة الأولى‪ :‬إخراج رؤ ية العمل من العمل‪ ،‬والخلاص من‬
‫طلب العوض على العمل‪ ،‬والنزول عن الرضا بالعمل«‪.‬‬
‫يعرض للعامل في عمله ثلاث آفات‪ :‬رؤ يته وملاحظته‪ ،‬وطلب العوض عليهن ورضاه به وسكونه‬
‫إليه‪.‬‬
‫ففي هذه الدرجة يتخلص من هذه الثلاثة‪ .‬فالذي يخلصه من رؤ ية عمله مشاهدته لمنة الل ّٰه عليه‬
‫وفضله وتوفيقه له‪ ،‬وأنه بالل ّٰه لا بنفسه‪ ،‬وأنه إنما أوجب عمله مشيئة ً الل ّٰه لا مشيئته هو‪ ،‬كما قال تعالى‪:‬‬
‫ب ال ْعاَ لم َي ِنَ﴾ ]التكو ير‪.[29:‬‬
‫﴿و َم َا ت َش َاء ُونَ ِإ َلّا َأن ي َش َاء َ ال َل ّـه ُ ر َ ُ ّ‬
‫فهاهنا ينفعه شهود الجـبر وأنه آلة محضة‪ ،‬وأن فعله كحركات الأشجار وهبوب الر ياح‪ ،‬وأن المحرك‬
‫غيره والفاعل فيه سواه‪ ،‬وأنه ميت—والميت لا يفعل شيئا ً—‪ ،‬وأنه لو خلي ونفسه لم يكن من فعله‬
‫الصالح شيء البتة‪ .‬فإن النفس جاهلة ظالمة‪ ،‬طبعها الـكسل وإيثار الشهوات والبطالة‪ .‬وهي منبع كل‬
‫شر ومأوى كل سوء‪ .‬وما كان هكذا لم يصدر منه خير ولا هو من شأنه‪.‬‬
‫ل‬
‫ض ُ‬
‫فالخـير الذي صدر منها إنما هو من الل ّٰه و به‪ ،‬لا من العبد ولا به‪ ،‬كما قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َلوَ ْل َا ف َ ْ‬
‫كَّن ال َل ّـه َ يزُ َك ِ ّي م َن ي َش َاء ُ﴾ ]النور‪ .[21:‬وقال أهل‬
‫ال َل ّـه ِ ع َل َي ْك ُْم و َر َْحم َتهُ ُ م َا ز َك َى ٰ م ِنك ُم مّ ِْن َأح ٍَد َأب َد ًا و َل َٰ ِ‬
‫الجنة‪﴿ :‬اْلحم َ ْد ُ ل َِل ّـه ِ ال َ ّذ ِي ه َد َاناَ ل ِهَٰ ذ َا﴾]الأعراف‪ .[43:‬وقال وتعالى لرسوله‪﴿ :‬و َلوَ ْل َا َأن ث َ َب ّت ْن َاك َ لقَ َْد‬

374

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

His Messenger, God grant him blessing and peace, “Were it not that We made
thee firm, thou would have nearly inclined to them a little” [17:74]. The Exalted
also said, “But God endeared faith to them, beautifying it in their hearts, and
making unbelief, wickedness, and disobedience hateful to them: such are the
righteous” [49:7].
Every good in the servant, then, is exclusively God’s grace and favor, His
beneficence and blessing, and it is He who is to be praised for it. The servant’s
vision of his good works is, in reality, his perception of His creative attributes,
such as his hearing and seeing, his cognition and strength, and soundness of
health and limbs, and the like: all are purely God’s grant, blessing, and grace.
What purifies the servant from this malady is his knowledge of his Lord and of
his own ego.
What purifies him from the quest for recompense is his knowledge that he
is merely a slave, and a slave does not deserve any wage for serving his master,
for he serves him by the terms of his servitude. Whatever he receives from his
master is not a recompense or wage, but only the latter’s favor and beneficence.
For only a free worker deserves wages, or the slave of another, but a master owes
nothing to his own slave.
What purifies him from his satisfaction with his works is two things. First, a
study of its defects and maladies, what it contains of the share of his own ego
and the share of the Devil in it. Rare is a good work that does not have some
share of the Devil in it, however small it be, and similarly, that does not have a
share of his own ego.
The Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, was asked about a man’s
distraction during his prayers so he said,
This is a kind of embezzlement, a share that the Devil steals from the
prayer of a servant.9
Imagine if this is the case with his glance or look, what would be the case with
the distraction of his heart to that which is other than God! That, surely, would
constitute a greater share of the Devil from his worship.
Ibn Masʿūd, God be pleased with him, said, “Do you make a share for the
Devil from your prayers, thinking that it is an obligation upon him to not turn
back [after prayer] except on the right hand side (that is: do not impose an
unnecessary obligation);”10 thus consider this little, insignificant thing a share
for the Devil in the prayer of a servant: what do you think of what is greater
than this?
9

Bukhārī #751.

‫‪375‬‬

‫‪chapter 24‬‬

‫ب ِإل َي ْك ُم ُ اْلِإ يم َانَ و َز َ َي ّن َه ُ‬
‫كَّن ال َل ّـه َ َ‬
‫شي ْئ ًا ق َل ِيل ًا﴾ ]الإسراء‪ .[74:‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َل َٰ ِ‬
‫ن ِإل َْيه ِْم َ‬
‫ك ُ‬
‫ت ترَ ْ َ‬
‫ك ِد َ ّ‬
‫ح َب ّ َ‬
‫شد ُونَ﴾ ]الحجرات‪.[7:‬‬
‫ك ه ُم ُ ال َر ّا ِ‬
‫صي َانَ ۚ ُأول َٰئ ِ َ‬
‫ق و َال ْع ِ ْ‬
‫ف ِي ق ُلوُ ب ِك ُْم و َكرَ َ ّه َ ِإل َي ْك ُم ُ الـ ْكُْفر َو َال ْف ُس ُو َ‬
‫فكل خير في العبد فهو مجرد فضل الل ّٰه ومنته وإحسانه ونعمته‪ ،‬وهو المحمود عليه‪ .‬فرؤ ية العبد‬
‫لأعماله في الحقيقةكرؤ يته لصفاته الخلقية من سمعه و بصره وإدراكه وقوته‪ ،‬بل من صحته وسلامة‬
‫أعضائه ونحو ذلك‪ .‬فالكل مجرد عطاء الل ّٰه ونعمته وفضله‪.‬‬
‫فالذي يخلص العبد من هذه الآفة معرفة ر به ومعرفة نفسه‪ ،‬والذي يخلصه من طلب العوض على‬
‫العمل علمه بأنه عبد محض‪ .‬والعبد لا يستحق على خدمته لسيده عوضا ًولا أجرة ً‪ ،‬إذ هو يخدمه بمقتضى‬
‫عبوديته‪ .‬فما يناله من سيده من الأجر والثواب تفضل منه وإحسان إليه وإنعام عليه لا معاوضة‪ .‬إذ‬
‫الأجرة إنما يستحقها الحر أو عبد الغير‪ ،‬فأما عبد نفسه فلا‪.‬‬
‫والذي يخلصه من رضاه بعمله وسكونه إليه أمران‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬مطالعة عيو به وآفاته وتقصيره فيه‪ ،‬وما فيه من حظ النفس ونصيب الشيطان‪ .‬فقل عمل‬
‫من الأعمال إلا وللشيطان فيه نصيب وإن قل‪ ،‬وللنفس فيه حظ‪ .‬سئل النبي ﷺ عن التفات الرجل‬
‫في صلاته فقال‪» :‬هو اختلاس يختلسه الشيطان من صلاة العبد«‪ .‬فإذا كان هذا التفات طرفه ولحظه‬
‫فكيف التفات قلبه إلى ما سوى الل ّٰه؟ هذا أعظم نصيب الشيطان من العبودية‪.‬‬
‫وقال ا بن مسعود—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—‪» :‬لا يجعل أحدكم للشيطان حظا ًمن صلاته يرى أن حقا ً‬
‫عليه ألا ينصرف إلا عن يمينه«‪ .‬فجعل هذا القدر اليسير النزر حظا ًونصيبا لً لشيطان من صلاة العبد‪،‬‬
‫فما الظن بما فوقه؟ وأما حظ النفس من العمل فلا يعرفه إلا أهل البصا ئر الصادقون‪.‬‬

‫‪Bukhārī #852.‬‬

‫‪10‬‬

376

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Second, one’s knowledge of what the Lord Almighty deserves of worship and
its full external and internal etiquettes and conditions, and that he is too weak,
powerless, and insignificant to fulfil them or be content with them, never thinking that he has done enough for his Lord. Rather, he must not be pleased with
his works for his Lord even for the wink of an eye, and must feel shy to stand
before and present his works to God.
His ill opinion of himself and his works, even his dislike for his breaths
and their rising to God, serves to prevent him from complacence and selfsatisfaction with his conduct.
One of the Predecessors used to offer four hundred units of prayer in a day
and then grab his beard and say to himself, “O source of all wickedness, have
you pleased God even for the wink of an eye?”
Another said, “The malady of a servant in worship is his pleasure with himself; whoever views his ego with the eye of admiration ruins it, and whoever
does not constantly accuse his ego is deceived.”

2

The Second Level

[Al-Harawī] said,
The second level is to be ashamed of good works while doing one’s best,
putting forth one’s best effort to guard it from witnessing, and seeing the
works in light of the grant by the Source of Bounty.
These are three things. One’s shame upon his works means intense modesty
before God, for he sees no good work as good enough for Him even while
putting forth one’s best. The Exalted has said, “And those who give what they
give while their hearts are filled with fear that they are going to return to their
Lord” [23:60]; the Prophet God grant him blessing and peace said, “This is about
a man who prays, fasts, and gives charity, and fears that it will not be accepted
of him.”11
The second part is to put forth one’s best effort while guarding it from witnessing, that is, expending one’s best effort in performing good works in the
correct fashion while avoiding feeling that it is through one’s own effort.
The third is that one guards it by means of the divinely granted light by which
God illuminates the insight of a servant. Thus, you see in light of that light that
your good works are entirely the gift of His generosity, not from or through you.
11

Aḥmad, Musnad 6:205; graded as sound.

‫‪377‬‬

‫‪chapter 24‬‬

‫الثاني‪ :‬علمه بما يستحقه الرب جل جلاله من حقوق العبودية وآدابها الظاهرة والباطنة وشروطها‪،‬‬
‫وأن العبد أضعف وأعجز وأقل من أن يوفيها حقها وأن يرضى بها لر به‪ .‬فالعارف لا يرضى بشيء من‬
‫عمله لر به ولا يرضى نفسه لل ّٰه تعالى طرفة عين‪ ،‬و يستحيي من مقابلة الل ّٰه بعمله‪ .‬فسوء ظنه بنفسه وعمله‬
‫و بغضه لها وكراهته لأنفاسه وصعودها إلى الل ّٰه يحول بينه و بين الرضا بعمله والرضا عن نفسه‪.‬‬
‫وكان بعض السلف يصلي في اليوم والليلة أر بعمائة ركعة‪ ،‬ثم يقبض على لحيته و يهزها و يقول‪ :‬يا‬
‫مأوى كل سوء‪ ،‬وهل رضيتك لل ّٰه طرفة عين؟‬
‫وقال بعضهم‪ :‬آفة العبد رضاه عن نفسه‪ ،‬ومن نظر إلى نفسه باستحسان شيء منها فقد أهلـكها‪،‬‬
‫ومن لم يتهم نفسه على دوام الأوقات فهو مغرور‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬الخجل من العمل مع بذل المجهود‪ .‬وتوفير الجهد بالاحتماء من الشهود‪ .‬ورؤ ية‬
‫العمل في نور التوفيق من عين الجود«‪.‬‬
‫هذه ثلاثة أمور‪ :‬خجلة من عمله وهو شدة حيائه من الل ّٰه‪ ،‬إذ لم ير ذلك العمل صالحا لً ه مع بذل‬
‫جع ُونَ﴾ ]المؤمنون‪.[60:‬‬
‫جلةَ ٌ َأَّنه ُْم ِإل َى ٰ ر َ ّبِه ِْم ر َا ِ‬
‫ن يؤُ ْتوُ نَ م َا آتوَ ا َّوق ُلوُ بُه ُْم و َ ِ‬
‫مجهوده فيه‪ .‬قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫قال النبي ﷺ‪» :‬هو الرجل يصوم و يصلي و يتصدق و يخاف ألا يقبل منه«‪ .‬فالمؤمن جمع إحسانا ًفي‬
‫مخافة وسوء ظن بنفسه‪ .‬والمغرور حسن الظن بنفسه مع إساءته‪.‬‬
‫الثاني‪ :‬توفير الجهد باحتمائه من الشهود‪ ،‬أي يأتي بجهد الطاقة في تصحيح العمل محتميا ًعن شهوده‬
‫منك و بك‪.‬‬
‫الثالث‪ :‬أن تحتمي بنور التوفيق الذي ينور الل ّٰه به بصيرة العبد‪ ،‬فترى في ضوء ذلك النور أن عملك‬
‫من عين جوده‪ ،‬لا بك ولا منك‪.‬‬

378

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

This level, therefore, comprises five things: good works, exertion of best
effort, shame and modesty before God for [its defects], protecting them from
your own eye of admiration, and seeing them as gifts of God’s generosity and
favor.
The third level is,
Purifying the act by ridding oneself of works altogether, letting go of it in
the same way its knowledge has been let go already, and letting yourself
go, witnessing the decree, free of bondage to form.
The meaning of his words here is that you make your work in accordance with
your knowledge [of God’s command], letting it complete it, going along with it
and stopping with it, thus you keep your eyes fixed on the command in doing
and avoiding, seeking and abandoning, looking at the accrual of reward or punishment through cause and acquisition. Yet, you also keep the eyes of your heart
on the creative decree of predestination in which causes and the caused, movements and stillness, are all folded up, there remaining nothing but the sheer will
and the singularity of the Exalted Lord as the Actor, all acts being an issue of His
will. You uphold the command and the prohibition, doing and desisting from
acts, going along with Him, His decree and ordainment, with faith, witness, and
reality.
These two commands are the servitude required by these two verses:
“Whoever wills among you to be upright, and you do not will except if God
the Lord of the worlds wills” [81:28–29]. And He said, “This is just a reminder:
whoever wills takes a path to his Lord. And yet, you do not will except if God
wills. God truly is All-knowing, All-wise” [76:29–30]. To let works go the way
of knowledge reflects “Whoever among you wills to be upright” and to let
yourself go the way of the decree reflects “And you do not will except if God
wills.”
As for [al-Harawī’s] words, “free of bondage to form”: the freedom to which
they allude is refusal to enter the servitude of the creation and the ego, and
entering, rather, servitude to the Truth alone.
They mean by “form” all that is other than God: forms, then, are remains, like
the remains of homes and abodes are the forms that are left after their denizens
have passed. In the station of reality all created beings in their entirety are nothing but remnants and forms. This means to rid yourself of servitude to all other
than God, and be present with your heart with the Omnipotent, the Truth alone
rather than with the remains that are nothing but forms. Let nothing distract
you from His servitude, and demand not from your servitude any state, any station, any disclosure, or anything else.

‫‪379‬‬

‫‪chapter 24‬‬

‫فقد اشتملت هذه الدرجة على خمسة أشياء‪ :‬عمل‪ ،‬واجتهاد فيه‪ ،‬وخجل وحياء من الل ّٰه فيه‪ ،‬وصيانة‬
‫عن شهوده منك‪ ،‬ورؤ يته من عين جود الل ّٰه ومنته‪.‬‬
‫الدرجة الثالثة‪» :‬إخلاص العمل بالخلاص من العمل‪ ،‬تدعه يسير سير العلم‪ ،‬وتسير أنت مشاهدا ً‬
‫للحكم‪ ،‬حرا ً من رق الرسم«‪.‬‬
‫قد فسر الشيخ مراده بإخلاص العمل من العمل بقوله‪» :‬تدعه يسير سير العلم‪ ،‬وتسير أنت مشاهدا‬
‫للحكم«‪.‬‬
‫ومعنى كلامه أنك تجعل عملك تابعا ً للعلم موافقا ً له مؤتما ً به‪ .‬تسير بسيره وتقف بوقوفه وتتحرك‬
‫بحركته‪ .‬نازلا ًمنازله مرتو يا ًمن موارده‪ ،‬فتكون ناظرا ًإلى الحكم الديني الأمري متقيدا به فعلا ًوتركا ً‬
‫وطلبا ًوهر با‪ ً،‬ناظرا ًإلى ترتب الثواب والعقاب عليه سببا ًوكسبا‪ ً.‬ومع ذلك فتسير أنت بقلبك مشاهدا‬
‫للحكم الـكوني القضائي الذي ينطوي فيه الأسباب والمسببات‪ ،‬والحركات والسكنات‪ ،‬ولا يبقى هناك‬
‫غير محض المشيئة وتفرد الرب وحده بالأفعال‪ ،‬ومصدرها عن إرادته ومشيئته‪ ،‬فتكون قائما بً الأمر‬
‫والنهي فعلا ً وتركا ًسا ئرا ً بسيره‪ ،‬و بالقضاء والقدر إ يمانا ً وشهودا ً وحقيقة ً‪ .‬فهو ناظر إلى الحقيقة قائم‬
‫بالشر يعة‪.‬‬
‫شاء َم ِنك ُْم َأن ي َْستقَ ِيم َو َم َا ت َش َاء ُونَ ِإ َلّا َأن ي َش َاء َال َل ّـه ُ‬
‫وهذان الأمران هما عبودية هاتين الآيتين‪﴿ :‬لم ِ َن َ‬
‫سبيِ ل ًا و َم َا ت َش َاء ُونَ‬
‫شاء َ اَّتخ َذ َ ِإل َى ٰ ر َب ِّه ِ َ‬
‫ن هَٰ ذِه ِ ت َْذك ِرةَ ٌ ۖ ف َم َن َ‬
‫ب ال ْعاَ لم َي ِنَ﴾ ]التكو ير‪ .[29–28:‬وقال‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َ ّ‬
‫رَ ُ ّ‬
‫كيم ًا﴾ ]الإنسان‪.[30–29:‬‬
‫ن ال َل ّـه َك َانَ ع َل ِيم ًا ح َ ِ‬
‫ِإ َلّا َأن ي َش َاء َ ال َل ّـه ُ ۚ ِإ َ ّ‬
‫شاء َ م ِنك ُْم َأن ي َْستقَ ِيم َ﴾‪ ،‬وسير صاحبه مشاهدا ًللحكم مشهد‬
‫فترك العمل يسير سير العلم مشهد ﴿لم ِ َن َ‬
‫﴿و َم َا ت َش َاء ُونَ ِإ َلّا َأن ي َش َاء َ ال َل ّـه ُ﴾‪.‬‬
‫وأما قوله‪» :‬حرا ً من رق الرسم«‪ .‬الحر ية التي يشيرون إليها هي عدم الدخول تحت عبودية الخلق‬
‫والنفس‪ ،‬والدخول تحت رق عبودية الحق وحده‪.‬‬
‫ومرادهم بالرسم ما سوى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فكله رسوم‪ .‬فإن الرسوم هي الآثار‪ ،‬ورسوم المنازل والديار هي‬
‫الآثار التي تبقى بعد سكانها‪ .‬والمخلوقات بأسرها—في منزل الحقيقة—ورسوم وآثار للقدرة‪ .‬أي‬
‫فتخلص نفسك من عبوديةكل ما سوى الل ّٰه وتكون بقلبك مع القادر الحق وحده‪ ،‬لا مع آثار قدرته‬
‫التي هي رسوم‪ .‬فلا تشتغل بغيره انشغالا بً عبوديته‪ ،‬ولا تطلب بعبوديتك له حالا ًولا مقاما ًولا مكاشفة ً‬
‫ولا شيئا ًسواه‪.‬‬

380

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

These, then, are the four things: putting forth the best effort, letting knowledge be the judge, keeping eyes fixed on reality, ridding yourself of any distraction. And God is the one to grant success.

2

Purification and Truthfulness

Purification is the indivisibility of the goal, and truthfulness is the indivisibility
of the quest. Accordingly, the essence of purification is the unicity of the goal,
and the essence of truthfulness is the unicity of the quest. Neither bears fruit
without total surrender.
These three, then, are the elements of the journey, and the foundation of the
path such that those who fail to build their journey on them are cut off, even if
they think that they are still on the quest. For such a one, the journey is either
in the opposite direction to the goal, or little more than daydreaming. If purification and obedience are absent, the journey is backward, and if one fails to
put forth one’s best effort and unify his quest, he daydreams. When all three
come together, the traveler cannot be overcome: “Such is the grace of God that
He grants whomsoever He wills, and God is greatly Munificent” [62:4].

‫‪381‬‬

‫‪chapter 24‬‬

‫فهذه أر بعة أمور‪ :‬بذل الجهد وتحكيم العلم والنظر إلى الحقيقة والتخلص من الالتفات إلى غيره‪.‬‬
‫والل ّٰه الموفق‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫»الإخلاص« عدم انقسام المطلوب‪ .‬و»الصدق« عدم انقسام الطلب‪ .‬فحقيقة الإخلاص توحيد‬
‫المطلوب‪ ،‬وحقيقة الصدق توحيد الطلب والإرادة‪ ،‬ولا يثمران إلا بالاستسلام المحض للمتابعة‪.‬‬
‫فهذه الأركان الثلاثة هي أركان السير وأصول الطر يق التي من لم يبن عليها سلوكه وسيره فهو‬
‫مقطوع‪ .‬وإن ظن أنه سا ئر فسيره إما إلى عكس جهة مقصوده وإما سير المقعد والمقيد‪.‬‬
‫فإن عدم الإخلاص والمتابعة انعكس سيره إلى خلف‪ .‬وإن لم يبذل جهده و يوحد طلبه سار سير‬
‫المقيد‪.‬‬
‫ل ال َل ّـه ِ يؤُ ْتيِه ِ م َن‬
‫ض ُ‬
‫ك فَ ْ‬
‫وإن اجتمعت له الثلاثة فذلك الذي لا يجارى في مضمار سيره‪﴿ .‬ذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫ل ال ْع َظ ِيِم﴾ ]الجمعة‪.[4:‬‬
‫ي َش َاء ُ ۚ و َال َل ّـه ُ ذ ُو ال ْف َ ْ‬
‫ض ِ‬

chapter 25

The Station of Refinement and Correction
Among the stations of “You alone we worship and You alone we supplicate
for help” is the station of correction and refinement, and it is the smelting of
worship in the fire of trial, seeking to remove from it any corruption and deception.
The author of al-Manāzil said,
Refinement is the trial for the beginners, and it is a path from the paths of
discipline.
He means that it is hard on the beginners, and it is for them a trial and the path
to mastery.
He said,
It has three levels. First, refinement of the service such that it is not
besmirched by ignorance, nor contaminated by habit, nor his resolve
exhausted.
That is, purification of servitude and refinement from three types of things:
taint of ignorance, contamination of habit, and lack of resolve of the seeker.
When ignorance infects worship, the servant misapplies it and misplaces it,
directing it to the non-deserving. In such a state he ends up doing works he
believes are good but they corrupt his service and worship: he moves when he
should be still and is still when he should move, disperses at the time of union
and seeks union at the time of dispersion, flies at the time of sailing and sails
at the time of flying, attacks at the time of restraint and desists at the time
of attack, and so on. Such errors with respect to the service [of the seeker]
are analogous to someone who is disagreeable and odious in his dealings with
men.
The service that is not accompanied by an additional knowledge of its etiquette and requisites that is apart from its own knowledge may lead one to the
opposite of its intended consequence. This does not mean that all the reward
and compensation [of the service] is entirely lost, but such a failure does lead
one to fail in attaining the desired station and nearness; the details of this statement cannot be known except through special knowledge of God and of His
command, total love, and knowledge of the ego and its mischiefs.

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬التهذيب« والتصفية«‪ .‬وهو سبك العبودية في كير‬
‫الامتحان طلبا ًلإخراج ما فيها من الخبث والغش‪.‬‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪» :‬التهذيب محنة أر باب البدايات‪ .‬وهو شر يعة من شرائع‬
‫الر ياضة«‪.‬‬
‫ير يد أنه صعب على المبتديء فهو لهكالمحنة‪ .‬وطر يقة للمرتاض الذي قد مرن نفسه حتى اعتادت‬
‫قبوله وانقادت إليه‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ :‬الأولى تهذيب الخدمة‪ ،‬ألا يخالجها جهالة ولا تشو بها عادة ولا‬
‫تقف عندها همة«‪.‬‬
‫أي تخليص العبودية وتصفيتها من هذه الأنواع الثلاثة‪ ،‬وهي مخالجة الجهالة وشوب العادة ووقوف‬
‫همة الطالب عندها‪.‬‬
‫فإن الجهالة متى خالطت العبودية أوردها العبد غير موردها‪ ،‬ووضعها في غير موضعها‪ ،‬وفعلها في‬
‫غير مستحقها‪ ،‬وفعل أفعالا ً يعتقد أنها صلاح وهي إفساد لخدمته وعبوديته‪ ،‬بأن يتحرك في موضع‬
‫السكون أو يسكن فى موضع الحركة‪ ،‬أو يفرق في موضع جمع أو يجمع في موضع فرق‪ ،‬أو يطير في‬
‫موضع سفون أو يسفن في موضع طيران‪ ،‬أو يقدم في موضع إحجام أو يحجم في موضع إقدام‪ ،‬أو‬
‫يتقدم في موضع وقوف أو يقف في موضع تقدم‪ ،‬ونحو ذلك من الحركات التي هي في حق الخدمة‬
‫كحركات الثقيل البغيض في حقوق الناس‪.‬‬
‫فالخدمة ما لم يصحبها علم ثان بآدابها وحقوقها غير العلم بها نفسها كانت في مظنة أن تبعد صاحبها‪،‬‬
‫وإن كان مراده بها التقرب‪ .‬ولا يلزم حبوط ثوابها وأجرها‪ ،‬فهي إن لم تبعده عن الأجر والثواب‬
‫أبعدته عن المنزلة والقر بة‪ .‬ولا تنفصل مسائل هذه الجملة إلا بمعرفة خاصة بالل ّٰه وأمره‪ ،‬ومحبة تامة له‬
‫ومعرفة بالنفس وما منها‪.‬‬

384

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The second, the contamination of habit, occurs when worship is confused
with habit. This may help it along, but the seeker thinks that [the habit] is the
real act of nearness and obedience. An example is someone who has become
used to fasting and has mastered it, such that his ego is settled upon it, and it
is a habit that has become an addiction. He begins to think that this is pure
worship; if another act of worship, more beneficial and higher in priority, is
presented to him, he may not pay any attention to it, given his habit. One Sufi
who said, “I performed Pilgrimage so many times without relying on means,
and then it became clear to me that all that was adulterated by my own desire.
That became clear when my mother asked me to fetch a drink of water, and
that felt really heavy to my ego, and I realized that my ego’s habituation of Pilgrimage was a thing for my own ego; had my ego been annihilated, it would not
have found hard what the Law requires of it.”
Third, lack of resolve in service is a sign of its weakness and deficiency, for the
pure slave never runs out of the resolve to serve, as he ever belittles his service
and is never bored by it. Contentment is praiseworthy except in this situation,
for here it is a loss. The lover is content with nothing short of his beloved, and
the servant’s lack of resolve to serve is similarly a loss.
He said,
The second level is the refinement of the state, which is that the state does
not incline toward any knowledge, nor submit to any form, nor turn to any
desire.
As for “the inclination of the state to knowledge” it could be of two kinds, praiseworthy and blameworthy.
The praiseworthy inclination is turning to knowledge and seeking its judgment, and without it, his state is blameworthy and deficient, distancing rather
than drawing to God the Exalted. Any state not accompanied by knowledge is
vulnerable to deceptions of the Devil, and this has ruined the states of many
masters, dispersing them away from God far and away, since they failed to let
knowledge [of the Law] govern their conduct; their avoidance of it led them to
abandon the realities of faith and Laws of Islam.
Such are the people about whom the Master of this Group, al-Junayd b.
Muḥammad, God have mercy on him, when it was said to him, “Knowers reach
a state where they give up works of piety and worship to draw near to God,” he
said, God have mercy on him, “This is the statement of those people who claim
the end of the obligation of works [due to spiritual advancement], and it is an
enormity to me: indeed, someone who steals and fornicates is in a better state
than the one who says this. For those who know God receive their duties from

‫‪385‬‬

‫‪chapter 25‬‬

‫النوع الثاني‪ :‬شوب العادة‪ .‬وهو أن يمازج العبودية حكم من أحكام عوائد النفس‪ ،‬تكون منفذة ً‬
‫لها معينة ً عليها‪ .‬وصاحبها يعتقدها قر بة ً وطاعة ًكمن اعتاد الصوم—مثلا ً—وتمرن عليه‪ ،‬فألفته النفس‬
‫وصار لها عادة ً ٺتقاضاها أتم اقتضاء‪ ،‬فيظن أن هذا التقاضي محض العبودية وإنما هو تقاضي العادة‪.‬‬
‫وعلامة هذا أنه إذا عرض عليها طاعة دون ذلك وأيسر منه وأتم مصلحة لم تؤثرها إ يثارا ًلما اعتادته‬
‫وألفته‪ .‬كما يحكى عن بعض الصوفية قال‪ :‬حججت كذا وكذا حجة على التجر يد‪ ،‬فبان لي أن جميع ذلك‬
‫كان مشو با ًبحظي‪ ،‬وذلك أن والدتي سألتني أن أستقي لها جرعة ماء‪ ،‬فثقل ذلك على نفسي‪ ،‬فعلمت‬
‫أن مطاوعة نفسي في الحجات كان بحظ نفسي وإرادتها‪ .‬إذ لو كانت نفسي فانية ً لم يصعب عليها ما هو‬
‫يحق في الشرع‪.‬‬
‫النوع الثالث‪ :‬وقوف همته عند الخدمة‪ .‬وذلك علامة ضعفها وقصورها‪ .‬فإن العبد المحض لا تقف‬
‫همته عند خدمته‪ ،‬بل همته أعلى من ذلك‪ .‬إذ هي طالبة لرضا مخدومه‪ .‬فهو دائما مستصغر خدمته له‬
‫ليس واقفا ًعندها‪ .‬والقناعة تحمد من صاحبها إلا في هذا الموضع‪ ،‬فإنها عين الحرمان‪ .‬فالمحب لا يقنع‬
‫بشيء دون محبو به‪ .‬فوقوف همة العبد مع خدمته وأجرتها سقوط فيها وحرمان‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬تهذيب الحال‪ .‬وهو ألا يجنح الحال إلى علم‪ ،‬ولا يخضع لرسم‪ ،‬ولا يلتفت إلى‬
‫حظ«‪.‬‬
‫أما »جنوح الحال إلى العلم« فهو نوعان‪ :‬ممدوح ومذموم‪.‬‬
‫فالممدوح التفاته إليه وإصغاؤه إلى ما يأمر به وتحكيمه عليه‪ .‬فمتى لم يجنح إلى هذا الجنوح كان‬
‫حالا ًمذموما نً اقصا ًمبعدا ًعن الل ّٰه تعالى‪ .‬فإن كل حال لا يصحبه علم يخاف عليه أن يكون من خدع‬
‫الشيطان‪ .‬وهذا القدر هو الذي أفسد على أر باب الأحوال أحوالهم‪ ،‬وشردهم عن الل ّٰه كل مشرد‪،‬‬
‫وطردهم عنهكل مطرد‪ .‬حيث لم يحكموا عليه العلم وأعرضوا عنه صفحا ًحتى قادهم إلى الانسلاخ‬
‫من حقائق الإ يمان وشرائع الإسلام‪.‬‬
‫وهم الذين قال فيهم سيد الطائفة الجنيد بن محمد—رحمه الل ّٰه—لما قيل له‪ :‬أهل المعرفة يصلون إلى‬
‫ترك الحركات من باب البر والتقرب إلى الل ّٰه تعالى‪ ،‬فقال الجنيد—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪» :‬هذا كلام قوم‬
‫تكلموا بإسقاط الأعمال وهو عندي عظيمة‪ .‬والذي يسرق و يزني أحسن حالا ًمن الذي يقول هذا‪.‬‬

386

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

God, seeking His help in fulfilling them, and if I had a thousand years I would
not decrease anything of my good works except when my time is up.”
He also said, “All paths are shut to creation except following the footsteps of
the Messenger, God grant him blessing and peace.” He also said, “He who does
not memorize the Qurʾan and write the Hadith should not be followed in this
matter, for our knowledge is constrained by the Book and the Sunna.”
He also said, “This knowledge of ours is tied to the Hadith of the Messenger
of God, God grant him blessing and peace.”
The calamity that has struck such people is that rulings contained in the
knowledge [of divine scripture] pertain to and call to works, whereas the rulings of spiritual states pertain to disclosure, and the seeker experiences states
that are not addressed in that knowledge. If the seeker were to hold them to the
standards of scriptural knowledge, he would find his experience in contradiction with it. He is, therefore, forced to reject one of them. Whoever attains these
states first and then turns to the rulings of knowledge, he has indeed regressed
and delayed in his journey. Beware this doubt that is in fact a lethal poison, and
one afflicted with it slips out of both inner knowledge and religion as easily as
hair from dough.
Know that true [inner] knowledge is the very essence of [scriptural] knowledge, [and a true state is the soul of sound action; every state that is not the
result of sound action, one that accords with scriptural knowledge,] is like a corrupted, wicked soul. We do not deny that this soul experiences spiritual states,
but the problem is the levels and stations of those states; when the spiritual
state contradicts any of the rulings of knowledge, that state is either invalid or
deficient, but never sound.
The knowledge [that is sound and action] that is sound both constitute the
proper inner knowledge and proper state; the latter of each pair is like the body
for which the former is the soul.
The best that one can do in explaining [al-Harawī’s] words “The state must
not incline toward knowledge” is that knowledge calls to separation whereas
the state calls to union, and the heart is between the two callers, responding
sometimes to one and other times to the other.
Refinement and correction of the state, then, requires that one responds
to the caller of the state rather than that of knowledge. This does not mean
that he avoids scriptural knowledge and refuses to submit to it.1 For of course,

1 This is one of many occasions where Ibn al-Qayyim charitably deflects what would be a plain
but unorthodox (because antinomian) implication in al-Harawī’s text.

‫‪387‬‬

‫‪chapter 25‬‬

‫فإن العارفين بالل ّٰه أخذوا الأعمال عن الل ّٰه وإليه رجعوا فيها‪ .‬ولو بقيت ألف عام لم أنقص من أعمال‬
‫البر ذرة إلا أن يحال بي دونها«‪.‬‬
‫وقال‪ :‬الطرق كلها مسدودة على الخلق إلا من اقتفى أ ثر الرسول ﷺ‪.‬‬
‫وقال‪ :‬من لم يحفظ القرآن و يكتب الحديث لا يقتدى به في هذا الأمر‪ ،‬لأن علمنا مقيد بالكتاب‬
‫والسنة‪.‬‬
‫وقال‪ :‬علمنا هذا مشيد بحديث رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪.‬‬
‫والبلية التي عرضت لهؤلاء أن أحكام العلم ٺتعلق بالعمل وتدعو إليه‪ ،‬وأحكام الحال ٺتعلق‬
‫بالـكشف‪ .‬وصاحب الحال ترد عليه أمور ليست في طور العلم‪ .‬فإن أقام عليها ميزان العلم ومعياره‬
‫تعارض عنده العلم والحال‪ ،‬فلم يجد بدا ً من الحكم على أحدهما بالإ بطال‪ .‬فمن حصلت له أحوال‬
‫الـكشف ثم جنح إلى أحكام العلم فقد رجع القهقرى وتأخر في سيره إلى وراء‪.‬‬
‫فتأمل هذا الوارد وهذه الشبهة التي هي سم ناقع تخرج صاحبها من المعرفة والدين كإخراج الشعرة‬
‫من العجين‪.‬‬
‫واعلم أن المعرفة الصحيحة هي روح العلم‪] .‬والحال الصحيح هو روح العمل المستقيم‪ .‬فكل حال‬
‫لا يكون نتيجة العمل المستقيم مطابقا لً لعلم[ فهو بمنزلة الروح الخبيثة الفاجرة‪ .‬ولا ننكر أن تكون لهذه‬
‫الروح أحوال‪ ،‬لـكن الشأن في مرتبة تلك الأحوال ومنازلها‪ .‬فمتى عارض الحال حكم من أحكام العلم‬
‫فذلك الحال إما فاسد وإما ناقص‪ ،‬ولا يكون مستقيما ًأبدا‪.‬‬
‫فالعلم ]الصحيح والعمل[ المستقيم هما ميزان المعرفة الصحيحة والحال الصحيح‪ ،‬وهما كالبدنين‬
‫لروحيهما‪.‬‬
‫فأحسن ما يحمل عليه قوله‪» :‬ألا يجنح الحال إلى العلم«‪ ،‬أن العلم يدعو إلى الفرقة دائما‪ ً،‬والحال‬
‫يدعو إلى الجمعية‪ ،‬والقلب بين هذين الداعيين‪ .‬فهو بحسب هذا مرة ًوهذا مرة ً‪.‬‬
‫فتهذيب الحال وتصفيته أن يجيب داعي الحال لا داعي العلم‪ .‬ولا يلزم من هذا إعراضه عن العلم‬
‫وعدم تحكيمه والتسليم له‪ ،‬بل هو متعبد بالعلم محكم له مستسلم له غير مجيب لداعيه من التفرقة‪ ،‬بل هو‬

388

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

he worships by knowledge, adjudicates by it, surrenders to it, yet, he responds
not to its call of separation but to the call of the spiritual state and union,
taking from knowledge that which will rectify his state and union, but not
delving into it in such a way as to drain his spiritual ambition and ultimate
goal, for he has no goal but Him, no desire but Him. Knowledge to him is a
tool, a means to an end, a path that leads him to his goal. It is like a guide
who shows him the way and he responds to it. Yet, his heart is fixed on his
goal, his journey, and all means that strengthen his resolve for setting out and
parting from his homeland, his kith and kin, and that which aides him on the
journey and seeking the path with singular devotion. He should not be distracted from the single-minded attention to his quest by the details or states
of the guide, and by anything that is other than that which he is being guided
to.
This is the meaning of Shaykh al-Islam, God willing, not the first meaning.
God knows best.

1

Second Level

His words that he does not “submit to forms” mean that no being overwhelms
his heart such that it would bow to it, for the one in possession of the spiritual state seeks nothing less than the Alive, the Sustainer, and is not arrested by
empty sites and forms.
As for his words that he does not “heed any pleasure,” he means when the
state is fully attained, he is not occupied by his own pleasure and gratification,
for that is a share of his own ego, a remnant of his ego.

2

Third Level

He said,
The third level is the refinement of the goal, which is its rising above being
coerced submission, its being guarded against the malady of fatigue, and
its victory against the contentions of knowledge.
These are the three things that refine and rectify the seeker. First, elimination of
any coercion; that is, he is not driven to God coercively, like a wage-earner, subordinated and obliged, but the motive of his heart and drive of his pull to God
must be his willing submission, his love and preference, like flowing water on

‫‪389‬‬

‫‪chapter 25‬‬

‫مجيب لداعي الحال والجمعية‪ ،‬آخذ من العلم ما يصحح له حاله وجمعيته‪ ،‬غير مستغرق فيه استغراق‬
‫من هو مطرح همته وغاية مقصده‪ ،‬لا مطلوب له سواه ولا مراد له إلا إ ياه‪ .‬فالعلم عنده آلة ووسيلة‬
‫وطر يق توصله إلى مقصده ومطلو به‪ .‬فهو كالدليل بين يديه يدعوه إلى الطر يق و يدله عليها‪ .‬فهو يجيب‬
‫داعيه للدلالة ومعرفة الطر يق‪ ،‬وما في قلبه من ملاحظة مقصده ومطلبه من سيره وسفره و باعث‬
‫همته على الخروج من أوطانه ومرباه ومن بين أصحابه وخلطائه‪ ،‬الحامل له على الاغتراب‪ .‬والتفرد في‬
‫طر يق الطلب هو المسير له والمحرك والباعث‪ .‬فلا يجنح عن داعيه إلى اشتغاله بجزئيات أو أحوال‬
‫الدليل‪ ،‬وما هو خارج عن دلالته على طر يقه‪.‬‬
‫فهذا مقصد شيخ الإسلام—إن شاء الل ّٰه—لا الوجه الأول‪ .‬والل ّٰه أعلم‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫وأما قوله‪» :‬ولا يخضع لرسم«‪ ،‬أي لا يستولي على قلبه شيء من الكائنات‪ ،‬بحيث يخضع له قلبه‪ .‬فإن‬
‫صاحب الحال إنما يطلب الحي القيوم لا يقف عند المعاهد والرسوم‪.‬‬
‫وأما قوله‪» :‬ولا يلتفت إلى حظ«‪ ،‬أي إذا حصل له الحال التام لم يشتغل بفرحه به وحظه منه‬
‫واستلذاذه‪ ،‬فإن ذلك حظ من حظوظ النفس و بقية من بقاياها‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬تهذيب القصد‪ .‬وهو تصفيته من ذل الإكراه‪ ،‬وتحفظه من مرض الفتور‪،‬‬
‫ونصرته على منازعات العلم«‪.‬‬
‫هذه أيضا ثً لاثة أشياء تهذب قصده وتصفيه‪.‬‬
‫أحدها‪ :‬تصفيته من ذل الإكراه‪ .‬أي لا يسوق نفسه إلى الل ّٰه كرها‪ ً،‬كالأجير المسخر المكلف‪ ،‬بل‬
‫تكون دواعي قلبه وجواذبه منساقة ً إلى الل ّٰه طوعا ًومحبة ً وإيثارا ً كجر يان الماء في منحدره‪ ،‬وهذه حال‬

390

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

its path. Such is the state of truthful lovers: their worship is by their own will,
love, and pleasure, for in it they find the coolness of their eyes, bliss of their
hearts, and delight of their souls, as he, God grant him blessing and peace, said,
“The coolness of my eyes has been made in prayers.”2 He would say, “O Bilāl,
bring us comfort by [announcing the prayer call].”
The coolness of the eyes of the lover and his delight and the nourishment of
his soul lie in obedience to the beloved, as opposed to the one who obeys without choice; were he not overpowered by the master or in fear of his punishment,
he would not do it, bearing his obedience like a forced laborer, overpowered
and compelled. A lover, in contrast, thinks of his obedience to the Beloved as his
nourishment and blessing, delight and pleasure. Such is the one who is above
coerced submission.
Second, guard against the malady of fatigue, that is, protection against the
ailment of the exhaustion of his resolve and cooling of the fire of his quest. His
resolve is the soul of his heart and his action; its exhaustion is a disease. Purification of his purpose and intention from the sources of his disease requires
identifying and eliminating them. These require that he turn away from all that
is more than his need and abandon all that does not concern him, and say nothing but what he hopes will increase his faith and state with God the Exalted,
befriending none except him who will aid him in that quest; when afflicted
with that which does not concern him, he must repel it to the best of his ability.
Third, he must aid the victory of his goal against the contentions of knowledge. This means to aid the impulse of worship that is fortified and focused,
approaching God wholeheartedly against newfangled knowledge and its minutia, into its endlessly branching problems and excesses.
Alternatively, it could mean that knowledge requires one to worship for the
desire and fear of reward and punishment, respectively. Refinement of the goal
means purifying it from attending to that and making it exclusively for the love
of God with no blemish; one does not love God for what God gives him or protects him against lest his love of God become the love of those means. The
first kind of love is the love of the created reward, such that if he attains his
beloved reward, his love of the one who provided the reward is mitigated and
consoled accordingly. If someone loves you for a thing, he turns his back on
you after attaining that thing, and becomes fed up with you after the need is
satisfied.

2 Nasāʾī #3939; al-Ḥākim, al-Mustadrak #2676; graded as sound.

‫‪391‬‬

‫‪chapter 25‬‬

‫المحبين الصادقين‪ .‬فإن عبادتهم طوعا ًومحبة ً ورضا‪ ً.‬ففيها قرة عيونهم وسرور قلو بهم ولذة أرواحهم‪،‬‬
‫كما قال ﷺ‪» :‬وجعلت قرة عيني في الصلاة«‪ .‬وكان يقول‪» :‬يا بلال أرحنا بالصلاة«‪.‬‬
‫فقرة عين المحب ولذته ونعيم روحه في طاعة محبو به‪ .‬بخلاف المطيع كرها‪ ،‬المتحمل للخدمة ثقلا‪ً.‬‬
‫وفي قوله‪» :‬ذل الإكراه« لطيفة‪ ،‬وهي أن المطيع كرها ً يرى أنه لولا ذل قهره وعقو بة سيده له لما‬
‫أطاعه‪ .‬فهو يتحمل طاعتهكالمكره الذي قد أذله مكرهه وقاهره‪ ،‬بخلاف المحب الذي يعد طاعة محبو به‬
‫قوتا ًونعيما ًولذة ً وسرورا ً‪ ،‬فهذا ليس الحامل له ذل الإكراه‪.‬‬
‫والثاني‪ :‬تحفظه من مرض الفتور‪ ،‬أي توقيه من مرض فتور قصده وخمود نار طلبه‪ .‬فإن العزم‬
‫هو روح القلب ونشاطهكالصحة له‪ ،‬وفتوره مرض من أمراضه‪ .‬فتهذيب قصده وتصفيته بحميته من‬
‫أسباب هذا المرض الذي هو فتوره‪ .‬وإنما يتحفظ منه بالحمية من أسبابه‪ ،‬وهي أن يلهو عن الفضول من‬
‫كل شيء و يحرص على ترك ما لا يعنيه‪ ،‬ولا يتكلم إلا فيما يرجو فيه ز يادة إ يمانه وحاله مع الل ّٰه تعالى‪،‬‬
‫ولا يصحب إلا من يعينه على ذلك‪ .‬فإن بلي بمن لا يعينه فليدرأه عنه ما استطاع و يدفعه دفع الصائل‪.‬‬
‫الثالث‪ :‬نصرة قصده على منازعات العلم‪ .‬ومعنى ذلك نصرة خاطر العبودية المحصنة والجمعية فيها‪،‬‬
‫والإقبال على الل ّٰه فيها بكلية القلب على حوادث العلم والفكرة في دقائقه وتفار يع مسائله وفضلاته‪ .‬أو‬
‫أن العلم يطلب من العبد العمل للرغبة والرهبة والثواب وخوف العقاب‪.‬‬
‫فتهذيب القصد تصفيته من ملاحظة ذلك‪ .‬وتجر يده أن يكون قصده وعبوديته محبة ً لل ّٰه بلا علة‪،‬‬
‫وألا يحب الل ّٰه لما يعطيه و يحميه منه‪ ،‬فتكون محبته لل ّٰه محبة الوسائل‪ ،‬ومحبته بالقصد الأول لما يناله من‬
‫الثواب المخلوق‪ .‬فهو المحبوب له بالذات‪ ،‬بحيث إذا حصل له محبو به تسلى به عن محبة من أعطاه إ ياه‪.‬‬
‫فإن من أحبك لأمر ولى عند حصوله ومل ّك عند انقضائه‪.‬‬

392

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The true lover fears that his love be for an ulterior motive, whatever it may
be, and that his love may vanish when that need is fulfilled. [Al-Harawī] means
by these words, therefore, that the [seeker’s] love is eternal, never-ending, and
he never makes his Beloved a means to another end. Rather, all else becomes
an end to his Beloved.
This is the extent of [opposition to knowledge] that the people [of Sufism]
have alluded to and intended. Some [interpreters of al-Harawī] have expressed
it well, and others have misspoken. His intention and his truthfulness mend the
defectiveness of his expression. Some have not understood it properly and are
driven inevitably to reject it.
God forgives any whose goal is the truth and the following of His pleasure,
for His forgiveness is vast.

‫‪393‬‬

‫‪chapter 25‬‬

‫فالمحب الصادق يخاف أن تكون محبته لغرض من الأغراض فتنقضي محبته عند انقضاء ذلك‬
‫الغرض‪ .‬وإنما مراده أن محبته تدوم ولا تنقضي أبدا ً‪ ،‬وألا يجعل محبو به وسيلة لً ه إلى غيره‪ ،‬بل يجعل‬
‫ما سواه وسيلة لً ه إلى محبو به‪ .‬وهذا القدر هو الذي حام عليه القوم وتكلموا فيه وشمروا إليه‪ ،‬فمنهم من‬
‫أحسن التعبير عنه‪ ،‬ومنهم من أساء العبارة‪ ،‬وقصده وصدقه يصلح فساد عبارته‪.‬‬
‫ومن الناس من لم يفهم هذا كما ينبغي فلم يجد له ملجأ ً غير الإنكار‪.‬والل ّٰه يغفر لكل من قصده الحق‬
‫واتباع مرضاته‪ ،‬فإنه واسع المغفرة‪.‬‬

chapter 26

The Station of Standing Firm
Among the stations of “You alone we worship and You alone we supplicate for
help” is standing firm or steadfastness.
God the Most High has said, “Those who say, ‘Our Lord is God,’ and then
stand firm, upon them the angels descend, saying: Fear not nor grieve, but
rejoice in the tiding of the Garden that you had been promised” [41:30]. He
also said, “Verily those who say, ‘Our Lord is God,’ and then stand firm, on them
shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve. Such shall be Companions of the Garden,
dwelling therein for eternity: a recompense for their works” [46:15]. He also said
addressing His Messenger, God grant him blessing and peace: “Stand firm as
you are commanded—you and those who with you have turned [to God]; and
transgress not: for He sees well all that you do” [11:112]. This verse indicates that
standing firm is to avoid transgression, which means to go beyond limits.
The Most High has also said, “Say [O Prophet], I am only a human like you:
It is revealed to me by Inspiration, that your God is one God: so stand true to
Him, and ask for His Forgiveness …” [41:6].
{And the Most High said: “Had they stood firm on the path, We would have
given them a water of abundance, that We may thereby test them …” [72:16–
17].}1
Abū Bakr the Truth-lover, the most truthful man of this Umma, God be
pleased with him, was asked about standing firm, so he said, “That you not associate anything to God,” implying standing firm on pure monotheism. ʿUmar
ibn al-Khaṭṭāb, may God be pleased with him, said: “Standing firm is that you
stand firm in command and prohibition, not change your colors like a fox.”
ʿUthmān b. ʿAffān, may God be pleased with him, said, explaining the phrase
“they stood firm” [41:30], “They made their works exclusive for God.”
ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib and Ibn ʿAbbās, may God be please with them both, said
“Standing firm means that they fulfilled the obligations.”
Al-Ḥasan [of Basra] said: “They stood firm on the command of God means
they acted in His obedience and avoided His disobedience.”
Mujāhid said: “They stood firm on the testimony that ‘There is no god but
God’ until they met God.”

1 As the braces indicate, this sentence is found in some manuscripts.

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬الاستقامة«‪.‬‬
‫تح ْز َنوُ ا‬
‫تخ َافوُ ا و َل َا َ‬
‫ل ع َليَ ْه ِم ُ ال ْم َل َائ ِك َة ُ َأ َلّا َ‬
‫ن ق َالوُ ا ر َ ُب ّن َا ال َل ّـه ُ ث ُ َم ّ اْستقَ َام ُوا ٺ َتنَ زَ ّ ُ‬
‫ن ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َ ّ‬
‫ن ق َالوُ ا ر َ ُب ّن َا ال َل ّـه ُ ث ُ َم ّ اْستقَ َام ُوا‬
‫ن ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫كنت ُم ْ توُ ع َد ُونَ﴾ ]فصلت‪ .[30:‬وقال‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َ ّ‬
‫و َ َأبشْ ِر ُوا باِ ْلج َنَ ّة ِ ا َل ّت ِي ُ‬
‫ن فيِ ه َا ج َز َاء ً ب ِم َا ك َانوُ ا يعَ ْم َلوُ نَ﴾‬
‫ب اْلج َنَ ّة ِ خ َال ِد ِي َ‬
‫ك َأ ْ‬
‫يح ْز َنوُ نَ ُأول َٰئ ِ َ‬
‫ف ع َليَ ْه ِْم و َل َا ه ُْم َ‬
‫خو ْ ٌ‬
‫ف َل َا َ‬
‫صح َا ُ‬
‫ك و َل َا ت َْطغ َو ْا ۚ ِإ َن ّه ُب ِم َا تعَ ْم َلوُ نَ‬
‫ب م َع َ َ‬
‫كم َا ُأم ِْر َ‬
‫]الأحقاف‪ .[14–13:‬وقال لرسوله ﷺ‪﴿ :‬ف َاْستقَ ِْم َ‬
‫ت و َم َن تاَ َ‬
‫ل ِإ َن ّم َا َأناَ‬
‫صير ٌ﴾ ]هود‪ ،[112:‬فبين أن الاستقامة بعدم الطغيان‪ ،‬وهو مجاوزة الحدود‪ .‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬ق ُ ْ‬
‫بَ ِ‬
‫حدٌ ف َاْستقَ ِيم ُوا ِإل َي ْه ِ و َاْستغَ ْف ِر ُوه ُ﴾ ]فصلت‪.[6:‬‬
‫ب َش َر ٌ مّ ِث ْلـ ُك ُْم يوُ حَى ٰ ِإل ََيّ َأ َن ّم َا ِإل َٰه ُك ُْم ِإل َٰه ٌ و َا ِ‬
‫سئل صديق الأمة وأعظمها استقامة أبو بكر الصديق—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—عن الاستقامة فقال‪:‬‬
‫»ألا تشرك بالل ّٰه شيئا َ«‪ .‬ير يد الاستقامة على محض التوحيد‪.‬‬
‫وقال عمر بن الخطاب—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—‪» :‬الاستقامة أن تستقيم على الأمر والنهي‪ ،‬ولا تروغ‬
‫روغان الثعالب«‪.‬‬
‫وقال عثمان بن عفان—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—‪» :‬استقاموا‪ :‬أخلصوا العمل لل ّٰه«‪.‬‬
‫وقال علي بن أبي طالب رضي الل ّٰه عنه‪ ،‬وا بن عباس رضي الل ّٰه عنهما‪» :‬استقاموا‪ :‬أدوا الفرائض«‪.‬‬
‫وقال الحسن‪» :‬استقاموا على أمر الل ّٰه فعملوا بطاعته واجتنبوا معصيته«‪.‬‬
‫وقال مجاهد‪» :‬استقاموا على شهادة ألا إله إلا الل ّٰه حتى لحقوا بالل ّٰه«‪.‬‬

396

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

I heard the Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya [may God sanctify his soul], say:
“They stood firm on the love and worship of God and swayed neither right nor
left from it.”
In the Ṣaḥīḥ of Muslim, it is reported on the authority of Sufyān ibn ʿAbdallāh, may God be pleased with him, “I said: ‘O Messenger of God, tell me in Islam
a saying about which I will not ask anyone but you.’ He, God grant him blessing
and peace, said: ‘Say I have faith, then stand firm on it.’ ”2
Also reported therein is another report on the authority of Thawbān,3 who
said that the Prophet said: “Stand firm, and you will not be able to encompass
it all, and know that the best of works is the regular prayer, and only a believer
protects his state of ritual purity.”4
What is required of a servant is steadfastness, and it means to try one’s best,
so that if one cannot do it all, one does as much as possible, but if one drops
below the minimum, that is deficiency and loss. As in Ṣaḥīḥ of Muslim, Abū
Hurayra is reported to have said that the Prophet, God grant him blessing and
peace, said: “Aim your best and try to get as close as possible, and know that
none of you will be saved by his actions alone.” They said: “Even you, O Messenger of God?” He said, “Not even I, unless God covers me with His mercy
and grace.” He has gathered in this Hadith all of the stations of religion: thus
he commanded steadfastness, which is to aim to the best of one’s ability, and
rectitude in one’s intentions, words, and works.
He also informed in the Hadith of Thawbān that the servants will not be able
to encompass all that they are required to do, so the Messenger directed them
to do their best according to their ability. Like the one who is shooting at a target, even if he cannot hit it in the middle, he tries his best to get as close to it as
possible. Along with this, he, God grant him blessing and peace, informed them
that neither their steadfastness nor their trying their best will alone save them
on the Day of Resurrection; no one should lean on their good deeds alone, for
his salvation is in the mercy, forgiveness, and grace of God.
Standing firm, then, is a comprehensive concept, containing within its fold
all of religion, which is to stand in front of God with truthfulness and loyalty.
Steadfastness relates to words, deeds, inner states, and intentions. Steadfastness means that all of these must be for the sake of God, with the help of God,
and in accordance with the commandments of God.
One of the knowers has said, “Be a man of steadfastness, not a seeker of miracles, for your ego works in the quest of miracles whereas your Lord demands
of you only steadfastness.”

2 Muslim #38.

‫‪397‬‬

‫‪chapter 26‬‬

‫وسمعت شيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية يقول‪ :‬استقاموا على محبته وعبوديته‪ ،‬فلم يلتفتوا عنه يمنة ً ولا يسرة ً‪.‬‬
‫وفي صحيح مسلم عن سفيان بن عبد الل ّٰه قال‪ :‬قلت يا رسول الل ّٰه‪ ،‬قل لي في الإسلام قولا ًلا أسأل‬
‫عنه أحدا ً غيرك‪ .‬قال‪» :‬قل آمنت بالل ّٰه ثم استقم«‪.‬‬
‫وفيه عن ثو بان عن النبي ﷺ قال‪» :‬استقيموا ولن تحصوا‪ ،‬واعلموا أن خير أعمالـكم الصلاة‪ ،‬ولا‬
‫يحافظ على الوضوء إلا مؤمن«‪.‬‬
‫والمطلوب من العبد الاستقامة وهي السداد‪ ،‬فإن لم يقدر عليها فالمقار بة‪ ،‬فإن نزل عنها فالتفر يط‬
‫والإضاعة‪ ،‬كما في صحيح مسلم من حديث أبي هر يرة عن النبي ﷺ‪» :‬سددوا وقار بوا‪ ،‬واعلموا أنه لن‬
‫ينجو أحد منكم بعمله«‪ .‬قالوا‪ :‬ولا أنت ]يا رسول الل ّٰه[ قال‪» :‬ولا أنا‪ ،‬إلا أن يتغمدني الل ّٰه برحمة منه‬
‫وفضل«‪ .‬فجمع في هذا الحديث مقامات الدين كلها‪ ،‬فأمر بالاستقامة وهي السداد والإصابة في‬
‫النيات والأقوال والأعمال‪.‬‬
‫وأخبر في حديث ثو بان أنهم لا يطيقونها فنقلهم إلى المقار بة‪ ،‬وهي أن يقر بوا من الاستقامة بحسب‬
‫طاقتهم‪ ،‬كالذي يرمي إلى الغرض فإن لم يصبه يقار به‪ .‬ومع هذا فأخبرهم أن الاستقامة والمقار بة لا‬
‫تنجي يوم القيامة‪ ،‬فلا يركن أحد إلى عمله‪ ،‬ولا يرى أن نجاته به‪ ،‬بل إنما نجاته برحمة الل ّٰه وعفوه وفضله‪.‬‬
‫فالاستقامةكلمة جامعة‪ ،‬آخذة بمجامع الدين‪ ،‬وهي القيام بين يدي الل ّٰه على حقيقة الصدق والوفاء‬
‫بالعهد‪.‬‬
‫والاستقامة ٺتعلق بالأقوال والأفعال والأحوال والنيات‪ .‬فالاستقامة فيها وقوعها لل ّٰه و بالل ّٰه وعلى‬
‫أمر الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫قال بعض العارفين‪» :‬كن صاحب الاستقامة لا طالب الـكرامة‪ ،‬فإن نفسك متحركة في طلب‬
‫الـكرامة‪ ،‬ور بك يطالبك بالاستقامة«‪.‬‬

‫‪3 Thawbān Abū ʿAbdallāh, a Companion and client of the Prophet, who died in AH 45: Ḥilya‬‬
‫‪1:180; Ṭabaqāt al-Kubrā 7:400.‬‬
‫‪4 Reported by Aḥmad, not Muslim.‬‬

398

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

I heard the Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya, may God sanctify his soul, say,
“The greatest of miracles is remaining steadfast.”

1

Exclusivity

The author of al-Manāzil said in reference to the words of the Exalted “Hold
you, then, firmly, to Him”:
It is an allusion to the essence of exclusivity.
He means that [God] is guiding them to witnessing His singularity, which is
that they witness Him and nothing other than Him.
His exclusivity is of two types: exclusivity in knowledge, inner awareness,
and witnessing, and exclusivity in the quest and intention, and these are two
aspects of monotheism. In his words “the essence of exclusivity” there is an allusion to the state of communion and His unicity, which in [al-Harawī’s] view is
above His knowledge and gnosis, for the state of separation may coexist with
the knowledge of communion, but it cannot coexist with the experiential state
of communion.

2

The Soul of All States

He said,
Steadfastness is the soul by which the states are quickened, just as for
the commoners it is the soul that quickens good works, and it is a buffer
between the lowland of separation and the highland of communion.
The form of steadfastness for the experiential state is like the soul for the body,
and just as body dies when devoid of the soul, so does the experiential state
become invalid when devoid of steadfastness; and just as the life of the states
is by it, the increase, growth, and flourishing of the works of the ascetics is by it.
As for it being the buffer between the lowlands of separation and highlands of communion, “buffer” is a middle ground between two distinct things,
whereas “lowland” is a depressed place in the land, being used here as a metaphor for the state of separation as it prevents one from seeing what someone
on the highland can see, just as one in the state of separation is unable to see
what someone in the state of communion can see. Furthermore, the former’s

‫‪399‬‬

‫‪chapter 26‬‬

‫وسمعت شيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية—قدس الل ّٰه تعالى روحه—يقول‪» :‬أعظم الـكرامة لزوم‬
‫الاستقامة«‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل في قوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬ف َاْستقَ ِيم ُوا ِإل َي ْه ِ﴾ ]فصلت‪» :[6:‬إنه إشارة إلى عين التفر يد«‪.‬‬
‫ير يد أنه أرشدهم إلى شهود تفر يده وهو ألا يروا غير فردانيته‪ .‬وتفر يده نوعان‪ :‬تفر يد في العلم والمعرفة‬
‫والشهود‪ ،‬وتفر يد في الطلب والإرادة‪ ،‬وهما نوعا التوحيد‪.‬‬
‫وفي قوله‪» :‬عين التفر يد« إشارة إلى حال الجمع وأحديته‪ ،‬التي هي عنده فوق علمه ومعرفته‪ ،‬لأن‬
‫التفرقة قد تجامع علم الجمع‪ ،‬وأما حاله فلا تجامعه التفرقة‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬والاستقامة روح تحيي بها الأحوال‪ ،‬كما تر بو للعامة عليها الأعمال‪ ،‬وهي برزخ بين وهاد التفرق‬
‫وروابي الجمع«‪.‬‬
‫شبه الاستقامة للحال بمنزلة الروح للبدن‪ .‬فكما أن البدن إذا خلا عن الروح فهو ميت‪ ،‬فكذلك‬
‫الحال إذا خلا عن الاستقامة فهو فاسد‪ ،‬وكما أن حياة الأحوال بها‪ ،‬فز يادة أعمال الزاهدين أيضا ً‬
‫ور بوها وزكاؤها بها‪ .‬فلا زكاء للعمل ولا صحة للحال بدونها‪.‬‬
‫وأما كونها »برزخا ً بين وهاد التفرق‪ ،‬وروابي الجمع«‪ ،‬ف »البرزخ« هو الحاجز بين شيئين‬
‫متغا ير ين‪ ،‬والوهاد الأمكنة المنخفضة من الأرض‪ .‬واستعارها للتفرق لأنها تحجب من يكون فيها‬
‫عن مطالعة ما يراه من هو على الروابي‪ .‬كما أن صاحب التفرق محجوب عن مطالعة ما يراه صاحب‬
‫الجمع و يشاهده‪.‬‬

400

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

state is lower than the state of the latter. The state of the one in communion
is higher than the state of the one in the lowland. He likened the state of communion to the state of being on the highland due to the latter’s vantage point
being high, and those highlands unveil for him what is near and what is far, in
the same way that the one in communion has realities available to him that are
unavailable to others.
Hence, the meaning of [steadfastness] being a buffer can be appreciated,
for the seeker enters his quest in the state of separation journeying toward the
highlands of communion, and remains firm on his path with utmost resolve.
His resolve is all that brings him from one to the other. Similarly, the separation
of a denizen of his homeland amidst numerous diversions, when he resolves to
undertake his journey, then sets out and leaves his lands, and continues in his
journey, his journey is the buffer separating his initial state from his destination.

3

Levels of Steadfastness

He said,
It is three levels. First, steadfastness in the struggle with moderation, neither transgressing the formalities of scriptural knowledge nor transgressing the bounds of purity nor opposing the path of the Sunna.
This level comprises six matters: work and struggle for [the goal]; moderation,
which is conduct that avoids either extreme, one being oppression of the ego
and the other being loss by neglect; upholding the forms made incumbent by
scriptural knowledge rather than the demands of the experiential state; and
singling out God in your intention, which means exclusivity or sincerity; and
finally, the conduct of works in accordance with the command, which is following the Sunna.
These six matters are necessary for steadfastness at this level and failing in
any one of them leads to failure in steadfastness, either totally or partially. The
Predecessors frequently mention these two principles together, moderation in
works and holding fast to the Sunna, for the Devil whiffs and sniffs the hearts
of the servant and if he sees in their hearts the subtlest openness to heresy
and evasion of perfect devotion to the Sunna, {he causes him to lose his grip,
whereas if he senses in his heart total devotion and adherence to it} he fails
in his effort to make the servant abandon the Sunna. He then commands him
to strive harder to the point of oppressing himself, transgressing the limits of

‫‪401‬‬

‫‪chapter 26‬‬

‫وأيضا ًفإن حاله أ نزل من حاله‪ ،‬فهو كصاحب الوهاد‪ ،‬وحال صاحب الجمع أعلى فهو كصاحب‬
‫الروابي‪ ،‬وشبه حال صاحب الجمع بحال من على الروابي لعلوه‪ .‬ولأن الروابي تكشف لمن عليها القر يب‬
‫والبعيد‪ ،‬وصاحب الجمع تكشف له الحقائق المحجو بة عن صاحب التفرقة‪.‬‬
‫إذا عرف هذا‪ ،‬فمعنى كونها برزخا ًأن السالك يكون في أول سلوكه في أودية التفرقة‪ ،‬سا ئرا ً إلى‬
‫روابي الجمع‪ ،‬فيستقيم في طر يق سيره غاية الاستقامة ليصل باستقامته إلى روابي الجمع‪ .‬فاستقامته برزخ‬
‫بين تلك التفرقة التي كان فيها و بين الجمع الذي يؤمه و يقصده‪ ،‬وهذا بمنزلة تفرقة المقيم في البلد في أنواع‬
‫التصرفات‪ .‬فإذا عزم على السفر وخرج وفارق البلد‪ ،‬واستمر على السير كان طر يق سفره برزخا بين‬
‫البلد الذي كان فيه والبلد الذي يقصده و يؤمه‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهي على ثلاث درجات‪ .‬الدرجة الأولى‪ :‬الاستقامة على الاجتهاد في الاقتصاد‪ ،‬لا عاديا ًرسم‬
‫العلم‪ ،‬ولا متجاوزا ً حد الإخلاص‪ ،‬ولا مخالفا ًنهج السنة«‪.‬‬
‫هذه الدرجة ٺتضمن ستة أمور‪ :‬عملا ًواجتهادا ً فيه وهو بذل المجهود‪ .‬واقتصادا ً وهو السلوك بين‬
‫طرفي الإفراط‪ ،‬وهو الجور على النفوس والتفر يط بالإضاعة‪ .‬ووقوفا ً مع ما يرسمه العلم لا وقوفا ً مع‬
‫دواعي الحال‪ .‬وإفراد المعبود بالإرادة وهو الإخلاص‪ .‬ووقوع الأعمال على الأمر وهو متابعة السنة‪.‬‬
‫فبهذه الأمور الستة تتم لأهل هذه الدرجة استقامتهم‪ .‬و بالخروج عن واحد منها يخرجون عن‬
‫الاستقامة إما خروجا ًكليا ًوإما خروجا ًجزئيا‪ً.‬‬
‫والسلف يذكرون هذين الأصلين كثيرا وهما الاقتصاد في الأعمال والاعتصام بالسنة‪ .‬فإن الشيطان‬
‫يشم قلب العبد و يختبره‪ ،‬فإن رأى فيه داعية ً للبدعة وإعراضا ًعن كمال الانقياد للسنة ]أخرجه عن‬
‫الاعتصام بها‪ ،‬وإن رأى فيه حرصا ًعليها وشدة طلب لها[ لم يظفر به من باب اقتطاعه عنها‪ ،‬فأمره‬

402

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

moderation, saying to him: This is only good, a matter of obedience, and doing
more of it is only better, so do not slacken with those who are fatigued, nor
sleep with those asleep. He keeps on goading and prodding him until he causes
him to abandon moderation. Just as the first one crossed one boundary, this
one crosses the other boundary.
This is the case with the Khārijites who look down upon the prayers, fasting,
and recitation of the People of Steadfastness. Both matters are tantamount to
the abandonment of the Sunna to heretical innovation, one to the innovation
of neglect and loss and the other to the innovation of transgression and excess.
One of the Predecessors said, “There is no command of God but that the
Devil has two tugs on it, one for neglect and the other for transgression, and he
does not care by which one he succeeds.”
{The Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, said to Abd Allāh
b. ʿAmr b. al-ʿĀṣ, may God be pleased with them, when teaching him moderation: “O ʿAbdallāh b. ʿAmr, every deed has a peak, and for every peak there is a
trough—if one’s trough is toward a Sunna, he succeeds, and if it is toward an
innovation, he fails.”5}
A Companion said that moderation in the right way is better than hard work
against the right way, so strive to make your actions on the path of the prophets,
may God’s peace be upon them.
Another vice that diverts one from the path of steadfastness is ostentation
as well as negligence and languor.

4

The Second Level

He said,
The second level is the steadfastness of the states, which is the witnessing of the reality but not by acquisition, rejection of the claim but not by
knowledge, and subsistence with the light of awakening but not guardedly.
He means that the steadfastness in the experiential state is attained by these
three things.
As for “witnessing the reality,” it should be noted that reality is of two kinds:
ontological reality and deontological reality. The two are brought together in

5 Aḥmad 2:188.

‫‪403‬‬

‫‪chapter 26‬‬

‫بالاجتهاد والجور على النفس ومجاوزة حد الاقتصاد فيها‪ ،‬قائلا ً له‪ :‬إن هذا خير وطاعة‪ ،‬والز يادة‬
‫والاجتهاد فيها أولى‪ ،‬فلا تفتر مع أهل الفتور ولا تنم مع أهل النوم‪ ،‬فلا يزال يحثه و يحرضه حتى‬
‫يخرجه عن الاقتصاد فيها‪ ،‬فيخرج عن حدها كما أن الأول خارج عن هذا الحد‪ ،‬فكذا هذا الآخر‬
‫خارج عن الحد الآخر‪.‬‬
‫وهذا حال الخوارج الذين يحقر أهل الاستقامة صلاتَهم مع صلاتهم‪ ،‬وصيامهم مع صيامهم‪،‬‬
‫وقراءتهم مع قراءتهم‪ ،‬وكلا الأمرين خروج عن السنة إلى البدعة‪ ،‬لـكن هذا إلى بدعة التفر يط‬
‫والإضاعة‪ ،‬والآخر إلى بدعة المجاوزة والإسراف‪.‬‬
‫وقال بعض السلف‪ :‬ما أمر الل ّٰه بأمر إلا وللشيطان فيه نزغتان‪ ،‬إما إلى تفر يط وإما إلى مجاوزة‪،‬‬
‫وهي الإفراط‪ ،‬ولا يبالي بأيهما ظفر‪.‬‬
‫فكل الخـير في اجتهاد باقتصاد مقرون بالاتباع كما قال بعض الصحابة‪ :‬اقتصاد في سبيل وسنة خيرٌ‬
‫من اجتهاد في خلاف سبيل وسنة‪ .‬فاحرصوا على أن تكون أعمالـكم على منهاج الأنبياء عليهم السلام‬
‫وسنتهم‪ .‬وكذلك الر ياء في الأعمال يخرجه عن الاستقامة‪ ،‬والفتور والتواني يخرجه عنها‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬استقامة الأحوال‪ ،‬وهي شهود الحقيقة لا كسبا‪ ً،‬ورفض الدعوى لا علما‪ً،‬‬
‫والبقاء مع نور اليقظة لا تحفظا ً«‪.‬‬
‫يعني أن استقامة الحال بهذه الثلاثة‪ .‬أما »شهود الحقيقة« فالحقيقة حقيقتان‪ :‬حقيقةكونية وحقيقة‬
‫دينية‪.‬‬

404

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

a third one, which is the source and origin of the other two, as well as their
ultimate goal. Most of the later masters of the path only intend to witness and
attain ontological reality. Witnessing this reality is to witness the Lord’s singularity in all acts, and that all that is other than Him is nothing but a site
or object of His command; it is like a canal that is merely the site of flowing
water.
They believe that witnessing this reality and annihilation in it is the ultimate
goal of the seekers.
Some among them witness the reality of God’s past and future eternity, the
evanescence of accidents within the folds of eternity, thus witnessing them as
non-existent and their Cause as the sole true existent, all other existents being
mere forms and shadows. The first of these sees the singularity of God in acts
and the second sees His singularity in existence.
However, the possessor of the deontological, religious reality is on an entirely
different plane, for he witnesses command and prohibition, reward and punishment, alliance [with God’s allies] and disavowal [of God’s enemies], and the
difference between what He loves and likes and what He dislikes and loathes.
Such a one is in the station of the Second Distinction without which a servant
cannot attain the [entry] level of Islam let alone the [higher] rank of Excellence. One who denies this [distinction] has no share in Islam at all. This is
the one about which al-Junayd used to advise his disciples, saying, “You must
adhere to the Second Distinction.” It has been named “second” because the
first distinction is the difference [in acts] by virtue of nature [such as between
pleasure and pain] and the ego, whereas this is the distinction by virtue of the
[divine] command.
Communion is also of two kinds. The first is the communion of the people
of steadfastness and monotheism, whereas the second communion is that of
the people of heresy and deviance.6
There are three types of people in this respect.
[A seeker] who experiences only separation but no communion is blameworthy and deficient, if not a failure. One who experiences only communion
but no separation is a deviant heretic. Finally, one who possesses separation
and communion, witnessing separation in union and multiplicity in unicity, is the steadfast, discerning monotheist. This is the possessor of the third
reality, one which unites both the deontological and the ontological realities. The witnessing of this comprehensive reality is the essence of steadfastness.

6 See glossary, “Zindīq.”

‫‪405‬‬

‫‪chapter 26‬‬

‫يجمعهما حقيقة ثالثة وهي مصدرهما ومنشؤهما وغايتهما‪ .‬وأكثر أر باب السلوك من المتأخر ين إنما‬
‫ير يدون بالحقيقة الحقيقة الـكونية‪ ،‬وشهودها هو شهود تفرد الرب بالفعل‪ ،‬وأن ما سواه محل جر يان‬
‫أحكامه وأفعاله‪ .‬فهو كالحفير الذي هو محل لجر يان الماء حسب‪.‬‬
‫وعندهم أن شهود هذه الحقيقة والفناء فيها غاية السالـكين‪.‬‬
‫ومنهم من يشهد حقيقة الأزلية والدوام وفناء الحادثات وطيها في ضمن بساط الأزلية والأبدية‪،‬‬
‫وتلاشيها في ذلك‪ .‬فيشهدها معدومة ً‪ ،‬و يشهد تفرد موجدها بالوجود الحق‪ ،‬وأن وجود ما سواه رسوم‬
‫وظلال‪.‬‬
‫فالأول‪ :‬يشهد تفرده بالأفعال‪ ،‬وهذا شهد تفرده بالوجود‪.‬‬
‫وصاحب الحقيقة الدينية في طور آخر‪ ،‬فإنه في مشهد الأمر والنهي والثواب والعقاب‪ ،‬والموالاة‬
‫والمعاداة والفرق بين ما يحبه الل ّٰه و يرضاه و بين ما يبغضه و يسخطه‪ .‬فهو في مقام الفرق الثاني الذي‬
‫لا يحصل للعبد درجة الإسلام—فضلا ًعن مقام الإحسان—إلا به‪.‬‬
‫فالمعرض عنه صفحا ًلا نصيب له في الإسلام البتة‪ ،‬وهو الذي كان الجنيد يوصى به أصحابه فيقول‪:‬‬
‫»عليكم بالفرق الثاني«‪ ،‬وإنما سمي ثانيا ًلأن الفرق الأول فرق بالطبع والنفس‪ ،‬وهذا فرق بالأمر‪.‬‬
‫والجمع أيضا ًجمعان‪ :‬جمع في الفرق وهو جمع أهل الاستقامة والتوحيد‪ ،‬وجمع بلا فرق وهو جمع‬
‫أهل الزندقة والإلحاد‪.‬‬
‫فالناس ثلاثة‪ :‬صاحب فرق بلا جمع‪ ،‬فهو مذموم ناقص مخذول‪ .‬وصاحب جمع بلا فرق فصاحبه‬
‫ملحد زنديق‪ .‬وصاحب فرق وجمع‪ ،‬يشهد الفرق في الجمع والـكثرة في الوحدة‪ ،‬فهو المستقيم الموحد‬
‫الفارق‪ ،‬وهذا صاحب الحقيقة الثالثة الجامعة للحقيقتين الدينية والـكونية‪ .‬فشهود هذه الحقيقة الجامعة‬
‫هو عين الاستقامة‪.‬‬

406

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

As for the experience of the ontological or eternal reality, and annihilation
in it, that is shared by all, the believers and the unbelievers, for the unbeliever
affirms the predestination and decree of God, as well as God’s past and future
eternity, and when he is drowned in this observation and lost in it to the exclusion of all else, he has witnessed its reality. As for [al-Harawī’s] qualification
“without acquisition,” he means that one realizes at the occasion of this witnessing of the reality that it is not acquired, for acquisition is an act of the ego,
and the reality is not attained if the ego subsists. For the reality is single, singular, and luminous, and unless the darkness of the ego and the thought of
acquisition are obliterated, one cannot witness it.
As for “rejection of the claim but not by knowledge,” the “claim” here is to
relate the state and other things to the ego, to one’s own being. Steadfastness
cannot be sound except by abandoning [any] claim, be it true or false; for even
a true claim dims the light of inner knowing, what then about a false claim?
As for his qualification, “not by knowledge,” it means that the cause of his
abandoning the claim must not be mere intellectual knowledge of the invalidity of the claim and its opposition to steadfastness, and his renunciation of
it therefore a result of a noetic conclusion, for that would be its outward and
not real renunciation, a renunciation of word while subsisting in it experientially. He must not renounce the claim merely out of courtesy or humility but
in experience and in reality. When he truly realizes that nothing of the matter is his—as God Almighty and Magnificent said to the best of his creation,
“Nothing of the matter belongs to you” [3:128]—only then he truly abandons
the claim in experience, reality, and state.
As for “subsistence with the light of the awakening,” it means the awakening
[to wit, the very first station of the seeker,] and that light not be put out by the
darkness of negligence, but he must perpetuate the awakening, while realizing
that he is being taken away from the grasp of his ego, driven by the protection
of God, not his own protection. There are three things here: the awakening, its
continuation, and witnessing that its source is the Exalted Truth, not you. The
reason for your light of awakening persisting is not that you guarded it, but God
guarded it for you.
Here [it is] as if the Shaykh suggests that this level of steadfastness is not
acquired but rather purely a gift, for he said concerning the first [level] “steadfastness upon the struggle” whereas concerning the second level, he says that
the steadfastness of the spiritual state is neither acquired nor guarded [by the
seeker].
A contention is possible here, which is that [this level of steadfastness]
is possibly acquired by the acquisition of its prerequisites and conditions in
whose presence this state occurs to the seeker. What is being denied here is

‫‪407‬‬

‫‪chapter 26‬‬

‫وأما شهود الحقيقة الـكونية أو الأزلية والفناء فيها فأمر مشترك بين المؤمنين والـكفار‪ .‬فإن الكافر‬
‫مقر بقدر الل ّٰه وقضائه‪ ،‬وأزليته وأبديته‪ .‬فإذا استغرق في هذا الشهود وفني به عن سواه فقد شهد‬
‫الحقيقة‪ .‬وأما قوله »لا كسبا ً«‪ ،‬أي يتحقق عند مشاهدة الحقيقة أن شهودها لم يكن بالـكسب لأن‬
‫الـكسب من أعمال النفس‪ ،‬فالحقيقة لا تبدو مع بقاء النفس‪ .‬إذ الحقيقة فردانية أحدية نورانية‪.‬‬
‫فلابد من زوال ظلمة النفس ورؤ يةكسبها وإلا لم يشهد الحقيقة‪.‬‬
‫وأما »رفض الدعوى لا علما ً«‪ ،‬ف »الدعوى« نسبة الحال وغيره إلى نفسك وإنيتك‪ .‬فالاستقامة‬
‫لا تصح إلا بتركه‪ ،‬سواء كانت حقا ً أو باطلا‪ ً.‬فإن الدعوى الصادقة تطفيء نور المعرفة‪ ،‬فكيف‬
‫بالكاذبة؟‬
‫وأما قوله‪» :‬لا علما ً«‪ ،‬أي لا يكون الحامل له على ترك الدعوى مجرد علمه بفساد الدعوى ومنافاتها‬
‫للاستقامة‪ .‬فإذا تركها يكون تركها لـكون العلم قد نهى عنها‪ ،‬فيكون تاركا ًلها ظاهرا ً لا حقيقة ً‪ ،‬أو‬
‫تاركا لً ها لفظا ًقائما ًبها حالا‪ ً،‬لأنه يرى أنه قد قام بحق العلم في تركها‪ ،‬فيتركها تواضعا‪ ،‬بل يتركها حالا ً‬
‫وحقيقة ً‪ .‬وإذا تحقق أنه ليس له من الأمر شيء—كما قال الل ّٰه عز وجل لخـير خلقه على الإطلاق‪:‬‬
‫يء ٌ﴾ ]آل عمران‪ ،[128:‬ترك الدعوى شهودا ً وحقيقة ً وحالا‪ً.‬‬
‫ن اْلَأْمر ِ ش َ ْ‬
‫ك مِ َ‬
‫سلَ َ‬
‫﴿ل َي ْ َ‬
‫وأما »البقاء مع نور اليقظة« فهو اليقظة‪ ،‬وألا يطفيء نورها بظلمة الغفلة‪ ،‬بل يستديم يقظته و يرى‬
‫أنه في ذلك كالمجذوب المأخوذ عن نفسه‪ ،‬حفظا ًمن الل ّٰه له‪ ،‬لا أن ذلك حصل بتحفظه واحترازه‪.‬‬
‫فهذه ثلاثة أمور‪ :‬يقظة‪ ،‬واستدامة لها‪ ،‬وشهود أن ذلك بالحق سبحانه لا بك‪ .‬فليس سبب بقائه‬
‫في نور اليقظة بحفظه بل بحفظ الل ّٰه له‪.‬‬
‫وكأن الشيخ يشير إلى أن الاستقامة في هذه الدرجة لا تحصل بكسب‪ ،‬وإنما هو مجرد موهبة‪ ،‬فإنه‬
‫قال في الأولى‪» :‬الاستقامة على الاجتهاد«‪ ،‬وفي الثانية‪» :‬استقامة الأحوال‪ ،‬لا كسبا ًولا تحفظا ً«‪.‬‬
‫ومنازعته في ذلك متوجهة‪ ،‬وأن ذلك مما يمكن تحصيلهكسبا بً تعاطي الأسباب التي تهجم بصاحبها‬
‫على هذا المقام‪.‬‬

408

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

the witnessing of this acquisition, and the notion that it occurred to him by his
own earning. Denying the acquisition is one thing, and rejecting its witnessing
is another.
Perhaps our discussion of the issue in the next section will address this issue
in greater detail, God willing.

5

The Third Level

He said,
The third level is steadfastness by renouncing the vision of steadfastness,
and being absent to the quest for steadfastness by witnessing its enactment as well as rectitude by the Truth.
This steadfastness requires losing awareness of one’s witnessing by focusing on
what is being witnessed; thus the seeker is annihilated in the Witnessed, the
Goal, the Almighty, from the vision of steadfastness in its quest, for the witnessing of steadfastness veils one from the reality of what is witnessed.
Being absent from the quest for steadfastness means being absent from it by
being present to the Truth that has brought him as well as his rectitude into
existence. When he witnesses that God is the sole source of his being and his
righteousness, that his steadfastness and standing is by God rather than himself
or by his quest, he is lost in this realization and not the quest.
This much is an implication of witnessing His name al-Qayyūm, which
means the one who subsists by Himself without needing anyone else, and by
whom all other things subsist. All that is other than Him is in need of Him, yet
their reliance on Him is not one of contingency as the People of Kalam claim,
nor one of possibility as the peripatetic philosophers claim; rather, the need for
Him is essential, and what is essential needs no proof. True, contingency and
possibility are two signs of the need, and to speak of causation by their means
is [valid] only by way of making it (God) known rather than [speaking of their]
effective causation. God knows best.

‫‪409‬‬

‫‪chapter 26‬‬

‫نعم‪ ،‬الذي ينفى في هذا المقام شهود الـكسب‪ ،‬وأن هذا حصل له بكسبه‪ ،‬فنفي الـكسب شيء‪،‬‬
‫ونفي شهوده شيء‪.‬‬
‫ولعل أن نشبع الكلام في هذا فيما يأتي إن شاء الل ّٰه تعالى‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬استقامة بترك رؤ ية الاستقامة‪] ،‬و بالغيبة عن تطلب الاستقامة بشهود إقامة‬
‫الحق وتقو يمه«‪.‬‬
‫هذه الاستقامة[ معناها الذهول بمشهوده عن شهوده‪ .‬فيغيب بالمشهود المقصود سبحانه عن رؤ ية‬
‫استقامته في طلبه‪ ،‬فإن رؤ ية الاستقامة تحجبه عن حقيقة الشهود‪.‬‬
‫وأما »الغيبة عن تطلب الاستقامة« فهو غيبته عن طلبها بشهود إقامة الحق للعبد‪ ،‬وتقو يمه إ ياه‪ .‬فإنه‬
‫إذا شهد أن الل ّٰه هو المقيم له والمقوم‪ ،‬وأن استقامته وقيامه بالل ّٰه لا بنفسه ولا بطلبه‪ .‬غاب بهذا الشهود‬
‫عن استشعار طلبه لها‪.‬‬
‫وهذا القدر من موجبات شهود معنى اسمه »القيوم« وهو الذي قام بنفسه فلم يحتج إلى أحد‪ ،‬وقام‬
‫كل شيء به فكل ما سواه يحتاج إليه بالذات‪ ،‬وليست حاجته إليه معللة ًبحدوث كما يقول المتكلمون‪،‬‬
‫ولا بإمكان كما يقول الفلاسفة المشاؤون‪ ،‬بل حاجته إليه ذاتية وما بالذات لا يعلل‪ .‬نعم‪ .‬الحدوث‬
‫والإمكان دليلان على الحاجة‪ ،‬فالتعليل بهما من باب التعر يف‪ ،‬لا من باب العلل المؤثرة‪ ،‬والل ّٰه أعلم‪.‬‬

chapter 27

The Station of Trusting Reliance
Among the stations of “You alone we worship and You alone we supplicate for
help” is the station of trusting reliance.
God the Most High has said:
“And on God you must rely if you are believers” [5:23].
“And on God alone the believers must rely” [3:160].
“Whosoever relies on God, He suffices him” [65:3].
He said [reporting] His allies, “O Lord, in You we trust, to You we have turned,
and to You is the final return” [60:3].
He said: “Say: He is the Most Merciful: in Him we believe and in Him we
trust” [67:29]. He said to His Messenger, God grant him blessing and peace,
“So trust in God, surely you are upon clear truth” [27:79]. Also, “And trust in
God, God indeed is sufficient succor” [4:81]. “And trust in the Alive, He who
never dies, and exalt His praise” [25:58]. He also said to him, “Once you have
decided [a matter], trust in God [and go forth]: God surely loves the trusting”
[3:159].
He reports His messengers and prophets as saying: “And how could it be that
we fail to trust in God when He it is who has guided our paths?” [14:12]
Of the companions of His Prophet, the Most High says: “Those who when
people said to them, ‘People have gathered to [destroy] you, fear them!’ that
only increased them in faith, and they said, ‘God is sufficient for us—and He
is the best support to rely on!’ ” [3:173] He also says: “Indeed the believers are
those who when God is mentioned their hearts tremble and when His signs
are rehearsed before them they increase them in faith, and in their Lord they
trust” [8:2].
The two Ṣaḥīḥs [of al-Bukhārī and Muslim] report a Hadith about seventy
thousand who will enter the Garden without reckoning:
They are those who neither practice charm, not take omens, nor do they
cauterize, and instead they trustingly rely on their Lord.
In the Ṣaḥīḥ of al-Bukhārī on the authority of Ibn ʿAbbās, God be pleased with
him and his father, he said,
“God is sufficient for us, and He is the best support to rely on” are words
that Abraham, God grant him blessing and peace, said when thrown in

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬التوكل«‪.‬‬
‫ل‬
‫قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َع َلىَ ال َل ّـه ِ ف َتوَ َ َكّلوُ ا ِإن ُ‬
‫كنت ُم ُمّؤ ْم ِن ِينَ﴾ ]المائدة‪ .[23:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬و َع َلىَ ال َل ّـه ِ ف َليْ َتوَ َ َكّ ِ‬
‫سبهُ ُ﴾ ]الطلاق‪ .[3:‬وقال عن‬
‫ح ْ‬
‫ال ْمؤُ ْم ِنوُ نَ﴾ ]آل عمران‪ .[160:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬و َم َن ي َتوَ َ َكّْل ع َلىَ ال َل ّـه ِ فهَ ُو َ َ‬
‫صير ُ﴾ ]الممتحنة‪.[4:‬‬
‫ك ال ْم َ ِ‬
‫ك َأن َب ْن َا و َِإل َي ْ َ‬
‫ك توَ َ َكّلنْ َا و َِإل َي ْ َ‬
‫أوليائه‪َ ﴿ :‬رّ َب ّن َا ع َل َي ْ َ‬
‫ن آم َ َن ّا ب ِه ِ و َع َل َي ْه ِ توَ َ َكّلنْ َا﴾ ]الملك‪ .[29:‬وقال لرسوله ﷺ‪﴿ :‬ف َتوَ َ َكّْل ع َلىَ ال َل ّـه ِ‬
‫ل ه ُو َ ال َر ّْحمَٰ ُ‬
‫وقال‪﴿ :‬ق ُ ْ‬
‫كفَى باِ ل َل ّـه ِ و َكيِ ل ًا﴾ ]الأحزاب‪،3:‬‬
‫ق ال ْم ُب ِينِ﴾ ]النمل‪ .[79:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬و َتوَ َ َكّْل ع َلىَ ال َل ّـه ِ ۚ و َ‬
‫ك ع َلىَ اْلح َ ّ ِ‬
‫ۖ ِإ َن ّ َ‬
‫َ ٰ‬
‫سب ِّْح ب ِح َم ْدِه ِ﴾ ]الفرقان‪ .[58:‬وقال له‪﴿ :‬ف ِ َإذ َا‬
‫ت وَ َ‬
‫ي ال َ ّذ ِي ل َا ي َموُ ُ‬
‫النساء‪ .[81:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬و َتوَ َ َكّْل ع َلىَ اْلح َ ِ ّ‬
‫ب ال ْم ُتوَ َكلّ ِ ِينَ﴾ ]آل عمران‪ .[159:‬وقال عن أنبيائه ورسله‪﴿ :‬و َم َا ل َن َا‬
‫ن ال َل ّـه َ ُ‬
‫ت ف َتوَ َ َكّْل ع َلىَ ال َل ّـه ِ ۚ ِإ َ ّ‬
‫ع ََزْم َ‬
‫يح ِ ُ ّ‬
‫س‬
‫ن ق َا َ‬
‫سب ُل َن َا[﴾ ]إ براهيم‪ .[12:‬وقال عن أصحاب نبيه‪﴿ :‬ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ل ع َلىَ ال َل ّـه ِ ]و َق َْد ه َد َاناَ ُ‬
‫َأ َلّا ن َتوَ َ َكّ َ‬
‫ل ل َه ُم ُ ال َن ّا ُ‬
‫ل﴾ ]آل عمران‪[173:‬‬
‫سب ُن َا ال َل ّـه ُ و َنعِ ْم َ ال ْو َكيِ ُ‬
‫ح ْ‬
‫خشَو ْه ُْم فزَ َاد َه ُْم ِإ يم َاناً و َق َالوُ ا َ‬
‫س ق َْد جَمعَ ُوا لـ َك ُْم ف َا ْ‬
‫ِإ َ ّ‬
‫ن ال َن ّا َ‬
‫ت ع َليَ ْه ِْم آياَ تهُ ُز َاد َْته ُْم ِإ يم َاناً و َع َلىَ ر َ ّبِه ِْم‬
‫ت ق ُلوُ بُه ُْم و َِإذ َا تلُ ِي َ ْ‬
‫جل َ ْ‬
‫ن ِإذ َا ذ ُك ِر َال َل ّـه ُو َ ِ‬
‫وقال‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َن ّم َا ال ْمؤُ ْم ِنوُ نَ ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ي َتوَ َ َكّلوُ نَ﴾ ]الأنفال‪.[2:‬‬
‫وفي الصحيحين في حديث السبعين ألفا ًالذين يدخلون الجنة بغير حساب‪» :‬هم الذين لا يسترقون‬
‫ولا يتطيرون ولا يكتوون وعلى ر بهم يتوكلون«‪.‬‬
‫وفي صحيح البخاري عن ا بن عباس—رضي الل ّٰه عنهما—قال‪» :‬حسبنا الل ّٰه ونعم الوكيل‪ ،‬قالها‬

412

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

the fire, and that Muhammad, God grant him blessing and peace, said
when they said to him [as reported in the Qurʾan at 3:173], “People have
gathered to (destroy) you, fear them!” that only increased them in faith,
and they said, “God is sufficient for us—and He is the best support to rely
on!”
The two Ṣaḥīḥs also report that the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing
and peace, used to say,
O God, unto You I surrender, in You I believe, on You I trustingly rely, to
You I turn, with Your help I contend with my adversaries. O God, I seek
refuge in Your Might: there is no god but You, lead me not astray! You are
the Alive who dies not, and Jinn and humankind die.1
Al-Tirmidhī reports on the authority of ʿUmar, God be pleased with him, in a
report elevated [to the Prophet’s authority],
If you were to trustingly rely on God the right way He would feed you as
He feeds the bird that leaves hungry in the morning and returns in the
evening with a full stomach.2
The Sunan report on the authority of Anas, God be pleased with him, that the
Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, said,
Whoever says when he sets out from his house: “In the name of God, I
trustingly rely on God, no power or strength there is but through God,” it
is said to him, “You have been guided, insured, and protected.” Upon this,
one devil says to another devil, “What can you do with a man who has
been guided, insured, and protected?”3
Trusting reliance is half of religion, the other half being turning [in repentance]; for religion is seeking help and offering worship. Trust is the seeking
of help and turning to God in repentance is worship.
The station of trusting reliance is one of the most vast and comprehensive
stations, ever welcoming the arriving guests due to its broad relevance, the
abundant needs of the worlds and the general scope of trust. It is visited by
1 Muslim #2717.
2 Tirmidhī 2344, who graded it ḥasan.
3 Tirmidhī #3426, graded variously as sound to weak.

‫‪413‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫خشَو ْه ُْم‬
‫س ق َْد جَمعَ ُوا لـ َك ُْم ف َا ْ‬
‫إ براهيم ﷺ حين ألقي في النار‪ ،‬وقالها محمد ﷺ حين قالوا له‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َ ّ‬
‫ن ال َن ّا َ‬
‫ل﴾ ]آل عمران‪.[173 :‬‬
‫سب ُن َا ال َل ّـه ُ و َنعِ ْم َ ال ْو َكيِ ُ‬
‫ح ْ‬
‫فزَ َاد َه ُْم ِإ يم َاناً و َق َالوُ ا َ‬
‫وفي الصحيحين أن رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ كان يقول‪» :‬اللهم لك أسلمت و بك آمنت وعليك توكلت‬
‫وإليك أنبت و بك خاصمت‪ .‬اللهم إني أعوذ بعزتك لا إله إلا أنت أن تضلني‪ ،‬أنت الحي الذي لا‬
‫يموت والجن والإنس يموتون«‪.‬‬
‫وفي الترمذي عن عمر—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—مرفوعا‪» ً:‬لو أنكم ٺتوكلون على الل ّٰه حق توكله لرزقكم كما‬
‫يرزق الطير تغدو خماصا ًوتروح بطانا ً«‪.‬‬
‫وفي السنن عن أنس رضي الل ّٰه عنه قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬من قال—يعني إذا خرج من‬
‫بيته—بسم الل ّٰه‪ ،‬توكلت على الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ولا حول ولا قوة إلا بالل ّٰه‪ ،‬يقال له‪ :‬هديت وكفيت ووقيت‪ ،‬فيقول‬
‫الشيطان لشيطان آخر‪ :‬كيف لك برجل قد هدي وكفي ووقي؟«‪.‬‬
‫التوكل نصف الدين ونصفه الثاني »الإنابة«‪ .‬فإن الدين استعانة وعبادة‪ .‬فالتوكل هو الاستعانة‪،‬‬
‫والإنابة هي العبادة‪.‬‬
‫ومنزلته أوسع المنازل وأجمعها‪ ،‬ولا تزال معمورة ً بالنازلين لسعة متعلق التوكل وكثرة حوائج‬
‫العالمين‪ ،‬وعموم التوكل ووقوعه من المؤمنين والـكفار والأ برار والفجار والطير والوحش والبهائم‪.‬‬

414

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

the believers and the unbelievers, the pious and the wicked, the birds and the
beast, for the denizens of the heavens and the earth, the morally responsible
ones as well as others, are found here, even if they differ in the kind of their trust
and reliance. His elite friends trust and rely on Him in attaining what pleases
Him and in enacting it among the creation: they trust and rely on him in faith,
support for His religion, raising its banner, struggle against His enemies, and all
that He loves and in fulfilling His commands. Next to them are those who trust
and rely on Him for establishing these things in their own selves, protecting
their experiential states with God, leaving others to themselves. Next to them
are those who trust in God for the well-known things that they receive from
[God] such as food, security, victory against the enemy, or with respect to wife
or children, and so on. Next to them are those who trust [in God] in [the pursuit
of things He does not love or like, such as oppression and transgression], and
attainment of sinful and lewd things. The seekers of these goals do not attain
them for the most part except because of their seeking of God’s aid and trust in
Him. It may be in fact that their trust is greater than the trust of many obedient
folks and they throw themselves into situations of harm and danger trusting
that God will protect them and give them success in their quests.4
The highest reliance is reliance in pursuit of duty, I mean duty to the Truth,
and duty to the creation, and duty to one’s self. The most encompassing and
beneficial of that is reliance in effecting change in the external world in seeking religious benefit or repelling religious harm, and that is the reliance of the
prophets in establishing religion and repelling the corruption on earth. This
is also the reliance of their heirs, and then people after them differ in their
reliance in accordance with their ambitions and goals. Some rely on God to
attain kingdom and others in pursuit of daily bread.
If one’s reliance on God is sincere, he undoubtedly attains one’s objective.
If one’s object of desire for which he relies is beloved to God, the end result is
praiseworthy. On the other hand, if one seeks some end disliked by God, the
end result of his reliance is harmful to him. If one’s object of desire is permissible, then by striving for it with reliance, one attains the reward of reliance,
while the benefit of the end result depends on its nature—that is, on whether
it helped him in attaining righteousness.

4 Note how the notion of true religiosity contrasts with the modern sense in which superstition
and feeling of the supernatural, rather than rational and measured pursuit of one’s mission
for God, are the height of religiosity.

‫‪415‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫فأهل السماوات والأرض—المكلفون وغيرهم—في مقام التوكل‪ ،‬وإن تبا ين متعلق توكلهم‬
‫فأولياؤه وخاصته ]متوكلون عليه في حصول ما يرضيه منهم وفي إقامته الخلق[‪ ،‬فيتوكلون عليه في‬
‫الإ يمان ونصرة دينه وإعلاء كلماته وجهاد أعدائه‪ ،‬وفي محابه وتنفيذ أوامره‪.‬‬
‫ودون هؤلاء من يتوكل عليه في استقامته في نفسه وحفظ حاله مع الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فارغا ًعن الناس‪.‬‬
‫ودون هؤلاء من يتوكل عليه في معلوم يناله منه‪ ،‬من رزق أو عافية‪ ،‬أو نصر على عدو أو زوجة‬
‫أو ولد‪ ،‬ونحو ذلك‪ .‬ودون هؤلاء من يتوكل عليه ]في حصول ما لا يحبه و يرضاه من الظلم والعدوان[‬
‫وحصول لإثم والفواحش‪ .‬فإن أصحاب هذه المطالب لا ينالونها غالبا ً إلا باستعانتهم بالل ّٰه وتوكلهم‬
‫عليه‪ ،‬بل قد يكون توكلهم أقوى من توكل كثير من أصحاب الطاعات‪ ،‬ولهذا يلقون أنفسهم في المتالف‬
‫والمهالك معتمدين على الل ّٰه أن يسلمهم و يظفرهم بمطالبهم‪.‬‬
‫ل في الواجب—أعني واجب الحق‪ ،‬وواجب الخلق‪ ،‬وواجب النفس—‬
‫ل التوك ُ‬
‫فأفضل التوك ِ‬
‫‪ .‬وأوسعه وأنفعه التوكل في التأثير في الخارج في مصلحة دينية أو في دفع مفسدة دينية‪ ،‬وهو توكل‬
‫الأنبياء في إقامة دين الل ّٰه‪ .‬ودفع فساد المفسدين في الأرض وهذا توكل ورثتهم‪ ،‬ثم الناس بعد في‬
‫التوكل على حسب هممهم ومقاصدهم‪ ،‬فمن متوكل على الل ّٰه في حصول الملك ومتوكل في حصول‬
‫رغيف‪.‬‬
‫ومن صدق توكله على الل ّٰه في حصول شيء ناله‪ ،‬فإن كان محبو با لً ه مرضيا ً كانت له فيه العاقبة‬
‫المحمودة‪ ،‬وإن كان مسخوطا ًمبغوضا ًكان ما حصل له بتوكله مضرة عليه‪ ،‬وإن كان مباحا ًحصلت‬
‫له مصلحة التوكل دون مصلحة ما توكل فيه‪ ،‬إن لم يستعن به على طاعته‪ .‬والل ّٰه أعلم ‪.‬‬

416
1

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Meaning of Tawakkul

Now we shall mention the meanings of trusting reliance (tawakkul), its various
levels, and what has been said regarding it.
Imam Aḥmad, God be pleased with him, said, “Reliance is an action of the
heart,” which means it is an action performed by the heart, not a movement
of the tongue or the limbs. Nor does it belong to the class of knowledge and
perceptions. Some consider it of the class of cognition and knowledge and
say that it consists in the heart’s knowledge of God’s sufficiency for the servant.
Others explain it as tranquility and ceasing of the heart’s perturbation, saying that it is the heart’s throwing of itself before the Lord as the dead body is
thrown before the washer who can turn it over at will, or, giving up one’s choice
and going along with the flow of the decree.
Sahl said, “Reliance is to let go [of control] to God, to whatever He wills.” Others explain it as contentment, saying that it is joyful contentment with God’s
decree.
Bishr al-Ḥāfī, God have mercy on him, said, “He who says ‘I rely on God’ has
lied against God: had he relied on God, he would be pleased with whatever
God decrees.” Yaḥyā b. Muʿādh was asked, “When does a man attain trusting reliance?” He said, “When he is pleased with God as the disposer of his
affairs.”
Others explain it as trust, tranquility, and stillness in God. Ibn ʿAṭāʾ said,
“Reliance is that you show no perturbance on account of causes despite your
dire lack of them, nor does your reliance on the Truth cease despite your possession of [the causes].” Dhū al-Nūn said, “It is to renounce the ego and dispose
of power and strength; a servant’s reliance is strengthened when he knows that
the Truth Almighty knows and sees the state he is in.”
One of them said, “Reliance is to be attached to God in every state.”
It has also been said, “Reliance is that occasions of dire need visit upon you
but you do not face except Him who is sufficient for all things.”
It was said, “Negation of doubts and handing your affairs to the King of the
Kings.”
Dhū al-Nūn also said, “It is to strip off any masters and cut off the causes.”
Others consider it a combination of two or more of these attributes.
Abū Saʿīd al-Kharrāz, God have mercy on him, said, “Reliance is perturbance
without stillness, and stillness without perturbance.” He means it is the tireless
movement of [the seeker’s] outward while his inward is in total tranquility in
the Causer, such that his heart is never perturbed with Him nor does the movement of his body cease in mobilizing the causes that lead to His pleasure.

‫‪417‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫فلنذكر معنى »التوكل ودرجاته« وما قيل فيه‪.‬‬
‫قال الإمام أحمد—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—‪ :‬التوكل عمل القلب‪ .‬ومعنى ذلك أنه عمل قلبي ليس بقول‬
‫اللسان ولا عمل الجوارح‪ ،‬ولا هو من باب العلوم والإدراكات‪ .‬ومن الناس من يجعله من باب‬
‫المعارف والعلوم فيقول‪ :‬هو علم القلب بكفاية الرب للعبد‪.‬‬
‫ومنهم من يفسره بالسكون وخمود حركة القلب فيقول‪» :‬التوكل هو انطراح القلب بين يدي الرب‪،‬‬
‫كانطراح الميت بين يدي الغاسل يقلبهكيف يشاء‪ ،‬أو ترك الاختيار والاسترسال مع مجاري الأقدار‪.‬‬
‫قال سهل‪ :‬التوكل الاسترسال مع الل ّٰه مع ما ير يد‪.‬‬
‫ومنهم من يفسره بالرضى فيقول‪ :‬هو الرضى بالمقدور‪.‬‬
‫قال بشر الحافي—رحمه الل ّٰه—يقول أحدهم‪ :‬توكلت على الل ّٰه‪ .‬يكذب على الل ّٰه‪ ،‬لو توكل ]على الل ّٰه[‬
‫رضي بما يفعل الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وسئل يحيى بن معاذ‪ :‬متى يكون الرجل متوكلا ً؟ فقال‪ :‬إذا رضي بالل ّٰه وكيلا‪ً.‬‬
‫ومنهم من يفسره بالثقة بالل ّٰه والطمأنينة إليه والسكون إليه‪.‬‬
‫قال ا بن عطاء‪ :‬التوكل ألا يظهر فيك ا نزعاج إلى الأسباب‪ ،‬مع شدة فاقتك إليها‪ ،‬تزول عن حقيقة‬
‫السكون إلى الحق مع وقوفك عليها‪.‬‬
‫وقال ذو النون‪ :‬هو ترك النفس والانخلاع من الحول والقوة‪ .‬وإنما يقوى العبد على التوكل إذا علم‬
‫أن الحق سبحانه يعلم و يرى ما هو فيه‪.‬‬
‫وقال بعضهم‪ :‬التوكل التعلق بالل ّٰه في كل حال‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬التوكل أن ترد عليك موارد الفاقات‪ ،‬فلا تسمو إلا إلى من إليه الـكفايات‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬نفي الشكوك والتفو يض إلى مالك الملوك‪.‬‬
‫وقال ذو النون‪ :‬خلع الأر باب وقطع الأسباب‪ .‬ير يد قطعها من تعلق القلب بها‪ ،‬لا من ملابسة‬
‫الجوارح لها‪.‬‬
‫ومنهم من جعله مركبا ًمن أمرين أو أمور‪ .‬فقال أبو سعيد الخراز—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪ :‬التوكل اضطراب‬
‫بلا سكون وسكون بلا اضطراب‪ .‬ير يد حركة ذاته في الأسباب بالظاهر والباطن‪ ،‬وسكون إلى المسبب‬
‫وركون إليه‪ ،‬فلا يضطرب قلبه معه ولا تسكن حركته عن الأسباب الموصلة إلى رضاه‪.‬‬

418

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Abū Turāb al-Nakhshabī said, “It is the rejection of the body in favor
of worship, attachment of the heart to the Lordship, and tranquility toward
sufficiency, to thank if given and be patient if barred.” He made it composed of five parts: establishing the movements of worship, attachment of the
heart to the workings of the Lord, tranquility to divine decree and predestination, tranquility in in His sufficiency, gratitude if given, and patience when
not.
Abū Yaʿqūb al-Nahrjūrī said, “Reliance upon God with the perfect reality
occurred to Abraham the friend, upon him be peace, when he said to Gabriel,
upon him be peace [when asked by the Archangel if he needed aid after being
thrown into the fire of Nimrod], ‘As for your [help], no!’ for his ego had vanished
in God and he did not see any other than God.”
The people [of Sufism] have agreed that reliance does not negate undertaking the causes, in fact, it is not possible without undertaking them, or else it is
procrastination and an invalid reliance.
Sahl b. ʿAbdallāh, God be pleased with him, said, “Whoever disparages movement [to carry out divine commands] disparages the Sunna, and whoever
disparages trusting reliance disparages faith; for reliance was the state of the
Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, and acquisition [of causes] was his
Sunna. Whoever acts according to this state must not abandon his Sunna.” This
is the meaning of Abū Saʿīd [al-Kharrāz] when he said, “It is perturbance without stillness and stillness without perturbance;” the words of Sahl are clearer
and loftier.
{It was also said, “Reliance is to sever attachments to other than God.”
Sahl was asked about reliance so he said, “It means a heart that dwells with
God without any other attachment.”}
It was also said, “Reliance is to abjure attachments and connect with realities.”
It was said, “Reliance is that increase or decrease [in possessions] is the same
to you.” This is its consequence and effect, not its reality, however.
It was also said, “It is to renounce any cause that connects you to the Causer,
until the Truth become its guarantee.” This is correct in one way but false in
another way, for renouncing the means that has been religiously commanded
is a flaw in reliance, and it may be that the Truth has used the means to connect
the servant [to his object]. As for the renunciation of means that is permissible: it can be praiseworthy only if it is done in order to take up more preferred
means, otherwise not.
It was also said, “It is to throw the ego in servitude and expel it from lordship.” He means its flow with the command and disavowal of its own power
and strength and the experience of that by it, or rather, by the Lord alone.

‫‪419‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫وقال أبو تراب النخشبي‪ :‬هو طرح البدن في العبودية وتعلق القلب بالر بو بية‪ ،‬والطمأنينة إلى‬
‫الـكفاية‪ .‬فإن أعطى شكر وإن منع صبر‪ .‬فجعله مركبا ًمن خمسة أمور‪ :‬القيام بحركات العبودية‪ ،‬وتعلق‬
‫القلب بتدبير الرب‪ ،‬وسكونه إلى قضائه وقدره‪ ،‬وطمأنينته بكفايته‪ ،‬وشكره إذا أعطى وصبره إذا‬
‫منع‪.‬‬
‫قال أبو يعقوب النهرجوري‪ :‬التوكل على الل ّٰه بكمال الحقيقة‪ ،‬وقع لإ براهيم الخليل—عليه السلام—‬
‫في الوقت الذي قال لجـبر يل—عليه السلام—‪» :‬أما إليك فلا«‪ ،‬لأنه غابت نفسه بالل ّٰه فلم ير مع الل ّٰه‬
‫غير الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وأجمع القوم على أن التوكل لا ينافي القيام بالأسباب‪ ،‬بل لا يصح إلا مع القيام بها وإلا فهو بطالة‬
‫وتوكل فاسد‪.‬‬
‫قال سهل بن عبد الل ّٰه—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—‪» :‬من طعن في الحركة فقد طعن في السنة‪ ،‬ومن طعن‬
‫في التوكل فقد طعن في الإ يمان‪ .‬فالتوكل حال النبي ﷺ والـكسب سنته‪ .‬فمن عمل على حاله فلا يتركن‬
‫سنته«‪ .‬وهذا معنى قول أبي سعيد‪» :‬هو اضطراب بلا سكون‪ ،‬وسكون بلا اضطراب«‪ ،‬وقول سهل‬
‫أبين وأرفع‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪] :‬التوكل قطع علائق القلب بغير الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وسئل سهل عن التوكل فقال‪ :‬قلب عاش مع الل ّٰه بلا علاقة[‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪] :‬التوكل هجر العلائق ومواصلة الحقائق[‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬التوكل أن يستوي عندك الإكثار والإقلال‪ .‬وهذا من موجباته وآثاره‪ ،‬لا أنه حقيقته‪ .‬وقيل‪:‬‬
‫هو ترك كل سبب يوصلك إلى مسبب‪ ،‬حتى يكون الحق هو المتولي لذلك‪.‬‬
‫وهذا صحيح من وجه باطل من وجه‪ .‬فترك الأسباب المأمور بها قادح في التوكل‪ ،‬وقد تولى الحق‬
‫إ يصال العبد بها‪ .‬وأما ترك الأسباب المباحة فإن تركها لما هو أرجح منها مصلحة فممدوح‪ ،‬وإلا فهو‬
‫مذموم‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬هو إلقاء النفس في العبودية وإخراجها من الر بو بية‪ .‬ير يد استرسالها مع الأمر‪ ،‬و براءتها من‬
‫حولها وقوتها‪ ،‬وشهود ذلك بها‪ ،‬بل بالرب وحده‪.‬‬

420

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

One of them said, “Reliance is surrendering to the command and decree of
the Lord.”
Another said, “It is to hand affairs over to Him in every state.”
Some among them make reliance the beginning, surrender the middle, and
relegation the end.
Abū ʿAlī al-Daqqāq said,
Reliance has three levels: reliance, then surrender, then relegation. The
reliant leans on His promise, the one who surrenders relies on His knowledge, and the one who relegates is pleased by His judgment; so reliance
is the beginning, surrendering the middle, relegation the end. Reliance is
the attribute of a believer, surrender that of the allies, and relegation that
of the [full] monotheists.
Reliance is the attribute of the commoners, surrender the attribute of
the elite, and relegation the attribute of the elite of the elite.
Reliance is the attribute of the prophets, surrender the attribute of
Abraham the Friend, and relegation the attribute of our Prophet Muḥammad, God grant him blessing and peace.
These are all words of al-Daqqāq, and their meaning is that reliance is to lean
on the Guardian, but one may lean on one’s Guardian while also hesitating,
maintaining one’s own will, and with a tinge of the possibility of disagreement.
When he surrenders the matter to Him altogether, that all goes away and one is
fully pleased with what the Guardian will do. The state of the relegator is above
this as he seeks to hand his affairs to his Guardian, beseeching Him to take
over his affairs, which is pleasure and choice, surrender and reliance, and trust.
Reliance, therefore, is included in surrender, and it and surrender are included
in the act of relegation to God.

2

Levels of Reliance

The truth of the matter is that reliance is a composite state requiring a number
of things without which its reality is not complete, and each [definition] has
pointed out one, two, or more of these [elements].

‫‪421‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫ومنهم من قال‪ :‬التوكل هو التسليم لأمر الرب وقضائه‪.‬‬
‫ومنهم من قال‪ :‬هو التفو يض إليه في كل حال‪.‬‬
‫ومنهم من جعل التوكل بداية والتسليم واسطة والتفو يض نهاية‪.‬‬
‫قال أبو علي الدقاق‪ :‬التوكل ثلاث درجات‪ :‬التوكل ثم التسليم ثم التفو يض‪ .‬فالمتوكل يسكن‬
‫إلى وعده‪ ،‬وصاحب التسليم يكتفي بعلمه‪ ،‬وصاحب التفو يض يرضى بحكمه‪ .‬فالتوكل بداية والتسليم‬
‫واسطة والتفو يض نهاية‪ .‬فالتوكل صفة المؤمنين والتسليم صفة الأولياء والتفو يض صفة الموحدين‪.‬‬
‫التوكل صفة العوام والتسليم صفة الخواص والتفو يض صفة خاصة الخاصة‪.‬‬
‫لتوكل صفة الأنبياء والتسليم صفة إ براهيم الخليل والتفو يض صفة نبينا محمد ﷺ‪.‬‬
‫هذا كلهكلام الدقاق‪ ،‬ومعنى هذا التوكل اعتماد على الوكيل‪ ،‬وقد يعتمد الرجل على وكيله مع نوع‬
‫اقتراح عليه وإرادة وشائبة منازعة‪ .‬فإذا سلم إليه زال عنه ذلك ورضي بما يفعله وكيله‪ .‬وحال المفوض‬
‫فوق هذا فإنه طالب مريد ممن فوض إليه‪ ،‬ملتمس منه أن يتولى أموره‪ ،‬فهو رضى واختيار وتسليم‬
‫واعتماد‪ .‬فالتوكل يندرج في التسليم‪ ،‬وهو والتسليم يندرجان في التفو يض‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫وحقيقة الأمر‪ :‬أن التوكل حال مركبة من مجموع أمور لا تتم حقيقة التوكل إلا بها‪ ،‬وكل أشار إلى‬
‫واحد من هذه الأمور أو اثنين أو أكثر‪.‬‬

422

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

2.1
First Level of Reliance
The first of these is the experiential knowledge of the Lord and His attributes
such as His power, self-sufficiency for Himself and for others, the finality of all
affairs being within His knowledge, and their origin from His will and power.
This is the experiential knowledge in the first level as the servant steps into the
station of reliance.
Our Shaykh [Ibn Taymiyya], God be pleased with him, said, “Because of that,
reliance cannot be imagined as having been attained by the philosopher, nor
the Qadarites who hold that there may occur in His dominion that which He
has not willed. Nor can it be attained by the Jahmites who reject any and all
attributes of the Lord. Nor can it be attained by anyone except the affirmers
[of divine attributes]. What kind of reliance can be imagined for someone who
believes that God does not know particulars of the world, nor is He an actor by
His own will, nor does He have intention and will, nor can He have an attribute?
The more one knows God and His attributes with certainty and with experiential knowledge, the sounder and stronger his reliance.”
2.2
Second Level: Reliance and the Case of Proximate Causation
The second level is affirmation of means and causes.5
Whoever denies these, his reliance is compromised. This is the exact opposite of what appears to the naïve, to wit, that affirming the means compromises
reliance and its negation perfects it.
Know that the deniers of causes cannot attain reliance at all, for reliance is
the strongest means in attaining what one pursues. It is like supplication which
God has made a cause in the attainment of what is being asked.
If a servant thinks that God has not made the attitude of trust and reliance
and supplication to be means of attaining one’s objective—for what one pursues in reliance is what one supplicates to attain—[thinking that] if it is predestined it occurs whether one relies or supplicates or not, and if not predestined
it does not occur regardless, he abandons reliance. They further elaborate that
reliance and supplication are purely acts of worship with no benefit to them
except themselves, and if the servant were to abandon reliance and supplication he would not miss anything that has been predestined. The extremists
among them even hold that praying for pardon for errors and forgetfulness is
without benefit, for that too is a forgone conclusion.

5 Note that the author does not mention al-Harawī’s words here yet; the eight ranks presented
here are Ibn al-Qayyim’s classification.

‫‪423‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫فأول ذلك‪ :‬معرفة بالرب وصفاته‪ :‬من قدرته وكفايته وقيوميته وانتهاء الأمور إلى علمه وصدورها عن‬
‫مشيئته وقدرته‪ .‬وهذه المعرفة أول درجة يضع بها العبد قدمه في مقام التوكل‪.‬‬
‫قال شيخنا—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—‪ :‬ولذلك لا يصح التوكل ولا يتصور من فيلسوف‪ ،‬ولا من القدر ية‬
‫النفاة القائلين بأنه يكون في ملـكه ما لم يشأ‪.‬‬
‫ولا يستقيم أيضا ًمن الجهمية النفاة لصفات الرب‪ ،‬ولا يستقيم التوكل إلا من أهل الإثبات‪ .‬فأي‬
‫توكل لمن يعتقد أن الل ّٰه لا يعلم جزئيات العالم‪ ،‬ولا هو فاعل باختياره ولا له إرادة ومشيئة‪ ،‬ولا يقوم‬
‫به صفة‪ ،‬فكل من كان بالل ّٰه وصفاته أعلم وأعرف كان توكله أصح وأقوى‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫»الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬إثبات الأسباب والمسببات«‪ .‬فإن من نفاها فتوكله مدخول‪ .‬وهذا عكس ما يظهر‬
‫في بدوات الرأي‪ ،‬أن إثبات الأسباب يقدح في التوكل‪ ،‬وأن نفيها تمام التوكل‪.‬‬
‫فاعلم أن نفاة الأسباب لا يستقيم لهم توكل البتة‪ ،‬لأن التوكل من أقوى الأسباب في حصول‬
‫المتوكل فيه‪ ،‬فهو كالدعاء الذي جعله الل ّٰه سببا ًفي حصول المدعو به‪.‬‬
‫فإذا اعتقد العبد أن توكله لم ينصبه الل ّٰه سببا ً ولا جعل دعاءه سببا ً لنيل شيء‪ ،‬فإن المتوكل فيه‬
‫المدعو بحصوله إن كان قد قّدِر حصل توكل أو لم يتوكل‪ ،‬دعا أو لم يدع‪ ،‬وإن لم يقدر لم يحصل توكل‬
‫أيضا ًأو ترك التوكل‪.‬‬
‫وصرح هؤلاء أن التوكل والدعاء عبودية محضة‪ ،‬لا فائدة لهما إلا ذلك ولو ترك العبد التوكل‬
‫والدعاء لما فاته شيء مما قدر له‪ .‬ومن غلاتهم من يجعل الدعاء بعدم المؤاخذة على الخطأ والنسيان‬
‫عديم الفائدة‪ ،‬إذ هو مضمون الحصول‪.‬‬

424

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

I have seen one of the extremists prohibiting even such prayers except as a
ritual recitation, but not as a prayer. For, to him, such a prayer would constitute
doubt in its occurrence, for the one who prays is between fear, hope, and doubt
about its occurrence: this would be tantamount to entertaining doubt in God’s
announcement.
Look what enormous [error] the negation of causality has led to, and prohibition of supplication by means of words for which God has created His
servants and allies, and until today Muslims from the time of their Prophet,
God grant him blessing and peace, supplicate on various occasions, and which
are among the highest of supplications.
The response to this false conjecture is that there is a third alternative that
you have not mentioned in the two kinds that you mentioned, which is what
in fact occurs. That is that the occurrence of a thing is decreed upon the occurrence of its cause such as reliance and prayer, thus making prayer and reliance
two of the causes that secure the objective, and that He decreed that it be
attained if the servant secured its causes. If he fails to secure the cause, the
consequence too is prohibited, just as He decreed that a child is born when the
man has intercourse, and if the man does not do so, the child is not created. He
similarly decreed that satiation be attained when he eats and drinks and if he
fails to, satiation does not occur. He decreed that the Hajj and arrival at Mecca
occurs when he travels and traverses the path, and when he sits at home he
does not get to Mecca ever.
The attainment of the Garden can occur as a result of embracing Islam and
performing righteous deeds; if one abandons Islam and righteous deeds one
can never enter it. He decreed that food is cooked by lighting a fire under it,
and seeds grow into crops by tilling the earth and spreading the seed in it—
and if one does not do so, he harvests nothing but failure.
Consider what the deniers of causality hold: that one should give up the
means to their ends, saying that if it was decreed and predestined for me since
eternity that I have a child, or be satiated, or perform Hajj, and the like, it must
happen ineluctably whether or not I move or stay at rest, marry or not, travel or
sit at home. Could anyone count such a one among the sane? Would the beasts
of burden not be more intelligent than such a one? For even the beasts adopt
the means owing to general [divine] guidance.
Trusting reliance in God, then, is the greatest of means towards the attainment of one’s goals and repelling harms, and whoever rejects causality
cannot attain reliance. Yet, the perfection of reliance is to not rely on the
means, but rather cut off the connection of the heart to them, so that even
as one’s physical existence is sustained by them the heart is sustained by God
alone.

‫‪425‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫ورأيت بعض متعمقي هؤلاء—في كتاب له—لا يجوِ ّز الدعاء بهذا‪ ،‬وإنما يجوزه تلاوة لا دعاء‪.‬‬
‫قال لأن الدعاء به يتضمن الشك في وقوعه‪ ،‬لأن الداعي بين الخوف والرجاء والشك في وقوع ذلك‬
‫شك في خبر الل ّٰه‪ .‬فانظر إلى ما قاد إنكار الأسباب من العظائم‪ ،‬وتحر يم الدعاء بما أثنى الل ّٰه على عباده‬
‫وأوليائه بالدعاء به و بطلبه‪ .‬ولم يزل المسلمون—من عهد نبيهم ﷺ وإلى الآن—يدعون به في مقامات‬
‫الدعاء‪ ،‬وهو من أفضل الدعوات‪.‬‬
‫وجواب هذا الوهم الباطل أن يقال‪ :‬بقي قسم ثالث غير ما ذكرتم من القسمين لم تذكروه‪ .‬وهو‬
‫الواقع‪ ،‬وهو أن يكون قضى بحصول الشيء عند حصول سببه من التوكل والدعاء‪ ،‬فنصب الدعاء‬
‫والتوكل سببين لحصول المطلوب‪ ،‬وقضى بحصوله إذا فعل العبد سببه‪.‬‬
‫فإذا لم يأت بالسبب امتنع المسبب‪ .‬وهذا كما قضى بحصول الولد إذا جامع الرجل من يحبلها‪ ،‬فإذا‬
‫لم يجامع لم يخلق منه الولد‪.‬‬
‫وقضى بحصول الشبع إذا أكل‪ ،‬والري إذا شرب‪ ،‬فإذا لم يفعل لم يشبع ولم يرو‪.‬‬
‫وقضى بحصول الحج والوصول إلى مكة إذا سافر وركب الطر يق‪ ،‬فإذا جلس في بيته لم يصل إلى‬
‫مكة أبدا ً‪.‬‬
‫وقضى بدخول الجنة إذا أسلم‪ ،‬وأتى بالأعمال الصالحة‪ .‬فإذا ترك الإسلام لم يدخلها أبدا ً‪ .‬وقضى‬
‫بإنضاج الطعام بإ يقاد النار تحته‪.‬‬
‫وقضى بطلوع الحبوب التي تزرع بشق الأرض‪ ،‬وإلقاء البذر فيها‪ .‬فما لم يأت بذلك لم يحصل إلا‬
‫الخيبة‪.‬‬
‫فوازن ما قاله منكرو الأسباب أن يترك كل من هؤلاء السبب الموصل‪ ،‬و يقول‪ :‬إن كان قضي‬
‫لي وسبق لي في الأزل حصول الولد والشبع والري والحج ونحوها‪ ،‬فلا بد أن يصل إلي‪ ،‬تحركت أو‬
‫سكنت‪ ،‬وتزوجت أو تركت‪ ،‬سافرت أو قعدت‪ ،‬وإن لم يكن قد قضي لي أيضا‪ ً،‬فعلت أو تركت‪.‬‬
‫فهل يعد أحد هذا من جملة العقلاء؟ وهل البهائم إلا أفقه منه؟ فإن البهيمة تسعى في السبب بالهداية‬
‫العامة‪.‬‬
‫فالتوكل من أعظم الأسباب التي يحصل بها المطلوب و يندفع بها المكروه‪ .‬فمن أنكر الأسباب لم‬
‫يستقم منه التوكل‪ .‬ولـكن من تمام التوكل عدم الركون إلى الأسباب‪ ،‬وقطع علاقة القلب بها‪ ،‬فيكون‬
‫حال قلبه قيامه بالل ّٰه لا بها‪ ،‬وحال بدنه قيامه بها‪.‬‬

426

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

For the means are the site of God’s wisdom, decree, and prescriptive command, whereas trust is connected to His omnipotence, decree, and predestination. The worship by means cannot stand but on the shank of trust, while the
shank of trust cannot stand but on the foot of worship.
2.3
Third Level
The third level is the firm establishment of the heart in monotheism.
Trusting reliance of a servant in God cannot be sound except if his affirmation of divine unicity is sound. In fact, the essence of trust is the heart’s
affirmation of unicity, and so long as it has associationism, his reliance is defective and adulterated, and his reliance is sound only to the extent of the purity
of his affirmation of unicity. When a servant inclines to anyone other than God,
that inclination occupies one of the chambers of his heart, and his reliance on
God is diminished accordingly. It is because of this some thought that reliance
cannot be complete without rejecting causality; this is true, but only in the
sense of the rejection of means in the heart, but not in the physical world.
For reliance is not perfected without rejecting the means from the heart while
securing them in the physical world; thus being both cut off and yet connected
to them.
2.4
Fourth Level
The fourth level of reliance is the relying of the heart upon God, seeking support in Him, and seeking tranquility in Him.
[This is so] in the sense that there remains no perturbance in [the heart]
due to the confusion of means. The confidence in the means is cleft away
from his heart and in its place there settles confidence in the Author of all
causes.
The indication of this [state] is that the heart has no concern for the appearance or disappearance of the means, nor is it perturbed when things he loves
move out of his reach and those he hates approach, for his reliance, succor,
and tranquility are in God, and they fortify his heart against fear or hope in
the [means]. The state of such a heart is like that of someone being chased
by a mighty enemy he cannot repel, but then he comes upon an open fortress
whose master receives him into it and closes its door; he looks out at the enemy
without any perturbance of the heart or fear.
Similarly, [he is] like someone whom the king gave a dirham but it was stolen
from him, but the king consoled him, “Do not worry, when you come to me
I will give you from my treasures many more,” and knowing the truth of the
king’s words, he attains confidence and tranquility, knowing that his treasures
are filled with more and no longer grieves.

‫‪427‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫فالأسباب محل حكمة الل ّٰه وأمره ودينه‪ ،‬والتوكل متعلق بر بو بيته وقضائه وقدره‪ ،‬فلا تقوم عبودية‬
‫الأسباب إلا على ساق التوكل‪ ،‬ولا يقوم ساق التوكل إلا على قدم العبودية‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫»الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬رسوخ القلب في مقام توحيد«‪ .‬فإنه لا يستقيم توكل العبد حتى يصح له توحيده‪ .‬بل‬
‫حقيقة التوكل توحيد القلب‪ .‬فما دامت فيه علائق الشرك فتوكله معلول مدخول‪ ،‬وعلى قدر تجر يد‬
‫التوحيد تكون صحة التوكل‪ .‬فإن العبد متى التفت إلى غير الل ّٰه أخذ ذلك الالتفات شعبة من شعب‬
‫قلبه‪ ،‬فنقص من توكله على الل ّٰه بقدر ذهاب تلك الشعبة‪ .‬ومن هاهنا ظن من ظن أن التوكل لا يصح‬
‫إلا برفض الأسباب‪] ،‬وهذا حق لـكن رفضها عن القلب لا عن الجوارح‪ ،‬فالتوكل لا يتم إلا برفض‬
‫الأسباب[ عن القلب‪ ،‬وتعلق الجوارح بها‪ ،‬فيكون منقطعا ًمنها متصلا‪ً.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫»الدرجة الرابعة‪ :‬اعتماد القلب على الل ّٰه واستناده إليه وسكونه إليه«‪ ،‬بحيث لا يبقى فيه اضطراب‬
‫من تشو يش الأسباب‪ ،‬ولا سكون إليها‪ ،‬بل يخلع السكون إليها من قلبه و يلبسه السكون إلى مسببها‪.‬‬
‫وعلامة هذا أنه لا يبالي بإقبالها وإدبارها‪ ،‬ولا يضطرب قلبه و يخفق عند إدبار ما يحب منها‪،‬‬
‫وإقبال ما يكره‪ ،‬لأن اعتماده على الل ّٰه وسكونه إليه واستناده إليه قد حصنه من خوفها ورجائها‪،‬‬
‫فحاله حال من خرج عليه عدو عظيم لا طاقة له به‪ ،‬فرأى حصنا ًمفتوحا ًفأدخله ر به إليه وأغلق عليه‬
‫باب الحصن‪ ،‬فهو يشاهد عدوه خارج الحصن‪ .‬فاضطراب قلبه وخوفه منهم في هذه الحال لا معنى‬
‫له‪.‬‬
‫وكذلك من أعطاه ملك درهما ًفسرق منه‪ ،‬فقال له الملك‪ :‬عندي أضعافه‪ ،‬لا تهتم‪ ،‬متى جئت إلي‬
‫أعطيتك من خزائني أضعافه‪ .‬فإذا علم صحة قول الملك ووثق به واطمأن إليه‪ ،‬وعلم أن خزائنه مليئة‬
‫بذلك لم يحزنه فوته‪.‬‬

428

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

This state has also been likened to that of a suckling child whose trust, asSūrance, and poise when at the breast of his mother no one else knows, nor is
his heart distracted by anything else. One of the gnostics said, “The reliant one
is like a baby who knows nowhere else to go for protection but the breast of
his mother; the reliant one similarly knows nowhere else to go except his Lord
Almighty.”
2.5
Fifth Level
The fifth level is to expect good from God the Most High.
For your reliance on God is proportional to your good expectation of Him
and hope in Him, which is why some have explained reliance as nothing but
good expectation [of God]. The truth, however, is that one’s good expectation
from God invites him to rely upon Him, for one cannot imagine relying upon
someone of whom one has ill expectation and little hope.

2.6
Sixth Level
The sixth level is to surrender the heart to Him, such that every drive of the
heart yearns for Him and every resistance is eliminated.
This is the meaning of the statement of the one who explained [reliance] as
being a dead body in the hands of the washer who turns it over as he wills, and
[the corpse] has no movement or strategy of its own.
This is also the meaning of those who say that reliance is the giving up of
planning and submitting to God’s plan for you. This, however, does not pertain to commandments and prohibitions, but only in what [your Lord] does to
you, not in what He commands you to do. His surrender is how a lowly servant
surrenders his ego to his master, follows his lead, giving up the resistance and
desires of his own for his master.
2.7
Seventh Level
The seventh level is relegation.6
This level is the soul, essence, and reality of trusting reliance. It is to place
all affairs in God’s hands and leave them all to Him by one’s own choice and
desire and not merely out of necessity and lack of alternatives, like a weak and
overwhelmed child who hands over his matters to his father, being certain of
the latter’s compassion and mercy for him as well as his capacity to do what is
needed. {The child knows that his father’s plan for him is better than his own

6 Note that relegation also appears as an independent station in al-Harawi’s classification.

‫‪429‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫وقد مثل ذلك بحال الطفل الرضيع في اعتماده وسكونه وطمأنينته بثدي أمه لا يعرف غيره‪،‬‬
‫وليس في قلبه التفات إلى غيره‪ ،‬كما قال بعض العارفين‪ :‬المتوكل كالطفل‪ ،‬لا يعرف شيئا يً أوي إليه‬
‫إلا ثدي أمه‪ ،‬كذلك المتوكل لا يأوي إلا إلى ر به عز وجل‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫»الدرجة الخامسة‪ :‬حسن الظن بالل ّٰه تعالى«‪ .‬فعلى قدر حسن ظنك به ورجائك له يكون توكلك عليه‪،‬‬
‫ولذلك فس ّر بعضهم التوكل بحسن الظن‪] ،‬فقال‪ :‬التوكل حسن الظن بالل ّٰه[‪.‬‬
‫والتحقيق أن حسن الظن به يدعوه إلى التوكل عليه‪ ،‬إذ لا يتصور التوكل على من تسيء ظنك به‪،‬‬
‫ولا التوكل على من لا ترجوه‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫»الدرجة السادسة‪ :‬استسلام القلب له وانجذاب دواعيهكلها إليه وقطع منازعاته«‪.‬‬
‫و بهذا فسره من قال‪ :‬أن يكون العبد بين يدي الل ّٰه كالميت بين يدي الغاسل‪ ،‬يقلبهكيف أراد‪ ،‬لا‬
‫يكون له حركة ولا تدبير‪.‬‬
‫وهذا معنى قول بعضهم‪ :‬التوكل إسقاط التدبير‪ ،‬يعني الاستسلام لتدبير الرب لك‪ ،‬وهذا في غير‬
‫باب الأمر والنهي‪ ،‬بل فيما يفعله بك‪ ،‬لا فيما أمرك بفعله‪ .‬فالاستسلام كتسليم العبد الذليل نفسه‬
‫لسيده وانقياده له وترك منازعات نفسه وإرادتها مع سيده‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫»الدرجة السابعة‪ :‬التفو يض«‪ ،‬وهو روح التوكل ولبه وحقيقته‪ ،‬وهو إلقاء أمورهكلها إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وإنزالها‬
‫به طلبا ًواختيارا ً لا كرها ًواضطرارا ً‪ ،‬بل كتفو يض الا بن العاجز الضعيف المغلوب أموره إلى أبيه‪،‬‬
‫العالم بشفقته عليه ورحمته وتمام كفايته‪ ،‬وحسن ولايته له وتدبيره له‪ ،‬فهو يرى أن تدبيره له خير من‬
‫تدبيره لنفسه‪ .‬وقيامه بمصالحه وتوليه ]لها خير من قيامه هو بمصالح نفسه وتوليه لها[‪ ،‬فلا يجد له أصلح‬

430

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

plan for himself.} He can think of nothing better than to relegate his affairs to
his father and relieve himself from the burden that he is unable to carry and
problems he does not know how to resolve, trusting full well that he whom he
has relegated his affairs is perfect, competent, and compassionate.

3

The Level of Joyful Contentment

When he places his foot on this step, he moves further to the level of joyful
contentment.
[Contentment] is the fruit of trusting reliance, and those who explain reliance as [contentment] mean to explain it by its greatest fruit and highest benefit, for when one fully trustingly relies on God, one is content and pleased with
whatever his guardian does.
Our Shaykh [Ibn Taymiyya], God be pleased with him, used to say, “One’s
destined action is surrounded by two things, trusting reliance before it and joyful contentment after it; whoever relies on God before an action and is pleased
with what has been decided for him after it has accomplished servitude” or
something to this effect.
I say: this is the meaning of the saying of the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, in the Supplication of Seeking the Better Choice: “O God, I seek
the better choice by your knowledge, and seek strength in your strength, and
ask of your bounteous grace.”7 This is reliance and relegation.
Then he says, “For you [O Lord] know and I do not, and you have power and
I do not, and you are the knower of the unseen.” This is to disavow any claim
of one’s own knowledge and power and to seek a means to Him through the
attributes that are the most beloved means to Him. Then he asks his Lord to
fulfill his need if it is better for him in the short and the long term [and to save
him from it if it is harmful for him in the short or the long term.]
After this, a servant can do no better than joyful contentment, being pleased
with what God decides for him, so he ends the supplication thus: “And destine
for me the good wherever it be and make me pleased with it.”
This supplication comprises the divine secrets and realities of faith which
include reliance and relegation [before the occurrence of the destined occurrence and contentment afterward, which is the fruit of reliance and relegation,]
and the mark of its soundness. If one is not pleased with what been decreed,
his relegation was defective and invalid.

7 Bukhārī #1166.

‫‪431‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫ولا أرفق من تفو يضه أمورهكلها إلى أبيه‪ ،‬وراحته من حمل كلفتها وثقل حملها‪ ،‬مع عجزه عنها وجهله‬
‫بوجوه المصالح فيها‪ ،‬وعلمه بكمال من فوض إليه وقدرته وشفقته‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫»فإذا وضع قدمه في هذه الدرجة‪ ،‬انتقل منها إلى درجة الرضا«‪ ،‬وهي ثمرة التوكل‪ .‬ومن فسر التوكل‬
‫بها فإنما فسره بأجل ثمراته وأعظم فوائده‪ ،‬فإنه إذا توكل حق التوكل رضي بما يفعله وكيله‪.‬‬
‫وكان شيخنا—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—يقول‪ :‬المقدور يكتنفه أمران‪ :‬التوكل قبله والرضى بعده‪ .‬فمن توكل‬
‫على الل ّٰه قبل الفعل ورضي بالمقضي له بعد الفعل‪ ،‬فقد قام بالعبودية أو معنى هذا‪.‬‬
‫قلت‪ :‬وهذا معنى قول النبي ﷺ في دعاء الاستخارة‪» :‬اللهم إني أستخيرك بعلمك وأستقدرك‬
‫بقدرتك‪ ،‬وأسألك من فضلك العظيم«‪ .‬فهذا توكل وتفو يض‪ .‬ثم قال‪» :‬فإنك تعلم ولا أعلم وتقدر‬
‫ولا أقدر وأنت علام الغيوب«‪ .‬فهذا تبرؤ إليه من العلم والحول والقوة‪ ،‬وتوسل إليه سبحانه بصفاته‬
‫التي أحب ما توسل إليه بها المتوسلون‪ .‬ثم سأل ر به أن يقضي له الأمر إن كان فيه مصلحته عاجلا ً‬
‫وآجلا‪] ً،‬وأن يصرفه عنه إن كان فيه مضرته عاجلا أً و آجلا[ً ‪ .‬فهذا هو حاجته التي سألها فلم يبق عليه‬
‫إلا الرضى بما يقضيه له‪ ،‬فقال‪» :‬وأقدر لي الخـير حيث كان ثم رضني به«‪.‬‬
‫فقد اشتمل هذا الدعاء على هذه المعارف الإلهية والحقائق الإ يمانية التي من جملتها التوكل‬
‫والتفو يض ]قبل وقوع المقدور‪ ،‬والرضى بعده‪ ،‬وهو ثمرة التوكل والتفو يض[ وعلامة صحته‪ ،‬فإن‬
‫لم يرض بما قضي له فتفو يضه معلول فاسد‪.‬‬

432

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Only by perfecting these precious levels does the servant perfect the station
of reliance and secure his steps. This is the meaning of the words of Bishr alḤāfī, “One says, ‘I rely on God,’ but he lies, for had he relied on God, he would
be pleased with what God does.’ ” Similarly, the words of Yaḥyā b. Muʿādh when
he was asked about when a man attains trusting reliance, he said, “When he is
pleased with God as his guardian.”

4

Separating Relegation from Inaction and Negligence

This is a subject in which often what is praiseworthy and excellent is confused
with what is blameworthy and deficient. Relegation is confused with negligent
wastefulness, that is, when a servant wastes away his share thinking that that
is the requirement of trusting God and relegating his affairs to him, when it is
negligence, not relegation. For negligence is in the right of God and relegation
in your right.
The mark of this is that the reliant one puts forth his utmost effort in securing the means that he has been commanded to secure, relieved of anything else
since he is occupied by them, whereas the one who works for his comfort takes
from the commandment only as necessary, failing to uphold the command of
the divine law. The two, in reality, are utterly different.
Similarly, there is confusion possible between divesting means [of their
exclusive authority] and abandoning them altogether, for divestment is monotheism but abandoning them is deviance and heresy; their divestment means
to not let the heart trust in them or rely and incline on them while securing
them and attending to them, whereas abandoning them means failing to physically attend to them.
Among them is the confusion of confidence in God with self-deception
and helplessness, the different between them being that the one who has
confidence in God carries out what God has commanded and relies on
God for the result and fruit of his actions, like one who plants a tree or tills
the land, whereas the deceived and helpless one neglects these and claims
that he trusts in God; but trust is only valid with the exertion of one’s best
effort.
In the same category falls the confusion between tranquility and reliance in
God and tranquility and reliance in a known means, and only one endowed
with insight can distinguish between the two.
Abū Sulaymān al-Dārānī relates that he saw a man for many days in Mecca
who would not take any food except a drink from the water of Zam Zam. Abū
Sulayman said to him what he would do if the water of Zam Zam ceased to

‫‪433‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫فباستكمال هذه الدرجات الثمان يستكمل العبد مقام التوكل وٺثبت قدمه فيه‪ .‬وهذا معنى قول بشر‬
‫الحافي‪ :‬يقول أحدهم‪ :‬توكلت على الل ّٰه‪ ،‬يكذب على الل ّٰه‪ ،‬لو توكل على الل ّٰه لرضي بما يفعله الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وقول يحيى بن معاذ—وقد سئل‪ :‬متى يكون الرجل متوكلا ً؟—فقال‪ :‬إذا رضي بالل ّٰه وكيلا‪ً.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫وكثيرا ما يشتبه في هذا الباب المحمود الكامل بالمذموم الناقص‪ ،‬فيشتبه التفو يض بالإضاعة‪ ،‬فيضيع‬
‫العبد حظه ظنا ً منه أن ذلك تفو يض وتوكل وإنما هو تضييع لا تفو يض‪ .‬فالتضييع في حق الل ّٰه‪،‬‬
‫والتفو يض في حقك‪.‬‬
‫ومنه اشتباه التوكل بالراحة‪ ،‬وإلقاء حمل الكل‪ ،‬فيظن صاحبه أنه متوكل‪ ،‬وإنما هو عامل على قدم‬
‫الراحة‪.‬‬
‫وعلامة ذلك أن المتوكل مجتهد في الأسباب المأمور بها غاية الاجتهاد‪ ،‬مستريح من غيرها لتعبه بها‪،‬‬
‫والعامل على الراحة آخذ من الأمر مقدار ما تندفع به الضرورة‪ ،‬وتسقط به عنه مطالبة الشرع‪ ،‬فهذا‬
‫لون وهذا لون‪.‬‬
‫ومنه اشتباه خلع الأسباب بتعطيلها‪ .‬فخلعها توحيد‪ ،‬وتعطيلها إلحاد وزندقة‪ ،‬فخلعها عدم اعتماد‬
‫القلب عليها‪ ،‬ووثوقه بها وركونه إليها مع قيامه بها‪ ،‬وتعطيلها إلغاؤها عن الجوارح‪ .‬ومنه اشتباه الثقة‬
‫بالل ّٰه بالغرة والعجز‪ .‬والفرق بينهما أن الواثق بالل ّٰه قد فعل ما أمره به ووثق بالل ّٰه في طلوع ثمرته‪ ،‬وتنميته‬
‫وتزكيتهكغارس الشجرة و باذر الأرض‪ .‬والمغتر العاجز قد فرط فيما أمر به‪ ،‬وزعم أنه واثق بالل ّٰه‪،‬‬
‫والثقة إنما تصح بعد بذل المجهود‪.‬‬
‫ومنه اشتباه الطمأنينة إلى الل ّٰه والسكون إليه بالطمأنينة إلى المعلوم وسكون القلب إليه‪ ،‬ولا يميز‬
‫بينهما إلا صاحب البصيرة‪ ،‬كما يذكر عن أبي سليمان الداراني أنه رأى رجلا ًبمكة لا يتناول شيئا ًإلا‬
‫شر بة ً من ماء زمزم‪ ،‬فمضى عليه أيام‪ ،‬فقال له أبو سليمان يوما‪ ً:‬أرأيت لو غارت زمزم أيش كنت‬

434

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

spring. At this the man stood up and kissed his head and said, “May God reward
you, for you have shown me the right path, for I had worshipped the water of
Zam Zam for days,” and went away.
Most people who think they trust in God have some other known means
as their real source of tranquility and reliance, as indicated by the fact that
when that means ceases to exist, they are overwhelmed by anxiety, fear, and
worries. This should make them realize that their trust had not truly been in
God.
Another one is the confusion between the servant’s contentment with what
God chooses for him, whether he likes it or not, with the mental resolve to do
so and his inner conversation about it; but the two are entirely different.
As it is reported on the authority of Abū Sulaymān, that he said, “I hope that
I was given a glimpse of contentment such that if He put me in fire I would be
content with that.”
I heard Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya, God have mercy on him, say that he
said this as a statement of resolve to attain contentment in his self-conversation, but were He to enter him into the fire, he would be nothing like that; to
resolve to do something is entirely different from in fact doing it.
Another conflation is between the knowledge of reliance and its experience; many know reliance, its nature, and its details, and think that they have
attained reliance on God because of that. But it is not so. The experience of
reliance is a matter beyond its knowledge, like the knowledge of love, its causes
and motives, in contrast with the experience of a passionate lover, or like the
knowledge of fear versus the state of one struck by fear that is entirely a different matter, or like an invalid person’s knowledge of health and its reality but
has a state that is entirely different.
This, however, is a subject in which claims are confused with realities and
incidentals with goals, and disqualifying calamities with necessary means. God
alone guides whomsoever He wills to the straight path.

5

Relating Reliance in God to the Beautiful Divine Names

Trusting reliance in God is the most general of stations connected with the
Beautiful Names of God.
It is particularly connected to many of the [divine] action names as well as
attributional names. It has a connection to the name the Forgiving, the Oftreturning, Pardoner, [the Compassionate,] the Ever Merciful.
And also connected to the Opener (of knots of confusion, doors), the Bestower of Gifts, the Provider, the Giver, and the Bounteous.

‫‪435‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫تشرب؟ فقام وقبل رأسه وقال‪ :‬جزاك الل ّٰه خيرا ً حيث أرشدتني‪ ،‬فإني كنت أعبد زمزم منذ أيام‬
‫ومضى‪.‬‬
‫وأكثر المتوكلين سكونهم وطمأنينتهم إلى المعلوم‪ ،‬وهم يظنون أنه إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وعلامة ذلك أنه متى‬
‫انقطع معلوم أحدهم حضره همه و بثه وخوفه‪ ،‬فعلم أن طمأنينته وسكونه لم يكن إلى الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫ومنه اشتباه الرضى عن الل ّٰه بكل ما يفعل بعبده—مما يحبه و يكرهه—بالعزم على ذلك وحديث‬
‫النفس به‪ .‬وذلك شيء والحقيقة شيء آخر‪.‬‬
‫ت طرفا ً من الرضى‪ ،‬لو أدخلني النار‬
‫كما يحكى عن أبي سليمان أنه قال‪ :‬أرجو أن أكون أعطي ُ‬
‫لـكنت بذلك راضيا‪ً.‬‬
‫فسمعت شيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية—رحمه الل ّٰه—يقول‪ :‬هذا عزم منه على الرضى وحديث نفس‬
‫به‪ ،‬ولو أدخله النار لم يكن من ذلك شيء‪ ،‬وفرق بين العزم على الشيء و بين حقيقته‪.‬‬
‫ومنه اشتباه علم التوكل بحال التوكل‪ ،‬فكثير من الناس يعرف التوكل وحقيقته وتفاصيله فيظن‬
‫أنه بذلك متوكل وليس من أهل التوكل‪ .‬فحال التوكل أمر آخر من وراء العلم به‪ ،‬وهذا كمعرفة المحبة‬
‫والعلم بها وأسبابها ودواعيها‪.‬‬
‫وحال المحب العاشق وراء ذلك‪ ،‬ومعرفة علم الخوف وحال الخائف وراء ذلك‪ ،‬وهو شبيه بمعرفة‬
‫المر يض ماهية الصحة وحقيقتها وحاله بخلافها‪.‬‬
‫فهذا الباب يكثر اشتباه الدعاوى فيه بالحقائق‪ ،‬والعوارض بالمطالب والآفات القاطعة بالأسباب‬
‫الموصلة‪ ،‬والل ّٰه يهدي من يشاء إلى صراط مستقيم‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫»والتوكل« من أعم المقامات تعلقا بً الأسماء الحسنى‪ .‬فإن له تعلقا ًخاصا بً عامة أسماء الأفعال وأسماء‬
‫الصفات‪ .‬فله تعلق باسم الغفار والتواب والعفو والرحيم‪ ،‬وتعلق باسم الفتاح والوهاب والرزاق‬
‫والمعطي والمحسن‪ ،‬وتعلق باسم المعز المذل الحافظ الرافع المانع‪ ،‬من جهة توكله عليه في إذلال أعداء‬

436

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

It is also connected to the Bestower of might and honor, the Bestower of dishonor and meekness, the Protector, the One who Elevates, and the One who
Prevents, from the perspective of one’s reliance on Him in humiliating, bringing down, and preventing the enemies of His religion from domination.
It is also connected to His names of power and will, and in general to all of the
Beautiful Names. This is why some of the authorities have interpreted [trusting
reliance] as being the same as experiential knowledge of God; they only meant
that the seeker’s station of reliance is good only as far as his knowledge. The
more he knows God, the greater his reliance on Him.

6

Limiting Reliance to Unworthy Pursuits

Many who rely on God cheat in their reliance; one may truly trust and rely on
God yet fall short, such as those whose purpose of reliance is something limited
or unworthy, things that he could have attained easily and reserved his utmost
effort and reliance for increasing his faith and knowledge, strengthening the
religion, and doing good in the world. But the ambition of many remains confined narrowly to small discomforts that he could have relieved easily, or hunger
that he could satiate with half a dirham, [rather than] turning his utmost effort
to the victory of the religion, eliminating heresies, and general benefit to the
Muslims.

7

Returning to al-Harawī on Trusting Reliance

The author of al-Manāzil, God have mercy on him, said,
Trusting reliance is to leave the matter to its Master, relying on His care.
It is the most difficult of the stations of the commoners for them, and
the weakest of the paths in view of the elite, for the Truth has taken hold
of all affairs Himself and deprived the world of the ownership of any of
it.
By “leaving the matter to its Master” he means surrendering it to Him who owns
them. By “relying on His care” he means trusting His upholding of all matters,
and His being above needing your help to accomplish it, and His will being in
no need of your will.
By “care” is meant two things: one is leaving in His care by parting from it
and relegating it to Him, and another is trusting reliance, which is to dispose

‫‪437‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫دينه‪ ،‬وخفضهم ومنعهم أسباب النصرة‪ ،‬وتعلق بأسماء القدرة والإرادة‪ ،‬وله تعلق عام بجميع الأسماء‬
‫الحسنى‪ ،‬ولهذا فسره من فسره من الأئمة بأنه المعرفة بالل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وإنما أراد أنه بحسب معرفة العبد يصح له مقام التوكل‪ ،‬وكلما كان بالل ّٰه أعرف كان توكله عليه‬
‫أقوى‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫وكثير من المتوكلين يكون مغبونا فً ي توكله‪ ،‬وقد توكل حقيقة التوكل وهو مغبون كمن صرف توكله إلى‬
‫حاجة جزئية استفرغ فيها قوة توكله‪ ،‬و يمكنه نيلها بأيسر شيء‪ ،‬وتفر يغ قلبه للتوكل في ز يادة الإ يمان‬
‫والعلم ونصرة الدين‪ ،‬والتأثير في العالم خيرا ً‪ .‬فهذا توكل العاجز القاصر الهمة‪ .‬كما يصرف بعضهم همته‬
‫وتوكله ودعاءه إلى وجع يمكن مداواته بأدنى شيء‪ ،‬أو جوع يمكن زواله بنصف ]رغيف أو نصف[‬
‫درهم‪ ،‬و يدع صرفه إلى نصرة الدين وقمع المبتدعين‪ ،‬ومصالح المسلمين‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪» :‬التوكل كلة الأمر إلى مالـكه‪ ،‬والتعو يل على وكالته‪ ،‬وهو من‬
‫أصعب منازل العامة عليهم‪ ،‬وأوهى السبل عند الخاصة‪ ،‬لأن الحق قد وكل الأمور كلها إلى نفسه‪،‬‬
‫وأيأس العالم من ملك شيء منها«‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬كلة الأمر إلى مالـكه«‪ ،‬أي تسليمه إلى من هو بيده‪.‬‬
‫»والتعو يل على وكالته«‪ ،‬أي الاعتماد على قيامه بالأمر‪ ،‬والاستغناء بفعله عن فعلك و بإرادته‬
‫عن إرادتك‪.‬‬
‫و»الوكالة« يراد بها أمران‪ :‬أحدهما التوكيل‪ ،‬وهو الاستنابة والتفو يض‪ .‬والثاني التوكل‪ ،‬وهو‬

438

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

of an affair on behalf of one’s ward. This takes place from both sides, for God
Almighty entrusts the matter to the servant while enabling him to dispose of
it, and the servant hands over the affair to God and relies on Him.
As for the Lord’s entrusting the matter to His servant, it is in His words: “But
if they disbelieve in it, then indeed We shall entrust it to a people who will not
disbelieve in it” [6:89]. Qatāda said, “We entrust it to the eighteen prophets that
we have mentioned, that is, in the preceding verse.” Abū Rajāʾ al-ʿAṭāridī said,
“It means if all denizens of the earth disbelieve in it, then no matter, for We
have entrusted it to the denizens of the heavens, the angels.” Ibn ʿAbbās and
Mujāhid said, “By them is meant the Helpers and the people of Medina.”
The truth is that it refers to all who take it up with faith, with calling to it,
striving for it, and supporting it; they are the ones to whom God has entrusted
the matter [of His religion].
If you say: Is it correct to say someone is a trustee of God?
I say: No, for the trustee is someone who takes care of his ward’s affairs in
his place, but God has no substitute, rather it is He who succeeds and substitutes for the servant. As the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, said,
“O God, You are the companion in the journey and my substitute in my family.”
Yet, there is no harm in taking that to mean that [the servant] is commanded
to protect, care for, and enact what He is entrusted with.
The servant’s entrusting his Lord means relegating to Him, taking his hands
off it and affirming it for its true Caretaker and Owner. This is why it has been
said concerning trusting reliance that it means quitting the ego’s claim to lordship and committing it to servitude, and this is the meaning of the Lord being
the trustee of the servant; that is, His being sufficient in upholding his affairs
and interests, without [God] being his replacement. For God entrusting the
matter to His servant is a normative command, a matter of worship, and a favor
to the servant, a badge of honor bestowed on the servant, not because God
needed it. The servant’s entrusting to His Lord, in contrast, is acknowledgment
and surrendering to His Lordship and enactment of His worship and servitude.
His statements that “It is the most difficult of the stations of the commoners for them” means that the commoners have not parted from their egos and
customs nor witnessed the reality that the elite have. This reality is leads to
reliance. They are, therefore, enthralled by the causes and find it hard to part
from them and empty it from their hearts and become engrossed with seeing
the Causer alone.
As for [reliance] being “the weakest of paths for the elite”: this is not always
true. Rather, it is among the noblest paths even for them, as we said at the beginning of this chapter that God enjoined it to His Prophet as well as the believers.
Among his names, God grant him blessing and peace, is the “Reliant” and his

‫‪439‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫التصرف بطر يق النيابة عن الموكل‪ ،‬وهذا من الجانبين‪ .‬فإن الل ّٰه تبارك وتعالى يوكل العبد و يقيمه في‬
‫حفظ ما وكله فيه‪ ،‬والعبد يوكل الرب و يعتمد عليه‪.‬‬
‫ن﴾‬
‫فأما وكالة الرب عبده ففي قوله‪﴿ :‬ف ِ َإن ي َْكف ُر ْ بِه َا هَٰ ؤلُ َاء ِ فقَ َْد و َ َكّلنْ َا بِه َا قوَ ْم ًا َل ّي ْس ُوا بِه َا ب ِك َاف ِرِ ي َ‬
‫]الأنعام‪ .[89:‬قال قتادة‪ :‬وكلنا بها الأنبياء الثمانية عشر الذين ذكرناهم—يعني قبل هذه الآية—‪ .‬وقال‬
‫أبو رجاء العطاردي‪ :‬معناه إن يكفر بها أهل الأرض‪ ،‬فقد وكلنا بها أهل السماء وهم الملائكة‪ .‬وقال‬
‫ا بن عباس ومجاهد‪ :‬هم الأنصار وأهل المدينة‪.‬‬
‫والصواب أن المراد من قام بها إ يمانا ًودعوة ً وجهادا ً ونصرة ً‪ ،‬فهؤلاء هم الذين وكلهم الل ّٰه بها‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬فهل يصح أن يقال إن أحدا ً وكيل الل ّٰه؟‬
‫قلت‪ :‬لا‪ .‬فإن الوكيل من يتصرف عن موكله بطر يق النيابة‪ ،‬والل ّٰه لا نائب له ولا يخلفه أحد‪ ،‬بل‬
‫هو الذي يخلف عبده‪.‬‬
‫كما قال النبي ﷺ‪» :‬اللهم أنت الصاحب في السفر والخليفة في الأهل«‪ .‬على أنه لا يمتنع أن يطلق‬
‫ذلك باعتبار أنه مأمور بحفظ ما وكله فيه ورعايته والقيام به‪.‬‬
‫وأما توكيل العبد ر به فهو تفو يضه إليه وعزل نفسه عن التصرف‪ ،‬وإثباته لأهله ووليه‪ .‬ولهذا قيل‬
‫في التوكل‪ :‬إنه عزل النفس عن الر بو بية وقيامها بالعبودية‪ ،‬وهذا معنى كون الرب وكيل عبده‪ ،‬أي‬
‫كافيه والقائم بأموره ومصالحه‪ ،‬لا أنه نائبه في التصرف‪ .‬فوكالة الرب عبده أمر وتعبد وإحسان إليه‬
‫وخلعة منه عليه‪ ،‬لا عن حاجة منه وافتقار إليهكموالاته‪ .‬وأما توكيل العبد ر به فتسليم لر بو بيته وقيام‬
‫بعبوديته‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬وهو من أصعب منازل العامة عليهم«‪ ،‬لأن العامة لم يخرجوا عن نفوسهم ومألوفاتهم‪،‬‬
‫ولم يشاهدوا الحقيقة التي شهدها الخاصة‪ ،‬وهي التي تشهد التوكل‪ .‬فهم في رق الأسباب‪ ،‬فيصعب‬
‫عليهم الخروج عنها وخلو القلب منها والاشتغال بملاحظة المسبب وحده‪ .‬وأما كونه »أوهى السبل‬
‫عند الخاصة« فليس على إطلاقه‪ ،‬بل هو من أجل السبل عندهم وأفضلها قدرا ً‪ ،‬وقد تقدم في صدر‬
‫الباب أمر الل ّٰه رسوله بذلك‪ ،‬وحضه عليه هو والمؤمنين‪ .‬ومن أسمائه ﷺ »المتوكل«‪ ،‬وتوكله أعظم‬

440
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
reliance is the greatest of all, even though He has assured him that he is upon
the truth. This shows that the religion in its entirety is in two things, that the
servant adhere to the truth in his word and deed, his belief and intention, and
that he trustingly rely on God. As the prophets and messengers of God said,
“How can we not trustingly rely on God when He has guided us to our paths?”
[14:12]. Accordingly, the servant has two threats: lack of guidance and lack of
reliance; when both [guidance and reliance] are present, the entirety of faith
is attained.
It is true, however, that relying upon God in seeking the daily provision and
thus neglecting the mission of aiding the truth and the religion is the weakest
of the stations of the elite. However, reliance in the mission of attaining what
He loves with respect to service to Him and to His creation is the reliance of the
messengers and prophets. How could it be the weakest of stations of the elite?
As for his statement that that is because “the Truth has taken hold of all
affairs Himself and deprived the world of the ownership of any of it,” its
response is as follows. He has charge of all that has been attributed to His servants as their acquisition, act, capacity, choice, as a command or prohibition,
thereby taking them as servants, separating through it those who obey Him
from those who disobey, those who prefer Him from those who prefer other
things over Him, and has commanded them to trust and rely on Him in regard
to all the things that He has attributed to them and commanded them. He has
declared, furthermore, that He loves those who trust and rely on Him, just as
He loves those who are grateful, righteous, and patient. He has also declared
that His aid to them is tied to their reliance on Him. He suffices those who rely
on Him. He has allocated for every righteous work and every station a known
reward. He has made Himself the reward of and sufficient for the one who trustingly relies on Him. He said, “And whoever is reverently mindful of God, He
erases his sins” [65:5], “And whoever obeys God and the Messenger: those are
with the ones God has blessed” [4:69]. He then said concerning reliance, “And
whoever trustingly relies on God, He suffices him” [65:3].
Consider the reward that accrues to the one who trusts God for no one else.
This establishes that trusting reliance on God is the strongest of paths with God
and dearest to Him. He taking charge of the affairs does not negate the reliance
of the servant on Him, but rather it is the confirmation that He is truly in charge.
When the servant knows that and experiences it his state of reliance becomes
definitive and [he knows] that the servant owns nothing whatsoever and that
all matters are in God’s hands and must be directed towards Him. His trust in
Him takes two forms: first, his absolute need and poverty; and second, all matters being in His hand and power. And reliance sprouts from these two acts [of
trust].

‫‪441‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫توكل‪ ،‬مع إخباره بأنه على الحق دلالة ًعلى أن الدين بمجموعه في هذين الأمرين أن يكون العبد على الحق‬
‫في قوله وعمله‪ ،‬واعتقاده ونيته‪ ،‬وأن يكون متوكلا ًعلى الل ّٰه واثقا ًبه‪ ،‬فالدين كله في هذين المقامين‪.‬‬
‫سب ُل َن َا﴾ ]إ براهيم‪ .[12:‬فالعبد آفته إما‬
‫ل ع َلىَ ال َل ّـه ِ و َق َْد ه َد َاناَ ُ‬
‫وقال رسل الل ّٰه وأنبياؤه‪﴿ :‬و َم َا ل َن َا َأ َلّا ن َتوَ َ َكّ َ‬
‫من عدم الهداية‪ ،‬وإما من عدم التوكل‪ ،‬فإذا جمع التوكل إلى الهداية فقد جمع الإ يمان كله‪.‬‬
‫نعم‪ ،‬التوكل على الل ّٰه في معلوم الرزق المضمون‪ ،‬والاشتغال به عن التوكل في نصرة الحق والدين‬
‫من أوهى منازل الخاصة‪ .‬أما التوكل عليه في حصول ما يحبه و يرضاه فيه وفي الخلق‪ ،‬فهذا توكل الرسل‬
‫والأنبياء‪ ،‬فكيف يكون من أوهى منازل الخاصة؟‬
‫قوله‪» :‬لأن الحق قد و َكّل الأمور إلى نفسه‪ ،‬وأيأس العالم من ملك شيء منها«‪.‬‬
‫فجوابه أن الذي تولى ذلك أسند إلى عبادهكسبا ًوفعلا ًوإقدارا ًواختيارا ً‪ ،‬وأمرا ًأو نهيا اً ستعبدهم‬
‫به‪ ،‬وامتحن به من يطيعه ممن يعصيه‪ ،‬ومن يؤثره ممن يؤثر عليه‪ ،‬وأمرهم بتوكلهم عليه فيما أسنده‬
‫إليهم وأمرهم به‪ ،‬وتعبدهم به‪ .‬وأخبر أنه يحب المتوكلين عليهكما يحب الشاكر ين‪ .‬وكما يحب المحسنين‬
‫وكما يحب الصا بر ين‪.‬‬
‫وأخبر أن كفايته لهم مقرونة بتوكلهم عليه‪ ،‬وأنهكاف من توكل عليه وحسبه‪ ،‬وجعل لكل عمل‬
‫من أعمال البر ومقام من مقاماته جزاء ً معلوما‪ً.‬‬
‫سي ِّئ َات ِه ِ﴾ ]الطلاق‪.[4:‬‬
‫ك ّف ِر ْ ع َن ْه ُ َ‬
‫ق ال َل ّـه َ ي ُ َ‬
‫وجعل نفسه جزاء المتوكل عليه وكفايته فقال‪﴿ :‬و َم َن ي َ َت ّ ِ‬
‫ن َأن ْع َم َ ال َل ّـه ُ ع َليَ ْه ِم﴾ ]النساء‪ .[69:‬ثم قال في التوكل‪:‬‬
‫ك م ََع ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ل ف َُأول َٰئ ِ َ‬
‫سو َ‬
‫﴿و َم َن ي ُط ِِع ال َل ّـه َ و َال َر ّ ُ‬
‫سبهُ ُ﴾ ]الطلاق‪.[3:‬‬
‫ح ْ‬
‫﴿و َم َن ي َتوَ َ َكّْل ع َلىَ ال َل ّـه ِ فهَ ُو َ َ‬
‫فانظر إلى هذا الجزاء الذي حصل للمتوكل ولم يجعله لغيره‪ .‬وهذا يدل على أن التوكل أقوى السبل‬
‫عنده وأحبها إليه‪ ،‬وليس كونه وكل الأمور إلى نفسه ]بمناف لتوكل العبد عليه‪ ،‬بل هذا تحقيق كون‬
‫الأمور كلها موكولة ًإلى نفسه[‪ ،‬لأن العبد إذا علم ذلك وتحققه معرفة ً صارت حاله التوكل قطعا ًعلى‬
‫من هذا شأنه‪ ،‬لعلمه بأن الأمور كلها موكولة إليه‪ ،‬وأن العبد لا يملك شيئا منها البتة‪ .‬فهو لا يجد بدا ً‬
‫من اعتماده عليه وتفو يضه إليه‪] ،‬واستناده إليه[ وثقته به من الوجهين‪ .‬من جهة الفقر وعدم ملـكه‬
‫شيئا ًالبتة‪ ،‬ومن جهةكون الأمر كله بيده وإليه‪ .‬والتوكل ينشأ من هذين العلمين‪.‬‬

442

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

If it is said that if all affairs and causality are God’s and the servant has nothing of it, how can he bear the trust of the Master and Owner over His goods?
How can he be His trustee if it is He who owns all things? When the elite think
this, they leave the station of trusting reliance and leave it for the commoners.
It would be said to them that since all affairs and causes are God’s and the servant has none, the latter’s reliance on God is surrendering the matter to Whom
it belongs and giving up any contentions about it.
For a servant to part from the station of trusting reliance is to part from the
very essence of worship. As for the claim that this obligation is addressed to the
commoners: God be glorified! Has God called to reliance except the elite of His
creation and the nearest and the most honorable of them?
He has made reliance a condition for their faith; if the condition is absence,
so is the result. Whoever has no trusting reliance has no faith. God Almighty
said, “And in God you trust if you are believers” [5:23], and “in God do the
believers trust” [14:11], and “Indeed, the believers are those who when God
is mentioned their hearts soften with fear and when His signs are recited to
them they increase in faith and in their Lord they trust” [8:2]. Similarly, God
has informed about His Messengers that trust in God was their safe haven and
refuge, and has commanded His Messenger, God grant him blessing and peace,
to trust in Him in four places in His book, and has said, “And Moses said, ‘O my
people, if you have faith in God, then trust in Him, if you are Muslims’—so they
said, ‘in God we trust’” [10:84–85].

8

The First Level according to al-Harawī

He said,
It is three levels, each of which is for the commoners. The first is the
trusting reliance accompanied by quest, and adherence to causality in
intending to busy the ego, benefit the creation, and abjuring the claim.
He says here that the seeker at this level is reliant on God and does not part
from causes; he rather adopts them with the intention of busying the ego
with the means, fearing that when the ego is empty it will busy itself with
pursuit of vain desire, for if one does not engage in something that benefits
it, it engages him in what harms him, especially if the availability [of time]
is accompanied by the heat of youth and possession of wealth, as has been
said

‫‪443‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫فإن قيل‪ :‬فإذا كان الأمر كله لل ّٰه وليس للعبد من الأمر شيء‪ ،‬فكيف يوكل المالك على ملـكه؟‬
‫وكيف يستنيبه فيما هو ملك له دون هذا الموكل؟ فالخاصة لما تحققوا هذا نزلوا عن مقام التوكل‬
‫وسلموه إلى العامة‪ ،‬و بقي الخطاب‪.‬‬
‫قيل‪ :‬لما كان الأمر كله لل ّٰه وليس للعبد فيه شيء البتة‪ ،‬كان توكله على الل ّٰه تسليم الأمر إلى من هو‬
‫له‪ ،‬وعزل نفسه عن منازعات مالـكه‪ ،‬واعتماده عليه فيه وخروجه بالتوكل لهم دون الخاصة‪.‬‬
‫أما عزل العبد نفسه عن مقام التوكل فهو عزل لها عن حقيقة العبودية‪ .‬وأما توجه الخطاب به‬
‫إلى العامة فيا فسبحان الل ّٰه! هل خاطب الل ّٰه بالتوكل في كتابه إلا خواص خلقه وأقر بهم إليه وأكرمهم‬
‫عليه؟ وشرط في إ يمانهم أن يكونوا متوكلين والمعلق على الشرط يعُ دم عند عدمه‪.‬‬
‫وهذا يدل على انتفاء الإ يمان عند انتفاء التوكل‪ ،‬فمن لا توكل له لا إ يمان له‪ .‬قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َع َلىَ‬
‫ل ال ْمؤُ ْم ِنوُ نَ﴾ ]آل عمران‪،122:‬‬
‫ال َل ّـه ِ ف َتوَ َ َكّلوُ ا ِإن ُ‬
‫كنت ُم ُمّؤ ْم ِن ِينَ﴾ ]المائدة‪ .[23:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬و َع َلىَ ال َل ّـه ِ ف َليْ َتوَ َ َكّ ِ‬
‫ت ع َليَ ْه ِْم آياَ تهُ ُ ز َاد َْته ُْم ِإ يم َاناً‬
‫ت ق ُلوُ بُه ُْم و َِإذ َا تلُ ِي َ ْ‬
‫جل َ ْ‬
‫ن ِإذ َا ذ ُك ِر َ ال َل ّـه ُ و َ ِ‬
‫‪ .[160‬وقال‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َن ّم َا ال ْمؤُ ْم ِنوُ نَ ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫و َع َلىَ ر َ ّبِه ِْم ي َتوَ َ َكّلوُ نَ﴾ ]الأنفال‪ .[2:‬وهذا يدل على انحصار المؤمنين فيمن كان بهذه الصفة‪.‬‬
‫ٰ‬
‫وأخبر عن رسله بأن التوكل ملجؤهم ومعاذهم‪ ،‬وأمر به رسوله في أر بعة مواضع من كتابه ]وقال‪:‬‬
‫سلمِ ِينَ فقَ َالوُ ا ع َلىَ ال َل ّـه ِ توَ َ َكّلنْ َا﴾‬
‫كنت ُم ُمّ ْ‬
‫كنت ُم ْ آم َنت ُم باِ ل َل ّـه ِ فعَ َل َي ْه ِ توَ َ َكّلوُ ا ِإن ُ‬
‫ل م ُوس َى ياَ قوَ ِْم ِإن ُ‬
‫﴿و َق َا َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫]يونس‪ .[85–84:‬فكيف يكون من أوهى السبل وهذا شأنه؟‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ ،‬كلها تسير مسير العامة‪ .‬الدرجة الأولى‪ :‬التوكل مع الطلب‪ ،‬ومعاطاة‬
‫السبب على نية شغل النفس‪ ،‬ونفع الخلق وترك الدعوى«‪.‬‬
‫يقول‪ :‬إن صاحب هذه الدرجة متوكل على الل ّٰه ولا يترك الأسباب‪ ،‬بل يتعطاها على نية شغل‬
‫النفس بالسبب مخافة أن تفرغ فتشتغل بالهوى والحظوظ‪ .‬فإن لم يشغل نفسه بما ينفعها شغلته بما‬
‫يضره‪ ،‬لا سيما إذا كان الفراغ مع حدة الشباب وملك الج ِدةكما قيل‪:‬‬

444

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Youth, leisure, and wealth
Corrupt a man in every which way8
In addition, such intention is to benefit his own ego and to benefit others.
As for “abjuring the claim,” it could mean that when the seeker becomes
involved with the means, he rids himself of others pointing to him [as a saint
or the like] which would cause his self-admiration and claim [to sainthood].
The attachment to means thus serves to veil his state and his station. From
another perspective, such engagement leads him to witness his poverty and
lowly status, his being but a laboring slave, which allows him to desist from
making frivolous claims. When he debases himself and deals with the means
[rather than the God alone] it saves him from these maladies.
It should be said, in response, however, that if engagement with means is
commanded in religion, its benefit must be much greater than these three, for
they are intended by the ultimate purpose, whereas these reasons pertain to
only the means. [The adoption of means] is the worship for which the servant
was created, messengers were sent, Books were sent, the heavens and the earth
were established, and the Garden and Hell created. To seek the means that have
been commanded is nothing but service that has been commanded, the right
of God upon the servant demanded of him, and based on which reward and
punishment will accrue.

9

The Blemish of Asking of Creation

He said,
The second level is reliance along with quitting asking, turning the eyes
away from the means, striving one’s best to correct the reliance, eradicating the nobility of the ego, and making room to protect the duties.
His statement “quitting asking” means asking of creation, not of the Truth. It
means that one does not ask anything of anyone. This is the best advice for a
seeker. Asking of creation is prohibited as a rule but permitted only for necessity, like the [case of] eating of carrion, according to the ruling of Aḥmad [b.
Ḥanbal], God be pleased with him, but it is not compulsory.
This is what our Shaykh [Ibn Taymiyya] would say as well, namely, that asking of others when in need is not religiously compulsory but permissible. I also
8 Ismāʿīl b. Qāsim (d. 211/826), whose poetic nickname was Abū al-ʿAtāhiya (lit., father of in-

Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya - 978-90-04-41342-9

‫‪445‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫إن الشباب والفراغ والجدة‬

‫مفسدة للمرء أي مفسدة‬

‫و يكون أيضا ًقيامه بالسبب على نية نفع النفس ونفع الناس بذلك‪ ،‬فحصل له نفع نفسه ونفع غيره‪.‬‬
‫وأما تضمن ذلك لترك الدعوى فإنه إذا اشتغل بالسبب تخلص من إشارة الخلق إليه‪ ،‬الموجبة‬
‫لحسن ظنه بنفسه‪ ،‬الموجب لدعواه‪ .‬فالسبب ستر لحاله ومقامه وحجاب مسبل عليه‪ .‬ومن وجه آخر‪،‬‬
‫وهو أن يشهد به فقره وذله‪ ،‬وامتهانه امتهان العبيد والفعلة‪ ،‬فيتخلص من رعونة دعوى النفس‪ ،‬فإنه‬
‫إذا امتهن نفسه بمعاطاة الأسباب سلم من هذه الأمراض‪.‬‬
‫فيقال‪ :‬إذا كانت الأسباب مأمورا ًبها ففيها فائدة أجل من هذه الثلاث‪ ،‬وهي المقصودة بالقصد‬
‫الأول‪ ،‬وهذه مقصودة قصد الوسائل وهي القيام بعبودية الأمر الذي خلق له العبد‪ ،‬وأرسلت به‬
‫الرسل وأ نزلت لأجله الـكتب‪ ،‬و به قامت السماوات والأرض وله وجدت الجنة والنار‪.‬‬
‫فالقيام بالأسباب المأمور بها محض العبودية وحق الل ّٰه على عبده الذي توجهت به نحوه المطالب‪،‬‬
‫وترتب عليه الثواب والعقاب‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬التوكل مع إسقاط الطلب‪ ،‬وغض العين عن السبب اجتهادا لً تصحيح التوكل‪،‬‬
‫وقمعا لً شرف النفس‪ ،‬وتفرغا ًإلى حفظ الواجبات«‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬مع إسقاط الطلب«‪ ،‬أي من الخلق لا من الحق‪ .‬فلا يطلب من أحد شيئا‪ ً،‬وهذا من أحسن‬
‫الكلام وأنفعه للمر يد‪ .‬فإن الطلب من الخلق في الأصل محظور‪ ،‬وغايته أن يباح للضرورةكإ باحة الميتة‬
‫للمضطر‪ .‬ونص أحمد—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—على أنه لا يجب‪ ،‬وكذلك كان شيخنا يشير إلى أنه لا يجب‬
‫الطلب والسؤال‪.‬‬
‫‪sanity), a poet of the Abbasid period, born in Kufa to a family of menial workers and clients‬‬
‫‪of the tribe of al-ʿAnaza, and flourished in Baghdad, became renowned for his simple, direct,‬‬
‫‪candid poetry in an age of highly artificial poetic production; at some point he became‬‬
‫‪extremely pietistic and renunciant in his life and poetry, and produced moving portrayals of‬‬
‫‪death and transience of worldly life. Some doubted his sincerity and orthodoxy. See A. Guil‬‬‫‪laume, “Abu ’l-ʿAtāhiya” in EI2.‬‬

446
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
heard him say concerning asking others, “It is unfair to the Lordship, unfair to
the people, and unfair to the self.” As for the Lordship, it is so because it entails
debasing oneself before other than God, sweating before someone other than
the Creator, and tantamount to replacing asking of Him with asking of others. It
is [unfair] to the people because it seeks to contend for what they have. People
hate those who ask them and love those who do not, for they love their wealth
and dislike anyone who takes away from it. It is unfair to the self because it
debases the self and stoops to asking someone [who is like him, or perhaps the
one asking is even better and more resourceful; thus one has failed to ask the
One who has no like whatsoever, the All-hearing and All-seeing], and agreed to
be an importunate beggar before other, similar beggars. God alone is above all
needs.
A created being asking another is like a beggar begging another. Whenever
you ask the Lord, you become ennobled before Him, you please Him, and
He loves you more, whereas when you ask the creation, you are debased and
become hated. As it was said,
God is angered if you quit asking Him whereas
The little children of Adam are angered when you ask
How unbecoming of a slave to ask of another slave when he would find with
his Master all that he wants.
It is narrated in the Ṣaḥīḥ of Muslim by ʿAwf b. Mālik al-Ashjaʿī, God be
pleased with him, who said, “We were nine, or maybe eight or seven, with the
Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, who said, ‘Would you
not pledge to the Messenger of God?’ and this was when we had just recently
taken the pledge. So we said, ‘We have pledged to you already, O Messenger of
God.’ He said again, ‘Would you not pledge to the Messenger of God?’ So we
stretched out our hands and said, ‘We have already pledged to you, O Messenger of God. What else shall we pledge to you now?’ He said, ‘That you worship
God and associate no partners to Him, and the five prayers,’ and then said very
quietly, ‘Do not ask people for anything.’ He said, I saw some of those men later,
and they would never ask anyone to help even if [it was a light matter as if]
they dropped their whip [from on top of their rides].”
In the two Ṣaḥīḥs on the authority of Ibn ʿUmar, God be pleased with them
both, [it is reported] that the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, was
standing on his pulpit and mentioning charity and avoiding asking others, and
he said, “The hand on top is better than the hand on the bottom”—the one on
top being the hand that gives and the one on the bottom the one that is asking.

‫‪447‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫وسمعته يقول في السؤال‪ :‬ظلم في حق الر بو بية وظلم في حق الخلق وظلم في حق النفس‪.‬‬
‫أما في حق الر بو بية فلما فيه من الذل لغير الل ّٰه وإراقة ماء الوجه لغير خالقه والتعوض عن سؤاله‬
‫بسؤال المخلوقين‪ .‬وأما في حق الناس فبمنازعتهم ما في أيديهم بالسؤال واستخراجه منهم‪ .‬وأبغض ما‬
‫إليهم من يسألهم‪ ،‬وأحب ما إليهم من لا يسألهم‪ .‬فإن أموالهم محبو باتهم‪ ،‬ومن سألك محبو بك فقد‬
‫تعرض لمقتك و بغضك‪.‬‬
‫وأما ظلم السائل نفسه حيث امتهنها وأقامها في مقام ذل السؤال‪ ،‬ورضي لها بذل الطلب ]ممن هو‬
‫مثله‪ ،‬أو لعل السائل خير منه وأعلى قدرا ً‪ ،‬وترك سؤال من ليس كمثله شيء وهو السميع البصير‪ .‬فقد‬
‫أقام السائل نفسه مقام الذل[ وأهانها بذلك‪ ،‬ورضي أن يكون شحاذا ً من شحاذ مثله‪ .‬فإن من تشحذه‬
‫فهو أيضا ًشحاذ مثلك‪ .‬والل ّٰه وحده هو الغني‪.‬‬
‫فسؤال المخلوق للمخلوق سؤال الفقير للفقير‪ .‬والرب تعالى كلما سألتهكرمت عليه ورضي عنك‬
‫وأحبك‪ .‬والمخلوق كلما سألته هنت عليه وأبغضك وقلاك‪ ،‬كما قيل‪:‬‬

‫الل ّٰه يغضب إن تركت سؤاله‬

‫و بنُ َُّي آدم حين ي ُسأل يغضب‬

‫وقبيح بالعبد المر يد أن يتعرض لسؤال العبيد‪ ،‬وهو يجد عند مولاهكل ما ير يد‪.‬‬
‫وفي صحيح مسلم عن عوف بن مالك الأشجعي—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—قال‪ :‬كنا عند رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‬
‫تسعة ً—أو ثمانية ً أو سبعة ً—فقال‪» :‬ألا تبايعون رسول الل ّٰه؟ وكنا حديثي عهد ببيعة‪ ،‬فقلنا قد بايعناك‬
‫يا رسول الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ثم قال‪ :‬ألا تبايعون رسول الل ّٰه؟ فبسطنا أيدينا وقلنا‪ :‬قد بايعناك يا رسول الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فعلام‬
‫نبايعك؟ قال‪ :‬أن تعبدوا الل ّٰه ولا تشركوا به شيئا‪ ً،‬والصلوات الخمس—وأسر كلمة خفية—ولا تسألوا‬
‫الناس شيئا‪ ً،‬قال‪ :‬ولقد رأيت بعض أولئك النفر يسقط سوط أحدهم فما يسأل أحدا ًأن يناوله إ ياه«‪.‬‬
‫وفي الصحيحين عن ا بن عمر—رضي الل ّٰه عنهما—عن النبي ﷺ قال‪» :‬لا تزال المسألة بأحدكم حتى‬
‫يلقى الل ّٰه وليس في وجهه م ُزعة لحم«‪.‬‬
‫وفيهما أيضا ًعنه أن رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ قال—وهو على المنبر‪ ،‬وذكر الصدقة والتعفف عن المسألة—‪:‬‬
‫»اليد العليا خير من اليد السفلى«‪.‬‬
‫واليد العليا هي المنفقة‪ ،‬والسفلى هي السائلة‪.‬‬

448

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

In the Ṣaḥīḥ of Muslim on the authority of Abū Hurayra, God be pleased with
him, [it is reported] that the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, said,
“Whoever asks of people for their money only to have more for himself [rather
than dire need] is asking for hot coal, so let him choose if he wants more of it
or less.”
Al-Tirmidhī has it on the authority of Samura b. Jundub, God be pleased with
him, that the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, said, “Begging is a blemish with which a man scars his honor, except if he were asking
someone in authority or in a matter he cannot avoid.”9 He also reports that
Ibn Masʿūd, God be pleased with him, said on the authority of the Prophet,
“Whoever is afflicted by starvation and goes to people to alleviate it will not
find satiation, but whoever goes to God, he will likely find provision sooner or
later.”10
In the Sunan [of Abū Dawūd, Ibn Maja, and al-Nasāʾī] and the Musnad [of
Aḥmad] on the authority of Thawbān, God be pleased with him, [it is reported
that] he said that the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace,
said, “Whoever guarantees me to not ask of people anything, I guarantee him
the Garden,” so he (Thawbān) said, “I do.”
In the Ṣaḥīḥ of Muslim, Qabīṣa, God be pleased with him, relates from the
Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, that “Begging is not permissible
but for one of the three [classes of] persons: one who has incurred debt, for
him begging is permissible till he pays that off, after which he must stop it; a
man whose property has been destroyed by a calamity which has smitten him,
for him begging is permissible till he gets what will support life, or he said, will
provide him reasonable subsistence; and a person who has been smitten by
starvation, the validity of which is confirmed by three intelligent members of
his people, for him begging is permissible till he gets what will support him, or
he said, will provide him subsistence. Qabīṣa, besides these three [every other
reason] for begging is forbidden, and one who engages in such consumes that
what is forbidden.”
Trusting reliance accompanied by desisting from asking for hand-outs is true
worship.
His statement “to avert eyes from the means striving to correct the reliance”
means that one should not be engrossed in the means so that his reliance is
sound, for the one who utilizes means may think that he has attained reliance
on God, but in reality he has not because his trust is still pinned on his knowl-

9
10

Tirmidhī #681; he grades the reports as ḥasan-ṣaḥīḥ.
Tirmidhī #2326.

‫‪449‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫وفي صحيح مسلم عن أبي هر يرة—رضى الل ّٰه عنه—عن النبي ﷺ قال‪» :‬من سأل الناس أموالهم‬
‫تكثرا ً فإنما يسأل جمرا ً‪ ،‬فليستقل أو ليستكثر«‪.‬‬
‫وفي الترمذي عن سمرة بن جندب—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬إن المسألةكد‬
‫يكد بها الرجل وجهه‪ ،‬إلا أن يسأل الرجل سلطانا‪ ً،‬أو في أمر لا بد منه«‪ .‬قال الترمذي‪ :‬حديث صحيح‪.‬‬
‫وفيه عن ا بن مسعود—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—مرفوعا‪» ً:‬من أصابته فاقة فأ نزلها بالناس لم تسد فاقته‪،‬‬
‫ومن أ نزلها بالل ّٰه فيوشك الل ّٰه برزق عاجل أو آجل«‪.‬‬
‫وفي السنن والمسند عن ثو بان—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬من تكفل لي ألا‬
‫يسأل الناس شيئا‪ ً،‬أتكفل له بالجنة‪ ،‬فقلت‪ :‬أنا«‪ .‬فكألا يسأل أحدا ً شيئا‪ً.‬‬
‫وفي صحيح مسلم عن قبيصة—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—عن النبي ﷺ‪ :‬إن المسألة لا تحل إلا لأحد ثلاثة‪:‬‬
‫رجل تحمل حمالة ً فحلت له المسألة حتى يصيبها ثم يمسك‪ .‬ورجل أصابته جائحة اجتاحت ماله‪ ،‬فحلت‬
‫له المسألة حتى يصيب قواما ًمن عيش—أو قال‪ :‬سدادا ً من عيش—ورجل أصابته فاقة حتى يقول‬
‫ثلاثة من ذوي الحجى من قومه‪ :‬لقد أصابت فلانا ًفاقة فحلت له المسألة حتى يصيب قواما ًمن عيش—‬
‫ت يأكلها صاحبها سحتا ً«‪.‬‬
‫أو قال سدادا ً من عيش—فما سواهن من المسألة يا قبيصة فسح ٌ‬
‫فالتوكل مع إسقاط هذا الطلب والسؤال هو محض العبودية‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬وغض العين عن السبب‪ ،‬اجتهادا في تصحيح التوكل«‪ .‬معناه أنه يعرض عن الاشتغال‬
‫صل التوكل ولم يحصله‬
‫بالسبب لتصحيح التوكل بامتحان النفس‪ ،‬لأن المتعاطي للسبب قد يظن أنه ح َ ّ‬
‫لثقته بعلومه‪ ،‬فإذا أعرض عن السبب صح له التوكل‪.‬‬

450
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
edge. When he avoids the means his reliance becomes sound. This has been
alluded to be one school of worshipers and seekers. As many stories have it,
many of them would go into wilderness without provisions, seeing that bringing the provisions would constitute the violation of the principle of reliance.
Such men are shielded by their truthfulness, but otherwise their rank is deficient according to the real knowers. It is never possible for a human being to
abandon the means altogether.
Take, for instance, Ibrāhīm al-Khawwāṣ, God have mercy on him, who was
totally devoted to trusting reliance to an extreme and would enter the wilderness without provisions, and yet would always carry a thread, a waterskin, and
a nail clipper. He was asked why he carried these things when you deprive
yourself of all other things? He said, “Things like these do not take away from
reliance, for we have duties we owe to God. A mendicant has none but one
robe, which may tear—and if he does not have a needle and thread his privates
would show and invalidate his prayers. If he has no waterskin, his purification
would be compromised. So when you see a mendicant without a water skin,
needle, and thread, question his prayers.”
Do you not see, then, that his religion could not be set right without partaking in means? Is not the movement of one’s feet to go anywhere, and asking for
directions if one does not know the taking of means? Divesting oneself from
the means is, therefore, impossible rationally, religiously, and physically.
True, sometimes a true seeker experiences such overpowering trust in God
that leads him to abandon all means that are not an obligation upon him, or to
throw himself into situations of death, and such moments are given by God not
his own effort, and God’s aid comes in whatever form the situation requires.
But such moments do not last, nor are they natural, but rather a momentary
epiphany that overtakes him without seeking it. In that state, if he leaves the
means he is excused for being overpowered; and his epiphanic state may carry
him through such feats that if he tried them without that state he would not be
able to.
All these stories [of great feats] that are true that are reported about the
people [of Sufism] are things that happen occasionally are not what one is
commanded to pursue, nor is one capable of doing so, but they have become
a trial for two types of people. One group thinks that they are the path to be
pursued and station to be attained, so they practice them, but it never works.
Some give up and others return, unable to continue. The other group opposes
them, declaring them opposed to both reason and revelation and condemning
them as those who claim states more perfect than the state of the Messenger
of God, God grant him blessing and peace, and his companions, for none of
them did such things, nor did any of them abandon the means. The Messen-

‫‪451‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫وهذا الذي أشار إليه مذهب قوم من العباد والسالـكين‪ ،‬وكثير منهم كان يدخل البادية بلا زاد‪،‬‬
‫و يرى حمل الزاد قدحا ًفي التوكل‪ ،‬ولهم في ذلك حكايات مشهورة‪ .‬وهؤلاء في خفارة صدقهم وإلا‬
‫فدرجتهم ناقصة عند العارفين‪ .‬ومع هذا فلا يمكن بشرا ً البتة ترك الأسباب جملة ً‪.‬‬
‫فهذا إ براهيم الخواص—رحمه الل ّٰه—كان مجردا ً في التوكل‪ ،‬يدقق فيه و يدخل البادية بغير زاد‪،‬‬
‫وكألا تفارقه الإ برة والركوة والمقراض‪ .‬فقيل له‪ :‬لم تحمل هذا وأنت تمنع من كل شيء؟ فقال‪ :‬مثل‬
‫هذا لا ينقص التوكل‪ ،‬لأن لل ّٰه علينا فرائض‪ ،‬والفقير لا يكون عليه إلا ثوب واحد‪ ،‬فر بما تخرق ثو به‪،‬‬
‫فإذا لم يكن معه إ برة وخيوط تبدو عورته فتفسد عليه صلاته‪ ،‬وإذا لم يكن معه ركوة فسدت عليه‬
‫طهارته‪ ،‬وإذا رأيت الفقير بلا ركوة ولا إ برة ولا خيوط فاتهمه في صلاته‪.‬‬
‫أفلا تراه لم يستقم له دينه إلا بالأسباب؟ أو ليست حركة أقدامه ونقلها في الطر يق والاستدلال على‬
‫أعلامها—إذا خفيت عليه—من الأسباب؟ فالتجرد من الأسباب جملة ً ممتنع عقلا ًوشرعا ًوحسا‪ً.‬‬
‫نعم‪ ،‬قد تعرض للصادق أحيانا ًقوة ثقة بالل ّٰه وحال مع الل ّٰه‪ ،‬تحمله على ترك كل سبب مفروض‬
‫عليه‪ ،‬كما تحمله على إلقاء نفسه في مواضع الهلـكة‪ ،‬و يكون ذلك الوقت بالل ّٰه لا به‪ ،‬فيأتيه مدد من الل ّٰه‬
‫على مقتضى حاله‪ .‬ولـكن لا يدوم له هذا الحال‪ ،‬وليست في مقتضى الطبيعة فإنها كانت هجمة ً هجمت‬
‫عليه بلا استدعاء فحمل عليها‪ ،‬فإذا استدعى مثلها وتكلفها لم يجب إلى ذلك‪ ،‬وفي تلك الحال إذا ترك‬
‫السبب يكون معذورا ً لقوة الوارد‪ ،‬وعجزه عن الاشتغال بالسبب‪ ،‬فيكون في وارده عون له و يكون‬
‫حاملا لً ه‪ ،‬فإذا أراد تعاطي تلك الحال بدون ذلك الوارد وقع في المحال‪.‬‬
‫وكل تلك الحكايات الصحيحة التي تحكي عن القوم فهي جزئية حصلت لهم أحيانا‪ ً،‬ليست طر يقا ً‬
‫مأمورا ً بسلوكها‪ ،‬ولا مقدورة ً‪ ،‬وصارت فتنة لطائفتين‪.‬‬
‫طائفة ظنتها طر يقا ًومقاما ًفعملوا عليها‪ .‬فمنهم من انقطع ومنهم من رجع ولم يمكنه الاستمرار عليها‪.‬‬
‫وطائفة قدحوا في أر بابها وجعلوهم مخالفين للشرع والعقل‪ ،‬مدعين لأنفسهم حالا ًأكمل من حال‬
‫رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ وأصحابه‪ ،‬إذ لم يكن فيهم أحد قط فعل ذلك‪ ،‬ولا أخل بشيء من الأسباب‪ .‬وقد‬

452

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

ger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, appeared on the day of Uḥud
protected by two shields, and never did he attend a battle uncovered, as some
who have no knowledge and understanding do. He employed a pagan guide
who showed him the way during his flight [to Medina], and God guided the
worlds through him. He used to store food for a year11 for his family and he
is the master of all trusting and reliant servants of God. When he traveled for
war or major or minor pilgrimage he carried his provisions and water bag, as
did all of his companions. And they were the people of true trusting reliance;
the most perfect ones after them have only smelled their reliance from a far
distance or found the dust of their [tracks]. Their states are the standard and
criterion for all states through which sound states are separated from defective ones. Their aims in reliance were higher than the aims of those after them.
Their reliance was in attaining the aim of opening hearts and countries [and to
call people to monotheism so the sun of the true religion rise upon the hearts of
all] and they filled with the hearts with guidance and faith through that trusting reliance. Through it they opened up countries of unbelief and made them
abodes of faith. Their aspirations, God be pleased with them, were higher and
nobler than one who spends the strength of his reliance and trust in God to
attain things that he could attain with little effort, but he makes that his ultimate goal.
His words “eradicating the nobility of the ego” mean that as one seeks the
means of authorities or wealth and other means by which power and influence among men are earned, giving up the means leads to eradicating all these
sources of the self-importance of the ego.
His words “making room for protecting the obligations” means that by giving
up chasing after the means one is free to attend to one’s obligations.

10

Third Level

He said,
The third level is reliance with the knowledge of reliance, which is the
motivation to purify it from the defect of reliance, which is that he knows
that the Truth Almighty’s ownership of things is the ownership of might
in which none else may participate. One’s servitude thus necessitates that
the slave knows that the Truth alone is the master of all things.

11

See Bukhārī #5357.

‫‪453‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫ظاهر رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ بين درعين يوم أحد‪ ،‬ولم يحضر الصف قط عريانا ًكما يفعله من لا علم عنده ولا‬
‫معرفة‪ ،‬واستأجر دليلا ًمشركا ًعلى دين قومه يدله على طر يق الهجرة‪ ،‬وقد هدى الل ّٰه به العالمين‪ ،‬وكان‬
‫يدخر لأهله قوت سنة وهو سيد المتوكلين‪ ،‬وكان إذا سافر في جهاد أو حج أو عمرة حمل الزاد والمزاد‪،‬‬
‫وجميع أصحابه‪.‬‬
‫وهم أهل التوكل حقا‪ ً،‬وأكمل المتوكلين بعدهم هو من اشتم رائحة توكلهم من مسيرة بعيدة‪ ،‬أو‬
‫لحق أ ثرا ً من غبارهم‪ ،‬فأحوال القوم محك الأحوال وميزانها‪ ،‬بها يعلم صحيحها من سقيمها‪ ،‬فإن‬
‫هممهم كانت في التوكل أعلى من همم من بعدهم‪ ،‬فإن توكلهم كان في فتح القلوب والبلاد‪] ،‬وأن‬
‫يوحده جميع العباد‪ ،‬وأن تشرق شموس الدين الحق على قلوب العباد[‪ ،‬فملؤوا بذلك التوكل القلوب‬
‫ى وإيمانا‪ ً،‬وفتحوا بلاد الـكفر وجعلوها دار إ يمان‪ ،‬فكانت همم الصحابة—رضي الل ّٰه عنهم—‬
‫هد ً‬
‫أعلى وأجل من أن يصرف أحدهم قوة توكله واعتماده على الل ّٰه في شيء يحصل بأدنى حيلة وسعي‪،‬‬
‫فيجعله نصب عينيه و يحمل عليه قوى توكله‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬وقمعا لً شرف النفس«‪ ،‬ير يد أن المتسبب بالولايات الشر يفة في العبادة أو التجارات الرفيعة‬
‫والأسباب التي له بها جاه وشرف في الناس‪ ،‬فإذا تركها يكون تركها قمعا لً شرف نفسه وإيثارا لً لتواضع‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬وتفرغا ًلحفظ الواجبات«‪ ،‬أي يتفرغ بتركها لحفظ واجباته التي تزاحمها تلك الأسباب‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬التوكل مع معرفة التوكل‪ ،‬النازعة إلى الخلاص من علة التوكل‪ ،‬وهو أن يعلم أن‬
‫ملـكة الحق تعالى للأشياء هي ملـكة عزة لا يشاركه فيها مشارك‪ ،‬فيكل شركته إليه‪ .‬فإن من ضرورة‬
‫العبودية أن يعلم العبد أن الحق هو مالك الأشياء وحده«‪.‬‬

454

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

He means that at this level, after severing the means and demands and transcending [the previous] two levels, the seeker’s reliance is of a higher quality
than what he had before. This can happens only after knowing the reality of
reliance {and he realizes that he has not yet attained it, thus his knowledge of
its reality becomes a motivation—that is, a drive and incentive—to removing
the defect of his reliance.}
That is, he does not know the defect of his reliance until he knows its reality,
which knowledge than invites him to remove its defect.
He then goes on to distinguish the knowledge by which the defect of reliance
is known and says, “he knows that the ownership of the Truth of things is the
ownership of might,” that, is one of compelling and irresistible power, which
cannot be shared.
The reliant one sees that he has possession of some matters that he relegates
to the Almighty, which is the opposite of the reality, which is that none other
than God has possession of any matter whatsoever. This is why [al-Harawī] said,
“No associate shares any might with him to begin with, so the [seeker] handing
any matter to God is meaningless.”
The reality of this state of affairs as if says to one who relegates affairs to God,
What have you handed to God? That which was His alone to begin with? Or was
it yours alone? Or did you have it split between you two? Since the last two are
impossible, the first one is the only possibility, which leads to the absurdity of
handing anything over to God.
In response, we (Ibn al-Qayyim) say that there are two things. One is trusting reliance, and the other is relegation. Reliance is trust and tranquility in Him
who has all command in His hand, and the knowledge of the servant in the
exclusiveness of the Almighty in ownership of all things and that He shares not
the smallest particle in existence with anyone. When this knowledge is established intellectually and experientially he must then rely on none but the Truth,
trust Him, seek tranquility in Him alone, knowing that his needs small and big
and all his interests are in His hands alone and no one else’s. When else could
his heart find a refuge other than reliance after this?
The defect of reliance then is to incline his heart in the slightest toward anyone who has no partnership in the dominion of the Truth Almighty nor owns
the slightest morsel in the heavens and the earth. He works now to eliminate
this defect.
There is another defect, which is his seeing of his reliance, for that is tantamount to being distracted by his own ego.
A third defect is to exert the strength of his reliance for the sake of anything
other than what God loves most.
These three are defects of relegation.

‫‪455‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫ير يد أن صاحب هذه الدرجة متى قطع الأسباب والطلب وتعدى تلك الدرجتين‪ ،‬فتوكله فوق‬
‫توكل من قبله‪ ،‬وهو إنما يكون بعد معرفته بحقيقة التوكل‪] ،‬وأنه دون مقامه‪ ،‬فتكون معرفته به‬
‫و بحقيقته نازعة ً—أي باعثة ً وداعية ً—إلى تخلصه من علة التوكل[‪ ،‬أي لا يعرف علة التوكل حتى‬
‫يعرف حقيقته‪ ،‬فحينئذ يعرف التوكل المعرفة التي تدعوه إلى التخلص من علته‪.‬‬
‫ثم بين المعرفة التي يعلم بها علة التوكل‪ ،‬فقال‪» :‬أن يعلم أن ملـكة الحق للأشياء ملـكة عزة«‪ .‬أي‬
‫ملـكة امتناع وقوة وقهر‪ ،‬يمنع أن يشاركه في ملـكه لشيء من الأشياء مشارك‪] ،‬فهو العز يز في ملـكه‬
‫الذي لا يشاركه غيره في ذرة منه‪ ،‬كما هو المنفرد بعزته التي لا يشاركه فيها مشارك[‪.‬‬
‫فالمتوكل يرى أن له شيئا ً قد وكل الحق فيه‪ ،‬وأنه سبحانه صار وكيله عليه‪ ،‬وهذا مخالف لحقيقة‬
‫الأمر‪ .‬إذ ليس لأحد من الأمر مع الل ّٰه شيء‪ ،‬فلهذا قال‪» :‬لا يشاركه فيه مشارك‪ ،‬فيكل شركته‬
‫إليه«‪ .‬فلسان الحال يقول لمن جعل الرب تعالى وكيله في ماذا وكلت ر بك‪ ،‬أفيما هو له وحده؟ أو لك‬
‫وحدك؟ أو بينكما؟ فالثاني والثالث ممتنع بتفرده بالملك وحده والتوكيل في الأول ممتنع‪ ،‬فكيف توكله‬
‫فيما ليس لك منه شيء البتة؟‬
‫فيقال هاهنا أمران‪ :‬توكل وتوكيل‪ .‬فالتوكل محض الاعتماد والثقة والسكون إلى من له الأمر كله‪،‬‬
‫وعلم العبد بتفرد الحق تعالى بملك الأشياء كلها‪ .‬وأنه ليس له مشارك في ذرة من ذرات الـكون من‬
‫أقوى أسباب توكله وأعظم دواعيه‪.‬‬
‫فإذا تحقق ذلك علما ًومعرفة ً و باشر قلبه حالا ًلم يجد بدا ً من اعتماد قلبه على الحق وحده‪ ،‬وثقته‬
‫به وسكونه إليه وحده وطمأنينته به وحده‪ ،‬لعلمه أن حاجاته وفاقاته وضروراته وجميع مصالحه بيديه‬
‫وحده لا بيد غيره‪ .‬فأ ين يجد قلبه مناصا ًمن التوكل بعد هذا؟‬
‫فعلة التوكل حينئذ التفات قلبه إلى من ليس له شركة في ملك الحق‪ ،‬ولا يملك مثقال ذرة في‬
‫السماوات ولا في الأرض‪ .‬هذه علة توكله فهو يعمل على خلاص توكله من هذه العلة‪.‬‬
‫نعم‪ ،‬ومن علة أخرى‪ ،‬وهي رؤ ية توكله‪ ،‬فإنه التفات إلى عوالم نفسه‪ .‬وعلة ثالثة‪ ،‬وهي صرفه قوة‬
‫توكله إلى شيء غيره أحب إلى الل ّٰه منه‪ .‬فهذه العلل الثلاث هي علل التوكيل‪.‬‬

456

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Reliance, however, is not merely relegation, even though that is among the
choicest stations of the knowers, as the Prophet of God, God grant him blessing
and peace, would say, “O God, I surrender my self to You and relegate my affairs
to You.”
The Almighty said, reporting the words of the believer among the people of
Pharaoh: “And I relegate my matter to God—He truly is watchful over [His] servants” [40:44]. His reward for this relegation was, “So God protected Him from
the evil of what they plotted” [40:45]. Had reliance been compromised by what
he mentioned, then relegation too would have been compromised, and if not,
then [reliance too] is not [made defective by relegating one’s affairs to God,
contrary to al-Harawī’s claim].
Had it not been that the truth is solely for God and His Messenger, and the
claims of all other than God and His Messenger can be accepted and rejected
[insofar as they accord with the truth,] for they are all prone to being false and
erroneous, we would not object to those [like al-Harawī] whose dust we do not
attain, nor are we in the same league as them, and we see them as far above us
in stations of faith and ranks of the seekers as the stars we see shining in the
sky. If someone has knowledge of this, let him guide us to it, and whoever sees
in our opinion prejudice or error, let him direct us to what is right; we would be
grateful and accept it earnestly and submit. And God is the source of all success.

‫‪457‬‬

‫‪chapter 27‬‬

‫وأما التوكل فليس المراد منه إلا مجرد التفو يض‪ ،‬وهو من أخص مقامات العارفين كما كان النبي‬
‫ﷺ يقول‪» :‬اللهم إني أسلمت نفسي إليك‪ ،‬وفوضت أمري إليك«‪.‬‬
‫صير ٌ باِ ل ْعبِ َادِ﴾ ]غافر‪.[44:‬‬
‫ن ال َل ّـه َ ب َ ِ‬
‫ض َأْمر ِي ِإل َى ال َل ّـه ِ ۚ ِإ َ ّ‬
‫وقال تعالى عن مؤمن آل فرعون‪﴿ :‬و َُأفوَ ِ ّ ُ‬
‫ت م َا م َكرَ ُوا﴾ ]غافر‪ .[45:‬فإن كان التوكل معلولا ً‬
‫سي ِّئ َا ِ‬
‫فكان جزاء هذا التفو يض قوله‪﴿ :‬فوَ قَ َاه ُ ال َل ّـه ُ َ‬
‫بما ذكره‪ ،‬فالتفو يض أيضا ًكذلك‪ ،‬وإن ليس فليس‪.‬‬
‫ولولا أن الحق لل ّٰه ورسوله وأن كل ما عدا الل ّٰه ورسوله فمأخوذ من قوله ومتروك‪ ،‬وهو عرضة‬
‫الوهم والخطأ‪ ،‬لما اعترضنا على من لا نلحق غبارهم ولا نجري معهم في مضمارهم‪ ،‬ونراهم فوقنا في‬
‫مقامات الإ يمان ومنازل السا ئر ين كالنجوم الدراري‪ .‬ومن كان عنده علم فليرشد إليه‪ ،‬ومن رأى في‬
‫كلامنا ز يغا ًوخطأ ً فليهد إلينا الصواب‪ .‬نشكر له سعيه ونقابله بالقبول والإذعان والانقياد والتسليم‪،‬‬
‫والل ّٰه الموفق‪.‬‬

chapter 28

The Station of Relegation
Among the stations of “You we worship and You alone we seek for help” is the
station of relegation.
The author of al-Manāzil said,
It has a subtler allusion and wider meaning than trusting reliance, for
reliance occurs after the means [to the given end] has been established
whereas relegation is before as well as after; it is the essence of surrender,
whereas reliance is one of its parts.
He means that the one relegating his affairs disavows any claim to power or control, not appointing someone in his place in his interests, in contrast to reliance,
which connotes that the one relied on stands in the place of the one relying.
Relegation is disavowal and separation from all control and surrendering of all
matters to the master.
It would be said in response that reliance too is like that. What you found
objectionable in reliance in fact applies to relegation just the same. How can
you relegate anything that you do not own to begin with to anyone? Would it
make sense to say that an ordinary subject has handed the dominion to the king
of his time?
The defect in relegation would be even greater than that in reliance. In fact, if
one were to say that reliance is above relegation in rank and loftier, one would
be correct, which is why the Qurʾan is filled with commands that urge it and
report it as a trait of the elite and saints of God and the chosen believers. God
has commanded it to the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, at four
occasions in His Book and named him “the reliant one” as in the Ṣaḥīḥ of alBukhārī on the authority of ʿAbdallāh b. ʿAmr, God be pleased with them, who
said, “I read in the Torah the description of the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, as: Muḥammad the Messenger of God whom I have named the
Reliant one, who is neither harsh hearted not foul-mouthed nor a loud-mouth
in the marketplace.”
He has also said concerning His messengers that they were in the state of
reliance, and through it they were given victory over their people, and the
Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, has prophesied about the seventy
thousand who will enter the Garden without reckoning that they will be those
of the station of reliance.

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬التفو يض«‪.‬‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل‪» :‬وهو ألطف إشارة ً وأوسع معنى ً من التوكل‪ ،‬فإن التوكل بعد وقوع السبب‪،‬‬
‫ض قبل وقوعه و بعده‪ ،‬وهو عين الاستسلام‪ ،‬والتوكل شعبة منه«‪.‬‬
‫والتفو ي َ‬
‫يعني أن المفوض يتبرأ من الحول والقوة و يفوض الأمر إلى صاحبه‪ ،‬من غير أن يقيمه مقام نفسه‬
‫في مصالحه‪ .‬بخلاف التوكل‪ ،‬فإن الوكالة تقتضي أن يقوم الوكيل مقام الموكل‪.‬‬
‫فالتفو يض براءة وخروج من الحول والقوة وتسليم الأمر كله إلى مالـكه‪.‬‬
‫فيقال‪ :‬وكذلك التوكل أيضا‪ ً،‬وما قدحتم به في التوكل يرد عليكم نظيره في التفو يض سواء‪ ،‬فإنك‬
‫كيف تفوض شيئا ًلا تملـكه البتة إلى مالـكه؟ وهل يصح أن يفوض واحد من آحاد الرعية الملُك إلى‬
‫ملك زمانه؟‬
‫فالعلة إذن في التفو يض أعظم منها في التوكل‪ ،‬بل لو قال قائل‪ :‬التوكل فوق التفو يض وأجل منه‬
‫وأرفع لكان مصيبا‪ ً.‬ولهذا القرآن مملوء به أمرا ً وإخبارا ً عن خاصة الل ّٰه وأوليائه وصفوة المؤمنين بأن‬
‫حالهم التوكل‪ ،‬وأمر الل ّٰه به رسوله في أر بعة مواضع من كتابه‪ .‬وسماه »المتوكل«‪ ،‬كما في صحيح البخاري‬
‫عن عبد الل ّٰه بن عمرو—رضي الل ّٰه عنهما—قال‪» :‬قرأت في التوراة صفة النبي ﷺ‪ :‬محمد رسول الل ّٰه‪،‬‬
‫سميته المتوكل‪ ،‬ليس بفظ ولا غليظ ولا سخاب في الأسواق«‪.‬‬
‫وأخبر عن رسله بأن حالهم كان التوكل‪ ،‬و به انتصروا على قومهم‪ .‬وأخبر النبي ﷺ عن السبعين‬
‫ألفا ًالذين يدخلون الجنة بغير حساب أنهم أهل مقام التوكل‪.‬‬

460

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

In contrast, relegation has not appeared in the Qurʾan except what He
reported about the believer of the people of Pharaoh, when he said, “I relegate my affairs to God” [40:44] whereas God has indeed commanded it to His
Messenger, God grant him blessing and peace, to take Him as his disposer of
affairs, as in, “The Lord of the east and the west, no god there is but He, take
Him, then, as the disposer of your affairs” [73:9].
This proves wrong the claim of the ignorant among the People who say that
relying on God to dispose your affairs has an element of brazenness toward
the Almighty, for it requires that the disposer stand in the place of the one
appointing him, which is nothing but brazenness. He also said that if God had
not accepted it and recommended it, it would never be licit for the servant to
engage in it.
This is the greatest display of ignorance, for taking Him as the disposer is the
essence of all worship or servitude, pure monotheism.
God honor the master of the people [of Sufism] and shaykh of the group,
Sahl b. ʿAbdullāh al-Tustarī, when he said, “Knowledge, all of it, is a part of worship; and worship, all of it, is a part of fearing sin; and fearing sin, all of it, is part
of avoiding excess; and avoiding excess, all of it, is a part of trusting reliance.”
We hold, therefore, that trusting reliance is a station more encompassing,
lofty, and elevated than relegation.
Now to his words, “reliance occurs after the occurrence of the means
whereas relegation occurs before and after.” He means by “means” the acquisition of the act. The one who relegates does so before he acquires the act and
afterward, whereas the reliant one first takes measure to acquire the means and
then relies in its success upon God, which makes relegation more encompassing.
It should be noted in response, however, that reliance may be before the
acquisition of the means, during it, and after it. One relies on God to enact the
means by which he attains his goal, and when he completes it, he relies in God
to attain its fruit. This is why this station is more encompassing than relegation,
as mentioned earlier.
His statement that “it is the essence of surrender” means that relegating is
the essence of total submission to the Almighty Truth, and he cares not whether
what is decided for him is good for him or its opposite, whereas the one who
trustingly relies on God does do for his benefits.
This is what the [Sufis] have observed in order to debase the station of
reliance and raise the level of relegation. Its response can be given in two ways.
First, the one who relegates does not do so except with the intention that
what God will decide for him will be good for him in this life and the afterlife.
And, if it was decreed against what he thought, he is content with it, for he

‫‪461‬‬

‫‪chapter 28‬‬

‫ض َأْمر ِي ِإل َى‬
‫ولم يجيء التفو يض في القرآن إلا فيما حكاه عن مؤمن آل فرعون من قوله‪﴿ :‬و َُأفوَ ِ ّ ُ‬
‫ب ل َا ِإل َٰه َ‬
‫ق و َال ْم َغْرِ ِ‬
‫ب ال ْم َش ْر ِ ِ‬
‫ال َل ّـه ِ﴾ ]غافر‪ .[44:‬وقد أمر الل ّٰه رسوله ﷺ بأن يتخذه وكيلا‪ ً،‬فقال‪َ ﴿ :‬رّ ُ ّ‬
‫ِإ َلّا ه ُو َ ف َاَّتخ ِْذه ُ و َكيِ ل ًا﴾ ]المزمل‪.[9:‬‬
‫وهذا يبطل قول من قال من جهلة القوم إن توكيل الرب فيه جسارة على الباري‪ ،‬لأن التوكل‬
‫يقتضي إقامة الوكيل مقام الموكل‪ ،‬وذلك عين الجسارة‪.‬‬
‫قال‪ :‬ولولا أن الل ّٰه أباح ذلك وندب إليه لما جاز للعبد تعاطيه‪ .‬وهذا من أعظم الجهل‪ .‬فإن اتخاذه‬
‫وكيل ًا هو محض العبودية وخالص التوحيد إذا قام به صاحب الحقيقة‪.‬‬
‫ولل ّٰه در سيد القوم وشيخ الطائفة سهل بن عبد الل ّٰه التستري إذ يقول‪ :‬العلم كله باب من التعبد‪،‬‬
‫والتعبد كله باب من الورع‪ ،‬والورع كله باب من الزهد‪ ،‬والزهد كله باب من التوكل‪ .‬فالذي نذهب‬
‫إليه أن التوكل أوسع من التفو يض وأعلى وأرفع‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬فإن التوكل بعد وقوع السبب‪ ،‬والتفو يض قبل وقوعه و بعده«‪.‬‬
‫يعني بالسبب الاكتساب‪ .‬فالمفوض قد فوض أمره قبل اكتسابه و بعد اكتسابه‪ ،‬والمتوكل قد‬
‫قام بالسبب وتوكل فيه على الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فصار التفو يض أوسع‪.‬‬
‫فيقال‪ :‬والتوكل قد يكون قبل السبب ومعه و بعده‪ ،‬فيتوكل على الل ّٰه أن يقيمه في سبب يوصله إلى‬
‫مطلو به‪ ،‬فإذا أتمه توكل على الل ّٰه في حصول ثمرته‪ ،‬فيتوكل على الل ّٰه قبله ومعه و بعده‪.‬‬
‫فعلى هذا هو أوسع من التفو يض على ما ذكر‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬وهو عين الاستسلام«‪ ،‬أي التفو يض عين الانقياد بالكلية إلى الحق سبحانه‪ ،‬ولا يبالي‬
‫أكان ما يقضى له الخـير أم خلافه؟ والمتوكل يتوكل على الل ّٰه في مصالحه‪.‬‬
‫وهذا القدر هو الذي لحظه القوم في هضم مقام التوكل‪ ،‬ورفع مقام التفو يض عليه‪ ،‬وجوابه من‬
‫وجهين‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬أن المفوض لا يفوض أمره إلى الل ّٰه إلا لإرادته أن يقضي له ما هو خير له في معاشه‬
‫ومعاده‪ ،‬وإن كان المقضي له خلاف ما يظنه خيرا ً‪ ،‬فهو راض به‪ ،‬لأنه يعلم أنه خير له‪ ،‬وإن خفيت‬

462
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
knows that it is good for him even if its benefit is hidden from him. The same is
true of the reliant one, but better, for he has the works of the heart that the one
who relegates does not. For the reliant one not only relegates but does more,
for the station of reliance cannot be enacted except with relegation, and when
he relegates his affair to Him he trusts with all his heart after having relegated
it. An illustration of this is that if one relegates his matter to a man he finds in
his self afterward a certain trust, tranquility, and serenity toward the one he has
relegated his affair to, even more than he did before the relegation. This is the
essence of reliance.
A second aspect of this is that the highest interest of the reliant one is to
attain the pleasure and love of his beloved, so he relies on Him in attaining
this end—what interest can be greater than that! In relegation, the servant relegates his daily needs and their means to God without relegating his pursuit of
His love to Him that the reliant one does.
The fancy that entered into this matter is when one thinks that reliance is
limited to the attainment of daily sustenance and physical health, and this concept is doubtless deficient compared to the reliance in the establishment of the
religion and calling to it.
He said,
It has three levels. The first is to know that the servant owns no capacity
before the action, nor is safe from any plot, nor despairs in succor, nor
depends on [his] intention.
That is, he realizes that capacity is in God’s hand, not his, and if He as the
sole owner of it does not grant it to him he is powerless, he cannot move
except through God, let alone stave off His plan against him, which is that He
does not permit him to move but rather prevents him and leaves him sitting
among those who sit back, as He said, “But God loathed their going out [for
battle] so He prevented them and said to them, sit with those who sit back”
[9:46].
This is the scourge of God against the servant, namely, to prevent the grant
of success and leave him to himself, instead of inciting his inner drive to move
toward His pleasure and love. This is not his right so He is not unjust for preventing it, but rather it is pure grace for which, if He grants it, He is praised, as
He is for His prevention of grace.
Whoever understands this understands a great secret of predestination and
many confusions are resolved for him. When the Almighty does not wish from
a servant an act that will please Him, He prevents him from it, which is [the
prevention of] success.

‫‪463‬‬

‫‪chapter 28‬‬

‫عليه جهة المصلحة فيه‪ ،‬وهكذا حال المتوكل سواء‪ ،‬بل أرفع من المفوض‪ ،‬لأن معه من عمل القلب ما‬
‫ليس مع المفوض‪ .‬فالمتوكل مفوض وز يادة‪ ،‬فلا يستقيم مقام التوكل إلا بالتفو يض‪ ،‬فإنه إذا فوض‬
‫أمره إليه اعتمد بقلبهكله عليه بعد تفو يضه‪.‬‬
‫ونظير هذا أن من فوض أمره إلى رجل وجعله إليه‪ ،‬فإنه يجد من نفسه—بعد تفو يضه—اعتمادا ً‬
‫خاصا ًوسكونا ًوطمأنينة ً إلى المفوض إليه أكثر مما كان قبل التفو يض‪ ،‬وهذا هو حقيقة التوكل‪.‬‬
‫الوجه الثاني‪ :‬أن أهم مصالح المتوكل حصول مراضي محبو به ومحابه‪ ،‬فهو يتوكل عليه في تحصيلها‬
‫له‪ ،‬فأي مصلحة أعظم من هذه؟‬
‫وأما التفو يض فهو تفو يض حاجات العبد المعيشية وأسبابها إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فإنه لا يفوض إليه محابه‪،‬‬
‫والمتوكل يتوكل في محابه‪.‬‬
‫والوهم إنما دخل حيث يظن الظان أن التوكل مقصور على معلوم الرزق وقوة البدن وصحة الجسم‪،‬‬
‫ولا ر يب أن هذا التوكل ناقص بالنسبة إلى التوكل في إقامة الدين والدعوة إلى الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ ،‬الأولى‪ :‬أن يعلم أن العبد لا يملك قبل عمله استطاعة‪ ،‬فلا يأمن‬
‫من مكر ولا ييأس من معونة ولا يعول على نية«‪.‬‬
‫أي يتحقق أن استطاعته بيد الل ّٰه لا بيده‪ ،‬فهو مالـكها دونه‪ .‬فإن لم يعطه الاستطاعة فهو عاجز‪ ،‬فهو‬
‫لا يتحرك إلا بالل ّٰه لا بنفسه‪ ،‬فكيف يأمن المكر‪ ،‬وهو ألا يحركه من حركته بيده‪ ،‬بل يثبطه و يقعده‬
‫ل اق ْع ُد ُوا م ََع‬
‫كن كرَ ِه َ ال َل ّـه ُ انبعِ َاثَه ُْم ف َث ََب ّطَه ُْم و َقيِ َ‬
‫مع القاعدين‪ ،‬كما قال فيمن منعه هذا التوفيق‪﴿ :‬و َل َٰ ِ‬
‫ن﴾ ]التو بة‪.[46:‬‬
‫ال ْق َاع ِدِي َ‬
‫فهذا مكر الل ّٰه بالعبد أن يقطع عنه مواد توفيقه و يخلي بينه و بين نفسه‪ ،‬ولا يبعث دواعيه ولا يحركه‬
‫إلى مرضاته ومحابه‪ ،‬وليس هذا حقا ًعليه يكون ظالما ًبمنعه‪ ،‬بل هو مجرد فضله الذي يحمده على بذله‬
‫لمن بذله‪ ،‬وعلى منعه لمن منعه إ ياه‪ ،‬فله الحمد على هذا وهذا‪ .‬ومن فهم هذا فهم بابا ً عظيما ً من سر‬
‫القدر‪ ،‬وانجلت له إشكالات كثيرة‪ .‬فهو سبحانه لا ير يد من نفسه فعلا يً فعله بعبده يقع منه ما يحبه‬
‫و يرضاه‪ ،‬فيمنعه فعل نفسه به‪ ،‬وهو توفيقه لا أنه يكرهه و يقهره على فعل مساخطه‪ ،‬بل يكله إلى نفسه‬
‫وحوله وقوته و يتخلى عنه‪ .‬فهذا هو المكر‪.‬‬

464

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

His saying, “nor does he despair in succor” means that if the mover is the Lord
Almighty, the Omnipotent, the sole provider and most merciful, how could his
help be not forthcoming?
His words “nor depends on [his] intention” mean that he does not recline on
and trust his intention and resolve, for they are in God’s hand not his.

1

Second Level

He said,
The second level is the observation of compulsion, so that he does not see
his action as salvatory nor sin destructive nor any causation.
That is, he observes his poverty, destitution, and total dependence on God, and
his salvation is by God not his own works. If by “nor sin destructive” he meant
that his destruction is caused by God not his own sin, then this is false, against
which God’s protection is sought. If he meant that the grace of God and expanse
of His forgiveness and mercy, and the experience of his utter need, leads him
to not see any sin as destructive, and this prevents him from plunging into even
more destructive sins. If this is what is meant, it would be correct and accord
with the experience of the knowers. His words “nor causation” mean that he
witnesses that what carries him is God not the means of his own, for both him
and they are carried by God alone.

2

Third Level

He said,
The third level is the witnessing of the Truth’s total possession of all movement and stillness, expansion and contraction, and his knowledge of separation and union.
This level pertains to experientially witnessing the attribute of God whereas
the one before it pertained to the state of the servant, namely, he witnesses all
movements and stillness in the world issuing from God Almighty in all things;
he thus witnesses the movement to His name “the One who Expands” and every
stillness to His name “the One who Withholds” and sees the exclusive power
of Almighty on expansion and contraction. As for “his knowledge of separa-

‫‪465‬‬

‫‪chapter 28‬‬

‫قوله‪» :‬ولا ييأس من معونة« يعني إذا كان المحرك له هو الرب جل جلاله‪ ،‬وهو أقدر القادر ين‪،‬‬
‫وهو الذي تفرد بخلقه ورزقه‪ ،‬وهو أرحم الراحمين‪ ،‬فكيف ييأس من معونته له؟ قوله‪» :‬ولا يعول‬
‫على نية«‪ ،‬أي لا يعتمد على نيته وعزمه‪ ،‬و يثق بها‪ .‬فإن نيته وعزمه بيد الل ّٰه لا بيده‪ ،‬وهي إلى الل ّٰه لا‬
‫إليه‪ ،‬فلتكن ثقته بمن هي في يده حقا ًلا بمن هي جار ية عليه حكما‪ً.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬معاينة الاضطرار‪ .‬فلا يرى عملا ً منجيا‪ ً،‬ولا ذنبا ً مهلكا‪ ً،‬ولا سببا ً حاملا ً«‪،‬‬
‫أي يعا ين فقره وفاقته وضرورته التامة إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬بحيث يرى في كل ذرة من ذراته الباطنة والظاهرة‬
‫ضرورة ً وفاقة ً تامة ً إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فنجاته إنما هي بالل ّٰه لا بعمله‪.‬‬
‫وأما قوله‪» :‬ولا ذنبا ً مهلكا ً«‪ ،‬فإن أراد به أن هلاكه بالل ّٰه لا بسبب ذنو به فباطل‪ ،‬معاذ الل ّٰه من‬
‫ذلك‪ ،‬وإن أراد به أن فضل الل ّٰه وسعة مغفرته ورحمته ومشاهدة شدة ضرورته وفاقته إليه يوجب‬
‫له ألا يرى ذنبا ً مهلكا‪ ً،‬فإن افتقاره وفاقته وضرورته يمنعه من الهلاك بذنو به‪ ،‬بل تمنعه من اقتحام‬
‫الذنوب المهلـكة‪ .‬إذ صاحب هذا المقام لا يصر على ذنوب تهلـكه‪ ،‬وهذا حاله فهذا حق‪ ،‬وهو من‬
‫مشاهد أهل المعرفة‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬ولا سببا ًحاملا ً«‪ ،‬أي يشهد أن الحامل له هو الحق تعالى‪ ،‬لا الأسباب التي يقوم بها‪ ،‬فإنه‬
‫وإياها محمولان بالل ّٰه وحده‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬شهود انفراد الحق بملك الحركة والسكون‪ ،‬والقبض والبسط‪ ،‬ومعرفته بتصر يف‬
‫التفرقة والجمع«‪.‬‬
‫هذه درجة ٺتعلق بشهود وصف الل ّٰه وشأنه‪ ،‬والتي قبلها ٺتعلق بشهود حال العبد ووصفه‪ ،‬أي يشهد‬
‫حركات العالم وسكونه صادرة عن الحق تعالى في كل متحرك وساكن‪ ،‬فيشهد تعلق الحركة باسمه‬
‫»الباسط«‪ ،‬وتعلق السكون باسمه »القابض«‪ ،‬فيشهد تفرده سبحانه بالبسط والقبض‪.‬‬

466

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

tion and union” it means that he should know the occasions for separation
and union, the meaning of separation being the perspective that attributes
actions to the creation, and the meaning of union being the perspective that
sees actions as issuing from their True Origin. Alternatively, separation and
union could mean something beyond this experience, namely, the state of separation and union. The state of separation is the wandering of the heart in the
vales and ravines of [human] will and the state of union is the concentration
on the will of the Truth alone.

‫‪467‬‬

‫‪chapter 28‬‬

‫وأما »معرفته بتصر يف التفرقة والجمع« أن يكون المشاهد عارفا ً بمواضع التفرقة والجمع‪ .‬والمراد‬
‫بالتفرقة نظر الاعتبار ونسبة الأفعال إلى الخلق‪.‬‬
‫والمراد بالجمع شهود الأفعال منسو بة إلى موجدها الحق‪.‬‬
‫وقد ير يدون بالتفرقة والجمع معنى ً وراء هذا الشهود‪ ،‬وهو حال التفرقة والجمع‪.‬‬
‫فحال التفرقة تفرق القلب في أودية الإرادات وشعابها‪ ،‬وحال الجمع جمعيته على مراد الحق وحده‪.‬‬
‫فالأول علم التفرقة والجمع‪ ،‬والثاني حالهما‪.‬‬

chapter 29

The Station of Trust in God
Among the stations of “You alone we worship and You alone we ask for help” is
the station of trust in God.
The author of al-Manāzil said,
Trust is the black [iris] of the eye of reliance, the center of the circle of
relegation, and the kernel of the heart of surrender.
He opened this chapter with the words of Almighty to the mother of Moses,
“So if you fear for him, throw him into the river and then fear nor grieve” [28:7].
Her act embodied the very essence of trust in God, for had it not been for her
immaculate trust in God she could never have thrown her baby, the apple of
her eye, into the current of the river for the waves to toss him and take him
wherever it goes or stands.
He means that trust is the essence of reliance just as the iris of the eye is
the noblest part of the eye. By it being the center of the circle of relegation
he means it is the axis of reliance. Just as every part of the periphery of a circle stands in the same relationship to the center, facing it, so does relegation
revolve around trust. Similarly, by “the kernel of the heart of surrender” he
means just as the noblest of the heart is its kernel which is responsible for life,
and it is at its center, if relegation were the heart trust would be its kernel, if it
were the eye trust would be its pupil, and if it were a circle trust would be its
center.
As we have discussed earlier, many explain reliance as trust, whereas others
explain it as relegation, and yet others as surrender. As you have learned, however, it is inclusive of all of these. According to the Shaykh, trust is the soul of
reliance, and it is to reliance what excellence is to faith.

1

First Level

He said,
It has three levels. The first is the level of despair, which is the despair of
the servant from fighting the decree, so he may sit back from contesting
the apportionment and purify himself from the brazenness of audacity.

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬الثقة بالل ّٰه«‪.‬‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل‪» :‬الثقة سواد عين التوكل‪ ،‬ونقطة دا ئرة التفو يض‪ ،‬وسو يداء قلب التسليم«‪.‬‬
‫تح ْز َن ِي﴾‬
‫تخ َاف ِي و َل َا َ‬
‫ت ع َل َي ْه ِ ف ََأل ْق ِيه ِ ف ِي اليْ َِم ّ و َل َا َ‬
‫خْف ِ‬
‫وصدر الباب بقوله تعالى لأم موسى‪﴿ :‬ف ِ َإذ َا ِ‬
‫]القصص‪ .[7:‬فإن فعلها هذا هو عين ثقتها بالل ّٰه تعالى‪ ،‬إذ لولا كمال ثقتها بر بها لما ألقت بولدها وفلذة‬
‫كبدها في تيار الماء‪ ،‬ٺتلاعب به أمواجه‪ ،‬وجر يانه إلى حيث ينتهي أو يقف‪.‬‬
‫ومراده أن »الثقة« خلاصة التوكل ولبه‪ ،‬كما أن سواد العين أشرف ما في العين‪.‬‬
‫وأشار بأنه »نقطة دا ئرة التفو يض« إلى أن مدار التوكل عليه وهو في وسطه كحال النقطة من‬
‫الدا ئرة‪ .‬فإن النقطة هي المركز الذي عليه استدارة المحيط‪ ،‬ونسبة جهات المحيط إليها نسبة واحدة‪،‬‬
‫وكل جزء من أجزاء المحيط مقابل لها‪ .‬كذلك »الثقة« هي النقطة التي يدور عليها التفو يض‪.‬‬
‫وكذلك قوله‪» :‬سو يداء قلب التسليم«‪ ،‬فإن القلب أشرف ما فيه سو يداؤه‪ ،‬وهي المهجة التي تكون‬
‫بها الحياة وهي في وسطه‪ ،‬فلو كان التفو يض قلبا لً كانت الثقة سو يداءه‪ ،‬ولو كان عينا لً كانت سوادها‪،‬‬
‫ولو كان دا ئرة ً لكانت نقطتها‪.‬‬
‫وقد تقدم أن كثيرا ًمن الناس يفسر التوكل بالثقة‪ ،‬و يجعله حقيقتها‪ .‬ومنهم من يفسره بالتفو يض‪.‬‬
‫ومنهم من يفسره بالتسليم‪ .‬فعلمت أن مقام التوكل يجمع ذلك كله‪.‬‬
‫فكأن الثقة عند الشيخ هي روح التوكل‪ ،‬والتوكل كالبدن الحامل لها‪ ،‬ونسبتها إلى التوكل كنسبة‬
‫الإحسان إلى الإ يمان‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهي على ثلاث درجات‪ .‬الدرجة الأولى‪ :‬درجة الإ ياس‪ ،‬وهو إ ياس العبد عن مقاومات‬
‫الأحكام‪ ،‬ليقعد عن منازعة الأقسام‪ ،‬ليتخلص من قحة الإقدام«‪.‬‬

470

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

He means that he who trusts in God believing that when God Almighty
issues a decree and decides a matter, there is no averting it, nor repelling His
judgment. Whosoever is judged or apportioned a provision by God or a share
in devotions, state, or knowledge or something else, cannot avert it, and whoever is denied it can find no way to it, just as one cannot fly into the sky or lift up
the mountains. Therefore, he gives up contesting the divine apportionment, for
what is his will come to him despite his weakness and what is not his strength
cannot attain. The difference between fighting the decree and contesting the
apportionment is that the former is to will what is not in God’s decree, and
when he does that, he contests the divine apportionment to creation.
His words, “purify himself from the brazenness of audacity” means that his
trust cures him of the brazenness and impudence to attempt what has not been
judged and apportioned for him.

2

Second Level

He said,
The second level is that of security, which is the security against the servant missing what has been apportioned or losing what has been written,
thus he earns the spirit of contentment, if not, the essence of certitude,
and if not, the subtlety of patience.
He says that whoever has attained the said despair attains security and peace,
for whoever attains the experiential knowledge of God and that whatever God
has decreed cannot be repelled is safe from feeling that he missed his portion,
as well as from the decrease that God has written for him and has inscribed it in
His Book. He thus attains the spirit of contentment, comfort, delight, and blessing. As in the Hadith of ʿAbdallāh b. Masʿūd on the authority of the Prophet,
God grant him blessing and peace,
God by his justice and fairness has made comfort and delight in certitude
and contentment and anxiety and grief in doubt and anger.1
If the servant cannot attain the spirit of contentment, he may attain the essence
of certitude, which is the power of faith and its presence in the heart, such that
nothing remains between him and the object of his belief except unveiling.
1 Ṭabarānī, al-Kabīr, #10,514; graded as weak.

‫‪471‬‬

‫‪chapter 29‬‬

‫يعني أن الواثق بالل ّٰه—لاعتقاده أن الل ّٰه تعالى إذا حكم بحكم وقضى أمرا ًفلا مرد لقضائه ولا معقب‬
‫لحكمه‪ .‬فمن حكم الل ّٰه له بحكم وقسم له بنصيب من الرزق أو الطاعة أو الحال أو العلم أو غيره‪ ،‬فلا بد‬
‫من حصوله له‪ .‬ومن لم يقسم له ذلك فلا سبيل له إليه البتة‪ ،‬كما لا سبيل له إلى الطيران إلى السماء‬
‫وحمل الجبال‪ .‬فبهذا القدر يقعد عن منازعة الأقسام‪ .‬فما كان له منها فسوف يأتيه على ضعفه‪ ،‬وما لم‬
‫يكن له منها فلن يناله بقوته‪.‬‬
‫والفرق بين »مقاومة الأحكام« و »منازعة الأقسام« أن مقاومة الأحكام أن ٺتعلق إرادته بغير‬
‫ما في حكم الل ّٰه وقضائه‪ .‬فإذا تعلقت إرادته بذلك جاذب الخلق الأقسام ونازعهم فيها‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬يتخلص من قحة الإقدام« أي يتخلص بالثقة بالل ّٰه من هذه القحة والجراءة على إقدامه على‬
‫ما لم يحكم له به ولا قسم له‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية درجة الأمن‪ .‬وهو أمن العبد من فوت المقدور‪ ،‬وانتقاض المسطور‪ ،‬فيظفر‬
‫بروح الرضى‪ ،‬وإلا فبعين اليقين‪ ،‬وإلا فبلطف الصبر«‪.‬‬
‫يقول‪ :‬من حصل له الإ ياس المذكور حصل له الأمن‪ ،‬وذلك أن من تحقق بمعرفة الل ّٰه وأن ما قضاه‬
‫الل ّٰه فلا مرد له البتة‪ ،‬أمن من فوت نصيبه الذي قسمه الل ّٰه له‪ ،‬و يأمن أيضا ًمن نقصان ما كتبه الل ّٰه‬
‫له وسطره في الكتاب المسطور‪ ،‬فيظفر بروح الرضى‪ ،‬أي براحته ولذته ونعيمه‪ ،‬لأن صاحب الرضى‬
‫في راحة ولذة وسرور‪ ،‬كما في حديث عبد الل ّٰه بن مسعود—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—عن النبي ﷺ‪» :‬إن الل ّٰه‬
‫بعدله وقسطه جعل الروح والفرح في اليقين والرضى‪ ،‬وجعل الهم والحزن في الشك والسخط «‪.‬‬
‫فإن لم يقدر العبد على »روح الرضى« ظفر »بعين اليقين«‪ ،‬وهو قوة الإ يمان ومباشرته للقلب‪،‬‬
‫بحيث لا يبقى بينه و بين العيان إلا كشف الحجاب المانع من مكافحة البصر‪.‬‬

472

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

If he cannot attain this station, he attains the bounty of patience and its fruit,
as it says in the a well-known report, “If you can work for God contentedly with
certitude, do so, and if not, there is much good in perseverance despite your
dislike.”

3

Third Level

He said,
The third level is the experience of eternity to become free of the trials
of objectives, burdens of protection, and diversion to the intermediate
ranks.
By “experience of eternity” he means that when the heart exclusively experiences the Almighty Lord’s eternity, he ceases any demand, due to his certainty
that the Lord Almighty has destined since eternity and the decree is established. He thus frees himself from the tribulations that come in pursuit of
means and ceases to be diverted and distracted by the means and devotes himself to the end.
This statement should be qualified, however, for means are of two kinds:
those means that take one to the essence of contentment, and to attend to them
and their high ranks, their knowledge, experience, and quest, is the essence of
worship or servitude. Still, he must not make these means the end.
As for “becoming free of burdens of protection,” it means free from asking
what God has kept from one by way of predestination, and so he has no burden of seeking what is not written for him. Another possibility is that through
his view of the predestination since eternity he rids himself of the burdens of
trying to protect himself from suffering, knowing that what has been written
is useless to seek protection from. The only thing he seeks protection from is
what is prohibited and whatever has no benefit in his quest.

‫‪473‬‬

‫‪chapter 29‬‬

‫فإن لم يحصل له هذا المقام حصل على »لطف الصبر« وما فيه من حسن العاقبة‪ ،‬كما في الأ ثر‬
‫المعروف‪» :‬إن استطعت أن تعمل لل ّٰه بالرضى مع اليقين فافعل‪ ،‬فإن لم تستطع فإن للصبر على ما تكره‬
‫خيرا ً كثيرا ً«‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬معاينة أزلية الحق‪ .‬ليتخلص من محن القصود وتكاليف الحمايات‪ ،‬والتعريج على‬
‫مدارج الوسائل«‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬معاينة أزلية الحق«‪ ،‬أي متى شهد قلبه تفرد الرب سبحانه وتعالى بالأزلية‪ ،‬غاب بها عن‬
‫الطلب لتيقنه فراغ الرب تعالى من المقادير‪ ،‬وسبق الأزل بها وثبوت حكمها هناك‪ .‬فيتخلص من المحن‬
‫التي تعرض له دون المقصود‪ ،‬و يتخلص أيضا ًمن تعر يجه والتفاته‪ ،‬وحبس مطيته على طرق الأسباب‬
‫التي يتوسل بها إلى المطالب‪.‬‬
‫وهذا ليس على إطلاقه‪ .‬فإن مدارج الوسائل قسمان‪ :‬وسائل موصلة إلى عين الرضى‪ ،‬فالتعريج‬
‫على مدارجها—معرفة ً وعملا ً وحالا ً وإيثارا ً—هو محض العبودية‪ ،‬ولـكن لا يجعل تعر يجهكله على‬
‫مدارجها بحيث ينسى بها الغاية التي هي وسائل إليها‪.‬‬
‫وأما »تخلصه من تكاليف الحمايات« فهو تخلصه من طلب ما حماه الل ّٰه تعالى عنه قدرا ً‪ ،‬فلا يتكلف‬
‫طلبه وقد حمي عنه‪.‬‬
‫ووجه آخر‪ ،‬وهو أن يتخلص بمشاهدة سبق الأزلية من تكاليف احترازاته‪ ،‬وشدة احتمائه من‬
‫المكاره‪ ،‬لعلمه بسبق الأزل بما كتب له منها‪ ،‬فلا فائدة في تكلف الاحتماء‪ .‬نعم يحتمي مما نهى عنه‪،‬‬
‫وما لا ينفعه في طر يقه‪ ،‬ولا يعينه على الوصول‪.‬‬

chapter 30

The Station of Submission
Among the stations of “You alone we worship and You alone we ask for help” is
the station of surrender.
Submission is of two types: submission to His religious, normative decree,
and submission to His existential predestined decree.
As for the first, it is the submission of the knowers and believers, as the
Almighty said,
But nay, by thy Lord, they will not believe until they make thee judge of
what is in dispute between them and find within themselves no dislike of
that which you decide, and submit with full submission. [4:65]
This has three stages: first, accepting the arbitration [of the Prophet]; second, the expansion of the heart by removing any hesitation; and submission.
Submission to the existential decree is an occasion of many pitfalls and misunderstandings that has confounded many and engendered much animosity,
as it is the question of contentment with divine decree; it has been discussed
sufficiently already, and we have explained that submission to the decree is
praiseworthy only if the servant is not commanded to fight and repel it such
as [in submitting to decreed] calamities that one has no capacity to repel. As
for repelling the decrees that one is commanded to repel, it is never permission to submit to them. Servitude, instead, comprises repelling those by means
of other decrees that are dearer to God.

1

The Defects of Submission

The author of al-Manāzil said,
Submission, trust, and relegation have the same hidden defects as does
reliance, and it is the highest of the stations of the commoners.
He means that the defects that are involved in the station of trusting reliance,
namely, the claim [to be in possession of power or ownership of something],
attribution of something to himself to begin with, in regard to which he claims

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪» :‬التسليم«‪.‬‬
‫وهي نوعان‪ :‬تسليم لحكمه الديني الأمري‪ ،‬وتسليم لحكمه الـكوني القدري‪.‬‬
‫يح َكِّموُ ك َ فيِ م َا َشجرَ َ‬
‫ح َت ّى ُ‬
‫ك ل َا يؤُ ْم ِنوُ نَ َ‬
‫فأما الأول‪ :‬فهو تسليم المؤمنين العارفين‪ .‬قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬ف َل َا و َر َب ِّ َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ت و َي ُس َل ِ ّموُ ا ت َْسل ِيم ًا﴾ ]النساء‪.[65:‬‬
‫ضي ْ َ‬
‫يج ِد ُوا ف ِي َأنف ُس ِه ِْم ح َر َج ًا م َِّم ّا ق َ َ‬
‫ب َي ْن َه ُْم ث ُ َم ّ ل َا َ‬
‫فهذه ثلاث مراتب‪ :‬التحكيم‪ ،‬وسعة الصدر بانتفاء الحرج‪ ،‬والتسليم‪.‬‬
‫وأما التسليم للحكم الـكوني فمزلة أقدام ومضلة أفهام‪ ،‬حير الأنام وأوقع الخصام‪ ،‬وهي مسألة الرضى‬
‫بالقضاء‪ ،‬وقد تقدم الكلام عليها بما فيهكفاية ً‪ ،‬و بينا أن التسليم للقضاء يحمد إذا لم يؤمر العبد بمنازعته‬
‫ودفعه‪ ،‬ولم يقدر على ذلك‪ ،‬كالمصائب التي لا قدرة له على دفعها‪.‬‬
‫وأما دفع الأحكام التي أمر بدفعها فلا يجوز له التسليم إليها‪ ،‬بل العبودية مدافعتها بأحكام أخر‬
‫أحب إلى الل ّٰه منها‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل‪» :‬وفي التسليم والثقة والتفو يض ما في التوكل من العلل‪ ،‬وهو من أعلى درجات‬
‫سبل العامة«‪.‬‬
‫يعني أن العلل التي في »التوكل« من معاني الدعوى‪ ،‬ونسبته الشيء إلى نفسه أولا ًحيث يزعم أنه‬

476

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

that he is reliant on God, for which he makes God his agent to attain his benefits that he used to procure for himself, and other such defects that have been
mentioned as you now know.
Submission, in fact, has only one defect, which is that his submission does
not issue from a place of pure joyful contentment and choice, but there is a
hint of coercion and displeasure, and this is the real defect of submission, so
do your best to eliminate it.
In his view, it is only for the commoners, for the elite are immersed in annihilation in the essence of union, as for him annihilation is immersion in union,
which has led to what it has. We seek God’s help.
He said,
It has three levels. First, submission of notions of reason to what it finds
difficult from the unseen, paying heed to what strains analogy from the
circulation of power and fortune, and responding to what scares the
seeker of the experience of the states.
Know that submission is purification from the doubt that opposes revelation,
desire that opposes command, will that opposes exclusive devotion, and objection that opposes divine decree or the Law. He who has this purification possesses the sound heart that guarantees salvation before God. For submission
is the opposite of contention, and contention is a corrupt doubt that opposes
faith in a report concerning how God has described Himself in respect of
His attributes and acts or concerning the Last Day and the like. Submitting
to that means giving up the false contentions of the Kalam theologians. It is
also the opposite of passion that opposes God’s command, and submitting to
divine command is to eliminate it. Also, it means purification of the will that
opposes God’s desire from His servant. Finally, an objection that opposes His
wisdom in His creation and command such that he thinks that wisdom requires
something other than what God has commanded in the Law and against what
He has decreed existentially. Submission is to rid oneself of all these contentions.
This shows that it is the noblest station of faith and the loftiest paths of the
elite, for submission is pure ṣiddīqiyya,1 which is the rank next to prophethood,
and the most perfect of men in submission are most perfect in ṣiddīqiyya.
Let us return to explaining the words of the Shaykh.

1 Ṣiddīqiyya, that is, being ṣiddīq, the attribute of being utterly devoted to the truth, and the
title given by the Prophet to his closest companion, Abū Bakr.

‫‪477‬‬

‫‪chapter 30‬‬

‫وكل ر به فيه وتوكل عليه فيه وجعله وكيله القائم عنه بمصالحه التي كان يحصلها لنفسه بالأسباب‬
‫والتصرفات وغير ذلك من العلل المتقدمة‪ .‬وقد عرفت ما في ذلك‪.‬‬
‫وليس في التسليم إلا علة ًواحدة ً‪ ،‬وهي ألا يكون تسليمه صادرا ًعن محض الرضى والاختيار‪ ،‬بل‬
‫يشو بهكره وانقباض‪ ،‬فيسلم على نوع إغماض‪ ،‬فهذه علة التسليم المؤثرة‪ ،‬فاجتهد في الخلاص منها‪.‬‬
‫وإنما كان للعامة عنده‪ ،‬لأن الخاصة في شغل عنه باستغراقهم في الفناء في عين الجمع‪ .‬وجعل الفناء‬
‫غاية الاستغراق في عين الجمع هو الذي أوجب ما أوجب‪ .‬والل ّٰه المستعان‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ :‬الدرجة الأولى تسليم ما يزاحم العقول مما سبق على الأوهام من‬
‫الغيب‪ ،‬والإذعان لما يغالب القياس من سير الدول والقسم‪ ،‬والإجابة لما يفزع المر يد من ركوب‬
‫الأحوال«‪.‬‬
‫اعلم أن »التسليم« هو الخلاص من شبهة تعارض الخـبر أو شهوة تعارض الأمر أو إرادة تعارض‬
‫الإخلاص أو اعتراض يعارض القدر والشرع‪ .‬صاحب هذا التخلص هو صاحب القلب السليم الذي‬
‫لا ينجو إلا من أتى الل ّٰه به‪ .‬فإن التسليم ضد المنازعة‪.‬‬
‫والمنازعة إما بشبهة فاسدة تعارض الإ يمان بالخـبر عما وصف الل ّٰه به نفسه من صفاته وأفعاله‪ ،‬وما‬
‫أخبر به عن اليوم الآخر‪ .‬وغير ذلك فالتسليم له ترك منازعته بشبهات المتكلمين الباطلة‪.‬‬
‫وإما بشهوة تعارض أمر الل ّٰه عز وجل‪ ،‬فالتسليم للأمر بالتخلص منها‪ .‬أو إرادة تعارض مراد الل ّٰه‬
‫من عبده فتعارضه إرادة ٺتعلق بمراد العبد من الرب‪ ،‬فالتسليم بالتخلص منها‪ .‬أو اعتراض يعارض‬
‫حكمته في خلقه وأمره بأن يظن أن مقتضى الحكمة خلاف ما شرع‪ ،‬وخلاف ما قضى وقدر‪ .‬فالتسليم‬
‫التخلص من هذه المنازعات كلها‪.‬‬
‫و بهذا يتبين أنه من أجل مقامات الإ يمان وأعلى طرق الخاصة‪ ،‬وأن التسليم هو محض الصديقية‬
‫التي هي بعد درجة النبوة‪ ،‬وأن أكمل الناس تسليما ًأكملهم صديقية‪.‬‬
‫فلنرجع إلى شرح كلام الشيخ‪.‬‬

478

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

His statement “submission of previously held notions of reason to the unseen” means that submission requires what reason prohibits or resists, since
it requires elimination of causes whereas reason demands it. The man of submission submits to God Almighty with respect to what is unseen to him, for His
action is not limited to the causes that reason cannot require. When he submits
to God he no longer turns to causes in all things that are unseen to him.
He is assailed by vain thoughts that what he lacks is attained by causes,
whereas submission requires ridding oneself of such.
There are six matters here: reason, resistance to it, vain thought, what drives
to it, the unseen, and submission to this resistance. Reason is what calls him to
causes. Resistance to that is to rid oneself of them through perfect surrender
to Him who holds the reins of all matters. The vain thought is the belief that
salvation and provisions depend on [the causes] and without them one could
not attain them. The unseen is the divine decree. Surrendering means the surrendering of this resistance to the decree.
That said, the attribution of this meaning to [al-Harawī’s] words is debatable.
Another possibility is that he means one’s submission to the intuition of the
unseen which occurs to the servant but which reason resists in its immaturity,
suggesting that the matter is otherwise, thus leading to a conflict between reason and intuition. Reason often more or less resists the things of the unseen.
Submission is to give up this resistance and rid one’s intuition from what resists
it. This is a better interpretations of his words, God willing.
The first one is the submission of the contention of causes to the monotheism of action and intention, and this one is the submission of thoughts that
oppose revelation to the monotheism of knowledge, report, and creed, and this
is the essence of submission.
His statement, “And submission to what contradicts rational analogy about
the circulation of power and fortune” could mean accepting God’s judgment

‫‪479‬‬

‫‪chapter 30‬‬

‫أما قوله‪» :‬تسليم ما يزاحم العقول مما سبق على الأوهام«‪ ،‬يعني أن التسليم يقتضي ما ينهى عنه‬
‫العقل و يزاحمه‪ ،‬فإنه يقتضي التجر يد عن الأسباب‪ ،‬والعقل يأمر بها‪ .‬فصاحب التسليم يسلم إلى الل ّٰه‬
‫عز وجل ما هو غيب عن العبد‪ ،‬فإن فعله سبحانه وتعالى لا يتوقف على هذه الأسباب التي ينهى‬
‫العقل عن التجرد عنها‪ ،‬فإذا سلم لل ّٰه لم يلتفت إلى السبب في كل ما غاب عنه‪.‬‬
‫فالأوهام يسبق عليها أن ما غاب عنها من الحكم لا يحصل إلا بالأسباب‪.‬‬
‫والتسليم يقتضي التجرد عنها‪ ،‬والعقل ينهى عن ذلك‪ ،‬والوهم قد سبق عليه أن الغيب موقوف‬
‫عليها‪.‬‬
‫فهاهنا أمور ستة‪ :‬عقل ومزاحم له‪ ،‬ووهم وسائق إليه‪ ،‬وغيب وتسليم لهذا المزاحم‪.‬‬
‫فالعقل هو الباعث له على الأسباب الداعي له إليها‪ ،‬التي إذا خرج الرجل عنها عد قدحا ً في‬
‫عقله‪.‬‬
‫والمزاحم له التجرد عنها بكمال التسليم إلى من بيده أزمة الأمور‪ ،‬مواردها ومصادرها‪ .‬والوهم‬
‫اعتقاده توقف حصول السعادة والنجاة‪ ،‬وحصول المقدور—كائنا ًما كان—عليها‪ ،‬وأنه لولاها لما‬
‫حصل المقدور‪.‬‬
‫وهذا هو الوهم السابق إلى الوهم‪.‬‬
‫والمغيب هو الحكم الذي غاب عنه‪ .‬وهو فعل الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫والتسليم تسليم هذا المزاحم إلى نفس الحكم‪.‬‬
‫مع أن في تنز يل عبارته على هذا وإفراغ هذا المعنى في قوالب ألفاظه نظرا ً‪.‬‬
‫وفيه وجه آخر وهو أن يكون المراد التسليم لما يبدو للعبد من معاني الغيب مما يزاحم معقوله في‬
‫باديء الرأي‪ .‬و يسبق إلى وهمه أن الأمر بخلافه‪ ،‬فيسبق على الأوهام من الغيب الذي أخبرت به‬
‫شيء يزاحم معقولها‪ ،‬فتقع المنازعة بين حكم العقل وحكم الوهم‪ ،‬فإن كثيرا ً من الغيب قد يزاحم‬
‫العقل بعض المزاحمة‪ ،‬و يسبق إلى الوهم خلافه‪ .‬فالتسليم تسليم هذا المزاحم إلى وليه‪ ،‬ومن أخبر به‪،‬‬
‫والتجرد عما يسبق إلى الوهم مما يخالفه‪.‬‬
‫وهذا أولى المعنيين بكلامه إن شاء الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫فالأولى‪ :‬تسليم منازعات الأسباب لتجر يد التوحيد العملي القصدي الإرادي‪ ،‬وهذا تجر يد‬
‫منازعات الأوهام المخالفة للخبر‪ ،‬لتجر يد التوحيد العلمي الخـبري الاعتقادي‪ .‬وهذا حقيقة التسليم‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬والإذعان لما يخالف القياس من سير الدول والق ِسم«‪.‬‬

480

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

against his own reason and assessment about those in power in ancient and
recent times, the decline of one and the rise of another, strengthening of this
and the weakening of that, as well as the fortunes He has distributed among
His creation, despite their extreme inequality and disparity in their quality
and quantity. He submits to God’s wisdom and does not object based on what
occurs to him by way of his own thought and conjecture.
It could also be that by “circulation of power and fortune” he means the
states [of wealth or poverty] that visit the seeker in different measures may
be less than what he expected, but he submits to what he is given, trusting His
wisdom and justice. For, some servants are not fit except for poverty and were
they given more that would harm them, others are fit only for affluence and
were they made poor that would corrupt them; some are fit in the state of good
health and were they given illness that would corrupt them.
His statement, “responding to what scares the seeker of the experience of the
states” means that the seeker at this level possesses a power of submission that
combats calamities that befall him and so the seeker does not lose his focus as
a result, nor do they scare him off from entering the states and taking the leap,
for his faculty of submission and acceptance protects him from their harm.

2

Second Level

He said,
The second level is submission of knowledge to the experiential state, purpose to unveiling, and form to Reality.
Submission of knowledge to the state does not mean that one ought to make
one’s state the judge over [scriptural] knowledge, God protect the Shaykh from
such a meaning! He only meant to move from the formality of external knowledge to its inner meanings and realities and their intended fruit, such as moving
from mere following of authority to seeing and certainty attained for oneself, so
much so that the seeker sees and witnesses the reports that the Messenger, God
grant him blessing and peace, has conveyed. The Almighty said, “Those who
have been given knowledge see that what has been revealed to you by your Lord
is the truth” [34:6], and, “Is, then, the one who knows that what has been sent
down to you from your Lord is the truth like one who is blind?” [13:19]. The veil
becomes unveiling, knowledge becomes certitude, and certitude becomes eyewitness certitude, and the knowledge of faith becomes the taste of faith—he
thus tastes its sweetness and this is beyond mere knowledge—and the knowledge of reliance gives way to its experience, and so on.

‫‪481‬‬

‫‪chapter 30‬‬

‫أي الانقياد لما يقاوي عقله وقياسه مما جرى به حكم الل ّٰه في الدول قديما ًوحديثا‪ ً،‬من طي دولة‬
‫ونشر دولة وإعزاز هذه وإذلال هذه‪ ،‬والقسم التي قسمها على خلقه مع شدة تفاوتها وتبا ين مقاديرها‬
‫وكيفياتها وأجناسها‪ ،‬فيذعن لحكمة الل ّٰه في ذلك ولا يعترض على ما وقع منها بشبهة وقياس‪.‬‬
‫و يحتمل أن يكون مراده ب »الدول« و»القسم« الأحوال التي ٺتداول على السالك و يختلف‬
‫سيرها‪ .‬و»القسم« التي نالته من الل ّٰه ما كان قياس سعيه واجتهاده أن يحصل له أكثر منها‪ ،‬فيذعن لما‬
‫غالب قياسه منها‪ ،‬و يسلم للقسام المعطي بحكمته وعدله‪ .‬فإن من عباده من لا يصلحه إلا الفقر‪ ،‬ولو‬
‫أغناه لأفسده ذلك‪ .‬ومنهم من لا يصلحه إلا الغنى ولو أفقره لأفسده ذلك‪ .‬ومنهم من لا يصلحه إلا‬
‫الصحة ولو أمرضه لأفسده ذلك‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬والإجابة لما يفزع المر يد من ركوب الأحوال«‪.‬‬
‫يقول‪ :‬إن صاحب هذه الدرجة من قوة التسليم يهجم على الأمور المفزعة‪ ،‬ولا يلتفت إليها‪ ،‬ولا‬
‫يخاف معها من ركوب الأحوال واقتحام الأهوال‪ ،‬لأن قوة تسليمه تحميه من خطرها‪ ،‬فلا ينبغي أن‬
‫يخاف‪ ،‬فإنه في حصن التسليم ومنعته وحمايته‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬تسليم العلم إلى الحال‪] ،‬والقصد إلى الـكشف‪ ،‬والرسم إلى الحقيقة«‪ .‬أما »تسليم‬
‫العلم إلى الحال[« فليس المراد منه تحكيم الحال على العلم‪ ،‬حاشا الشيخ من ذلك‪ .‬وإنما أراد الانتقال‬
‫من الوقوف عند صور العلم الظاهرة إلى معانيها وحقائقها الباطنة‪ ،‬وثمراتها المقصودة منها‪ ،‬مثل‬
‫الانتقال من محض التقليد والخـبر إلى العيان واليقين‪ ،‬حتى كأنه يرى و يشاهد ما أخبر به الرسول‬
‫ك ه ُو َ اْلح ََّق﴾ ]سبأ‪ .[6:‬وقال‪:‬‬
‫ك م ِن َرّ ب ِّ َ‬
‫ل ِإل َي ْ َ‬
‫ن ُأوتوُ ا ال ْعلِ ْم َ ال َ ّذ ِي ُأ نز ِ َ‬
‫ﷺ كما قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َيرَ َى ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ك اْلح َُّق ك َم َْن ه ُو َ َأعْم َى﴾ ]الرعد‪ .[19:‬و ينتقل الحجاب إلى الـكشف‪،‬‬
‫ك م ِن َرّ ب ِّ َ‬
‫ل ِإل َي ْ َ‬
‫﴿ َأف َم َن يعَ ْل َم ُ َأ َن ّم َا ُأ نز ِ َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫فينتقل من العلم إلى اليقين‪ ،‬ومن اليقين إلى عين اليقين‪ .‬ومن علم الإ يمان إلى ذوق طعم الإ يمان ووجد‬
‫حلاوته‪ .‬فإن هذا قدر زائد على مجرد علمه‪ ،‬ومن علم التوكل إلى حاله وأشباه ذلك‪.‬‬

482

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

He surrenders sound knowledge in favor of sound state, for the authority
of experiential state is stronger than the authority of knowledge. If state is
opposed to knowledge it is like a tyrant king against whom he must rebel with
the sword of knowledge and make it judge over him.
As for surrendering “purpose to unveiling,” it does not mean that he should
abandon purpose upon experiencing the unveiling, for when he abandons purpose he abandons servanthood. Rather, having made his purpose entirely dedicated to the quest of unveiling, he surrenders it to the state of unveiling upon
attaining it and thus the unveiling takes the command, the purpose being its
means and instrument. If his unveiling is sound and in accordance with the
truth, it unveils to him the maladies and defects in his purpose as well as ways
to correct them. He thus turns to correct them by the light of unveiling. This
does not mean that he who experiences unveiling abandons purpose, for that
is the journey of the heretics and those who turn away from the path of truth
and righteousness.
Abandoning “form for the Reality” refers to annihilation. The surrender of
the man of annihilation includes surrendering his own being in favor of his
experience of the reality, and the being of the servant is a form that is annihilated by the reality just as light annihilates darkness. To the people of annihilation, the Truth Almighty is not seen or witnessed by anyone but by Himself,
not in the sense of monistic union but in the sense that the servant cannot
witness Him until his essence and form and all marks of his existence are annihilated. That which was once non-being is annihilated and only He who still is
persists.2 This is nearly a matter of consensus in this group [namely, the Sufis];
nay, indeed, it is a consensus to them.
The second level is the submission of all that is other than the Truth to
the Truth while being safe from the view of the submission through the
viewing of the Truth’s subduing of you to Him.
This level complements the last one, for the submission in the last one is its
beginning and the medium between the first and the third levels. The first level
was the beginning; the second, the middle; and the third, now, is the finale. By
“the submission of all that is other than the Truth to the Truth” he means the
vanishing of the forms of creation into the witnessing of the Reality. All that
is other than the Truth is but form, and when one surrenders one’s form to his
Lord the reality of annihilation is given to him. This submission is of two kinds.

2 Cf. Ibn Taymiyya, MF 10:219–221.

‫‪483‬‬

‫‪chapter 30‬‬

‫فيسلم العلم الصحيح إلى الحال الصحيح‪ .‬فإن سلطان الحال أقوى من سلطان العلم‪ .‬فإن كان الحال‬
‫مخالفا لً لعلم فهو ملك ظالم‪ ،‬فليخرج عليه بسيف العلم وليحكمه عليه‪.‬‬
‫وأما »تسليم القصد إلى الـكشف« فليس معناه أن يترك القصد عن معاينة الـكشف‪ ،‬فإنه متى‬
‫ترك القصد خلع ر بقة العبودية من عنقه‪ ،‬ولـكن يجعل قصده سا ئرا ً طالبا لً ـكشفه يؤمه‪ ،‬فإذا وصل‬
‫إليه سلمه إليه وصار الحكم للـكشف‪ ،‬إذ القصد آلة ووسيلة إليه‪ ،‬فإن كان كشفا ًصحيحا ًمطابقا ًللحق‬
‫في نفسه‪ ،‬كشف له عن آفات القصد ومفسداته ومصححاته وعيو به‪ ،‬فأقبل على تصحيحه بنور‬
‫الـكشف‪ ،‬لا أن صاحب القصد ترك القصد لأجل الـكشف‪ ،‬فهذا سير أهل الإلحاد الناكبين عن‬
‫سبيل الحق والرشاد‪.‬‬
‫وأما »ترك الرسم إلى الحقيقة« فيشير به إلى الفناء‪ .‬فإن من جملة تسليم صاحب الفناء تسليم ذاته‬
‫ليفنى في شهود الحقيقة‪ ،‬فإن ذات العبد هي رسم تفنيه الحقيقةكما يفني النور الظلمة‪ ،‬لأن عند أصحاب‬
‫الفناء أن الحق سبحانه لا يراه سواه ولا يشاهده غيره‪ ،‬لا بمعنى الاتحاد‪ ،‬ولـكن بمعنى أنه لا يشاهده‬
‫العبد حتى يفنى عن إنيته ورسمه وجميع عوالمه‪ ،‬فيفنى من لم يكن و يبقى من لم يزل‪ ،‬وهذا كالإجماع‬
‫من الطائفة بل‪ ،‬هو إجماع منهم‪.‬‬
‫»الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬تسليم ما دون الحق إلى الحق‪ ،‬مع السلامة من رؤ ية التسليم بمعاينة تسليم الحق‬
‫إ ياك إليه«‪.‬‬
‫هذه الدرجة تكملة الدرجة التي قبلها‪] .‬فإن التسليم في التي قبلها[ بداية لها‪ ،‬وهي واسطة بين الدرجة‬
‫الأولى والثالثة‪ .‬فالأولى بداية‪ ،‬والثانية توسط‪ ،‬والثالثة نهاية‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬تسليم ما دون الحق إلى الحق«‪ ،‬ير يد به اضمحلال رسوم الخلق في شهود الحقيقة‪ ،‬وكل ما‬
‫دون الحق رسوم‪ .‬فإذا سلم رسمه الخاص إلى ر به حصل له حقيقة الفناء‪ .‬وهذا التسليم نوعان‪:‬‬

484

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

One is the submission of his particular form and the other the submission of the
forms of all created beings, witnessing their disappearance and vanishing into
the essence of reality. This kind is submission in one’s knowledge and awareness and the first in experience.
His statement “being safe from the view of the submission” means parting
as well from the witnessing of the act of submission itself, for such a view is
just another form like the rest, and so long as one holds one to it his surrender or submission is incomplete. He then further describes this kind of safety,
attained as it is “through the viewing of the Truth’s subduing of you to Him,”
that is, when you submit all that is other than the Truth to the Truth it dawns
on you that the Truth Almighty is the One, not you, who has surrendered all that
is other than Him to Him. He is the one surrendering and the one being surrendered to, and you are merely an instrument. Whoever witnesses this finds his
being surrendered to the Truth. The one who surrendered to Truth is none but
the Truth Himself. This saves the servant from the claim of submission. And
God knows best.

‫‪485‬‬

‫‪chapter 30‬‬

‫أحدهما‪ :‬تسليم رسمه الخاص به‪.‬‬
‫والثاني‪ :‬تسليم رسوم الكائنات ورؤ ية تلاشيها واضمحلالها في عين الحقيقة‪ .‬وهذا علم ومعرفة‪،‬‬
‫والأول حال‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬والسلامة من رؤ ية التسليم«‪ ،‬أي ينسلب أيضا ًمن رسم رؤ ية التسليم‪ .‬فإن »الرؤ ية« أيضا ً‬
‫رسم من جملة الرسوم‪ .‬فما دام مستصحبا ًلها لم يسلم التسليم التام‪ ،‬وقد بقيت عليه بقية من منازعات‬
‫رسمه‪.‬‬
‫ثم عرف كيفية هذا التسليم فقال‪» :‬بمعاينة تسليم الحق إ ياك إليه«‪ ،‬أي ينكشف لك—حين تسلم‬
‫ما دون الحق إلى الحق—أن الحق تعالى هو الذي سلم إلى نفسه ما دونه‪ ،‬فالحق تعالى هو الذي سلمك‬
‫إليه‪ ،‬فهو المسل ِ ّم وهو المس َل ّم إليه‪ ،‬وأنت آلة التسليم‪ .‬فمن شهد هذا المشهد وجد ذاته مسل َمة ً إلى الحق وما‬
‫سلمها إلى الحق غير الحق‪ ،‬فقد سلم العبد من دعوى التسليم‪ .‬والل ّٰه أعلم‪.‬‬

chapter 31

The Station of Patience
Among the stations of “You we worship and You we seek for help” is the station
of patience.
Imam Aḥmad [b. Ḥanbal], may God have mercy on him, has said, “God has
mentioned patience on nearly ninety occasions in the Qurʾan.”
It is an obligation by the consensus of the Community and comprises half
of faith. Faith is two halves, one being patience and the other gratitude.
In the Qurʾan, patience has been mentioned in sixteen ways.
First: The command to observe it, as the Most High says, “O you who have
faith, seek help in patience and prayers” [2:153], and “And seek you help in
patience and prayer” [2:45], and “Be patient and outdo [others/each other] in
patience” [3:200].
Second: Prohibition of its opposite, as in His words, “So be patient like those
of great resolve among the messengers, and seek not to hasten on [the end]
for them” [46:35]. He said, “Turn not your backs [in combat]” [8:15], and turning one’s back is deficiency in patience and in outdoing one’s opponent in
endurance. Also: “And reduce not your deeds to naught” [47:33] means wasting away one’s deeds by failing to bring them to completion. Also, “And do not
weaken” [3:139], weakness being lack of endurance.
Third: Praise for those who possess patience, as He the Most High says in
“[the Garden is for] those who are patient and the truthful” [3:17] and “And
those who are patient in affliction and loss, and at the utmost moment of
calamity—such are the truthful and such are the God-conscious” [2:177]. There
are many instances of such [praise] in the Qurʾan.
Fourth: God’s self-obligation of love for those who are patient, as in, “And
God loves the patient” [2:146].
Fifth: God’s self-obligation of granting then His company; and it is a special company inclusive of their protection, support, assistance, not the general
company of God in knowledge and watchfulness [that apply to all creatures].
As in His words, “And you be patient, for God is with the patient” [8:46]. Also,
“And God is with the patient,” [2:249; 8:66]. [Since we know that] God is with
everyone by his knowledge and power, the meaning here is that for those who
are patient, the company or their state of being with God is of a special rank,
consisting of His protection, victory, and support.
Sixth: Confirmation that patience is good, as in His words, “And if you remain
patient, that is better for those who are patient” [16:126], and “that you be
patient is better for ye” [4:25].

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل )ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ( منزلة‪» :‬الصبر«‪.‬‬
‫قال الإمام أحمد‪ :‬ذكر الل ّٰه تعالى الصبر في القرآن في نحو من تسعين موضعا‪ً.‬‬
‫وهو واجب بإجماع الأمة‪ ،‬وهو نصف الإ يمان‪ ،‬فإن الإ يمان نصفان‪ :‬نصف صبر‪ ،‬ونصف شكر‪.‬‬
‫وهو في القرآن على ستة عشر نوعا‪ً:‬‬
‫صل َاة ِ﴾ ]البقرة‪.[153:‬‬
‫صب ْر ِ و َال َ ّ‬
‫ن آم َنوُ ا اْستعَ يِ نوُ ا باِ ل َ ّ‬
‫الأول‪ :‬الأمر به‪ ،‬نحو قوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬ياَ َأُّيه َا ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫صا برِ ُوا﴾ ]آل عمران‪.[200:‬‬
‫صبرِ ُوا و َ َ‬
‫صل َاة ِ﴾ ]البقرة‪ .[45:‬وقوله‪﴿ :‬ا ْ‬
‫صب ْر ِ و َال َ ّ‬
‫وقوله‪﴿ :‬و َاْستعَ يِ نوُ ا باِ ل َ ّ‬
‫صب ْر ُك َ ِإ َلّا باِ ل َل ّـه ِ﴾ ]النحل‪.[127:‬‬
‫صبرِ ْ و َم َا َ‬
‫وقوله‪﴿ :‬و َا ْ‬
‫جل َل ّه ُْم﴾‬
‫ل و َل َا ت َْستعَ ْ ِ‬
‫ن ال ُر ّ ُ‬
‫صبرَ َ ُأولوُ ال ْع َز ِْم م ِ َ‬
‫كم َا َ‬
‫صبرِ ْ َ‬
‫لثاني‪ :‬النهي عن ضده‪ ،‬كقوله‪﴿ :‬ف َا ْ‬
‫س ِ‬
‫]الأحقاف‪ .[35:‬وقوله‪﴿ :‬ف َل َا توُ َُل ّوه ُم ُ اْلَأْدباَ ر َ﴾ ]الأنفال‪ ،[15:‬فإن تولية الأدبار ترك للصبر‬
‫والمصا برة‪ .‬وقوله‪﴿ :‬و َل َا ت ُب ْط ِلوُ ا َأعْم َالـ َك ُْم﴾ ]محمد‪ ،[33:‬فإن إ بطالها ترك للصبر على إتمامها‪ .‬وقوله‪﴿ :‬و َل َا‬
‫تَه ِنوُ ا﴾ ]آل عمران‪ ،[139:‬فإن الوهن من عدم الصبر‪.‬‬
‫صادِقيِ نَ﴾ ]آل عمران‪ .[17:‬وقوله‪:‬‬
‫ن و َال َ ّ‬
‫صا برِ ِي َ‬
‫الثالث‪ :‬الثناء على أهله‪ ،‬كقوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬ال َ ّ‬
‫ك ه ُم ُ ال ْم َُت ّق ُونَ﴾‬
‫صد َقوُ ا ۖ و َُأول َٰئ ِ َ‬
‫ن َ‬
‫ك ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫س ۗ ُأول َٰئ ِ َ‬
‫حينَ البْ ْأَ ِ‬
‫ساء ِ و َال َض ّ َرّاء ِ و َ ِ‬
‫ن ف ِي البْ ْأَ َ‬
‫صا برِ ِي َ‬
‫﴿و َال َ ّ‬
‫]البقرة‪ ،[177:‬وهو كثير في القرآن‪.‬‬
‫ن﴾ ]آل عمران‪.[146:‬‬
‫صا برِ ِي َ‬
‫ب ال َ ّ‬
‫الرابع‪ :‬إ يجابه سبحانه محبته لهم‪ ،‬كقوله‪﴿ :‬و َال َل ّـه ُ ُ‬
‫يح ِ ُ ّ‬
‫لخامس‪ :‬إ يجاب معيته لهم‪ ،‬وهي معية خاصة ٺتضمن حفظهم ونصرهم وتأييدهم‪ ،‬ليست معية ً‬
‫ن﴾ ]الأنفال‪ .[46:‬وقوله‪:‬‬
‫صا برِ ِي َ‬
‫ن ال َل ّـه َ م ََع ال َ ّ‬
‫صبرِ ُوا ۚ ِإ َ ّ‬
‫عامة ً‪ ،‬وهي معية العلم والإحاطة‪ ،‬كقوله‪﴿ :‬و َا ْ‬
‫ن﴾[ ]البقرة‪ 249:‬الأنفال‪.[69:‬‬
‫صا برِ ِي َ‬
‫]﴿و َال َل ّـه ُ م ََع ال َ ّ‬
‫ن﴾ ]النحل‪:‬‬
‫صا برِ ِي َ‬
‫صبرَ ْت ُم ْ ل َهوُ َ خ َي ْر ٌ ل ّ ِل َ ّ‬
‫السادس‪ :‬إخباره بأن الصبر خير لأصحابه‪ ،‬كقوله‪﴿ :‬و َلئَ ِن َ‬
‫صبرِ ُوا خ َي ْر ٌ ل َـ ّك ُْم﴾ ]النساء‪.[25:‬‬
‫‪ .[126‬وقوله‪﴿ :‬و َ َأن ت َ ْ‬

488

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Seventh: Confirmation of returning their patience with the best of their
deeds, as in “And We shall reward those who have been patient with best of
what they used to do” [16:96].
Eighth: Confirmation of their reward without reckoning. He the Most High
has said, “The patient will be granted their reward without accounting” [39:10].
Ninth: Good news for those who are patient, as in “And We shall test you with
some of fear, hunger, and loss in property, life, and harvest—so give good news
to those who are patient” [2:155].
Tenth: Guarantee of victory and help for those who are patient, as He the
Most High says, “Indeed, if you are patient and on your guard and [the enemy]
attack you suddenly, your Lord will help you with five thousand angels sweeping on” [3:125]. In this regard there is also a saying of the Prophet, God grant
him blessing and peace, “And know that victory is with patience.”1
Eleventh: Reassurance from Him Almighty that those with patience are the
people of determination, as He says, “And whoever is patient and forgives, that
indeed is from the deeds of determination” [42:43].
Twelfth: Declaration that no one can accomplish righteous deeds and attain
their reward and their great pleasures except for the patient, as the Most High
says, “Woe to you, God’s reward is better for those who have faith and act
righteously—and no one attains that except those with patience” [28:80]. And
He says, “None reaches it except for those who have been patient, and none
reaches it but the fortunate” [41:35].
Thirteen: That only the people of patience benefit from the signs and lessons
that God makes available for them, as He the Most High said to Moses, “And
remind them of the Days of God, for in them are signs for every patient and
grateful [person]” [14:5]. God says of the people of Sheba, “We reduced them to
mere stories and erased every trace of them: in it there are signs for any who is
patient and grateful” [34:19].
He says in the Sūra The Counsel, “And among His signs are the ships, smoothrunning through the ocean, [tall] as mountains. If it be His will He can still the
wind, leaving them motionless on the back of the [ocean]: Verily in this are
signs for everyone who is patient and grateful” [42:33].
Fourteenth: That the sought-after and beloved success and salvation from
the despised and feared ending and entrance into the Garden are attained only
through patience, as God Almighty says, “And the Angels enter upon them from
every door: peace be upon you for your patience, what a great final abode!”
[13:23–24].

1 Reported by Aḥmad; classed ḥasan.

‫‪489‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫ن‬
‫جر َه ُم ب َأِ ْ‬
‫صبرَ ُوا َأ ْ‬
‫ن َ‬
‫السابع‪ :‬إ يجاب الجزاء لهم بأحسن أعمالهم‪ ،‬كقوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َل َن َْجزِ ي ََّن ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫حسَ ِ‬
‫م َا ك َانوُ ا يعَ ْم َلوُ نَ﴾ ]النحل‪.[96:‬‬
‫ب﴾‬
‫حسَا ٍ‬
‫جر َه ُم بغِ يَ ْر ِ ِ‬
‫صا برِ ُونَ َأ ْ‬
‫الثامن‪ :‬إ يجابه الجزاء لهم بغير حساب‪ ،‬كقوله تعالى‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َن ّم َا يوُ فَ َ ّى ال َ ّ‬
‫]الزمر‪.[10:‬‬
‫ص‬
‫ف و َاْلج ُوِع و َنقَ ْ ٍ‬
‫ن اْلخ َو ْ ِ‬
‫يء ٍ م ّ ِ َ‬
‫التاسع‪ :‬إطلاق البشرى لأهل الصبر‪ ،‬كقوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َل َن َب ْلوُ ََن ّك ُم بشِ َ ْ‬
‫ن﴾ ]البقرة‪.[155:‬‬
‫صا برِ ِي َ‬
‫ت ۗ و َب َش ِ ّر ِ ال َ ّ‬
‫س و َال َثمّ َر َا ِ‬
‫ن اْلَأْمو َا ِ‬
‫مّ ِ َ‬
‫ل و َاْلَأنف ُ ِ‬
‫صبرِ ُوا و َٺ َ َت ّق ُوا و َي ْأَ توُك ُم مّ ِن فوَ ْرِه ِْم هَٰ ذ َا‬
‫العاشر‪ :‬ضمان النصر والمدد لهم‪ ،‬كقوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬بلَىَ ۚ ِإن ت َ ْ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ن ال ْم َل َائ ِك َة ِ م ُسَوِ ّم ِينَ﴾ ]آل عمران‪.[125:‬‬
‫ف مّ ِ َ‬
‫يمُ ْدِْدك ُْم ر َ ُب ّك ُم ب ِخ َم ْسَة ِ آل َا ٍ‬
‫ومنه قول النبي ﷺ‪» :‬واعلم أن النصر مع الصبر«‪.‬‬
‫ك‬
‫ن ذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫صبرَ َ و َغ َف َر َِإ َ ّ‬
‫الحادى عشر‪ :‬الإخبار أن أهل الصبر هم أهل العزائم‪ ،‬كقوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َل َم َن َ‬
‫لم َ ِْن ع َْزِم اْلُأم ُورِ﴾ ]الشورى‪.[43:‬‬
‫الثاني عشر‪ :‬الإخبار أنه ما يلقى الأعمال الصالحة وجزاءها والحظوظ إلا أهل الصبر‪ ،‬كقوله تعالى‪:‬‬
‫صا برِ ُونَ﴾ ]القصص‪ .[80:‬وقوله‪:‬‬
‫صاِلحاً و َل َا يلُقَ ّاهاَ ِإ َلّا ال َ ّ‬
‫ل َ‬
‫ن و َعمَ ِ َ‬
‫ب ال َل ّـه ِ خ َي ْر ٌ لمّ ِ َْن آم َ َ‬
‫﴿و َ ي ْلـ َك ُْم ثوَ َا ُ‬
‫صبرَ ُوا و َم َا‬
‫ن َ‬
‫ك و َب َي ْنهَ ُ ع َد َاو َة ٌك َ َأ َن ّه ُ و َل ِيّ ٌ حَم ِيم ٌ و َم َا يلُقَ ّاهاَ ِإ َلّا ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ن ف ِ َإذ َا ال َ ّذ ِي ب َي ْن َ َ‬
‫حسَ ُ‬
‫﴿اْدف َْع باِ َل ّت ِي هِي َ َأ ْ‬
‫ظ ع َظ ِيٍم﴾ ]فصلت‪.[35–34:‬‬
‫ح ٍّ‬
‫يلُقَ ّاهاَ ِإ َلّا ذ ُو َ‬
‫سلنْ َا‬
‫الثالث عشر‪ :‬الإخبار أنه إنما ينتفع بالآيات والعبر أهل الصبر‪ ،‬كقوله تعالى‪]﴿ :‬و َلقَ َْد َأْر َ‬
‫ل‬
‫ك ل َآياَ ٍ‬
‫ن ف ِي ذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫ت ِإل َى ال ُن ّورِ و َذ َك ِّر ْه ُم ب َأِ َي ّاِم ال َل ّـه ِ ۚ ِإ َ ّ‬
‫ظل ُم َا ِ‬
‫ن ال ُ ّ‬
‫ك مِ َ‬
‫ج قوَ ْم َ َ‬
‫م ُوس َى ب ِآياَ تنِ َا[ َأْن َأ ْ‬
‫ت ل ِّك ُ ّ ِ‬
‫خر ِ ْ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ن ف ِي‬
‫ق ۚ ِإ َ ّ‬
‫ل م ُمزَ َ ّ ٍ‬
‫ث و َم ََّزقنْ َاه ُْم ك ُ َ ّ‬
‫شكُوٍر﴾ ]إ براهيم‪ .[5:‬وقوله في أهل سبأ‪﴿ :‬فَج َع َلنْ َاه ُْم َأح َادِي َ‬
‫ص َب ّاٍر َ‬
‫َ‬
‫شكُوٍر﴾ ]سبأ‪ .[19:‬وقوله في سورة الشورى‪﴿ :‬و َم ِْن آياَ ت ِه ِ اْلج َو َارِ ف ِي البْ َْحرِ‬
‫ص َب ّاٍر َ‬
‫ل َ‬
‫ك ل َآياَ ٍ‬
‫ذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫ت ل ِّك ُ ّ ِ‬
‫شكُوٍر﴾‬
‫ص َب ّاٍر َ‬
‫ل َ‬
‫ك ل َآياَ ٍ‬
‫ن ف ِي ذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫ن ر َو َاك ِد َ ع َلىَ َظْهرِه ِ ۚ ِإ َ ّ‬
‫ن الر ِ ّيح َ ف َي َْظل َل ْ َ‬
‫ك َاْلَأع ْل َاِم ِإن ي َش َ ْأ ي ُْس ِ‬
‫ت ل ِّك ُ ّ ِ‬
‫ك ِ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫]الشورى‪.[33–32:‬‬
‫الرابع عشر‪ :‬الإخبار بأن الفوز بالمطلوب والنجاة من المرهوب ودخول الجنة‪ ،‬إنما نالوه بالصبر‪،‬‬
‫صبرَ ْت ُم ْ ۚ ف َن ِعْم َ ع ُْقب َى ال َد ّارِ﴾‬
‫سل َام ٌ ع َل َي ْك ُم ب ِم َا َ‬
‫ب َ‬
‫ل باَ ٍ‬
‫كقوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َال ْم َل َائ ِك َة ُ ي َْدخ ُلوُ نَ ع َليَ ْه ِم مّ ِن ك ُ ّ ِ‬
‫]الرعد‪.[24–23:‬‬

490

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Fifteenth: That the people of patience shall inherit the honor of high authority. I have heard the Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya, may God honor his soul,
say, “Authority (or leadership) in religion is attained by means of patience and
certitude,” then he recited the saying of God Almighty, “And We made among
[the Israelites] leaders who were guided by Our command when they observed
patience and believed with certitude in our signs” [32:24].
Sixteenth: God’s connection of patience with the stations of submission and
faith, as He did (in the previously cited verses) with certitude and faith, with
piety and reliance, and with gratitude, righteous actions and mercy.
This is why patience is to faith what the head is to the body. There is no faith if
there is no patience, just as one cannot have a body without a head. ʿUmar b. alKhaṭṭāb, may God be pleased with him, said, “The best in life we have attained
has been through patience.” The Apostle of God, God grant him blessing and
peace, said in a sound Hadith that patience is “light”.2 He also said, “Whosoever
seeks to be patient, God grants him patience.”3 In another sound Hadith:
Wonderful is the affair of a believer. All of his affairs are good for him. And
that is for none but a believer. If he experiences some blessing, he is grateful, and that is for him good. And if he experience hardship, he is patient,
and that too is good for him.4
He said to the black woman who suffered from epilepsy when she asked him to
pray for her, “If you wish, you could patiently suffer in return for the Garden, or
if you wish, I would pray for you to be healed.” She said (choosing to patiently
suffer), “I am uncovered, so ask God that I am not uncovered [when I suffer an
attack],” so he prayed for her.5
The Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, also commanded the Helpers [of Medina] to be patient over the nepotism that they would experience
after him until they met him at the Basin (ḥawḍ) [in the afterlife].6
He, God grant him blessing and peace, also commanded perseverance upon
encounter with the enemy and with any calamity, and informed them that
[patience] counts “Only upon the first encounter with the calamity.”7
He commanded the suffering what is most beneficial for him, namely, patience and anticipation [of reward and relief from God]. For it lightens the
suffering and increases the reward, whereas wailing, anger, and complaining
increases the affliction and takes away the reward.
2 Muslim, Nasāʾī, Aḥmad.
3 Bukhārī #1469, Muslim #1053.
4 Muslim #2999.

‫‪491‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫الخامس عشر‪ :‬أنه يورث صاحبه درجة الإمامة‪] ،‬سمعت شيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية—قدس الل ّٰه‬
‫جع َلنْ َا م ِْنه ُْم َأئ َِم ّة ً يَه ْد ُونَ‬
‫روحه—يقول‪ :‬بالصبر واليقين ت ُنال الإمامة في الدين[‪ ،‬ثم تلا قوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َ َ‬
‫صبرَ ُوۖا و َك َانوُ ا ب ِآياَ تنِ َا يوُ قنِ وُ نَ﴾ ]السجدة‪.[24:‬‬
‫ب َأِ ْمر ِناَ ل ََم ّا َ‬
‫السادس عشر‪ :‬اقترانه بمقامات الإسلام والإ يمان‪ ،‬كما قرنه الل ّٰه سبحانه باليقين و بالإ يمان‪،‬‬
‫و بالتقوى والتوكل والشكر والعمل والمرحمة‪.‬‬
‫ولهذا كان الصبر من الإ يمان بمنزلة الرأس من الجسد‪ ،‬ولا إ يمان لمن لا صبر له‪ ،‬كما أنه لا جسد‬
‫لمن لا رأس له‪ .‬قال عمر بن الخطاب رضي الل ّٰه عنه‪» :‬خير عيش أدركناه بالصبر«‪.‬‬
‫وأخبر النبي ﷺ في الحديث الصحيح‪» :‬أنه ضياء«‪ .‬وقال‪» :‬من يتصبر يصبره الل ّٰه«‪.‬‬
‫وفي الحديث الصحيح‪» :‬عجبا ًلأمر المؤمن! إن أمرهكله له خير‪ ،‬وليس ذلك لأحد إلا للمؤمن‪ ،‬إن‬
‫أصابته سراء شكر فكان خيرا لً ه‪ ،‬وإن أصابته ضراء صبر فكان خيرا لً ه«‪.‬‬
‫وقال للمرأة السوداء التي كانت ت ُصرع فسألته أن يدعو لها‪» :‬إن شئت صبرت ولك الجنة‪ ،‬وإن‬
‫شئت دعوت الل ّٰه أن يعافيك‪ ،‬فقالت‪ :‬إني أتكشف فادع الل ّٰه ألا أتكشف‪ ،‬فدعا لها«‪.‬‬
‫وأمر الأنصار رضي الل ّٰه تعالى عنهم بأن يصبروا على الأ ثرة التي يلقونها بعده حتى يلقوه على الحوض‪.‬‬
‫وأمر عند ملاقاة العدو بالصبر‪ ،‬وأمر بالصبر عند المصيبة‪ ،‬وأخبر »أنه عند الصدمة الأولى«‪.‬‬
‫وأمر المصاب بأنفع الأمور له وهو الصبر والاحتساب‪ ،‬فإن ذلك يخفف مصيبته و يوفر أجره‪،‬‬
‫والجزع والتسخط والتشكى يز يد في المصيبة و يذهب بالأجر‪.‬‬

‫‪5 Bukhārī #5652; Muslim #2576.‬‬
‫‪6 Bukhārī #3163; Muslim #1059.‬‬
‫‪7 Bukhārī #1283; Muslim #926.‬‬

492

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

{The Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, also said that patience is
all of goodness; he said, “One is not given a bounty better and more capacious
than patience.”8}

1

The Literal Meaning

In the Arabic language, ṣabr means to confine or hold in/back (like holding
water in one’s hand, or holding in breath). This is why it is said, “one has been
killed by ṣabr” meaning one was choked to death. God the Most High says, “And
hold your self (i.e. do ṣabr) along with those who call upon their Lord by day
and by night, seeking His face …” [18:28], that is, confine yourself with them.
Therefore, ṣabr is to hold one’s self back from anxiety and anger, to hold one’s
tongue from complaint, and to hold one’s body from disgraceful movements.
It is of three types: patience (perseverance) in obeying God, patience in
avoiding God’s disobedience (namely, resolve), and patience in God’s tests. The
first two of these are related to voluntary acts, whereas the last pertains to what
the servant has no choice in incurring.
I have heard the Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya, may God purify his soul, say,
The patience of [the prophet] Joseph in resisting the temptation of the
minister’s wife was higher than his patience over his brothers’ throwing
him into the well and separating him from his father, for the latter happened to him without his choice. In such cases, a servant of God has no
choice but patience. But [Joseph’s] perseverance in avoiding temptation
involved his choice and pleasure [in obedience to God], struggling against
his ego, especially because the factors that made it harder for him. For he
was young and his natural desire was strong, unmarried with no other
way to satisfy his desire, a stranger in the land with no relatives or friends
to be ashamed of, and a slave—and in servitude one’s moral restraint is
not the same as in freedom. The woman [who tried to seduce him] was
beautiful, of high status, and his owner. She tempted him when her husband was out. On top of all that, she threatened him with imprisonment
and humiliation if he did not oblige. Yet, despite all these factors, he was
patient of his own choice, preferring what is with God. How much better is that compared to [his] patience in the well, about which he had no
choice?

8 Bukhārī and Muslim.

‫‪493‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫]وأخبر أن الصبر خير كله فقال‪» :‬ما أعطي أحد عطاء ً خيرا لً ه وأوسع من الصبر«[‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫و»الصبر« في اللغة الحبس والـكف‪ ،‬ومنه‪ :‬قتل فلان صبرا ً‪ ،‬إذا ُأمسك وح ُبس‪ .‬ومنه قوله تعالى‪:‬‬
‫جه َه ُ﴾ ]الـكهف‪ ،[28:‬أي احبس‬
‫ي يرُ ِيد ُونَ و َ ْ‬
‫ن ي َْدع ُونَ ر ََّبه ُم باِ ل ْغ َد َاة ِ و َال ْع َش ِ ِ ّ‬
‫ك م ََع ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫صبرِ ْ نفَ ْ سَ َ‬
‫﴿و َا ْ‬
‫نفسك معهم‪.‬‬
‫فالصبر حبس النفس عن الجزع والتسخط‪ ،‬وحبس اللسان عن الشكوى‪ ،‬وحبس الجوارح عن‬
‫التشو يش‪.‬‬
‫وهو ثلاثة أنواع‪ :‬صبر على طاعة الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وصبر عن معصية الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وصبر على امتحان الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫فالأولان صبر على ما يتعلق بالـكسب‪ ،‬والثالث صبر على ما لا كسب للعبد فيه‪ .‬وسمعت شيخ‬
‫الإسلام ا بن تيمية—قدس الل ّٰه روحه—يقول‪ :‬كان صبر يوسف عن مطاوعة امرأة العز يز عن شأنها‬
‫أكمل من صبره على إلقاء إخوته له في الجب‪ ،‬و بيعه وتفر يقهم بينه و بين أبيه‪ .‬فإن هذه أمور جرت‬
‫عليه بغير اختياره لا كسب له فيها‪ ،‬ليس للعبد فيها حيلة غير الصبر‪ ،‬وأما صبره عن المعصية فصبر‬
‫واختيار ورضى ومحار بة للنفس‪ ،‬ولا سيما مع الأسباب التي تقوى معها دواعي المواقعة‪ ،‬فإنهكان‬
‫شابا ًوداعية الشباب إليها قو ية‪ ،‬وعزبا لً يس له ما يعوضه و يبرد شهوته‪ ،‬وغريبا ًوالغر يب لا يستحي في‬
‫بلد غربته مما يستحي منه بين أصحابه ومعارفه وأهله‪ ،‬ومملوكا ًوالمملوك أيضا لً يس وازعهكوازع الحر‪،‬‬
‫والمرأة جميلة وذات منصب وهي سيدته‪ ،‬وقد غاب الرقيب‪ .‬وهي الداعية له إلى نفسها والحر يصة على‬
‫ذلك أشد الحرص‪ ،‬ومع ذلك توعدته إن لم يفعل بالسجن والصغار‪ .‬ومع هذه الدواعي كلها صبر‬
‫اختيارا ً وإيثارا ً لما عند الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وأ ين هذا من صبره في الجب على ما ليس من كسبه؟‬

494

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

He [Ibn Taymiyya] also used to say,
Patience in the performance of righteous acts is better and higher in status than patience in avoiding sins, for the benefit that comes from the
performance of a righteous deed is dearer to the Lawgiver than the benefit that comes from avoiding sin, and the ill that comes from absence of
righteous obedience is more hateful to God than the ill that comes from
the presence of disobedience.
He has a treatise on this matter in which he has supported this opinion in
twenty different ways, but this is not the occasion to mention them.9 Our purpose here is to discuss patience, its reality, and its levels and ranks. God alone
gives success.

2

Kinds of Patience

It is of three kinds: patience by God, patience for God, and patience with (i.e.,
in the company of) God.
The first is seeking God’s help and seeing God as the source of patience; and
the patience of a servant is not in his own power but is his Lord’s gift, as He the
Most High says, “And be patient, and your patience is but by God” [16:127]—
that is, if God did not grant you patience, you could not have been patient.
The second is patience for God, which means that the motivation of your
patience must be the love of God, the will to seek His Face and nearness to
Him, not to show off your self-control, seeking other’s admiration, or any other
reasons.
The third is patience with God, which is the servant’s effort with God’s religious decrees and requirements, in terms of persevering with them, living with
them, establishing them, going with them wherever they take him and stopping
wherever they stop. This is his patience with God—to make one’s self attached
to the things God commands and loves. This is the hardest and most demanding type of patience; it is the patience of the truth-loving (ṣiddīq).
Al-Junayd said,

9 The treatise is likely al-Tuḥfa al-ʿIrāqiyya fī al-aʿmāl al-qalbiyya, ed. Yaḥya al-Hunaydī (Maktaba al-Riyāḍ, 1421).

‫‪495‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫وكان يقول‪ :‬الصبر على أداء الطاعات أكمل من الصبر عن اجتناب المحرمات وأفضل‪ ،‬فإن مصلحة‬
‫فعل الطاعة أحب إلى الشارع من مصلحة ترك المعصية‪ ،‬ومفسدة عدم الطاعة أبغض إليه وأكره من‬
‫مفسدة وجود المعصية‪.‬‬
‫وله رحمه الل ّٰه في ذلك مصنف قرره فيه بنحو من عشر ين وجها‪ ً،‬ليس هذا موضع ذكرها‪.‬‬
‫والمقصود‪ :‬الكلام على الصبر وحقيقته ودرجاته ومرتبته‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫»وهو على ثلاثة أنواع‪ :‬صبر بالل ّٰه وصبر لل ّٰه وصبر مع الل ّٰه«‪.‬‬
‫فالأول الاستعانة به ورؤ يته أنه هو المصب ِّر‪ ،‬وأن صبر العبد بر به لا بنفسهكما قال تعالى‪:‬‬
‫صب ْر ُك َ ِإ َلّا باِ ل َل ّـه ِ﴾ ]النحل‪ ،[127:‬يعني إن لم يصب ِّرك هو لم تصبر‪.‬‬
‫صبرِ ْ و َم َا َ‬
‫﴿و َا ْ‬
‫والثاني الصبر لل ّٰه‪ ،‬وهو أن يكون الباعث له على الصبر محبة الل ّٰه وإرادة وجهه‪ ،‬والتقرب إليه‪ ،‬لا‬
‫إظهار قوة النفس‪ ،‬والاستحماد إلى الخلق وغير ذلك من الأغراض‪.‬‬
‫والثالث الصبر مع الل ّٰه‪ .‬وهو دوران العبد مع مراد الل ّٰه الديني منه ومع أحكامه الدينية‪ ،‬صا برا ً‬
‫نفسه معها سا ئرا ً بسيرها مقيما بإقامتها‪ ،‬يتوجه معها أ ين توجهت ركائبها و ينزل معها أ ين استقلت‬
‫مضار بها‪.‬‬
‫فهذا معنى كونه صا برا ًمع الل ّٰه‪ ،‬أي قد جعل نفسه وقفا ًعلى أوامره ومحابه‪ ،‬وهو أشد أنواع الصبر‬
‫وأصعبها‪ ،‬وهو صبر الصديقين‪.‬‬

496

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The journey from this world to the hereafter is easy and light for a believer
compared to parting with people for the sake of God, which is harder. The
journey from the ego to God is still harder, and to be patient with God is
the hardest of all.10
He was asked about patience, so he said, “It is to swallow bitterness without
frowning.”
Dhū al-Nūn said, “Patience is to distance yourself from oppositions [to God’s
commands], tranquility while swallowing the agonies of calamities, and displaying richness (or self-sufficiency) when poverty descends in the fields of
livelihood.”
It has been said, “Patience is to encounter affliction with chivalry.”
It has also been said, “It is to be erased in the affliction without any display
of complaint.”
It has also been said, “It is the habituation of the ego in attacking adversities.”
Also, “[it is] withstanding a calamity with a good attitude like in the state of
well-being.”
ʿAmr b. ʿUthmān said, “[Patience] is standing fast with God, meeting the
calamity God has given with magnanimity and largesse.”
Al-Khawwāṣ said, “It is to stand fast with the commands of the Book and the
Sunna.”
Yaḥyā b. Muʿādh said, “The patience of the lovers is stronger than the patience of the renunciants. How can they ever be patient!” Then he recited,
Patience is a thing of beauty in all things
But in [attaining] you: for that is no good
It was said, “Patience is seeking God’s aid.”
It was also said, “It is to give up complaining.”
It was said,
Patience, like its name, is bitter in taste
But its result is sweeter than honey

10

This and following opinions on the notion of patience draw on Abū al-Qāsim al-Qushayrī,
al-Risāla al-Qushayriyya, translated by Alexander Knysh as Al-Qusharyri’s Epistle on
Sufism: Al-Risala Al-qushayriyya Fi ʿilm Al-tasawwuf (Reading: Garnet Publishing, 2007).

‫‪497‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫قال الجنيد‪ :‬المسير من الدنيا إلى الآخرة سهل هين على المؤمن‪ ،‬وهجران الخلق في جنب الل ّٰه شديد‪،‬‬
‫والمسير من النفس إلى الل ّٰه صعب شديد‪ ،‬والصبر مع الل ّٰه أشد‪.‬‬
‫وسئل عن الصبر فقال‪ :‬تجرع المرارة من غير تعبس‪.‬‬
‫وقال ذو النون‪ :‬الصبر التباعد من المخالفات‪ ،‬والسكون عند تجرع غصص البلية‪ ،‬وإظهار الغنى‬
‫مع حلول الفقر بساحات المعيشة‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬الصبر الوقوف مع البلاء بحسن الأدب‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬هو الفناء في البلوى بلا ظهور ولا شكوى‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬تعو يد النفس الهجوم على المكاره‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬المقام مع البلاء بحسن الصحبةكالمقام مع العافية‪.‬‬
‫وقال عمرو بن عثمان‪ :‬هو الثبات مع الل ّٰه وتلقي بلائه بالرحب والسعة‪.‬‬
‫وقال الخواص‪ :‬هو الثبات على أحكام الكتاب والسنة‪.‬‬
‫وقال يحيى بن معاذ‪ :‬صبر المحبين أشد من صبر الزاهدين‪ ،‬واعجبي كيف يصبرون؟ وأنشد‪:‬‬

‫والصبر يجْم ُل في المواطن كلها‬

‫إلا عليك فإنه لا يجمل‬

‫وقيل‪ :‬الصبر هو الاستعانة بالل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬هو ترك الشكوى‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪:‬‬

‫الصبر مثل اسمه مر مذاقته‬

‫لـكن عواقبه أحلى من العسل‬

498

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

It was said, “Patience is that you are pleased with the perishing of your ego
for the pleasure of one you love, as it was said,
I will perish to please you and perish in lament
It is enough that you are pleased even if you perish in patience.”
It has been said that the ranks of the patient one (ṣābir) are five: ṣābir, muṣṭabir,
mutaṣabbir, ṣabūr, and ṣabbār. The first, ṣābir, is the most general; muṣṭabir is
the one who has earned patience and is filled with it; mutaṣabbir is someone
who forces one’s ego to be patient [beyond one’s capacity]; ṣabūr is someone
whose patience is great in comparison to others; and finally ṣabbār is extremely
patient; this last one excels in the measure and weight of patience whereas the
one before it excels in its quality and modality.
ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib, God be pleased with him, said, “Patience is a mount that
never trips.”
A man asked al-Shiblī, “What kind of patience is the hardest?” He said,
“Patience in God.” The questioner said, “No.” So he said, “Patience for God.”
The questioner again said, “No.” So he said, “Patience with God?” The questioner again said, “No.” So [al-Shiblī] asked, “What then?” The questioner said,
“Patience without (that is, desiring but not attaining) God.” Al-Shiblī [recognizing the meaning] emitted a cry as if his soul was about to leave his
body.
Al-Jurayrī said, “Patience is to not differentiate between the state of blessing
and the state of affliction on account of inner tranquility with both; taṣabbur
is tranquility in trial and when experiencing the weight of the affliction.”
Abī ʿAlī al-Daqqāq said, “The patient are successful in attaining honor in the
two abodes, for they have attained the with-ness of God, as ‘God is with those
who are patient.’ ”
Concerning the words of God the Most High,
Be patient (do ṣabr), encourage each other to be patient (do musābara),
and wait in patience (do murābaṭa). [3:200]
It has been said that this verse proceeds from the easier duty to the harder and
nobler. This means that ṣabr is less than muṣābara, and muṣābara is less than
murābaṭa. Murābaṭa comes from rabṭ which means a tie or hold; al-murābiṭ is
someone who ties (or saddles) his horse in wait for the fright [of sudden attack].
Hence, this term has been used for anyone who ties and holds himself in discipline and waits for God’s commandments.
The Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, said,

‫‪499‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫وقيل‪ :‬الصبر أن ترضى بتلف نفسك في رضى من تحبهكما قيل‪:‬‬

‫سأتلف كي ترضى وأتلف حسرة‬

‫وحسبي أن ترضى و يتلفني صبري‬

‫وقيل‪ :‬مراتب الصا بر ين خمسة‪ :‬صا بر ومصطبر ومتصبر وصبور وصبار‪ .‬فالصا بر أعمها‪ ،‬والمصطبر‬
‫المكتسب الصبر المليء به‪ ،‬والمتصبر متكلف الصبر حامل نفسه عليه‪ ،‬والصبور العظيم الصبر الذي‬
‫صبره أشد من غيره‪ ،‬والصبار الشديد الصبر‪ .‬فهذا في القدر والـكم والذي قبله في الوصف والـكيف‪.‬‬
‫وقال علي بن أبي طالب رضي الل ّٰه عنه‪» :‬الصبر مطية لا تكبو«‪.‬‬
‫وقف رجل على الشبلي فقال‪ :‬أي صبر أشد على الصا بر ين؟ فقال‪ :‬الصبر في الل ّٰه‪ ،‬قال السائل‪ :‬لا‪،‬‬
‫فقال‪ :‬الصبر لل ّٰه‪ ،‬فقال السائل‪ :‬لا‪ ،‬فقال‪ :‬الصبر مع الل ّٰه‪ ،‬قال‪ :‬لا‪ ،‬قال الشبلي‪ :‬فأيش هو؟ قال‪ :‬الصبر‬
‫عن الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فصرخ الشبلي صرخة ًكادت روحه ٺتلف‪.‬‬
‫وقال الجر يري‪» :‬الصبر ألا يفرق بين حال النعمة وحال المحنة‪ ،‬مع سكون الخاطر فيهما‪ .‬والتصبر‬
‫هو السكون مع البلاء مع وجدان أثقال المحنة«‪.‬‬
‫قال أبو علي الدقاق‪» :‬فاز الصا برون بعز الدار ين لأنهم نالوا من الل ّٰه معيته‪ ،‬فإن الل ّٰه مع الصا بر ين«‪.‬‬
‫صا برِ ُوا و َر َاب ِط ُوا﴾ ]آل عمران‪ .[200:‬إنه انتقال من الأدنى إلى‬
‫صبرِ ُوا و َ َ‬
‫وقيل في قوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬ا ْ‬
‫الأعلى‪ ،‬ف»الصبر« دون المصا برة‪ ،‬و»المصا برة« دون »المرابطة«‪ ،‬و»المرابطة« مفاعلة من الر بط‬
‫وهو الشد‪ ،‬وسمي المرابط مرابطا ًلأن المرابطين ير بطون خيولهم ينتظرون الفزع‪ ،‬ثم قيل لكل منتظر‬
‫قد ر بط نفسه لطاعة ينتظرها مرابط‪ ،‬ومنه قول النبي ﷺ‪» :‬ألا أخبركم بما يمحو الل ّٰه به الخطايا و يرفع‬

500

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Shall I not inform you of that by which God erases sins and raises ranks?
Perfecting ablution even when it is difficult, frequency of steps towards
the mosques, and waiting for a prayer after another: that is ribāṭ, that is
ribat!11
It was said, “Be patient with your selves upon God’s obedience, vie in patience
with your hearts in a trial, and lie in wait with your secrets on the path to God.”
It was also said, “Be patient in God, vie in patience through God, and lie in
wait (i.e., do ribāṭ) with God.”
{It was also said, “Be patient with bounties, vie in patience upon afflictions
and harm, and vie in patience in the abode of the enemy, fearing the deity of
the earth and the heavens, so that you may succeed in the enduring abode.”
Hence, ṣabr is with respect to your own ego, muṣābara is between you and
your enemy, and murābaṭa is to stay put and be prepared. Just as ribāṭ is to
guard the frontiers whence the enemy might attack, murābaṭa is similarly to
guard vigilantly the openings or weaknesses of one’s heart against the assaults
of Satan, lest he control it, ruin it, or destroy its order.
It was said, “Swallow patience: if it kills you, you will be a martyr, and if it
sustains you, you will live in honor.”
It was said, “Patience for God is richness, patience through God is endurance,
[patience] in God is a trial, [patience] with God is fidelity, [patience] from [the
attainment of] God is futility, patience in the quest is the index of achievement,
and [patience] in a trial is the symbol of relief.”
It was also said, “The servant’s state with God is his ribāṭ (lit., that state of
endurance before battle) and what is other than God is the enemy [he is battling].”
In al-Bukhārī’s book of al-Adab [al-Mufrad], it is reported that the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, was asked about faith. He said,
“It is patience and liberality.” He (al-Bukhārī) narrated this on the authority of
Mūsā b. Ismāʿīl, who said: it was narrated by Suwayd who said: it was narrated
by ʿAbdallāh b. ʿUmayr on the authority of his father who narrated from [Ibn
ʿUmayr’s] grandfather.
This is the most comprehensive way to put it and most evident, encompassing all stations of faith, from the beginning to the end. For two things
are required of the ego: to give what it has been commanded to give, which
comes from liberality; and to abstain from what is prohibited, which comes
from patience.

11

Muslim #251.

‫‪501‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫به الدرجات؟ إسباغ الوضوء على المكاره‪ ،‬وكثرة الخطى إلى المساجد‪ ،‬وانتظار الصلاة بعد الصلاة‪،‬‬
‫فذلـكم الر باط فذلـكم الر باط«‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪» :‬اصبروا في الل ّٰه وصا بروا بالل ّٰه ورابطوا مع الل ّٰه«‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪» :‬اصبروا على النعماء وصا بروا على البأساء والضراء ورابطوا في دار الأعداء واتقوا إله‬
‫الأرض والسماء[ لعلـكم تفلحون في دار البقاء«‪ .‬فالصبر مع نفسك‪ ،‬والمصا برة بينك و بين عدوك‪،‬‬
‫والمرابطة الثبات وإعداد العدة‪ .‬وكما أن الر باط لزوم الثغر لئلا يهجم منه العدو‪ ،‬فكذلك المرابطة أيضا‬
‫لزوم ثغر القلب لئلا يهجم عليه الشيطان‪ ،‬فيملـكه أو يخر به أو يشعثه‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪» :‬تجرع الصبر‪ ،‬فإن قتلك قتلك شهيدا ً وإن أحياك أحياك عزيزا ً«‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪» :‬الصبر لل ّٰه غناء و بالل ّٰه بقاء وفي الل ّٰه بلاء ومع الل ّٰه وفاء وعن الل ّٰه جفاء‪ ،‬والصبر على الطلب‬
‫عنوان الظفر‪ ،‬وفي المحن عنوان الفرج«‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪» :‬حال العبد مع الل ّٰه ر باطه‪ ،‬وما دون الل ّٰه أعداؤه«‪.‬‬
‫وفي كتاب الأدب للبخاري‪ ،‬سئل رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ عن الإ يمان فقال‪» :‬الصبر والسماحة«‪ ،‬ذكره‬
‫عن موسى بن إسماعيل‪ ،‬قال‪ :‬حدثنا سو يد قال‪ :‬حدثنا عبد الل ّٰه بن عمير عن أبيه عن جده—فذكره‪.‬‬
‫وهذا من أجمع الكلام وأعظمه برهانا ًوأوعبه لمقامات الإ يمان من أولها إلى آخرها‪.‬‬
‫فإن النفس يراد منها شيئان‪ :‬بذل ما أمرت به وإعطاؤه‪ .‬فالحامل عليه السماحة‪ ،‬وترك ما نهيت‬
‫عنه‪ .‬والبعد منه فالحامل عليه الصبر‪.‬‬

502

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

God the Most Exalted and Glorified has enjoined in His Book beautiful
patience, beautiful forgiveness, and beautiful indulgence. I have heard the
Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya, may God purify his soul, say: beautiful patience
is one which accompanies no complaint, beautiful forgiveness is one which
accompanies no anger, and beautiful indulgence is one which accompanies no
harm.
One Israelite report has it, “God revealed to one of His prophets: I sent down
a trial upon My servant so he called unto Me, I delayed in responding so he
complained, so I said to him: My servant, how can I have mercy upon you by
relieving you of the thing through which I have mercy upon you?”
Ibn ʿUyayna said regarding God’s words, “And We have made from among
them leaders who guide by Our command, when they were patient” [32:24]
that “They lived by the summit of all virtues (namely, patience) so God made
them leaders.”
It has been said that the best of the patience of the worshippers is when it
is protected and the best of the patience of the lovers is when it is refused. As
it was said,}
It became clear on the day of parting that all his resolve
To be patience was just a false hope
Complaining to God does not negate patience, for Yaʿqūb (Jacob), upon him
be peace, swore adherence to good patience, and a prophet never violates
his promise, yet he said, “I only complain of my calamity and grief to God”
[12:86]. Similarly, Ayyūb (Job) promised God to be patient, yet prayed, “Harm
has touched my and You [O Lord] are the Most Merciful of all” [21:83].
What does negate patience, however, is complaining of God. One of them
(the righteous) saw a man complaining to another of poverty and need, so he
said, “You complain of the One who is merciful to you to one who is not!”
Then he recited:
When a calamity befalls you, endure the endurance of a nobleman,
For He is well aware of your state
When you complain to a son of Adam:
You complain of the Merciful to one who has no mercy

‫‪503‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫وقد أمر الل ّٰه سبحانه وتعالى في كتابه بالصبر الجميل الذي لا شكوى فيه ولا معه‪ ،‬و»الصفح الجميل«‬
‫هو الذي لا عتاب معه‪ ،‬و»الهجر الجميل« الذي لا أذى معه‪.‬‬
‫وفي أ ثر إسرائيلي‪» :‬أوحى الل ّٰه إلى نبي من أنبيائه‪ :‬أ نزلت بعبدى بلائي فدعاني فماطلته بالإجابة‪،‬‬
‫فشكاني‪ ،‬فقلت‪ :‬عبدي‪ ،‬كيف أرحمك من شيء به أرحمك؟«‪.‬‬
‫صبرَ ُوا﴾[ السجدة‪ .[24:‬قال‪:‬‬
‫جع َلنْ َا م ِْنه ُْم َأئ َِم ّة ً يَه ْد ُونَ ب َأِ ْمر ِناَ ل ََم ّا َ‬
‫]وقال ا بن عيينة في قوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َ َ‬
‫»أخذوا برأس الأمر فجعلهم رؤساء«‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬صبر العابدين أحسنه أن يكون محفوظا‪ ً،‬وصبر المحبين أحسنه أن يكون مرفوضا ًكما قيل‪[:‬‬

‫تبين يوم البين أن اعتزامه‬

‫على الصبر من إحدى‬

‫الظنون الـكواذب والشكوى إلى الل ّٰه عز وجل لا تنافي الصبر‪ ،‬فإن يعقوب—عليه السلام—وعد‬
‫بالصبر الجميل‪ ،‬والنبي إذا وعد لا يخلف‪ ،‬ثم قال‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َن ّم َا َأْشكُو بثَ ِ ّي و َح ُْزن ِي ِإل َى ال َل ّـه ِ﴾ ]يوسف‪.[86:‬‬
‫حم ُ ال َر ّاِحم ِينَ﴾ ]الأنبياء‪.[83:‬‬
‫ت َأْر َ‬
‫سن ِي َ ال ُض ّ ُرّ و َ َأن َ‬
‫وكذلك أيوب أخبر الل ّٰه أنه وجده صا برا ًمع قوله‪﴿ :‬م َ َ ّ‬
‫وإنما ينافي الصبر شكوى الل ّٰه لا الشكوى إليه‪ ،‬كما رأى بعضهم رجلا يً شكو إلى آخر فاقة وضرورة‪،‬‬
‫فقال‪ :‬يا هذا‪ ،‬تشكو من يرحمك إلى من لا يرحمك؟ ثم أنشد‪:‬‬

‫وإذا عرَتك بلية فاصبر لها‬

‫صبر الـكر يم فإنه بك أعلم‬

‫وإذا شكوت إلى ا بن آدم إنما‬

‫تشكو الرحيم إلى الذي لا يرحم‬

504
3

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Patience according to al-Harawī

The author of al-Manāzil said,
Patience is to hold oneself upon what one dislikes and hold back the
tongue from complaining, and this is the hardest of stations for the commoners and most desolate on the path of love, and most reprehensible on
the path of divine unicity.
It is difficult for the commoner for he is a beginner on the path, lacking training
on the way and the refinement necessary to cross the stations, so when trials
befall him and apprehension overwhelms him, he finds it difficult to bear and
endure it patiently. He is neither a devotee habituated in patience nor a lover
who takes pleasure in the affliction in seeking the pleasure of his beloved.
His desolation on the path of love is because this path requires seeking pleasure in the trials given by the beloved, whereas patience necessitates hating
them. He holds himself on to them despite his dislike, which is desolation in
the path of love.
Desolation has a fine point in it, however. It is that seeking delight in a trial
for love is the cause of the intimacy of the heart with the beloved, for when he
feels the pain that requires him to be patient, he moves from intimacy to desolation. Were it not for the desolation, he would not feel the pain that would
necessitate patience.
Its reprehensibility on the path of divine unicity is because it has the force of
a claim: one who is patient claims his strength of endurance, which is a great
claim on behalf of his ego, and this directly contradicts the purity of divine
unicity, for no one has strength but God, and for God is all strength, there being
no strength or power except through God. This is the reason for patience being
reprehensible on the path of divine unicity, a most vile [trait] in fact, as he said,
for affirmation of unicity refers all things back to God whereas patience refers
them to one’s ego. The affirmation of the ego in divine unicity is reprehensible.
This is the sum total of his discourse after a careful, thorough reading, and it
is a reprehensible discourse in itself.
In reality, patience is among the surest of stations on the path of love, the
most necessary for the lovers, the most needed of them, the most welcome and
clearest of stations on the path of affirming divine unicity. The lover needs it in
desperation.
If it is said: how can the lover need it in desperation, even if it negates perfect love, in that it is impossible without a sense of conflict with the love’s will?

‫‪505‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال صاحب المنازل‪» :‬الصبر حبس النفس على المكروه‪ ،‬وعقل اللسان عن الشكوى‪ ،‬وهو من‬
‫أصعب المنازل على العامة‪ ،‬وأوحشها في طر يق المحبة‪ ،‬وأنكرها في طر يق التوحيد«‪.‬‬
‫إنما كان صعبا ً على العامة‪ ،‬لأن العامي مبتديء في الطر يق‪ ،‬وما له در بة بالسلوك‪ ،‬ولا تهذيب‬
‫المرتاض بقطع المنازل‪ ،‬فإذا أصابته المحن أدركه الجزع‪ ،‬وصعب عليه احتمال البلاء‪ ،‬وعز عليه‬
‫وجدان الصبر‪ ،‬لأنه ليس من أهل الر ياضة فيكون مستوطنا لً لصبر‪ ،‬ولا من أهل المحبة فيلتذ بالبلاء‬
‫في رضى محبو به‪.‬‬
‫وأما وحشته في طر يق المحبة فلأنها تقتضي التذاذ المحب بامتحان محبو به له‪ ،‬والصبر يقتضي كراهيته‬
‫لذلك‪ ،‬وحبس نفسه عليهكرها‪ ً،‬فهو وحشة في طر يق المحبة‪.‬‬
‫وفي الوحشة نكتة لطيفة‪ ،‬لأن الالتذاذ بالمحنة في المحبة هو من موجبات أنس القلب بالمحبوب‪ ،‬فإذا‬
‫أحس بالألم—بحيث يحتاج إلى الصبر—انتقل من الأنس إلى الوحشية‪ ،‬ولولا الوحشة لما أحس‬
‫بالألم المستدعي للصبر‪.‬‬
‫وإنما أنكرها في طر يق التوحيد لأن فيه قوة الدعوى‪ ،‬لأن الصا بر يدعي بحاله قوة الثبات‪ ،‬وذلك‬
‫ادعاء منه لنفسه قوة ً عظيمة ً‪ ،‬وهذا مصادمة لتجر يد التوحيد‪ ،‬إذ ليس لأحد قوة البتة‪ ،‬بل لل ّٰه القوة‬
‫جميعا‪ ً،‬ولا حول ولا قوة إلا بالل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫فهذا سبب كون الصبر منكرا ً في طر يق التوحيد‪ ،‬بل من أنكر المنكر—كما قال—لأن التوحيد يرد‬
‫الأشياء إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬والصبر يرد الأشياء إلى النفس‪ ،‬وإثبات النفس في التوحيد منكر‪.‬‬
‫هذا حاصل كلامه محررا ً مقررا ً‪ ،‬وهو من منكر كلامه‪.‬‬
‫بل الصبر من آكد المنازل في طر يق المحبة وألزمها للمحبين‪ ،‬وهم أحوج إلى منزلته ]من كل منزلة[‪،‬‬
‫وهو من أعرف المنازل في طر يق التوحيد وأبينها‪ .‬وحاجة المحب إليه ضرور ية‪.‬‬
‫فإن قيل‪ :‬كيف تكون حاجة المحب إليه ضرور ية مع منافاته لـكمال المحبة‪ ،‬فإنه لا يكون إلا مع‬
‫منازعات النفس لمراد المحبوب؟‬

506

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

It would be said: it is for this reason that it is the surest of stations on the path
to love and most relevant to it, and by it sound and true love can be separated
from deficient and false love. True love is known by the strength of endurance
of pain in the quest of the beloved’s pleasure.
This is why the love of most people is false, for everyone claims to love
God Almighty but when afflicted with pain they abandon their love. None
but the patient endure. Were it not for the difficulties and pain, their love
would not be established. The greatest in love are those most patient for its
sake.
This is why God Almighty has characterized His lovers and allies with patience, saying about his Beloved, “We found him patient,” and then praised him,
“how good a servant he is, truly devout” [38:44].
He commanded the dearest of His creation to Him to be patient upon His
command, that their patience is by His own grace, and praised the patient
ones with the best praise, guaranteeing them the greatest reward, and made
their reward beyond reckoning when the reward of others is measured, and
linked patience to the stations of submission, faith, and excellence, as has been
said earlier, making it a virtue alongside trusting reliance, certitude, righteous
works, and piety. He has declared also that only those with patience can benefit from His signs, that is it good for those who practice it, and that the angels
greet them in the Garden, as has been stated previously.
There is nothing in the feeling of pain or coercion of the ego to be patient
upon it anything to render its love or affirmation of divine unicity defective, for
its sensing of pain and desire to repulse it are natural matters, just as its need
for nourishment from food and water and its affliction if it lacks these. There
is no way to eliminate or suspect the necessities of the ego altogether, or else it
would not be a human ego, nor would love raise it; it would be another world
altogether.
Patience and love do not contradict, but rather accompany and complement. A lover is one who is utterly perseverant. What is a defect in patience
in reality and contradictory to love and affirmation of unicity is that its motive
be anything other than the desire for the pleasure of the beloved, that its motive
be desire for someone else or opposition to the Beloved. This is the desolation
and reprehensibility of patience.
As for one who sees his patience as being for God, by God, and with God, witnessing that his patience is by God Almighty and not by the strength of his own
ego, the love of such a one is not afflicted by desolation nor is his affirmation
of unicity reprehensible.
If this endurance persists for him, he has still only attained one of the kinds
of patience, which is patience in affliction. As for patience in obedience, hold-

‫‪507‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫قيل‪ :‬هذه هي النكتة التي لأجلها كان من آكد المنازل في طر يق المحبة وأعلقها بها‪ ،‬و به يعلم صحيح‬
‫المحبة من معلولها وصادقها من كاذبها‪ ،‬فإن بقوة الصبر على المكاره في مراد المحبوب يعلم صحة محبته‪.‬‬
‫ومن هاهنا كانت محبة أكثر الناس كاذبة ً‪ ،‬لأنهم كلهم ادعوا محبة الل ّٰه تعالى‪ ،‬فحـين امتحنهم‬
‫بالمكاره انخلعوا عن حقيقة المحبة‪ ،‬ولم يثبت معه إلا الصا برون‪ ،‬فلولا تحمل المشاق وتجشم المكاره‬
‫بالصبر لما ثبتت صحة محبتهم‪ ،‬تبين بذلك أن أعظمهم محبة أشدهم صبرا ً‪.‬‬
‫ولهذا وصف الل ّٰه تعالى بالصبر خاصة أحبائه وأوليائه وأحبابه فقال عن حبيبه أيوب‪:‬‬
‫ب﴾ ]ص‪ .[44:‬وأمر‬
‫﴿ِإ َن ّا و َج َْدناَ ه ُ َ‬
‫صا برِ ًا﴾ ]ص‪ ،[44:‬ثم أثنى عليه فقال‪﴿ :‬ن ِّعْم َ ال ْعبَ ْد ُ ۖ ِإ َن ّه ُ َأَّوا ٌ‬
‫أحب الخلق إليه بالصبر لحكمه‪ ،‬وأخبر أن صبره به‪ ،‬وأثنى على الصا بر ين أحسن الثناء‪ ،‬وضمن لهم‬
‫أعظم الجزاء‪ ،‬وجعل أجر غيرهم محسو با ً وأجرهم بغير حساب‪ ،‬وقرن الصبر بمقامات الإسلام‬
‫والإ يمان والإحسان—كما تقدم—فجعله قر ين التوكل واليقين والإ يمان والأعمال والتقوى‪.‬‬
‫وأخبر أن آياته إنما ينتفع بها أولو الصبر‪ ،‬وأخبر أن الصبر خير لأهله‪ ،‬وأن الملائكة تسلم عليهم في‬
‫الجنة بصبرهم‪ ،‬كما تقدم ذلك‪.‬‬
‫وليس في استكراه النفوس لألم ما تصبر عليه وإحساسها به ما يقدح في محبتها ولا توحيدها‪ ،‬فإن‬
‫إحساسها بالألم ونفرتها منه أمر طبعي لها‪ ،‬كاقتضائها للغذاء من الطعام والشراب وتألمها بفقده‪ .‬فلوازم‬
‫النفس لا سبيل إلى إعدامها أو تعطيلها بالكلية وإلا لم تكن نفسا إً نسانية ً‪ ،‬وارتفعت المحبة وكانت عالما ً‬
‫آخر‪.‬‬
‫و»الصبر« و»المحبة« لا يتناقضان‪ ،‬بل يتواخيان و يتصاحبان‪ .‬والمحب صبور‪ ،‬بل علة الصبر في‬
‫الحقيقة المناقضة للمحبة المزاحمة للتوحيد أن يكون الباعث عليه غير إرادة رضى المحبوب‪ ،‬بل إرادة‬
‫غيره أو مزاحمته بإرادة غيره‪ ،‬أو المراد منه لا مراده‪ ،‬هذه هي وحشة الصبر ونكارته‪.‬‬
‫وأما من رأى صبره لل ّٰه وصبره بالل ّٰه وصبره مع الل ّٰه‪ ،‬مشاهدا ً أن صبره به تعالى لا بنفسه‪ ،‬فهذا لا‬
‫يلحق محبته وحشة ولا توحيده نكارة‪ .‬ثم لو استقام له هذا لكان في نوع واحد من أنواع الصبر‪ ،‬وهو‬
‫الصبر على المكاره‪.‬‬

508

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

ing fast to them, and in opposing disobedience, holding oneself from such acts
by one’s own choice and taking delight in that, how could this be desolation,
and what is reprehensible at all about it?
If it is said if one does so out of choice, love, delight, and self-sacrifice, one
was not driven by patience, rather, one’s patience is the concomitance of the
desolation and reprehensibility that he experiences which contradicts the state
of a lover.
It would be said in response that there is no contradiction here for one’s
patience in such a case falls under his pleasure and contentment, and takes on
the judgment of contentment, not because it vanishes but because the strength
of the contentment and love and the preference for the Belove, the station and
the experience becomes one of delightful content, patience being one of its
parts. We do not reject this much, if that is what is meant: well done, then,
bravo! Our intention is not refutation and polemics. If the meaning was something else, it has now been examined and clarified.

4

First Level

He said,
It has three levels. First, patience upon disobedience by studying the
warning in order to persist in faith and avoid the impermissible, and better than that is to endure against disobedience because of modesty.
He mentioned two motivations and benefits of enduring against disobedience.
The two motivations are, first, fear of the warning associated with it and, second, modesty before the Lord Almighty, that His bounties be mobilized for His
disobedience and that He be challenged by [the commission of] enormities.
The two benefits are persisting in faith and caution against the prohibited.
The study and fear of the warning is prompted by the strength of faith in the
revelation and confirmation of its substance.
Modesty is prompted by the strength of knowledge and one’s experience of
the meanings of the Names and Attributes.
Better even than [the motive of modesty], however, is the motive of love.
Of the two benefits, persisting in faith motivates [one] to give up disobedience, for it inevitably reduces it, eliminates it altogether, or at least destroys its
luster and freshness, puts out its light, enervates its faculties or fruits. This is a
necessary relationship between disobedience and faith. It is known by intuitive
experience, revelation, as well as intellect, as it has been authentically reported
that he, God grant him blessing and peace, said,

‫‪509‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫فأما الصبر على الطاعات—وهو حبس النفس عليها—‪ ،‬وعن المخالفات—وهو منع النفس منها‬
‫طوعا ًواختيارا ً والتذاذا ً—فأي وحشة في هذا؟ وأي نكارة فيه؟‬
‫فإن قيل‪ :‬إذا كان يفعل ذلك طوعا ًومحبة ً ورضىً وإيثارا ًلم يكن الحامل له على ذلك الصبر‪ ،‬فيكون‬
‫صبره في هذا الحال ملزوم الوحشة والنكارة لمنافاتها لحال المحب‪.‬‬
‫قيل‪ :‬لا منافاة في ذلك بوجه‪ ،‬فإن صبره حينئذ قد اندرج في رضاه وانطوى فيه‪ ،‬وصار الحكم‬
‫للرضى‪ ،‬لا أن الصبر ع ُدم‪ ،‬بل لقوة وارد الرضى والحب وإيثار مراد المحبوب صار المشهد والمنزل‬
‫للرضى بحكم الحال‪ ،‬والصبر جزء منه ومنطو فيه‪ .‬ونحن لا ننكر هذا القدر‪ ،‬فإن كان هو المراد فحبذا‬
‫الوفاق‪ ،‬وليس المقصود القيل والقال ومنازعات الجدال‪ .‬وإن كان غيره فقد عرف ما فيه‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ ،‬الدرجة الأولى‪ :‬الصبر عن المعصية بمطالعة الوعيد‪ ،‬إ بقاء ً على الإ يمان‬
‫وحذرا ً من الحرام‪ ،‬وأحسن منها الصبر عن المعصية حياء ً«‪.‬‬
‫ذكر للصبر عن المعصية سببان وفائدتان‪:‬‬
‫أما السببان‪ :‬فالخوف من لحوق الوعيد المترتب عليها‪.‬‬
‫والثاني‪» :‬الحياء« من الرب تبارك وتعالى أن يستعان على معاصيه بنعمه وأن يبارز بالعظائم‪.‬‬
‫وأما الفائدتان‪ ،‬فالإ بقاء على الإ يمان‪ ،‬والحذر من الحرام‪.‬‬
‫فأما مطالعة الوعيد والخوف منه‪ ،‬فيبعث عليه قوة الإ يمان بالخـبر والتصديق بمضمونه‪.‬‬
‫وأما الحياء‪ ،‬فيبعث عليه قوة المعرفة ومشاهدة معاني الأسماء والصفات‪.‬‬
‫وأحسن من ذلك أن يكون الباعث عليه وازع الحب‪ ،‬فيترك معصيته محبة ً له‪ ،‬كحال الصهيبيين‪.‬‬
‫وأما الفائدتان‪ ،‬فالإ بقاء على الإ يمان يبعث على ترك المعصية لأنها لا بد أن تنقصه أو تذهب به‬
‫أو تذهب رونقه و بهجته أو تطفىء نوره أو تضعف قوته أو تنقص ثمرته‪ ،‬وهذا أمر ضروري بين‬
‫المعصية و بين الإ يمان‪ ،‬يعلم بالوجود والخـبر والعقل كما صح عنه‪» :‬لا يزني الزاني حين يزني وهو مؤمن‪،‬‬

510

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

A fornicator is not a believer while fornicating, nor one who drinks wine
a believer while drinking it, nor a thief a believer while stealing, nor he
who robs as people look on a believer while doing so. Beware, beware. Yet
the door to repentance [stands] open afterwards.12
As for caution against the prohibited, it consists in enduring against excess in
permissible things, fearing that it will lead to what is prohibited.
Modesty being a trait of the noble, those possessed of pure and dignified
souls, its people are higher than those driven by fear. Furthermore, modesty
before God is a sign of watchfulness before God and presence of the heart with
Him. It is also a sign of His majesty and honor that is not in the motivation
that comes from fear. For if one is motivated by fear, his heart is filled with fear,
while the one who is motivated by modesty, his heart is filled with God. The
one who fears is worried about his ego and wishes to protect it, while the one
who is modest before God is concerned with God and in awe of His greatness.
Both of these stations are stations of faith. Except that modesty is closer to the
station of excellence, for if one reaches a place where it is as if he sees God,
thence emanate and burst open from his heart springs of modesty.
He said,
The second level is patience upon obedience through constant guarding,
keeping an eye on its purity, and improving it through knowledge.
This shows that in his view the doing of acts of obedience is harder than
the avoidance of the illicit and endurance in them higher in rank than the
endurance in avoiding what is illicit.
This is the correct view, as has been discussed before, for the avoidance of
disobedience is the completion of obedience, and the prohibition is intended
for the sake of what is commanded. The illicit acts weaken and deplete the
strength of what is commanded, and so they have been prohibited for the sake
of protecting the commanded things, and the command is, therefore, stronger
and more emphatic. It is like [natural practices that sustain] health and life,
whereas the prohibition of illicit things is for the sake of the protection of heath
and means of life.
The Shaykh also stated that patience in this level is attained by three means:
constancy of obedience, their purification, and their performance in accordance with the demands of [revealed] knowledge. This is the attainment of
excellence through knowledge.
12

Bukhārī #2475; Muslim #57.

‫‪511‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫ولا يشرب الخمر حين يشر بها وهو مؤمن‪ ،‬ولا يسرق حين يسرق وهو مؤمن‪ ،‬ولا ينتهب نهبة ً ذات‬
‫شرف—يرفع إليه الناس فيها أبصارهم حين ينتهبها—وهو مؤمن‪ ،‬فإ ياكم إ ياكم‪ ،‬والتو بة معروضة‬
‫بعد«‪.‬‬
‫وأما الحذر عن الحرام فهو الصبر عن كثير من المباح حذرا ً من أن يسوقه إلى الحرام‪ .‬ولما كان‬
‫»الحياء« من شيم الأشراف وأهل الـكرم والنفوس الزكية‪ ،‬كان صاحبه أحسن حالا ً من أهل‬
‫الخوف‪.‬‬
‫ولأن في الحياء من الل ّٰه ما يدل على مراقبته وحضور القلب معه‪ ،‬ولأن فيه من تعظيمه وإجلاله‬
‫ما ليس في وازع الخوف‪ ،‬فمن وازعه الخوف قلبه حاضر مع العقو بة‪ ،‬ومن وازعه الحياء قلبه حاضر‬
‫مع الل ّٰه‪ .‬والخائف مراع جانب نفسه وحمايتها‪ ،‬والمستحي مراع جانب ر به وملاحظ عظمته‪ .‬وكلا‬
‫المقامين من مقامات أهل الإ يمان‪.‬‬
‫غير أن الحياء أقرب إلى مقام الإحسان وألصق به‪ ،‬فإنه إذا أ نزل نفسه منزلة ً من كأنه يرى الل ّٰه‪،‬‬
‫فنبعت ينابيع الحياء من عين قلبه وتفجرت عيونها‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬الصبر على الطاعة بالمحافظة عليها دواما‪ ً،‬و برعايتها إخلاصا‪ ً،‬و بتحسينها علما ً«‪.‬‬
‫هذا يدل على أن عنده أن فعل الطاعة آكد من ترك المعصية‪ ،‬فيكون الصبر عليها فوق الصبر على‬
‫ترك المعصية في الدرجة‪.‬‬
‫وهذا هو الصواب—كما تقدم—‪ .‬فإن ترك المعصية إنما كان لتكميل الطاعة‪ ،‬والنهي مقصود للأمر‪.‬‬
‫فالمنهي عنه لما كان يضعف المأمور به و ينقصه‪ .‬نهي عنه حماية ً وصيانة ً لجانب الأمر‪ ،‬فجانب الأمر‬
‫أقوى وآكد‪ ،‬وهو بمنزلة الصحة ]والحياة‪ ،‬والنهي بمنزلة الحمية التي تراد لحفظ الصحة[ وأسباب الحياة‪.‬‬
‫وذكر الشيخ أن الصبر في هذه الدرجة بثلاثة أشياء‪ :‬دوام الطاعة‪ ،‬والإخلاص فيها‪ ،‬ووقوعها على‬
‫مقتضى العلم وهو تحسينها علما‪ً.‬‬

512

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Obedience leaves behind one of these three, and if one doesn’t keep constant watch one loses them, and if he protects them two maladies threaten
him.
First, loss of purity in them if their motivation is other than the Face of
God, the will to attain Him and His nearness. This is protected by watching
one’s works for purity. The second fear is that one’s deeds do not correspond
to knowledge, insofar as they contradict the Sunna. One protects them from
this malady by purifying one’s compliance just as he guarded against the first
malady by purifying his intention and will. This is why he said, “through constant guarding, keeping an eye on its purity, and improving it through knowledge.”

5

Third Level

He said,
The third level is patience in calamity by keeping the eyes on the excellence of the reward, anticipating the breath of relief, downplaying the
calamity by counting the favors, and remembering the bounties of the
past.
These three things motivate endurance in the face of affliction.
The first is keeping the eyes on the excellence of the reward. The affliction
becomes easier to bear in proportion to one’s attention to and confidence in
the reward. Similarly, every sufferer finds his load lightened as he anticipates
the delight at the end. Were it not so, the benefits of this world and the next
would be lost, for no one steps forward in the face of immediate hardship
except for the anticipation of a delayed reward, since the ego is addicted to
the love of what is at hand, and intellect is the faculty that gestures toward the
non-immediate and the consideration of the end-goals.
All wise men of all nations agree that bounties are not attained through
bounties, and that whoever befriends comfort must part from it, and that comfort is attained only to the extent that one is willing to tire himself.
Great resolutions are attained by men of resolve in due measure
The noble in due proportion attain noble possessions
In the eyes of the small, the small ones are big
In the eyes of the great, the great ones are small

‫‪513‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫فإن الطاعة تتخلف من فوات واحد من هذه الثلاثة‪ ،‬فإن العبد إن لم يحافظ عليها دواما ًعطلها‪،‬‬
‫وإن حافظ عليها دواما ًعرض لها آفتان‪:‬‬
‫إحداهما‪ :‬ترك الإخلاص فيها‪ ،‬بأن يكون الباعث عليها غير وجه الل ّٰه وإرادته والتقرب إليه‪ ،‬فحفظها‬
‫من هذه الآفة برعاية الإخلاص‪.‬‬
‫الثانية‪ :‬ألا تكون مطابقة للعلم بحيث لا تكون على اتباع السنة‪ ،‬فحفظها من هذه الآفة بتجر يد‬
‫المتابعة‪ ،‬كما أن حفظها من تلك الآفة بتجر يد القصد والإرادة‪ ،‬فلذلك قال‪» :‬بالمحافظة عليها دواما‪ً،‬‬
‫ورعايتها إخلاصا‪ ً،‬وتحسينها علما ً«‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬الصبر في البلاء بملاحظة حسن الجزاء‪ ،‬وانتظارِ روح الفرج وتهو ين البلية بع َّدِ‬
‫أيادي المنن وتذكر سوالف النعم«‪.‬‬
‫هذه ثلاثة أشياء تبعث على الصبر في البلاء‪.‬‬
‫إحداها‪ :‬ملاحظة حسن الجزاء وعلى حسب ملاحظته والوثوق به ومطالعته يخف حمل البلاء‬
‫لشهود العوض‪ ،‬وهذا كما يخف على كل متحمل مشقة ً عظيمة ً حملها لما يلاحظه من لذة عاقبتها‬
‫وظفره بها‪ ،‬ولولا ذلك لتعطلت مصالح الدنيا والآخرة وما أقدم أحد على تحمل مشقة عاجلة إلا لثمرة‬
‫مؤجلة‪ .‬فالنفس موكلة بحب العاجل‪ ،‬وإنما خاصة العقل تلمح العواقب ومطالعة الغايات‪.‬‬
‫وأجمع العقلاء من كل أمة على أن النعيم لا يدرك بالنعيم‪ ،‬وأن من رافق الراحة وأن قدر التعب‬
‫تكون الراحة‪.‬‬

‫على قدر أهل العزم تأتي العزائم‬

‫وتأتي على قدر الـكر يم الـكرائم‬

‫و يكبر في عين الصغير صغيرها‬

‫وتصغر في عين العظيم العظائم‬

514

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The point is that to observe, anticipate, and be certain about the goodly
reward in future aids you in enduring them, be it matters of your choice or
those in which you have none.
The second is that “anticipation of the ease after difficulty” eases enduring
one’s calamities with patience, especially if the hope is strong and the comfort
after calamity certain. He finds even in the midst of the calamity a ray of hope
and a breeze of relief, and this subtle anticipation already becomes a comfort
for him. In moments such as this one understands the meaning of His name
the Subtle.
The third is “downplaying the calamity,” which occurs by two means. First, by
recounting the blessings and benefits bestowed by God upon him, for when the
servant recognizes that he is incapable of counting or encompassing them for
their sheer plenitude and greatness, his calamities look smaller to him in comparison and he realizes that compared to the blessings of God that he enjoys,
his calamities are like a drop in the ocean. Second, by recalling the blessings
of God that he has enjoyed, which pertains to the past, and by recounting the
favors, which pertains to the present, and by anticipating the goodly reward
and relief, which pertains to the future, one in this world and the other on the
Day of Recompense.
It is reported that a devout woman given to worship tripped and fell and lost
her finger, but she laughed it off. Someone asked, “You are laughing?” She said, “I
will reply to you according to your understanding. The sweetness of the reward
that I anticipate made me forget the bitterness of its loss.” She alluded that his
understanding could not grasp what is beyond this, namely, her witnessing of
the One who caused it and the excellence of His choice of this affliction, and
her delight in gratitude to Him, and comparison with the bounties that have
come before.
If it hurts me that you cause me a hurt
It delights me that you thought of me

6

Patience and God

He said,
The weakest kind of patience is patience for God, which is the patience of
the commoners; above it is patience through God, which is the patience of
the seekers, and above it is the patience upon God, which is the patience
of the travelers on the path.

‫‪515‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫والقصد أن ملاحظة حسن العاقبة تعين على الصبر فيما تتحمله باختيارك وغير اختيارك‪.‬‬
‫والثاني‪» :‬انتظار روح الفرج«‪ .‬يعني راحته ونسيمه ولذته‪ .‬فإن انتظاره ومطالعته وترقبه يخفف‬
‫حمل المشقة ولا سيما عند قوة الرجاء والقطع بالفرج‪ ،‬فإنه يجد في حشو البلاء من روح الفرج ونسيمه‬
‫وراحته ما هو من خفي الألطاف‪ ،‬وما هو فرج معجل‪ ،‬و به—و بغيره—يفهم معنى اسمه »اللطيف«‪.‬‬
‫والثالث‪» :‬تهو ين البلية« بأمرين‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬أن يعد نعم الل ّٰه عليه وأياديه عنده‪ ،‬فإذا عجز عن عدها وأيس من حصرها هان عليه ما هو‬
‫فيه من البلاء ورآه—بالنسبة إلى أيادي الل ّٰه ونعمه—كقطرة من بحر‪.‬‬
‫الثاني‪ :‬تذكر سوالف النعم التي أنعم الل ّٰه بها عليه‪ ،‬فهذا يتعلق بالماضي‪ ،‬وتعداد أيادي المنن يتعلق‬
‫بالحال‪ ،‬وملاحظة حسن الجزاء وانتظار روح الفرج يتعلق بالمستقبل‪ ،‬وأحدهما في الدنيا والثاني‬
‫يوم الجزاء‪ .‬و يحكى عن امرأة من العباد أنها عثرت فانقطعت إصبعها فضحكت‪ ،‬فقال لها بعض‬
‫من معها‪ :‬أتضحكين وقد انقطعت إصبعك؟ فقالت‪ :‬أخاطبك على قدر عقلك‪ .‬حلاوة أجرها أنستني‬
‫مرارة ذكرها‪ ،‬إشارة ً إلى أن عقله لا يحتمل ما فوق هذا المقام‪ ،‬من ملاحظة المبتلي ومشاهدة حسن‬
‫اختياره لها في ذلك البلاء‪ ،‬وتلذذها بالشكر له والرضى عنه‪ ،‬ومقابلة ما جاء من قبله بالحمد والشكر‪،‬‬
‫كما قيل‪:‬‬

‫لئن ساءني أن نلتني بمساءة‬

‫فقد سرني أني خطرت ببالكا‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬وأضعف الصبر الصبر لل ّٰه‪ .‬وهو صبر العامة‪ ،‬وفوقه الصبر بالل ّٰه وهو صبر المر يدين‪ ،‬وفوقه الصبر‬
‫على الل ّٰه وهو صبر السالـكين«‪.‬‬

516

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

He means that the patience of the commoners is for God, that is, in hope for
His reward and for fear of His punishment, whereas the patience of the seekers of God is through God, that is, through His strength and aid, and they see
no endurance or strength in themselves, rather, what carries them is the actualization of [the formula] “There is no strength nor power except in God” in
knowledge, inner realization, and experience.
Above these two in rank is patience upon God, namely, upon His commands,
for such a one witnesses the one who controls all things and endures with
patience the divine decrees that are in effect upon him, bringing to him things
that he loves or hates, and this is the patience of the travelers on the path.
These three in [al-Harawī’s] view are the levels of the commoners, as he has
mentioned them in the station of patience under the commoners and stated
that these are the weakest of them. This is the meaning of his words.
The correct view, however, is that patience for God is of a higher status than
patience through God, for the former is related to God’s divinity [acknowledgment of God’s right to be worshiped alone], while the latter is related to God’s
lordship [acknowledgement of God’s power]. What pertains to divinity is more
complete and higher in rank than what relates to His lordship. It is so because
patience for Him is worship and patience through Him is seeking His help—
and since worship is the ultimate objective and seeking help a means to it, it
follows that patience for the worship of God is higher in status than patience
for other things in which God’s help is sought.
Furthermore, patience through God is common to believers as well as nonbelievers (i.e., non-Muslims), and the pious and the wicked—for whoever realizes the existential reality endures through Him. As for patience for Him, that
is the status of the messengers, the prophets, and the most truthful, those who
have observed the truth of “You alone we worship and You alone we seek for
help.”
Also, patience for Him is patience in fulfilling His rights, in doing what is
beloved and delightful to Him, whereas patience through Him could be for that
end or it could be for what displeases or angers Him or is a neutral matter. How
could the two be equal, then?
As for calling “patience upon His decrees” patience upon Him, there is no
dispute about the choice of words once the meaning is clear, as it means
patience upon His ordainment, and the Shaykh has placed that in the third
level. You know by what has been said before that patience in obedience and
in resisting disobedience is more perfect than patience upon His ordained
decrees. For the latter is the patience of choice, love, and self-sacrifice, whereas
patience upon His existential decrees is the patience of necessity, and between
them there is a great difference as you now know.

‫‪517‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫معنى كلامه أن صبر العامة لل ّٰه‪ ،‬أي رجاء ثوابه وخوف عقابه‪ .‬وصبر المر يدين بالل ّٰه أي بقوته‬
‫ومعونته‪ ،‬فهم لا يرون لأنفسهم صبرا ً ولا قوة ً عليه‪ ،‬بل حاملهم التحقق ب »لا حول ولا قوة إلا‬
‫بالل ّٰه« علما ًومعرفة ً وحالا‪ً.‬‬
‫وفوقهما الصبر على الل ّٰه‪ ،‬أي على أحكامه‪ ،‬إذ صاحبه يشهد المتصرف فيه‪ .‬فهو يصبر على أحكامه‬
‫الجار ية عليه جالبة ً عليه ما جلبت من محبوب ومكروه‪ ،‬فهذه درجة صبر السالـكين‪.‬‬
‫وهؤلاء الثلاثة عنده من العوام‪ ،‬إذ هو في مقام الصبر‪ .‬وقد ذكر أنه للعامة وأنه من أضعف منازلهم‪.‬‬
‫هذا تقر ير كلامه‪.‬‬
‫والصواب أن الصبر لل ّٰه فوق الصبر بالل ّٰه وأعلى درجة منه وأجل‪ .‬فإن الصبر لل ّٰه متعلق بالإلهية‪،‬‬
‫والصبر به متعلق بر بو بيته‪ ،‬وما تعلق بإلهيته أكمل وأعلى مما تعلق بر بو بيته‪.‬‬
‫ولأن الصبر له عبادة‪ ،‬والصبر به استعانة‪ ،‬والعبادة غاية والاستعانة وسيلة‪ ،‬والغاية مرادة لنفسها‬
‫والوسيلة مرادة لغيرها‪.‬‬
‫ولأن الصبر به مشترك بين المؤمن والكافر والبر والفاجر‪ ،‬فكل من شهد الحقيقة الـكونية صبر به‪.‬‬
‫وأما الصبر له فمنزلة الرسل والأنبياء والصديقين‪ ،‬أصحاب مشهد ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾‪.‬‬
‫ولأن الصبر له صبر فيما هو حق له‪ ،‬محبوب له مرضى له‪ ،‬والصبر به قد يكون في ذلك وقد يكون‬
‫فيما هو مسخوط له‪ ،‬وقد يكون في مكروه أو مباح‪ ،‬فأ ين هذا من هذا؟‬
‫وأما تسمية »الصبر على أحكامه« صبرا ً عليه‪ ،‬فلا مشاحة في العبارة بعد معرفة المعنى‪ .‬فهذا هو‬
‫الصبر على أقداره‪ ،‬وقد جعله الشيخ في الدرجة الثالثة‪ ،‬وقد عرفت بما تقدم أن الصبر على طاعته‬
‫والصبر عن معصيته أكمل من الصبر على أقداره—كما ذكرنا—‪ .‬فإن الصبر فيهما صبر اختيار وإيثار‬
‫ومحبة‪ ،‬والصبر على أحكامه الـكونية صبر ضرورة‪ ،‬و بينهما من البون ما قد عرفت‪.‬‬

518

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

By this logic, the patience of Abraham, Moses, and Noah, upon them be
blessing and peace, in what occurred to them for God by their own choice as
they confronted their people is more perfect than the patience of Job when
he called out to God due to His affliction and trial that were not caused by his
choice.
Similarly, the patience of Ishmael the slaughtered one and the patience of
His father Abraham in fulfilling the command of God are more perfect than
the patience of Jacob when he lost Joseph.
You know, therefore, that patience for God is more perfect than patience
through God, and patience in obedience and in resisting disobedience is more
meritorious than patience upon His decree and foreordainment. God’s help
alone we seek and on Him we reply, there is no strength nor power except in
Him.
If you said that patience through God is stronger than patience for God, for
what is through God is by means of His power and strength and what is by Him
cannot be confronted by anything else, and it is the patience of the lords of
inner knowledge, whereas the patience for God is the patience of the people of
worship and renunciation, as he said, “The weakest of patience is the patience
for God,” it would be said in response:
There are four levels.
First, the level of perfection, the patience of the people of resolve, which is
the patience for God and through God, as he seeks in his patience God’s Face,
through Him, abandoning any claim to his own strength and power, and this is
the highest and noblest of levels.
Second, that one has neither this nor that, and this is the lowest of
levels, and such is the meanest of creatures who deserves loss and deprivation.
Third, one who has patience through God, who seeks and relies on the
strength and power of God and abjures any claim to his own power, but his
patience is not for the sake of God, for there is nothing in his condition that
corresponds to God’s normative, religious command, and such a person will
attain his goal and be successful, but he will not have any reward in the end, or
he may even have an evil end, depending on his end-goal. This is the station of
the unbelievers and the masters of satanic states, for their patience is through
God but not for the sake of God, even as they have inner unveiling and influence in accordance with the strength of their states. Their example is that of
oppressive kings, for inner states are like dominion, given to the righteous and
the unrighteous, the believing and the unbelieving.

‫‪519‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫و بذلك كان صبر إ براهيم وموسى ونوح عليهم الصلاة والسلام على ما نالهم في الل ّٰه باختيارهم‬
‫وفعلهم ومقاومتهم قومهم أكمل من صبر أيوب على ما ناله في الل ّٰه من ابتلائه وامتحانه بما ليس مسببا ً‬
‫عن فعله‪.‬‬
‫وكذلك صبر إسماعيل الذبيح وصبر أبيه إ براهيم عليهما السلام على تنفيذ أمر الل ّٰه أكمل من صبر‬
‫يعقوب على فقد يوسف‪.‬‬
‫فعلمت أن الصبر لل ّٰه أكمل من الصبر بالل ّٰه‪ ،‬والصبر على طاعته والصبر عن معصيته أكمل من الصبر‬
‫على قضائه وقدره‪ ،‬والل ّٰه المستعان‪ ،‬وعليه التكلان‪ ،‬ولا حول ولا قوة إلا بالل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬الصبر بالل ّٰه أقوى من الصبر لل ّٰه‪ ،‬فإن ما كان بالل ّٰه كان بحوله وقوته وما كان به لم يقاومه‬
‫شيء ولم يقم له‪ ،‬وهو صبر أر باب الأحوال والتأثير‪ .‬والصبر لل ّٰه صبر أهل العبادة والزهد‪ ،‬ولهذا هم—‬
‫مع إخلاصهم وصبرهم لل ّٰه—أضعف من الصا بر ين به‪ ،‬فلهذا قال »وأضعف الصبر‪ ،‬الصبر لل ّٰه«‪.‬‬
‫قيل‪ :‬المراتب أر بع‪:‬‬
‫إحداها‪ :‬مرتبة الـكمال‪ .‬وهي مرتبة أولي العزائم‪ ،‬وهي الصبر لل ّٰه و بالل ّٰه‪ ،‬فيكون في صبره مبتغيا ًوجه‬
‫الل ّٰه صا برا ً به متبرئا ًمن حوله وقوته‪ ،‬فهذا أقوى المراتب وأرفعها وأفضلها‪.‬‬
‫الثانية‪ :‬ألا يكون فيه لا هذا ولا هذا‪ ،‬فهو أخس المراتب وأردأ الخلق‪ ،‬وهو جدير بكل خذلان‬
‫و بكل حرمان‬
‫الثالثة‪ :‬من فيه صبر بالل ّٰه وهو مستعين متوكل على حوله وقوته‪ ،‬متبريء من حوله وقوته‪ ،‬ولـكن‬
‫صبره ليس لل ّٰه إذ ليس فيما هو مراد الل ّٰه الديني منه‪ ،‬فهذا ينال مطلو به و يظفر به‪ ،‬ولـكن لا عاقبة‬
‫له ور بما كانت عاقبته شر العواقب‪.‬‬
‫وفي هذا المقام خفراء الـكفار وأر باب الأحوال الشيطانية‪ ،‬فإن صبرهم بالل ّٰه لا لل ّٰه ولا في الل ّٰه‪،‬‬
‫ولهم من الـكشف والتأثير بحسب قوة أحوالهم وهم من جنس الملوك الظلمة‪ ،‬فإن الحال كالملك‬
‫يعطاه البر والفاجر والمؤمن والكافر‪.‬‬

520

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Fourth, one who possesses endurance for the sake of God but is weak in his
share of patience through Him and reliance and trust in Him. Such a one still
has a praiseworthy end, even if he is weak and incapable and fails in many of
his pursuits, due to his weakness in “You we worship and You we seek for help.”
His share from God is stronger than His share through God. This is the case of
a weak believer.
In contrast, one who endures through God but not for the sake of God is like
a strong but impious man. Accordingly, he who is patient for God and through
God is like a strong believer, and “A strong believer is better and dearer to God
than a weak believer.”13
One who endures for the sake of God and through God is strong and praiseworthy, and one who is neither for God nor endures through God is blameworthy and fruitless; he who endures through God but not for God is capable but
blameworthy, whereas one who is for God but not through God is incompetent
but praiseworthy.
This detail alleviates the confusion in this matter, separating error from rectitude.

13

Muslim #2664.

‫‪521‬‬

‫‪chapter 31‬‬

‫الرابعة‪ :‬من فيه صبر لل ّٰه لـكنه ضعيف النصيب من الصبر به والتوكل عليه والثقة به والاعتماد عليه‪،‬‬
‫فهذا له عاقبة حميدة ولـكنه ضعيف عاجز‪ ،‬مخذول في كثير من مطالبه لضعف نصيبه من ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ‬
‫نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾‪ .‬فنصيبه من الل ّٰه أقوى من نصيبه بالل ّٰه‪ ،‬فهذا حال المؤمن الضعيف‪.‬‬
‫وصا بر بالل ّٰه لا لل ّٰه حال الفاجر القوي‪ .‬وصا بر لل ّٰه و بالل ّٰه حال المؤمن القوي‪ .‬والمؤمن القوي خير‬
‫وأحب إلى الل ّٰه من المؤمن الضعيف‪.‬‬
‫فصا بر لل ّٰه و بالل ّٰه عزيز حميد‪ ،‬ومن ليس لل ّٰه ولا بالل ّٰه مذموم مخذول‪ ،‬ومن هو بالل ّٰه لا لل ّٰه قادر‬
‫مذموم‪ ،‬ومن هو لل ّٰه لا بالل ّٰه عاجز محمود‪.‬‬
‫فبهذا التفصيل يزول الاشتباه في هذا الباب‪ ،‬و يتبين فيه الخطأ من الصواب‪.‬‬

chapter 32

The Station of Joyful Contentment
Among the stations of “You we worship and Your help we seek” is the station of
delightful contentment.
Scholars agree that contentment is emphatically liked, but disagree as to
whether it is an obligation. I heard Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya, may God
honor his soul, report both opinions from the companions of Aḥmad, though
he inclined toward it being beloved but not obligatory. He said, “No command has been given in its regard, unlike patience—which is an obligation—
[however,] those who possess it have been praised.”
Concerning the report that “[God says] whosoever does not bear the trial I
give with patience and is not pleased with My decree should find a Lord other
than Me” he remarked, “It is of Israelite origin and is not authentically reported
from the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace.”
I add that especially for those who say that it is a gift rather than an acquired
trait; how can it be obligated when it is not within one’s capacity?
The masters of the path are split into three opinions concerning this
issue.
The Khorasanians say that delightful contentment falls in the category of stations, as it is the final stage of trusting reliance, and on this view, it is possible
to acquire it.
The Iraqis hold that it is one of the states and hence cannot be earned,
but rather it descends upon the heart just like all that states. The difference
between stations and states is that the former are earned while the latter are
given by God as gifts.
A third group adjudicates between the two positions, among them the author of al-Risāla,1 who says, as do some others, that the beginning of contentment is earned by the servant, and can be considered among the stations, but
its completion is a state, and hence cannot be acquired. Therefore it begins as
a station and is perfected as a state.
Those who make it among the stations offer as proof the fact that God has
praised its people and encouraged them to it, which suggests that it is within
their capacity to attain it. The Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, said,

1 For more on al-Qushayrī’s Risāla, see “Translator’s Introduction” in Volume One.

‫فصل‬
‫ومن منازل ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾ منزلة‪ :‬الرضى‪.‬‬
‫وقد أجمع العلماء على أنه مستحب مؤكد استحبابه‪ ،‬واختلفوا في وجو به على قولين‪.‬‬
‫وسمعت شيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية—قدس الل ّٰه روحه—يحكيهما قولين لأصحاب أحمد‪ ،‬وكان يذهب‬
‫إلى القول باستحبابه‪.‬‬
‫قال‪ :‬ولم يجيء الأمر بهكما جاء الأمر بالصبر‪ ،‬وإنما جاء الثناء على أصحابه ومدحهم‪ .‬قال‪ :‬وأما ما‬
‫يروى من الأ ثر‪» :‬من لم يصير على بلائي ولم يرض بقضائي فليتخذ ر با ً«‪ .‬فهذا أ ثر إسرائيلي ليس يصح‬
‫عن النبي ﷺ‪.‬‬
‫قلت‪ :‬ولا سيما عند من يرى أنه من جملة الأحوال التي ليست بمكتسبة‪ ،‬وأنه موهبة محضة‪ .‬فكيف‬
‫يؤمر به وليس مقدورا ً؟‬
‫وهذه مسألة اختلف فيها أر باب السلوك على ثلاث طرق‪:‬‬
‫فالخراسانيون قالوا‪ :‬إن الرضى من جملة المقامات‪ ،‬وهو نهاية التوكل‪ ،‬فعلى هذا يمكن أن يتوصل‬
‫إليه العبد باكتسابه‪.‬‬
‫والعراقيون قالوا‪ :‬هو من جملة الأحوال وليس كسبيا ً للعبد‪ ،‬بل هو نازلة تحل بالقلب كسا ئر‬
‫الأحوال‪.‬‬
‫والفرق بين المقامات والأحوال أن المقامات عندهم من المكاسب‪ ،‬والأحوال مجرد المواهب‪.‬‬
‫وحكمت فرقة ثالثة بين الطائفتين منهم—صاحب الرسالة—وغيره فقالوا‪ :‬يمكن الجمع بينهما بأن‬
‫يقال‪ :‬بداية الرضى مكتسبة للعبد وهي من جملة المقامات‪ ،‬ونهايته من جملة الأحوال وليست مكتسبة‪.‬‬
‫فأوله مقام ونهايته حال‪.‬‬
‫واحتج من جعله من جملة المقامات بأن الل ّٰه مدح أهله وأثنى عليهم وندبهم إليه‪ ،‬فدل ذلك على‬
‫أنه مقدور لهم‪.‬‬

524

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

“He has truly tasted the taste of faith who is pleased with God as Lord, Islam
as religion, and Muḥammad as messenger.”2 He also said, “Whoever says upon
hearing the call [to prayer], ‘I am pleased with God as lord, Islam as religion,
and Muḥammad as messenger,’ his sins are forgiven.”3
These two Hadiths are the pivot of the religion, and they sum up the entire
religion. They encompass being content and pleased with God’s lordship and
divinity, being pleased with and obedience to His Messenger, and being pleased
with and submission to His religion. Whosoever has all four of these, such is the
most truthful believer indeed. Such a claim is easy on the tongue, but in reality
the most difficult of all things when one is tested. Especially when one is faced
with what opposes one’s desire and quest, it becomes clear that the contentment was limited to one’s words and not a reality.
Being content and pleased with God’s divinity includes being pleased with
one’s love, fear, hope, repentance, and exclusive devotion to Him, making Him
the sole object of one’s quest and love, like one who is utterly content with his
Beloved. All this comprises His worship and unadulterated devotion to Him.
Being pleased with God’s lordship is to be pleased with His plan for his servant, and to make Him alone the object of his reliance. His seeking of help and
his source of support and trust is none but God.
The first of these constitutes being pleased with God’s [religious] commands
and the second is being pleased with God’s [existential] decree.
To be pleased with Muhammad, God grant him blessing and peace, as
His Messenger entails total obedience and submission to him, such that he
becomes preferable to one’s ego, to not seek guidance except in his words, to
not seek a judge other than him, nor make anyone else a judge over his teachings, nor be pleased with anyone’s judgment but his, neither in the matter of
God’s Names and Attributes, nor in the matter of the realities of faith and its
various spiritual stations, nor in the matter of his judgments, be they related to
external matters or internal. If one is unable to find his judgment, his turning
to any other source must be like one who cannot find any food and turns to carrion and blood only out of dire necessity, and the best case would be for him to
treat it like the alternative of dust for one’s ablution when he is unable to find
purifying water.
To be pleased with Islam as one’s religion is to be pleased with what the religion commands, forbids, judges, and informs, and to not let there be in the
heart the slightest discomfort or doubt regarding it, but to submit to it wholly,
even if it be against one’s desires or plans or against the teachings of one’s
shaykh, one’s authority in law (taqlīd), or his school.
2 Muslim #34.

‫‪525‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وقال النبي ﷺ‪» :‬ذاق طعم الإ يمان من رضي بالل ّٰه ر با ًو بالإسلام دينا ًو بمحمد رسولا ً«‪.‬‬
‫وقال‪» :‬من قال حين يسمع النداء‪ :‬رضيت بالل ّٰه ر با ً و بالإسلام دينا ً و بمحمد رسولا ً غفرت له‬
‫ذنو به«‪.‬‬
‫وهذان الحديثان عليهما مدار مقامات الدين وإليهما ينتهي‪ .‬وقد تضمنا الرضى بر بو بيته سبحانه‬
‫وألوهيته‪ ،‬والرضى برسوله والانقياد له‪ ،‬والرضى بدينه والتسليم له‪ .‬ومن اجتمعت له هذه الأر بعة فهو‬
‫الصّديق حقا‪ ً.‬وهي سهلة بالدعوى واللسان‪ ،‬وهي من أصعب الأمور عند الحقيقة والامتحان‪ ،‬ولا‬
‫سيما إذا جاء ما يخالف هوى النفس ومرادها من ذلك‪ ،‬تبين أن الرضى كان على لسانه لا على حاله‪.‬‬
‫فالرضى بإلهيته يتضمن الرضى بمحبته وحده وخوفه ورجاءه والإنابة إليه والتبتل إليه‪ ،‬وانجذاب‬
‫قوى الإرادة والحب كلها إليه‪ .‬فعل الراضي بمحبو بهكل الرضى وكل ذلك يتضمن عبادته والإخلاص‬
‫له‪.‬‬
‫والرضى بر بو بيته يتضمن الرضى بتدبيره لعبده‪ ،‬و يتضمن إفراده بالتوكل عليه والاستعانة به والثقة‬
‫به والاعتماد عليه‪ ،‬وأن يكون راضيا بً كل ما يفعل به‪.‬‬
‫فالأول يتضمن رضاه بما يؤمر به‪ ،‬والثاني يتضمن رضاه بما يقدر عليه‪.‬‬
‫وأما الرضى بنبيه رسولا ًفيتضمن كمال الانقياد له والتسليم المطلق إليه‪ ،‬بحيث يكون أولى به من‬
‫نفسه فلا يتلقى الهدى إلا من مواقع كلماته‪ ،‬ولا يحاكم إلا إليه ولا يحكم عليه غيره‪ ،‬ولا يرضى بحكم‬
‫غيره البتة‪ ،‬لا في شيء من أسماء الرب وصفاته وأفعاله‪ ،‬ولا في شيء من أذواق حقائق الإ يمان‬
‫ومقاماته‪ ،‬ولا في شيء من أحكام ظاهره و باطنه‪] ،‬لا يرضى في ذلك بحكم غيره[‪ ،‬ولا يرضى‬
‫إلا بحكمه‪ .‬فإن عجز عنهكان تحكيمه غيره من باب غذاء المضطر إذا لم يجد ما يقيته إلا من الميتة‬
‫والدم‪ ،‬وأحسن أحواله أن يكون من باب التراب الذي إنما يتيمم به عند العجز عن استعمال الماء‬
‫الطهور‪.‬‬
‫وأما الرضى بدينه‪ :‬فإذا قال أو حكم أو أمر أو نهى رضي كل الرضى‪ ،‬ولم يبق في قلبه حرج من‬
‫حكمه‪ ،‬وسلم له تسليما‪ ً.‬ولو كان مخالفا لً مراد نفسه أو هواها‪ ،‬أو قول مقلَ ّده وشيخه وطائفته‪.‬‬

‫‪3 Muslim #386.‬‬

526

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

If you ever reach this station, you will find yourself alone amongst men
except those who are strangers in this world. So be warned and never let yourself feel lonely even if you are left alone in this cause—for that, by God, is the
true honor and might, and that is the price of the company of God and His
messenger—that is a breeze of His ultimate nearness. This is what it means to
be pleased with Him as your lord, with Muhammad, upon him be blessing and
peace, as your Messenger, and with Islam as your religion.
In fact, whenever a truthful servant finds a touch of estrangement and
ostracism for God’s sake and tastes of God’s exclusive company, he yearns for
more of it, asking God: O God, increase me in isolation from men, and loneliness in the world, and nearness to you! The more he tastes the sweetness of
this estrangement and isolation, the more he begins to see that nearness to
[worldly] men is the true loneliness, to be honored by such is the true humiliation, to agree with their opinions and the filth of their minds is the very
essence of ignorance, and to follow their customs and conventions is the true
strangeness. He has not preferred anyone of the created things to his share from
God, nor sold his portion from God in return for their agreement in what will
not incur anything but loss and whose ultimate benefit is to gain their goodwill
in this earthly abode. When the chain of causality ends, the realities are realized and what is in the graves resurrected and what is in the breasts brought
out, when the secrets are unveiled and one finds no power nor succor except
in the True Patron, profit will then become set apart from loss, and what will
count in the Balance will become clear, and God alone is sought in help and
reliance.
The resolution of the issue, then, is that the station of delightful contentment is acquired in regard to its causes and gifted in regard to its essence. Once
one has earned its causes and planted its seed, he picks the fruit of contentment from it. For contentment is the end of trusting reliance on God, and once
one becomes well-established in reliance, surrender, and relegation, contentment will inevitably come to him. However, due to its mighty status and the
inability of most selves to incline to it and the difficulty of maintaining it, God
has, in His mercy and concession, not made it an obligation upon His creation.
Rather, He has made it recommended and praiseworthy, promising that the
reward of their pleasure with Him in all things is nothing short of His pleasure with them, which is greater and loftier than the Gardens and all that is in
them.
Whoever is content with his Lord, God is pleased with him; rather, the contentment of a servant towards God is a consequence of God’s pleasure with
him. In fact, God’s pleasure with a servant surrounds the pleasure of the servant from either side. For it is due to God’s pleasure and grace that the servant

‫‪527‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وهاهنا يوحشك الناس كلهم إلا الغر باء في العالم‪ ،‬فإ ياك أن تستوحش من الاغتراب والتفرد‪،‬‬
‫فإنه والل ّٰه عين العزة‪ ،‬والصحبة مع الل ّٰه ورسوله وروح الأنس به والرضى به ر با‪ ً،‬و بمحمد ﷺ رسولا ً‬
‫و بالإسلام دينا‪ً.‬‬
‫بل الصادق كلما وجد مس الاغتراب وذاق حلاوته وتنسم روحه قال‪ :‬اللهم زدني اغترابا ً‬
‫ووحشة ً من العالم وأنسا بً ك‪ ،‬وكلما ذاق حلاوة هذا الاغتراب وهذا التفرد رأى الوحشة عين الأنس‬
‫بالناس‪ ،‬والذل عين العز بهم‪ ،‬والجهل عين الوقوف مع آرائهم وز بالة أذهانهم‪ ،‬والانقطاع عين التقيد‬
‫برسومهم وأوضاعهم‪ ،‬فلم يؤثر بنصيبه من الل ّٰه أحدا ً من الخلق ولم يبع حظه من الل ّٰه بموافقتهم فيما لا‬
‫يجدي عليه إلا الحرمان‪ ،‬وغايته مودة بينهم في الحياة الدنيا‪ ،‬فإذا انقطعت الأسباب وحقت الحقائق‬
‫و بعثر ما في القبور وحصل ما في الصدور و بليت السرا ئر ولم يجد من دون مولاه الحق من قوة ولا‬
‫ناصر‪ ،‬تبين له حينئذ مواقع الربح من الخسران‪ ،‬وما الذي يخف به الميزان‪ ،‬والل ّٰه المستعان وعليه‬
‫التكلان‪.‬‬
‫والتحقيق في المسألة أن »الرضى« كسبي باعتبار سببه‪ ،‬موهبي باعتبار حقيقته‪ .‬فيمكن أن يقال‬
‫بالـكسب لأسبابه‪ ،‬فإذا تمكن في أسبابه وغرس شجرته اجتنى منها ثمرة الرضى‪ ،‬فإن الرضى آخر التوكل‪.‬‬
‫فمن رسخ قدمه في التوكل والتسليم والتفو يض حصل له الرضى ولا بد‪ ،‬ولـكن لعزته وعدم إجابة أكثر‬
‫النفوس له وصعو بته عليها لم يوجبه الل ّٰه على خلقه رحمة ً بهم وتخفيفا ًعنهم‪ ،‬لـكن ندبهم إليه وأثنى على‬
‫أهله وأخبر أن ثوابه رضاه عنهم الذي هو أعظم وأكبر وأجل من الجنات وما فيها‪ .‬فمن رضي عن ر به‬
‫رضي الل ّٰه عنه‪ ،‬بل رضى العبد عن الل ّٰه من نتائج رضى الل ّٰه عنه‪ ،‬فهو محفوف بنوعين من رضاه عن‬

528

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

attains contentment. Once the servant has attained it, God responds by being
pleased with him or her even more. This is why contentment is the greatest of
the doors to God, the Garden of the earth, a leisurely respite for the knowers,
the life of the lovers, a bounty for the worshippers, and the coolness of the eyes
of the devotees.
The greatest of the facilitating causes of contentment is to hold on to those
things that God has characterized as being the source of His pleasure, for that
surely leads to the path of contentment and delight.
Yaḥyā b. Muʿādh was asked, “When does a servant reach the station of contentment?” He said, “When he has established himself upon four principles in
dealing with His Lord, he says, ‘[O Lord] If You give me, I accept; if You deprive
me, I am content; if You leave me [by affording me free time], I worship you;
and if you call on me, I respond.’”
Al-Junayd said, “Contentment is the soundness of the knowledge that
reaches to the heart, for when the heart encounters the reality of knowledge, it
attains contentment.”
Contentment and love are not like the stations of hope and fear. For pleasure
and love are two of the states of the dwellers of the Garden, yet they do not
part from the seeker in this world, in the intermediate state [between death
and the Judgment Day], and in the hereafter. Fear and hope, in contrast, do
not accompany the righteous in the Garden, for now they know that they have
attained what they hoped for and avoided what they feared. They still may
hope eternally in His magnanimity, but one that has no uncertainty attached
to it, but an anticipatory hope in a promise that is truthful by a Beloved that
is omnipotent. This hope is of an entirely different order than hope in earthly
life.
Ibn ʿAṭāʾ, God have mercy on him, said, “Contentment is the tranquility of
the heart in what God has eternally chosen for the servant as being the best
possible choice, and so he is pleased with it.”
I add that this contentment pertains to what is from God; as for contentment
with Him, that is even higher and nobler than that; the difference between one
who is pleased with His Beloved and one who is pleased with what he receives
from the Beloved is the share of his ego.

‫‪529‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫عبده‪ :‬رضىً قبله أوجب له أن يرضى عنه‪ ،‬ورضىً بعده هو ثمرة رضاه عنه‪ ،‬ولذلك كان الرضى باب‬
‫الل ّٰه الأعظم وجنة الدنيا ومستراح العارفين وحياة المحبين ونعيم العابدين وقرة عيون المشتاقين‪.‬‬
‫ومن أعظم أسباب حصول الرضى أن يلزم ما جعل الل ّٰه رضاه فيه‪ .‬فإنه يوصله إلى مقام الرضى‬
‫ولابد‪.‬‬
‫قيل ليحيى بن معاذ‪ :‬متى يبلغ العبد إلى مقام الرضى؟ فقال‪» :‬إذا أقام نفسه على أر بعة أصول‬
‫فيما يعامل به ر به‪ ،‬فيقول‪ :‬إن أعطيتني قبلت وإن منعتني رضيت وإن تركتني عبدت وإن دعوتني‬
‫أجبت«‪.‬‬
‫وقال الجنيد‪» :‬الرضى هو صحة العلم الواصل إلى القلب‪ .‬فإذا باشر القلب حقيقة العلم أداه إلى‬
‫الرضى«‪.‬‬
‫وليس الرضى والمحبة كالرجاء والخوف‪ .‬فإن الرضى والمحبة حالان من أحوال أهل الجنة‪ ،‬لا‬
‫يفارقان ]المتلبس بهما[ في الدنيا ولا في البرزخ ولا في الآخرة‪ ،‬بخلاف الخوف والرجاء‪ ،‬فإنهما‬
‫يفارقان أهل الجنة بحصول ما كانوا يرجونه‪ ،‬وأمنهم مما كانوا يخافونه وإن كان رجاؤهم لما ينالون من‬
‫كرامته دائما‪ ً،‬لـكنه ليس رجاء ً مشو با بً شك‪ ،‬بل رجاء واثق بوعد صادق من حبيب قادر‪ ،‬فهذا لون‬
‫ورجاؤهم في الدنيا لون‪.‬‬
‫وقال ا بن عطاء—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪» :‬الرضى سكون القلب إلى قدم اختيار الل ّٰه للعبد أنه اختار له‬
‫الأفضل فيرضى به«‪.‬‬
‫قلت‪ :‬وهذا رضى بما منه‪ ،‬وأما الرضى به فأعلى من هذا وأفضل‪ ،‬ففرق بين من هو راض بمحبو به‬
‫و بين من هو راض فيما يناله من محبو به من حظوظ نفسه‪.‬‬

530
1

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Contentment versus Patience in Suffering

Contentment does not require absence of the feeling of pain and discomfort,
but that one does not object to or feel resentment toward God’s decree. This
distinction has been lost on some people who reject the idea of contentment
in the face of difficulties altogether as an unnatural thing, and argue that what
is required is nothing other than patience. For pleasure at displeasure is oxymoronic, for the one is the opposite of the other.
The correct position, however, is that there is no contradiction between
them, for the presence of affliction and discomfort of the self does not negate
pleasure and contentment, such as the pleasure of a patient with drinking bitter medicine, or the pleasure of a fasting person on a hot day with the feeling of
hunger and thirst, the pleasure of a warrior with the difficulties and struggles
he faces in the path of God, and so on.
Contentment is a path to God that is short and quick and attains the highest goal. Yet, it is arduous. But it is not more arduous than the difficulty in the
path of armed struggle, nor does it have the steep paths and deserts that the
latter has. Its steep road is nothing but a lofty will, pure soul, and the settling
of the self upon everything that comes from God. What makes it easy for the
servant is his knowledge of the weakness and helplessness of one’s self and the
mercy, compassion, and goodness of God. When one considers the two facts
and yet fails to throw himself before God in contentment with every motivation of love and joy drawn to it, his self is not worthy of God, far removed from
Him, undeserving of His nearness and friendship, suffering from maladies and
trials. For the path of contentment is one which causes a servant to leap in
strides even when he is in his bed and makes him surpass a rider by many a
destination.
The fruit of contentment is happiness and delight with the Lord Almighty.
I saw Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya, may God honor his soul, in a dream and
mentioned to him an issue regarding the acts of the heart and went on to mention its greatness and benefit, which I will not mention here. His response was,
“As for me: my way is to be pleased and delighted with God,” or something to
this effect. This was his state in life as is apparent and as his state made plain.
But al-Wāsiṭī4 said, “Put your contentment to use as best as you can, but do
not let your contentment put you to use so that you will become veiled by its
pleasure and lost in it to the reality of what you see.” This allusion of al-Wāsiṭī
4 Muḥammad b. Mūsā al-Wāsiṭī (d. 320), a companion of al-Junayd’s circle. For more on him,
see Laury Silvers, A Soaring Minaret: Abu Bakr al-Wasiti and the Rise of Baghdadi Sufism
(Albany: SUNY Press, 2010).

‫‪531‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫وليس من شرط »الرضى« ألا يحس بالألم والمكاره‪ ،‬بل ألا يعترض على الحكم ولا يتسخطه‪ ،‬ولهذا‬
‫أشكل على بعض الناس الرضى بالمكروه وطعنوا فيه‪ ،‬وقالوا هذا ممتنع على الطبيعة‪ ،‬وإنما هو الصبر‪،‬‬
‫وإلا فكيف يجتمع الرضى والـكراهية وهما ضدان؟‬
‫والصواب أنه لا تناقض بينهما وأن وجود التألم وكراهة النفس له لا ينافي الرضى‪ ،‬كرضى المر يض‬
‫بشرب الدواء الـكر يه‪ ،‬ورضى الصائم في اليوم الشديد الحر بما يناله من ألم الجوع والظمأ‪ ،‬ورضى المجاهد‬
‫بما يحصل له في سبيل الل ّٰه من ألم الجراح‪ ،‬وغيرها‪.‬‬
‫وطر يق الرضى طر يق مختصرة قر يبة جدًا موصلة إلى أجل غاية‪ ،‬ولـكن فيها مشقة ً‪ ،‬ومع هذا‬
‫فليست مشقتها بأصعب من مشقة طر يق الجهاد‪ ،‬ولا فيها من العقبات والمفاوز ما فيها‪ ،‬وإنما عقبتها‬
‫همة عالية ونفس زكية وتوطين النفس على كل ما يرد عليها من الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫و يسهل ذلك على العبد علمه بضعفه وعجزه ورحمته به وشفقته عليه و بره به‪ .‬فإذا شهد هذا وهذا ولم‬
‫يطرح نفسه بين يديه و يرضى به وعنه‪ ،‬وتنجذب دواعي حبه ورضاهكلها إليه‪ ،‬فنفسه نفس مطرودة‬
‫عن الل ّٰه بعيدة عنه‪ ،‬ليست مؤهلة ً لقر به وموالاته‪ ،‬أو نفس ممتحنة مبتلاة بأصناف البلايا والمحن‪.‬‬
‫فطر يق الرضى والمحبة ت ُسير العبد وهو مستلق على فراشه‪ ،‬فيصبح أمام الركب بمراحل‪.‬‬
‫وثمرة الرضى الفرح والسرور بالرب تبارك وتعالى‪.‬‬
‫ورأيت شيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية—قدس الل ّٰه روحه—في المنام‪ ،‬وكأني ذكرت له شيئا ًمن أعمال‬
‫القلب وأخذت في تعظيمه ومنفعته—لا أذكره الآن—فقال‪ :‬أما أنا فطر يقتي الفرح بالل ّٰه والسرور به‬
‫أو نحو هذا من العبارة‪.‬‬
‫وهكذا كانت حاله في الحياة‪ ،‬يبدو ذلك على ظاهره و ينادي به عليه حاله‪ .‬لـكن قد قال الواسطي‪:‬‬
‫استعمل الرضى جهدك‪ ،‬ولا تدع الرضى يستعملك فتكون محجو با بً لذته ورؤ يته عن حقيقة ما تطالع‪.‬‬

532
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
is a greatly arduous pass and crossing in the view of the People [of Sufism],
for to them seeking rest and tranquility in the states, stopping at them for the
sake of pleasure and love, is a great veil between them and their Lord, as their
own pleasure veils them from observing the rights of the object of their love
and worship, and this difficult pass is not crossed except by the great masters.
Al-Wāsiṭī frequently cautioned against this challenge and warned of its
[treacherous nature]. He would say, “Beware of sweetening your acts of worship, for they are a deadly poison.”
This, then, is the meaning of [al-Harawī’s] words, “putting contentment to
use” but do not let it use you, that is, your work must not be intended to attain
the sweetness of contentment, such that that becomes your real motivation.
Rather, make it an instrument and cause in the attainment of your goal and
objective, so that you use it rather than letting it use you.
This caution is not limited to the station of contentment, however, but pertains to all of the states and stations of the heart in which the heart finds peace.
One ought not to work toward love just for the sake of love and the delight
and bliss that accompanies it, but rather use the love to accomplish that which
pleases the Beloved; to stop at the love would be a defect of love.
Dhū al-Nūn said, “There are three signs of contentment: abandoning control
before the decree, possessing no bitterness after the decree, and the excitation
of love when the affliction is at its worst.”
It was said to Ḥusayn the son of ʿAlī, God be pleased with them both, that
Abū Dharr, God be pleased with him, says, “Poverty is dearer to me than affluence and sickness dearer to me than health.” Ḥusayn said, “God have mercy on
Abū Dharr. As for me, I say, ‘Whosoever trusts the goodness of God’s choice for
him does not wish for anything other than what God has chosen.’ ”
Al-Fuḍayl b. ʿIyād said to Bishr al-Ḥāfī, “Contentment is superior to renunciation towards this world, for one who is pleased does not desire for anything
above what he has been given.”
Abū ʿUthmān was asked about the saying of the Prophet, peace be upon
him, “I ask for contentment after the divine decree,” so he said, “This is because
being pleased before divine judgment [of a matter that afflicts us] is only intention and resolution; the real contentment is the one that is after the judgment.”
It was said: “Contentment is to avoid complaining about any affliction, whatever it may be.”
“It is to give up choice.”
“It is to welcome decrees with delight.”
“It is the tranquility of the heart under the passing decrees.”

‫‪533‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وهذا الذي أشار إليه الواسطي هو عقبة عظيمة عند القوم ومقطع لهم‪ .‬فإن مساكنة الأحوال‬
‫والسكون إليها والوقوف عندها استلذاذا ًومحبة ً حجاب بينهم و بين ر بهم بحظوظهم عن مطالعة حقوق‬
‫محبو بهم ومعبودهم‪ ،‬وهي عقبة لا يجوزها إلا أولو العزائم‪.‬‬
‫وكان الواسطي كثير التحذير من هذه العقبة شديد التنبيه عليها‪ .‬ومن كلامه‪ :‬إ ياكم واستحلاء‬
‫الطاعات فإنها سموم قاتلة‪.‬‬
‫فهذا معنى قوله‪» :‬استعمل الرضى ولا تدع الرضى يستعملك«‪ ،‬أي لا يكون عملك لأجل حصول‬
‫حلاوة الرضى‪ ،‬بحيث تكون هي الباعثة لك عليه‪ ،‬بل اجعله آلة ً لك وسببا ً موصلا ً إلى مقصودك‬
‫ومطلو بك‪ ،‬فتكون مستعملا لً ه لا أنه مستعمل لك‪.‬‬
‫وهذا لا يختص بالرضى‪ ،‬بل هو عام في جميع الأحوال والمقامات القلبية التي يسكن إليها القلب‪.‬‬
‫حتى إنه أيضا لا يكون عاملا ًعلى المحبة لأجل المحبة وما فيها من اللذة والسرور والنعيم‪ ،‬بل يستعمل‬
‫المحبة في مراضي المحبوب لا يقف عندها‪ ،‬فهذا من علل المحبة‪.‬‬
‫وقال ذو النون‪» :‬ثلاثة من أعلام الرضى‪ :‬ترك الاختيار قبل القضاء‪ ،‬وفقدان المرارة بعد القضاء‪،‬‬
‫وهيجان الحب في حشو البلاء«‪.‬‬
‫وقيل للحسين بن علي—رضي الل ّٰه عنهما—‪ :‬إن أبا ذر رضي الل ّٰه عنه يقول‪ :‬الفقر أحب إلي من‬
‫الغنى والسقم أحب إلي من الصحة‪ ،‬فقال‪ :‬رحم الل ّٰه أبا ذر‪ ،‬أما أنا فأقول‪ :‬من اتكل على حسن اختيار‬
‫الل ّٰه له لم يتمن غير ما اختار الل ّٰه له‪.‬‬
‫وقال الفضيل بن عياض لبشر الحافي‪ :‬الرضى أفضل من الزهد في الدنيا لأن الراضي لا يتمنى فوق‬
‫منزلته‪.‬‬
‫وسئل أبو عثمان عن قول النبي ﷺ‪» :‬أسألك الرضى بعد القضاء« فقال‪ :‬لأن الرضى قبل القضاء‬
‫عزم على الرضى‪ ،‬والرضى بعد القضاء هو الرضى‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬الرضى ارتفاع الجزع في أي حكم كان‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬رفع الاختيار‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬استقبال الأحكام بالفرح‪.‬‬
‫وقيل سكون القلب تحت مجاري الأحكام‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬نظر القلب إلى قديم اختيار الل ّٰه للعبد‪ ،‬وهو ترك السخط‪.‬‬

534

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

ʿUmar b. al-Khaṭṭāb wrote to Abū Mūsa al-Ashʿarī, may God be pleased with
them both,
All goodness lies in being pleased and content. So if you can, do so, otherwise, be patient.
Abū ʿAlī al-Daqqāq said,
Man is like an earthen pot that has no value if it opposes the degree of the
Truth Almighty.
Abū ʿUthmān al-Ḥīrī said,
For forty years God has not made me stay in a place that I have disliked or
made me move to another than I have resented.
Contentment has three kinds. The contentment of the commoners with what
God has apportioned for him and given him, the contentment of the elite with
what God has apportioned and decreed, and the contentment of the elite of
the elite with Him in exchange for everything else.

2

Contentment and Tranquility

The author of al-Manāzil says:
God Almighty has said,
“O soul at peace, return unto thy Lord, well-pleased, well-pleasing!
Enter thou among My servants! Enter thou My Garden!”
[This verse means that] God has not permitted a way unto Him for one
who is resentful. Thus He made entry into the state of contentment a
condition for any seeker. And contentment is the name of a truthful stop
where [God] stops his servant, seeking neither to move forward nor backward, neither increase nor replace any state. It is among the first steps of
the elite and the most arduous for the commoners.
His words “God has not permitted a way unto Him for one who is resentful”
make the [honorable] return of the soul to His Majesty contingent upon the
attribute of contentment, lacking which there is no way unto Him. An example of this is in the words of the Almighty,

‫‪535‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وكتب عمر بن الخطاب إلى أبي موسى رضي الل ّٰه عنهما‪» :‬أما بعد‪ ،‬فإن الخـير كله في الرضى‪ ،‬فإن‬
‫استطعت أن ترضى وإلا فاصبر«‪.‬‬
‫وقال أبو علي الدقاق‪ :‬الإنسان خزف‪ ،‬وليس للخزف من الخطر ما يعارض فيه حكم الحق تعالى‪.‬‬
‫وقال أبو عثمان الحـيري‪ :‬منذ أر بعين سنة ً ما أقامني الل ّٰه في حال فكرهته‪ ،‬وما نقلني إلى غيره‬
‫فسخطته‪.‬‬
‫والرضى ثلاثة أقسام‪ :‬رضى العوام بما قسمه الل ّٰه وأعطاه‪ ،‬ورضى الخواص بما قدره الل ّٰه وقضاه‪،‬‬
‫ورضى خواص الخواص به بدلا ًمن كل ما سواه‪.‬‬

‫فصل قال صاحب المنازل—رحمه الل ّٰه—‪:‬‬
‫ض َي ّة ً ف َاْدخ ُل ِي ف ِي عِب َادِي‬
‫ضيةَ ً َمّْر ِ‬
‫ك ر َا ِ‬
‫جع ِي ِإل َى ٰ ر َب ِّ ِ‬
‫س ال ْم ُْطم َئ َِن ّة ُ اْر ِ‬
‫»قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬ياَ َأ َي ّت ُه َا ال َن ّْف ُ‬
‫ل‬
‫خط إليه سبيلا‪ ً،‬وشرط القاصدِ الدخو ُ‬
‫ج َن ّت ِي﴾ ]الفجر‪ .[30–27:‬لم يدع في هذه الآية للمتس ّ ِ‬
‫و َاْدخ ُل ِي َ‬
‫في الرضى‪ ،‬والرضى اسم للوقوف الصادق‪ ،‬حيثما وقف العبد لا يلتمس متقدما ً ولا متأخرا ً‪ ،‬ولا‬
‫يستز يد مزيدا ً ولا يستبدل حالا‪ ً،‬وهو من أوائل مسالك أهل الخصوص وأشقها على العامة«‪.‬‬
‫خط إليه سبيلا ً«‪ ،‬فلأنه قيد رجوعها إليه سبحانه بحال‪،‬‬
‫أما قوله‪» :‬لم يد َع في هذه الآية للمتس ّ ِ‬
‫وهو وصف الرضى‪ .‬فلا سبيل إلى الرجوع إليه مع سلب ذلك الوصف عنها‪ ،‬وهذا نظير قوله تعالى‪:‬‬

536

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

[So God recompenses the godfearing,] whom the angels receive [in death]
well-disposed, saying, “Peace be on you! Enter the Garden for what you
used to do.” [16:32]
Here [God] has conditioned the reception of the angels’ greetings and glad tidings on their dying well-disposed. This verse leaves no room for one who does
not meet this condition to deserve this glad tiding. This means that [al-Harawī’s
idea of] attainment of contentment as a condition for a soul returning to its
Lord [honorably] is, I say, related to the allusion of the verse, not its immediate
meaning. For the immediate meaning of the verse is the soul’s pleasure with
what it has attained of noble and generous reception [with its Lord], and His
pleasure with it. This will be said to it at the moment of its exit from the abode
of this world and its presentation before God.
ʿAbdallāh b. ʿAmr, God be pleased with them both, said,
When a believing servant dies God sends to it two angels along with a gift
from the Garden. It is thus addressed, “Come out, O tranquil soul, come
to breeze and fragrance, and to a Lord who is with thee well-pleased.”5
There are three opinions as to the occasion of this glad tiding. The first, and the
most well-known, is that it will be the time of death. Al-Ḥasan [of Basra] said,
“When God intends to collect it, it resigns to its Lord in tranquility, well-pleased
with God, and so God is pleased with it.”
The second opinion is that this glad tiding will be given to it at the time of
resurrection. This is the opinion of ʿIkrima, ʿAṭāʾ, al-Ḍaḥḥāk, and a few others.
The third opinion is that the first part of this compliment, namely, “Return
unto thy Lord, well-pleased, well-pleasing,” will be said at the time of death,
while the second part, “Enter thou among My servants! Enter though My Garden!” will be said to it on the Day of Resurrection. Abū Ṣāliḥ said that “Return
unto thy Lord, well-pleased, well-pleasing” will be said upon its exit from the
world, whereas on the Day of Resurrection, it will be said, “Enter thou among
My servants! Enter though My Garden!”
The correct opinion is that this compliment will be presented to the goodly
soul upon its departure from this world as well as on the Day of Resurrection.
For the first resurrection of the soul is its death. At that moment, if it had been
tranquil and content with God, it will find itself in the presence of the Highest
Companion and His Garden. Sound Hadiths provide evidence for this. Then,
on the Day of Resurrection, this glad tiding is [once again] given to it, and thus
the return to God and entry into the Garden is complete.
5 Reported in al-Nasāʾī on the authority of Abū Hurayra.

‫‪537‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫كنت ُم ْ تعَ ْم َلوُ نَ﴾ ]النحل‪.[32:‬‬
‫سل َام ٌ ع َل َي ْك ُم ُ اْدخ ُلوُ ا اْلج َنَ ّة َ ب ِم َا ُ‬
‫ن ٺ َتوَ فَ َ ّاه ُم ُ ال ْم َل َائ ِك َة ُ َطي ِّب ِينَ ۙ يقَ ُولوُ نَ َ‬
‫﴿ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫فإنما أوجب لهم هذا السلام من الملائكة والبشارة‪ ،‬بقيد وهو وفاتهم طيبين‪ ،‬فلم تبق الآية لغير الطيب‬
‫سبيلا ًلهذه البشارة‪.‬‬
‫والحاصل أن الدخول في الرضى شرط في رجوع النفس إلى ر بها‪ ،‬فلا ترجع إليه إلا إذا كانت‬
‫راضية‪.‬‬
‫قلت‪ :‬هذا تعلق بإشارة الآية لا بالمراد منها‪ ،‬فإن المراد منها رضاها بما حصل لها من كرامته ونالته‬
‫عند الرجوع إليه‪ ،‬فحصل لها رضاها والرضى عنها‪ ،‬وهذا يقال لها عند خروجها من دار الدنيا وقدومها‬
‫على الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫قال عبد الل ّٰه بن عمرو رضي الل ّٰه عنهما‪» :‬إذا توفى العبد المؤمن أرسل الل ّٰه إليه ملـكين‪ ،‬وأرسل‬
‫إليه بتحفة من الجنة‪ ،‬فيقال‪ :‬اخرجي أيتها النفس المطمئنة‪ ،‬اخرجي إلى روح ور يحان‪ ،‬ورب عنك‬
‫راض«‪.‬‬
‫وفي وقت هذه المقالة ثلاثة أقوال للسلف‪:‬‬
‫أحدها‪ :‬أنه عند الموت وهو الأشهر‪ ،‬قال الحسن—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—‪ :‬إذا أراد الل ّٰه قبضها اطمأنت‬
‫إلى ر بها ورضيت عن الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فيرضى الل ّٰه عنها‪.‬‬
‫وقال آخرون‪ :‬إنما يقال لها ذلك عند البعث‪ ،‬هذا قول عكرمة وعطاء والضحاك وجماعة‪.‬‬
‫ض َي ّة ً﴾—تقال لها عند الموت‪،‬‬
‫ضيةَ ً َمّْر ِ‬
‫ك ر َا ِ‬
‫جع ِي ِإل َى ٰ ر َب ِّ ِ‬
‫وقال آخرون‪ :‬الكلمة الأولى—وهي‪﴿ :‬اْر ِ‬
‫ج َن ّت ِي﴾—إنما تقال لها يوم القيامة‪ .‬قال أبو صالح‪:‬‬
‫والكلمة الثانية—وهي‪﴿ :‬ف َاْدخ ُل ِي ف ِي عِب َادِي و َاْدخ ُل ِي َ‬
‫ض َي ّة ً﴾‪ ،‬هذا عند خروجها من الدنيا‪ ،‬فإذا كان يوم القيامة قيل لها‪:‬‬
‫ضيةَ ً َمّْر ِ‬
‫ك ر َا ِ‬
‫جع ِي ِإل َى ٰ ر َب ِّ ِ‬
‫﴿اْر ِ‬
‫ج َن ّت ِي﴾‪.‬‬
‫﴿ف َاْدخ ُل ِي ف ِي عِب َادِي و َاْدخ ُل ِي َ‬
‫والصواب أن هذا القول يقال لها عند الخروج من الدنيا و يوم القيامة‪ ،‬فإن أول بعثها عند مفارقتها‬
‫الدنيا‪ ،‬وحينئذ فهي في الرفيق الأعلى إن كانت مطمئنة ً إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وفي جنتهكما دلت عليه الأحاديث‬
‫الصحيحة‪ .‬فإذا كان يوم القيامة قيل لها ذلك‪ ،‬وحينئذ فيكون تمام الرجوع إلى الل ّٰه ودخول الجنة‪.‬‬
‫فأول ذلك عند الموت‪ ،‬وتمامه ونهايته يوم القيامة‪ .‬فلا اختلاف في الحقيقة‪.‬‬

538

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

However, the Shaykh [al-Harawī] understands from this verse that the return
of the soul to God is contingent upon its being well-pleased. It would have been
better if he had employed it to endorse the station of tranquility, for this state of
being well-pleased and well-pleasing occurs to the soul, according to the verse,
due to its tranquility.
Now we shall return to the explanation of his statements.
His statement “And contentment is the truthful stop” means stopping with
what the Lord Almighty has required in religion without hesitation or objection. This is required of those who are the foremost, which is truthful standing
with the intended meaning or demand of the Truth without being muddied by
any hesitation or impeded by one’s own desire.
His statement could be read as “where a servant stops” such that the servant
is the subject of the verb, so that he stops by the leave of his Lord seeking neither to move forward nor backward. It would also be correct if [the servant] is
read as the object, and this is more obvious. The meaning would now be “wherever God stops His servant,” as the verb waqafa could be used as transitively
or intransitively. This would mean that wherever his Lord makes him stand,
he seeks neither to advance nor retreat. This must, however, refer to conditions related to God’s existential will that does not pertain to divine command
and prohibition; if it meant the religious decree, then perfection always lies in
seeking to advance in it. If he does not aspire to advance toward God in every
moment, he would return to what he does not know. There is no standing in
the way, but if he stands in a place with respect to wealth and poverty, comfort
and discomfort or illness, or being at home or homeless, he stands where He
makes him stand, seeking nothing other than the state that He has given. This
is to perfect his contentment with the choice of God for him and his effacement
of his own choice into it. The same applies to his statement “he seeks neither
increase nor to replace a state.”
This point that the Shaykh [al-Harawī] has brought up is one of the many
kinds of contentment, which is contentment with respect to divine ordainment and existential decrees, against which resistance has not been commanded.6

6 This point by al-Harawī, and Ibn al-Qayyim’s agreement with it, is non-trivial, if one juxtaposes it to the scriptural imperative to seek prosperity and strength in this world (for example,
Q. 2:201; 8:60; 11:52, etc). Consider, also, the doctrine of beneficial objectives (maqāṣid) of the
sharīʿa that Muslim scholars have long endorsed.

‫‪539‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫ولـكن الشيخ أخذ من إشارة الآية أن رجوعها إلى الل ّٰه من الخلق في هذا العالم إنما يحصل‬
‫برضاها‪ ،‬ولـكن لو استدل بالآية في مقام الطمأنينة لكان أولى‪ ،‬فإن هذا الرجوع الذي حصل لها‬
‫فيه رضاها والرضى عنها إنما نالته بالطمأنينة‪ ،‬وهو حظ الـكسب من هذه الآية‪ ،‬وموضع التنبيه على‬
‫موقع الطمأنينة وما يحصل لصاحبها‪ ،‬فلنرجع إلى شرح كلامه‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬الرضى هو الوقوف الصادق«‪ ،‬ير يد به الوقوف مع مراد الرب تبارك وتعالى الديني حقيقة‪،‬‬
‫من غير تردد في ذلك ولا معارضة‪ ،‬وهذا مطلوب القوم السابقين‪ ،‬وهو الوقوف الصادق مع مراد‬
‫الحق تعالى من غير أن يشوب ذلك تردد ولا يزاحمه مراد‪.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬حيثما وقف العبد«‪ ،‬يصح أن يكون »العبد« فاعلا‪ ً،‬أي حيث ما وقف بإذن ر به لا‬
‫يلتمس تقدما ً ولا تأخرا ً و يصح أن يكون مفعولا ً وهو أظهر‪ ،‬أي حيثما وقف الل ّٰه العبد—فإن‬
‫»وقف« يستعمل لازما ًومتعديا ً—أي حيثما وقفه ر به لا يطلب تقدما ًولا تأخرا ً‪ ،‬وهذا إنما يكون‬
‫فيما يقفه فيه من مراده الـكوني الذي لا يتعلق بالأمر والنهي‪ .‬وأما إذا وقفه في مراد ديني فكماله‬
‫بطلب التقدم فيه دائما‪ ً،‬فإنه إن لم تكن همته التقدم إلى الل ّٰه في كل لحظة رجع من حيث لا يدري‪،‬‬
‫فلا وقوف في الطر يق‪ .‬ولـكن إذا وقف في مقام—من الغنى والفقر‪ ،‬والراحة والتعب‪ ،‬والسقم‪،‬‬
‫والاستيطان ومفارقة الأوطان—يقف حيث وقفه‪ ،‬فلا يطلب غير تلك الحالة التي أقامه الل ّٰه فيها‪،‬‬
‫وهذا لتصحيح رضاه باختيار الل ّٰه له والفناء به عن اختياره لنفسه‪.‬‬
‫وكذلك قوله‪» :‬لا يستز يد مزيدا ً ولا يستبدل حالا ً«‪.‬‬
‫هذا الذي ذكره الشيخ فرد من أفراد الرضى‪ ،‬وهو الرضى بالأقسام والأحكام الـكونية التي لم يؤمر‬
‫بمدافعتها‪.‬‬

540

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

His statement that it “is among the first steps of the elite” means that since
the path of the elite is part from the ego, and parting from the will is the beginning of the parting from the ego, which is why contentment in this sense is the
beginning of the path of the elite. This idea in essence is based on his position
that annihilation is the ultimate goal above the station of contentment.
The correct opinion, however, is that contentment is nobler and loftier than
annihilation. Contentment is the goal, not the beginning. Indeed, the station
of gratitude is above even contentment, which is in between [the station of
gratitude] and the station of patience.
Finally, [al-Harawī’s] statement that contentment “is the most arduous for
the commoners” means that abjuring sensual pleasures and comforts is the
most difficult thing for common people, and that is precisely the first requirement of attaining contentment.

3

Three Levels of Contentment

He said,
It has three levels. First is the contentment of the commoners, which is
contentment with God as Lord and displeasure with the worship of all
other than Him, and this is the pivot of Islam that purifies one from major
associationism.
Contentment with God as Lord means not taking a master other than God
Almighty in whose disposal of affairs one seeks his peace of heart and to whom
one brings one’s needs. The Almighty said, “Say: Shall I seek a lord other than
God, when He in fact is the lord of all things?” [6:164]. Ibn ʿAbbās, God be
pleased with him, said [concerning the meaning of “lord” in this verse], “Master and diety”. It means, then: How can I seek a lord other than Him who is the
lord of all things? He said in the beginning of the Sūra, “Say: Shall I take as an
ally other than God who is the originator of the heavens and the earth?” [6:14].
That is, [the ally here means] deity, source of support, help, and refuge; this is
the kind of alliance that necessitates love and obedience. In the middle [of the
Sūra] He said, “Shall I seek an arbiter other than God when He is the one who
has revealed to you a Book clearly detailed?” [6:114]. That is, shall I seek other
than God someone who will arbitrate between me and you and to whom we
can turn for judgment? Similarly, this being the Book of the master of all the
judges, how can we seek arbitration from a book other than His, when He has
sent it down as a book that is detailed, clear, sufficient, and efficacious?

‫‪541‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وقوله‪» :‬وهو من أوائل مسالك أهل الخصوص« يعني أن سلوك أهل الخصوص هو بالخروج عن‬
‫النفس‪ ،‬والخروج عن الإرادة هو مبدأ الخروج عن النفس‪ ،‬فإذا الرضى بهذا الاعتبار من أوائل‬
‫مسالك الخاصة‪.‬‬
‫وهذا على أصله في كون الفناء غاية مطلو بة فوق الرضى‪.‬‬
‫والصواب أن »الرضى« أجل منه وأعلى‪ ،‬وهو غاية لا بداية‪.‬‬
‫نعم‪ ،‬فوقه مقام »الشكر« فهو منزلة بينه و بين منزلة الصبر‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬وأشقها على العامة« وذلك لمشقة الخروج عن الحظوظ على العامة‪ ،‬و »الرضى« أول ما‬
‫فيه الخروج عن الحظوظ‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫خط عبادة‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهو على ثلاث درجات‪ :‬الدرجة الأولى رضى العامة‪ ،‬وهو الرضى بالل ّٰه ر با‪ ً،‬وتس ُ ّ‬
‫ما دونه‪ ،‬وهذا قطب رحى الإسلام‪ ،‬وهو يطهر من الشرك الأكبر«‪.‬‬
‫ل‬
‫الرضى بالل ّٰه ر با ًألا يتخذ ر با ًغير الل ّٰه تعالى يسكن إلى تدبيره و ينزل به حوائجه‪ .‬قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬ق ُ ْ‬
‫ل شَ ْ‬
‫يء ٍ﴾ ]الأنعام‪ .[164:‬قال ا بن عباس رضى الل ّٰه عنهما‪» :‬سيدا ً‬
‫ب ك ُ ِّ‬
‫َأغ َي ْر َ ال َل ّـه ِ َأب ْغ ِي ر َ ًب ّا و َه ُو َ ر َ ُ ّ‬
‫ل َأغ َي ْر َ ال َل ّـه ِ َأَّتخ ِذ ُ‬
‫وإلها ً«‪ ،‬يعني فكيف أطلب ر با غيره وهو رب كل شيء؟ وقال في أول السورة‪﴿ :‬ق ُ ْ‬
‫ض﴾ ]الأنعام‪ ،[14:‬يعني معبودا ً وناصرا ً ومعينا ًوملجأ ً‪ ،‬وهو من الموالاة‬
‫ت و َاْلَأْر ِ‬
‫سم َاو َا ِ‬
‫و َل ًِي ّا ف َاطِرِ ال َ ّ‬
‫ب‬
‫كم ًا و َه ُو َ ال َ ّذ ِي َأ نز َ َ‬
‫التي ٺتضمن الحب والطاعة‪ .‬وقال في وسطها‪َ ﴿ :‬أفغَ يَ ْر َ ال َل ّـه ِ َأب ْت َغ ِي ح َ َ‬
‫ل ِإل َي ْك ُم ُ ال ْك ِتاَ َ‬
‫صل ًا﴾ ]الأنعام‪ ،[114:‬أي أفغير الل ّٰه أبتغي من يحكم بيني و بينكم‪ ،‬فنتحاكم إليه فيما اختلفنا فيه؟‬
‫م ُف َ َ ّ‬
‫وهذا كتابه سيد الحكام فكيف نتحاكم إلى غير كتابه‪ ،‬وقد أ نزله مفصلا ًمبينا ًكافيا ًشافيا ً؟‬

542

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

When you consider these three verses properly you shall see that [their
teachings] comprise nothing but contentment with God as the lord, Islam as
the religion, and Muhammad as the messenger, and you will see the hadith7
reflecting these [verses] and derived from them. Many are pleased with Him as
the lord and seek no lord but Him, yet they are not pleased with Him as their
patron, but rather, their patrons are other than Him, thinking that they bring
them closer to God. Their patronage is like those who receive the patronage of
the courtiers of kings. This precisely is associationism. True monotheism is that
one does not take patrons other than Him, and the Qurʾan is filled with declarations that characterize the pagans as those who have taken patrons other than
God.
This is the essence of the clientage of his prophets and messengers and
His believing servants, as this is part of the perfection of faith. The clientage
of His clients is a class and taking of patrons other than Him is a class altogether different. One who understandings the difference between them should
seek monotheism from its essence. This question is the essence and crux of
monotheism.
Many others seek a judge other than Him, seeking his judgment, arguing for
him and being pleased with his judgment. These three, then, are the pillars of
monotheism: that one takes no lord other than Him, nor object of worship, nor
judge.
The exegesis of pleasure with God as the lord is that you are displeased
with the worship of other than Him, {this is to be pleased with God as god,
which is the perfection of being pleased with God as the lord, for whosoever
is duly pleased with God has his lord is necessarily displeased with the worship of another} absolutely. For being pleased with the purification of his lordship necessitates the purification of His worship, just as the knowledge of the
unicity of His lordship necessitates the knowledge of the unicity of His divinity.
His statement “And it is the pivot of Islam” means that the pivot of Islam is
that one is content with His worship alone and displeased with the worship
of any other, and it has been stated that worship is love with humility, and so
everyone to whom you have humbled yourself, obeyed, and loved other than
God, you are his slave.

7 The reference is to several hadiths that include this formula; see, for example, Muslim
#386.

‫‪543‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وأنت إذا تأملت هذه الآيات الثلاث حق التأمل‪ ،‬رأيتها هي نفس الرضى بالل ّٰه ر با ًو بالإسلام‬
‫دينا ًو بمحمد رسولا‪ ً،‬ورأيت الحديث مترجما ًعنها ومشتقا ًمنها‪ ،‬فكثير من الناس يرضى به ر با ًولا يبغي‬
‫ر با ًسواه‪ ،‬لـكنه لا يرضى به وحده وليا‪ ً،‬بل يوالي من دونه أولياء ظنا ًمنه أنهم يقر بونه إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وأن‬
‫موالاتهم كموالاة خواص الملك وهذا عين الشرك‪ .‬بل التوحيد ألا يتخذ من دونه أولياء‪ .‬والقرآن مملوء‬
‫من وصف المشركين بأنهم اتخذوا من دونه أولياء‪.‬‬
‫وهذا غير موالاة أنبيائه ورسله وعباده المؤمنين فيه‪ .‬فإن هذا من تمام الإ يمان وتمام موالاته‪ ،‬فموالاة‬
‫أوليائه لون واتخاذ الولي من دونه لون‪ ،‬ومن لم يفهم الفرقان بينهما فليطلب التوحيد من رأس فإن‬
‫هذه المسألة أصل التوحيد وأساسه‪.‬‬
‫وكثير من الناس يبتغي غيره حكم ًا يحاكم إليه و يخاصم إليه و يرضى بحكمه‪ ،‬وهذه المقامات الثلاث‬
‫هي أركان التوحيد‪ ،‬ألا يتخذ سواه ر با ًولا إلها ًولا غيره حكما‪ً.‬‬
‫وتفسيره الرضى بالل ّٰه ر با أً ن تسخط عبادة ما دونه‪] ،‬وهذا هو الرضى بالل ّٰه إلها‪ ً،‬وهو من تمام الرضى‬
‫بالل ّٰه ر با‪ ً.‬فمن أعطى الرضى به ر با ًحقه سخط عبادة ما دونه[ قطعا‪ ً،‬لأن الرضى بتجر يد ر بو بيته يستلزم‬
‫تجر يد عبادته‪ ،‬كما أن العلم بتوحيد الر بو بية يستلزم العلم بتوحيد الألوهية‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬وهو قطب رحى الإسلام« يعني أن مدار رحى الإسلام على أن يرضى العبد بعبادة وحده‪،‬‬
‫يسخط عبادة غيره‪ ،‬وقد تقدم أن العبادة هي الحب مع الذل‪ ،‬فكل من ذللت له وأطعته وأحببته‬
‫دون الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فأنت عبد له‪.‬‬

544

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

His statement “and it purifies one from major associationism” means that
associationism is of two kinds, major and minor; this contentment purifies one
from the major one. As for the minor one, what purifies from it is to descend
on the station of “You we worship and You alone we seek for help.”

4

The Three Conditions of Contentment

He said,
It is sound when three conditions are met, that God Almighty is dearer of
all things to the servant, the foremost object of one’s reverence, and the
most deserving of things of one’s obedience.
He means that this kind of contentment can be sound only with three things.
First, that God Almighty is the dearest of things to the servant, and this is
known by three further things. One, that his love is greater in the heart than
any other love and any other object of love; two, that His love overwhelms every
other love, such that the love of all things other than Him is overpowered, overwhelmed, and contained in His love; and three, that the love of other than Him
is subservient to His love. Thus, He is the One loved for His sake as the foremost
objective, and other than Him is loved in following His love, just as anyone else
is obeyed in obedience to Him. He alone in reality is the Obeyed and the Loved.
These three apply to Him being the highest object of one’s reverence and
obedience as well.
To sum up, then, He alone ought to be the greatest beloved and master; one
who does not love and revere Him does not obey Him, and such a one is arrogant before Him. When he loves and glorifies another along with Him, and
obeys the other along with Him, he is an associationist. Only when he singles
Him out for love, glorification, and obedience is he truly the monotheistic servant.

‫‪545‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وقوله‪» :‬وهو يطهر من الشرك الأكبر« يعني أن الشرك نوعان‪ :‬أكبر وأصغر‪ ،‬فهذا الرضى يطهر‬
‫صاحبه من الأكبر‪ ،‬وأما الأصغر فيطهره نزوله منزلة ﴿ِإ َي ّاك َ نعَ ْب ُد ُ و َِإ َي ّاك َ ن َْستعَ يِ نُ﴾‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬وهو يصح بثلاثة شروط‪ :‬أن يكون الل ّٰه عز وجل أحب الأشياء إلى العبد‪ ،‬وأولى الأشياء‬
‫بالتعظيم‪ ،‬وأحق الأشياء بالطاعة‪.‬‬
‫]يعني أن هذا النوع[ من الرضى إنما يصح بثلاثة أشياء أيضا‪ً:‬‬
‫أحدها‪ :‬أن يكون الل ّٰه عز وجل أحب شيء إلى العبد‪ :‬وهذه تعرف بثلاثة أشياء‪:‬‬
‫أحدها‪ :‬أن تسبق محبته إلى القلب كل محبة‪ ،‬فتتقدم محبته المحاب كلها‪.‬‬
‫الثاني‪ :‬أن تقهر محبتهكل محبة ]فتكون محبته غيره مقهورة ً مغلو بة ً منطو ية ً في محبته‪ .‬الثالث‪ :‬أن‬
‫تكون محبة غيره[ تابعة ً لمحبته فيكون هو المحبوب بالذات والقصد الأول‪ ،‬وغيره محبو با ًتبعا ًلحبه‪ ،‬كما‬
‫يطاع تبعا لً طاعته‪ .‬فهو في الحقيقة المطاع المحبوب‪.‬‬
‫وهذه الثلاثة في كونه أولى الأشياء بالتعظيم والطاعة أيضا‪ً.‬‬
‫فالحاصل أن يكون الل ّٰه وحده المحبوب المعظم المطاع‪ ،‬فمن لم يحبه ولم يطعه ولم يعظمه فهو متكبر‬
‫عليه‪ ،‬ومتى أحب معه سواه وعظم معه سواه وأطاع معه سواه فهو مشرك‪ ،‬ومتى أفرده وحده بالحب‬
‫والتعظيم والطاعة فهو عبد موحد‪.‬‬

546

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

5

Second Level

He said,
The second level is contentment with8 God, and this is the contentment
of which the revelation has spoken, and it is contentment with Him in
everything He decides and measures out, and this is the beginning of the
paths of the elite.
The Shaykh has made this level higher than the last one. This is because one
does not enter Islam except by means of the first level, when his feet are established in it; as for this level, it pertains to the affairs of the heart and is for the
elite and concerns contentment with His judgments and decrees.
This is only the beginning of the path of the elite because it is the foreshadowing of parting from the ego, which is the path of the elite. This foreshadowing is the beginning of their path as the latter consists in the servant’s
abjuration of his own shares of pleasure and standing with God rather than his
ego.
This is the precise meaning of his words, and yet his making this level higher
than the last is clearly open to debate, and is analogous to his making patience
by God higher than patience for God.
What ought to be the case is that the first level be higher and loftier in
worth, but this level is, in fact, ambiguous, for contentment with the decree
could happen from a believer and an unbeliever, its end goal being surrender
to the decree and apportionment of one’s share by God. How is this comparable
to being joyfully content with God as one’s lord, deity, object of worship, and
judge? This contentment is an obligation, rather, it is the greatest of obligations
by the agreement of the Community. Whosoever is not pleased with Him as the
lord, neither his Islam nor work is sound.
As for being pleased with His decree, most people hold that it is preferred
and not obligated. It has also been said that it is an obligation. These are the
two opinions in the school of Aḥmad.

8 In English, it is difficult to express through a preposition the difference al-Harawī wishes to
express between riḍā bi-llāh and riḍā ʿan-illāh; the former stresses being pleased and content
with God’s Being and the latter with God’s acts.

‫‪547‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثانية‪ :‬الرضى عن الل ّٰه‪ ،‬و بهذا الرضى نطقت آيات التنز يل‪ ،‬وهو الرضى عنه في كل‬
‫ما قضى وقدر‪ ،‬وهذا من أوائل مسالك أهل الخصوص«‪.‬‬
‫الشيخ جعل هذه الدرجة أعلى من الدرجة التي قبلها‪.‬‬
‫ووجه قوله إنه لا يدخل في الإسلام إلا بالدرجة الأولى‪ ،‬فإذا استقر قدمه عليها دخل في مقام‬
‫الإسلام‪.‬‬
‫وأما هذه الدرجة فمن معاملات القلوب وهي لأهل الخصوص‪ ،‬وهي الرضى عنه في أحكامه‬
‫وأقضيته‪.‬‬
‫وإنما كان من أول مسالك أهل الخصوص‪ ،‬لأنه مقدمة للخروج عن النفس والذي هو طر يق‬
‫أهل الخصوص‪ ،‬فمقدمته بداية سلوكهم‪ ،‬لأنه يتضمن خروج العبد عن حظوظه ووقوفه مع مراد‬
‫الل ّٰه عز وجل لا مع مراد نفسه‪.‬‬
‫هذا تقر ير كلامه‪ ،‬وفي جعله هذه الدرجة أعلى من التي قبلها نظر لا يخفى‪ ،‬وهو نظير جعله الصبر‬
‫بالل ّٰه أعلى من الصبر لل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫والذي ينبغي أن يكون الدرجة الأولى أعلى شأنا ًوأرفع قدرا ً‪ ،‬فإنها مختصة وهذه الدرجة مشتركة‪،‬‬
‫فإن الرضى بالقضاء يصح من المؤمن والكافر‪ ،‬وغايته التسليم لقضاء الل ّٰه وقدره‪ .‬فأ ين هذا من الرضى‬
‫به ر با ًوإلها ًومعبودا ً وحكما ً؟ فالرضى به ر با ًفرض‪ ،‬بل هو آكد الفروض باتفاق الأمة‪ ،‬فمن لم يرض‬
‫به ر با لم يصح له إسلام ولا عمل‪.‬‬
‫وأما الرضى بقضائه فأكثر الناس على أنه مستحب وليس واجبا‪ ً،‬وقيل‪ :‬بل هو واجب‪ ،‬وهما‬
‫قولان في مذهب أحمد‪.‬‬

548

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The difference between the two levels is the difference between the obligatory and the preferred; as a sound divine hadith has it, “God Almighty says, My
servant has not drawn near to Me by anything like the performance of what
I have obligated upon him.” This shows that drawing near to the Almighty by
dispensing the obligation is superior to and loftier than the same by means of
supererogatory acts.
Furthermore, being pleased with Him as the lord is inclusive of and requires
being content with Him, for it entails being content with what He has commanded and prohibited as well as what He has given and predestined for and
prevented from one. If one is not content with all that, one cannot be pleased
and content with Him as the lord in a complete fashion, even if he is content
with some aspects of it, but being pleased and content in every way is certainly
part of it.
Also, being content with Him pertains to His Being, Names, and Attributes,
and His lordship both general and particular, the latter being inclusive of His
being the Creator, the Planner, the Commander, the Prohibitor, the King, the
Giver and the Withholder, the Arbiter, the Caretaker, the Patron, the Grantor
of victory and success, the Sufficient, the Inspector and Watcher, the One who
tests and overlooks, who expands and contracts, among other attributes of His
lordship.
As for contentment with His acts, it constitutes the contentment of a servant with what He does with him and gives him, which is why [this phrase]
has occurred with respect to reward and punishment, as in His saying, “O
tranquil self, return to your Lord, pleased and well-pleasing”: this is the self’s
contentment with Him in what it has received of His bounty. Similarly, in
the words of Almighty, “Their reward with their Lord is Gardens of eternity
beneath which rivers flow, abiding therein forever and ever: God is pleased
with them and they are pleased with Him: this is for any who fears his Lord”
[98:8].
The contentment with His Being is the essence of being content with His
acts; the latter is the fruit of the former.
The secret of this conundrum is that contentment with Him pertains to
His Names and Attributes whereas contentment with His acts pertains to His
reward and punishment.
Also, the Prophet connected the taste of faith to whoever is pleased with
God as his lord, not to one who is pleased with His acts, as he said, “He has
truly tasted faith who is pleased with God as his lord, with Islam as his religion,
and with Muhammad as the messenger.” He thus made pleasure with Him the
companion of pleasure with His religion and His prophet, and these three are
the foundations of Islam without which it cannot exist.

‫‪549‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫فالفرق ما بين الدرجتين فرق ما بين الفرض والندب‪ ،‬وفي الحديث الإلهي الصحيح‪» :‬يقول الل ّٰه‬
‫عز وجل‪ :‬ما تقرب إلي عبدي بمثل أداء ما افترضت عليه«‪ ،‬فدل على أن التقرب إليه سبحانه بأداء‬
‫الفرض أفضل وأعلى من التقرب إليه بالنوافل‪.‬‬
‫وأيضا‪ ً،‬فإن الرضى به ر با ًيتضمن الرضى عنه و يستلزمه‪ ،‬فإن الرضى بر بو بيته هو رضى العبد بما‬
‫يأمره به و ينهاه عنه و يقسمه له و يقدره عليه‪ ،‬و يعطيه إ ياه و يمنعه منه‪ ،‬فمتى لم يرض بذلك كله لم يكن‬
‫قد رضي به ر با ً من جميع الوجوه‪ ،‬وإن كان راضيا ً به ر با ً من بعضها‪ .‬فالرضى به ر با ً من كل وجه‬
‫يستلزم الرضى عنه و يتضمنه بلا ر يب‪.‬‬
‫وأيضا‪ ً:‬فالرضى به ر با ًيتعلق بذاته وصفاته وأسمائه ور بو بيته العامة والخاصة‪ .‬فهو الرضى به خالقا ً‬
‫ومدبرا ً وآمرا ً وناهيا ً وملكا ًومعطيا ً ومانعا ً وحكما ً ووكيلا ً ووليا ً وناصرا ً ومعينا ً وكافيا ً وحسيبا ً ورقيبا ً‬
‫ومبتليا ًومعافيا ًوقابضا ًو باسطا‪ ً،‬إلى غير ذلك من صفات ر بو بيته‪.‬‬
‫وأما الرضى عنه‪ :‬فهو رضى العبد بما يفعله به و يعطيه إ ياه‪ ،‬ولهذا إنما جاء في الثواب والجزاء‪،‬‬
‫ض َي ّة ً﴾ ]الفجر‪ .[28–27:‬فهذا‬
‫ضيةَ ً َمّْر ِ‬
‫ك ر َا ِ‬
‫جع ِي ِإل َى ٰ ر َب ِّ ِ‬
‫س ال ْم ُْطم َئ َِن ّة ُ اْر ِ‬
‫كقوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬ياَ َأ َي ّت ُه َا ال َن ّْف ُ‬
‫تج ْرِي م ِن‬
‫ن َ‬
‫ت ع َْد ٍ‬
‫ج َن ّا ُ‬
‫رضاها عنه لما حصل لها من كرامته‪ ،‬وكقوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬ج َز َاؤ ُه ُْم عِند َ ر َ ّبِه ِْم َ‬
‫خش ِيَ ر َ َب ّه ُ﴾ ]البينة‪.[8:‬‬
‫ك لم ِ َْن َ‬
‫ضوا ع َن ْه ُ ۚ ذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫ن فيِ ه َا َأب َد ًا ۖ َرّض ِيَ ال َل ّـه ُ ع َْنه ُْم و َر َ ُ‬
‫تح ْت ِه َا اْلَأْنه َار ُ خ َال ِد ِي َ‬
‫َ‬
‫والرضى به أصل الرضى عنه‪ ،‬والرضى عنه ثمرة الرضى به‪.‬‬
‫وسر المسألة أن الرضى به متعلق بأسمائه وصفاته‪ ،‬والرضى عنه متعلق بثوابه وجزائه‪ .‬وأيضا‪ ً،‬فإن‬
‫النبي علق ذوق طعم الإ يمان بمن رضي بالل ّٰه ر با ًولم يعلقه بمن رضي عنه‪ ،‬كما قال‪» :‬ذاق طعم الإ يمان‬
‫من رضي بالل ّٰه ر با ًو بالإسلام دينا ًو بمحمد رسولا ً«‪ ،‬فجعل الرضى به قر ين الرضى بدينه ونبيه‪ ،‬وهذه‬
‫الثلاثة هي أصول الإسلام التي لا يقوم إلا بها‪ .‬وأيضا‪ ً،‬فالرضى به ر با ًيتضمن توحيده وعبادته والإنابة‬

550

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Furthermore, being pleased and content with Him is inclusive of the affirmation of His unicity and worship, repentance to Him, trusting reliance on
Him, fear, hope and love for Him, gratitude for His bounties: in fact, seeing
all that is from Him as bounty and blessing even if He is harsh with His servant. Contentment with Him as the lord includes the testimony that there
is no god but God and being content with Muhammad as the messenger
includes the testimony that Muhammad is the messenger of God. Being content with Islam as the religion consists of adherence to His service, and obedience to Him and His messenger. The three together complete the whole religion.
Contentment with Him as the lord is further inclusive of taking Him alone as
the sole Patron and as the object of worship, as the Almighty said to His messenger, “Shall I seek a judge other than Him?” [6:114] and also, “Shall I take a
Patron other than Him?” [6:14] and “Say: Do I seek a lord other than God when
He is the lord of everything?” [6:124]; this is the essence of contentment with
Him as the lord.
Also, He made the reality of contentment with Him as the lord displeasure
with the worship of other than Him; when the servant is displeased with the
worship, love, fear, hope in and reverence of false gods, he now truly realizes
the contentment that is the pivot of the axis of Islam.
The pivot of the axis of the religion is that all of one’s beliefs, works, and
states are built on the affirmation of the unicity of God Almighty in worship
and displeasure with the worship of all other than Him. Whoever is deficient
in this lacks his center, and whosoever possess it attains the axis that brings
him out from the circle of associationism to the circle of Islam, thereby firmly
grounding the axis of his Islam and faith in its pivot.
Also, He made the attainment of this degree of contentment depend on God
Almighty being dearer to the servant than all else, the most deserving of veneration and obedience, and all these gather in their ambit the principles of worship
and order their branches and parts.
If total love is the total inclination of the heart to the object of love, that
inclination leads to its obedience and veneration, and the stronger the inclination, the more complete the obedience and the more profound the veneration.
This inclination is a necessity of faith, rather, it is the soul and essence of faith.
What can be loftier than a matter that includes in itself the requirement that
God Almighty be dearer of all things to the servant, the most deserving of veneration and obedience?
By virtue of this precisely does the servant find sweetness of faith as in the
Ṣaḥīḥ that he, God grant him blessing and peace, said,

‫‪551‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫إليه والتوكل عليه‪ ،‬وخوفه ورجاءه ومحبته‪ ،‬والصبر له و به‪ ،‬والشكر على نعمه‪ ،‬بل رؤ يةكل ما منه‬
‫نعمة ً وإحسانا‪ ً،‬وإن ساء عبده فالرضا به ر با ًيتضمن »شهادة ألا إله إلا الل ّٰه«‪ ،‬والرضى بمحمد رسولا ً‬
‫يتضمن شهادة »أن محمدا ًرسول الل ّٰه«‪ ،‬والرضى بالإسلام دينا ًيتضمن التزام عبوديته وطاعته وطاعة‬
‫رسوله‪ ،‬فجمعت هذه الثلاثة الدين كله‪.‬‬
‫وأيضا‪ ً،‬فإن الرضى به ر با ً يتضمن اتخاذه معبودا ً دون ما سواه‪ ،‬واتخاذه وليا ً ومعبودا ً‪ ،‬وقد‬
‫ل َأغ َي ْر َ ال َل ّـه ِ َأَّتخ ِذ ُ و َل ًِي ّا﴾‬
‫كم ًا﴾ ]الأنعام‪ ،[114:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬ق ُ ْ‬
‫قال تعالى لرسوله‪َ ﴿ :‬أفغَ يَ ْر َ ال َل ّـه ِ َأب ْت َغ ِي ح َ َ‬
‫يء ٍ﴾ ]الأنعام‪ .[164:‬فهذا هو عين‬
‫ل شَ ْ‬
‫]الأنعام‪ ،[14:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬ق ُ ْ‬
‫ب ك ُ ِّ‬
‫ل َأغ َي ْر َ ال َل ّـه ِ َأب ْغ ِي ر َ ًب ّا و َه ُو َ ر َ ُ ّ‬
‫الرضى به ر با‪ً.‬‬
‫وأيضا‪ ً،‬فإنه جعل حقيقة الرضى به ر با ًأن يسخط عبادة ما دونه‪ ،‬فمتى سخط العبد عبادة ما سواه‬
‫من الآلهة الباطلة حبا ًوخوفا ًورجاء ً وتعظيما ًوإجلالا ً—فقد تحقق بالرضى به الذي هو قطب رحى‬
‫الإسلام‪.‬‬
‫وإنما كان قطب رحى الدين‪ ،‬لأن جميع العقائد والأعمال والأحوال إنما تنبني على توحيد الل ّٰه‬
‫عز وجل في العبادة‪ ،‬وسخط عبادة ما سواه‪ .‬فمن لم يكن له هذا القطب لم يكن له رحى يدور عليه‪،‬‬
‫ومن حصل له هذا القطب ثبتت له الرحى التي تدور عليه فيخرج حينئذ من دا ئرة الشرك إلى دا ئرة‬
‫الإسلام‪ ،‬فتدور رحى إسلامه وإيمانه على قطبها الثابت اللازم‪.‬‬
‫وأيضا ًفإنه جعل حصول هذه الدرجة من الرضى موقوفا ًعلى كون المرضي به ر با ً—سبحانه—‬
‫أحب إلى العبد من كل شيء‪ ،‬وأولى الأشياء بالتعظيم وأحق الأشياء بالطاعة‪ .‬ومعلوم أن هذا يجمع‬
‫قواعد العبودية و ينظم فروعها وشعبها‪.‬‬
‫ولما كانت المحبة التامة ميل القلب بكليته إلى المحبوب‪ ،‬كان ذلك الميل حاملا ًعلى طاعته وتعظيمه‪.‬‬
‫وكلما كان الميل أقوى كانت الطاعة أتم والتعظيم أوفر‪ .‬وهذا الميل يلازم الإ يمان‪ ،‬بل هو روح الإ يمان‬
‫ولبه‪ .‬فأي شيء يكون أعلى من أمر يتضمن أن يكون الل ّٰه سبحانه أحب الأشياء إلى العبد وأولى‬
‫الأشياء بالتعظيم وأحق الأشياء بالطاعة؟‬
‫و بهذا يجد العبد حلاوة الإ يمان كما في الصحيح عنه أنه قال‪» :‬ثلاث من كن فيه وجد بهن حلاوة‬

552

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

One finds the sweetness of faith by three things: one to whom God and
His messenger become dearer than all else, one who loves another for no
other reason but for God, and one who hates to be thrown into the fire.9
And it is God we seek for help.
Both this and that result from one’s contentment with Him alone as the lord
and disavowal of servitude to anyone else, the inclination of the heart to Him
and the attraction of all the powers of the lover to Him alone; the Lord’s satisfaction with the servant depends on this contentment. Whoever is content with
God as the lord, God is pleased with Him as His servant. However, whosever is
pleased and content with Him in what He has given and withheld and in the
afflictions and safety He has given, does not attain the level of the pleasure and
satisfaction of the Lord with Him if he is not also pleased with Him as the lord,
His prophet as the messenger, and Islam as the religion. For a servant may be
happy with God in what He has given him or kept from him but not with Him
alone as his god and one deserving worship. This is why He guaranteed [His]10
pleasure only to him who is pleased with Him as the lord, as the Prophet said,
Whoever says every day, I am pleased with God as the lord, Islam as the
religion, and Muhammad as the prophet, it is his right upon God to be
pleased with him on the Day of Resurrection.11

6

Differentiating Normative and Ontological Commands

This having been established, we turn now to the explanation of [al-Harawī’s]
words.
He said,
And of this contentment the revelation speaks.
He is referring to the words of Almighty,
God said, This day the truth of the truthful shall benefit them, for them
are Gardens beneath which rivers flow, forever and ever: God is pleased
with them and they with God. Such is the great success. [5:119]

9

Bukhārī #16; Muslim # 43.

‫‪553‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫الإ يمان‪ :‬من كان الل ّٰه ورسوله أحب إليه مما سواهما‪ ،‬ومن كان يحب المرء لا يحبه إلا لل ّٰه‪ ،‬ومن كان‬
‫يكره أن يعود في الـكفر—بعد إذ أنقذه الل ّٰه منه—كما يكره أن يلقى في النار«‪.‬‬
‫فعل ّق ذوق الإ يمان بالرضى بالل ّٰه ر با‪ ً،‬وعلق وجود حلاوته بما هو موقوف عليه ولا يتم إلا به‪ ،‬وهو‬
‫كونه سبحانه أحب الأشياء إلى العبد هو ورسوله‪.‬‬
‫ولما كان هذا الحب التام والإخلاص—الذي هو ثمرته—أعلى من مجرد الرضى بر بو بيته سبحانه‬
‫كانت ثمرته أعلى‪ ،‬وهي وجد حلاوة الإ يمان‪ ،‬وثمرة الرضى ذوق طعم الإ يمان‪ .‬فهذا وجد حلاوة‬
‫وذاك ذوق لطعم‪ .‬والل ّٰه المستعان‪.‬‬
‫وإنما ترتب هذا وهذا على الرضى به وحده ر با‪ ً.‬والبراءة من عبودية ما سواه ميل القلب بكليته‬
‫إليه وانجذاب قوى المحب كلها إليه‪ ،‬ورضاه عن ر به تابع لهذا الرضى‪ ،‬فمن رضي بالل ّٰه ر با ًرضيه الل ّٰه‬
‫له عبدا ً‪ ،‬ومن رضي عنه في عطائه ومنعه و بلائه وعافيته لم ينل بذلك درجة رضى الرب عنه إن لم‬
‫يرض به ر با ًو بنبيه رسولا ًو بالإسلام دينا‪ ً.‬فإن العبد قد يرضى عن الل ّٰه فيما أعطاه ومنعه ولم يرض‬
‫به وحده معبودا ًوإلها‪ ً،‬ولهذا إنما ضمن رضى العبد يوم القيامة لمن رضي به ر با ًكما قال النبي‪» :‬من قال‬
‫كل يوم‪ :‬رضيت بالل ّٰه ر با ًو بالإسلام دينا ًو بمحمد نبيا ًإلا كان حقا ًعلى الل ّٰه أن يرضيه يوم القيامة«‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫إذا عرف هذا فلنرجع إلى شرح كلامه‪.‬‬
‫قال‪» :‬و بهذا الرضى نطق النز يل«‪.‬‬
‫تح ْت ِه َا‬
‫تج ْرِي م ِن َ‬
‫ت َ‬
‫ج َن ّا ٌ‬
‫صْدقهُ ُْم ۚ ل َه ُْم َ‬
‫صادِقيِ نَ ِ‬
‫ل ال َل ّـه ُ هَٰ ذ َا يوَ ْم ُ ي َنف َُع ال َ ّ‬
‫يشير إلى قوله عز وجل‪﴿ :‬ق َا َ‬
‫ك ال ْف َو ْز ُ ال ْع َظ ِيم ُ﴾ ]المائدة‪ ،[119:‬وقال تعالى‪:‬‬
‫ضوا ع َن ْه ُۚ ذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫ن فيِ ه َا َأب َد ًا ۚ َرّض ِيَ ال َل ّـه ُع َْنه ُْم و َر َ ُ‬
‫اْلَأْنه َار ُ خ َال ِد ِي َ‬

‫‪The text has it “the pleasure of the servant,” but the context suggests that this is a more‬‬
‫‪obvious reading.‬‬
‫‪This is the version in the Musnad of Aḥmad and elsewhere; the report in Muslim #386‬‬
‫‪associates this formula with how one should respond to the call to prayer.‬‬

‫‪10‬‬
‫‪11‬‬

554

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The Almighty also said,
You will not find a people who believe in God and the Last Day having affection for those who oppose God and His Messenger, even if they
were their fathers or their sons or their brothers or their kindred. Those—
He has decreed within their hearts faith and supported them with spirit
from Him. And We will admit them to gardens beneath which rivers flow,
wherein they abide eternally. God is pleased with them, and they are
pleased with Him. [58:22]
He also said,
Their reward with God will be Gardens of eternity beneath which rivers
flow, wherein they will abide forever and ever; God is pleased with them
and they with Him. That is for whoever has feared his Lord. [98:8]
These verses are inclusive of their recompense for their truthfulness and faith,
their good works and their struggle against His enemies and their negation of
allegiance to them, that He is pleased with them and has pleased them so they
are pleased with Him. This only occurred after their pleasure and contentment
with Him as the lord, Muhammad as the prophet, and Islam as the religion.
His statement,
And that is joyful contentment with Him in all that He has decreed.
There are three things here: contentment with God, contentment with God
[with respect to His decrees], and contentment with God’s decrees themselves.
To be pleased and content with Him is an absolute obligation; to be pleased
with His decrees, even though among the highest and noblest kinds of servitude, has not been demanded of [the servants] due to their incapacity and its
arduous nature. Some do, however, consider it an obligation just like the obligation of being pleased with Him. For this, they have offered several arguments.
Among them, one is that if one is not pleased with His decrees, one is [then]
displeased and resentful, there being no third possibility. And a servant’s displeasure with his Lord’s decree is contradictory to pleasure with Him as the
lord.
They further argue that lack of pleasure and contentment with Him necessitates ill thought of Him and contesting Him in His choice with respect to His
slave-servant, that the Blessed Lord chooses whatever He pleases and the servant has no choice and [that He] does not choose nor is pleased with other
things. This is in opposition to worship and servitude.

‫‪555‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫سول َه ُو َلوَ ْ ك َانوُ ا آباَ ء َه ُْم َأْو َأب ْن َاء َه ُْم‬
‫خر ِ يوُ َا ُدّونَ م َْن ح َا َدّ ال َل ّـه َ و َر َ ُ‬
‫تج ِد ُ قوَ ْم ًا يؤُ ْم ِنوُ نَ باِ ل َل ّـه ِ و َاليْ وَ ِْم اْلآ ِ‬
‫﴿] َلّا َ‬
‫كت َب ف ِي ق ُلوُ بِه ِم ُ اْلإ يم َانَ و َأ َي ّد َه ُم برِ ُو ٍ‬
‫تج ْرِي‬
‫ت َ‬
‫ج َن ّا ٍ‬
‫خلهُ ُْم َ‬
‫ح مّ ِن ْه ُ[ ۖ و َي ُْد ِ‬
‫شير َتَه ُْمۚ ُأول َٰئ ِ َ‬
‫خو َانَه ُْم َأْو ع َ ِ‬
‫َأْو ِإ ْ‬
‫ِ‬
‫َ‬
‫ك َ َ‬
‫ب ال َل ّـه ِ ه ُم ُ‬
‫ن ِ‬
‫ب ال َل ّـه ِ ۚ َأل َا ِإ َ ّ‬
‫ك ِ‬
‫ضوا ع َن ْه ُ ۚ ُأول َٰئ ِ َ‬
‫ن فيِ ه َا ۚ ر َض ِيَ ال َل ّـه ُ ع َْنه ُْم و َر َ ُ‬
‫تح ْت ِه َا اْلَأْنه َار ُ خ َال ِد ِي َ‬
‫م ِن َ‬
‫حْز َ‬
‫حْز ُ‬
‫ن‬
‫تح ْت ِه َا اْلَأْنه َار ُ خ َال ِد ِي َ‬
‫تج ْرِي م ِن َ‬
‫ن َ‬
‫ت ع َْد ٍ‬
‫ج َن ّا ُ‬
‫حونَ ﴾ ]المجادلة‪ .[22:‬وقال‪﴿ :‬ج َز َاؤ ُه ُْم عِند َ ر َ ّبِه ِْم َ‬
‫ال ْم ُْفل ِ ُ‬
‫خش ِيَ ر َ َب ّه ُ﴾ ]البينة‪.[8:‬‬
‫ك لم ِ َْن َ‬
‫ضوا ع َن ْه ُ ۚ ذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫فيِ ه َا َأب َد ًا ۖ َرّض ِيَ ال َل ّـه ُ ع َْنه ُْم و َر َ ُ‬
‫فتضمنت هذه الآيات جزاءهم على صدقهم وإيمانهم وأعمالهم الصالحة‪ ،‬ومجاهدة أعدائه وعدم‬
‫ولايتهم‪ ،‬بأن رضي الل ّٰه عنهم فأرضاهم فرضوا عنه‪ ،‬وإنما حصل لهم هذا بعد الرضى به ر با ًو بمحمد‬
‫نبيا ًو بالإسلام دينا‪ً.‬‬
‫قوله‪» :‬وهو الرضى عنه في كل ما قضى«‪.‬‬
‫هاهنا ثلاثة أمور‪ :‬الرضى بالل ّٰه والرضى عن الل ّٰه والرضى بقضاء الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫فالرضى به فرض والرضى عنه‪—،‬وإن كان من أجل الأمور وأشرف أنواع العبودية—فلم يطالب‬
‫به العموم لعجزهم عنه ومشتقه عليهم‪ ،‬وأوجبته طائفةكما أوجبوا الرضى به واحتجوا بحجج‪.‬‬
‫منها أنه إذا لم يكن راضيا ًعن ر به فهو ساخط عليه‪ ،‬إذ لا واسطة بين الرضى والسخط‪ ،‬وسخط‬
‫العبد على ر به مناف لرضاه به ر با‪ً.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬وأيضا‪ ً،‬فعدم رضاه عنه يستلزم سوء ظنه به ومنازعته في اختياره لعبده‪ ،‬وأن الرب تبارك‬
‫وتعالى يختار شيئا ًو يرضاه‪ ،‬فلا يختاره العبد ولا يرضى به وهذا مناف للعبودية‪.‬‬

556

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

They also say that a divine tradition says, “Whoever is not pleased with My
judgment and is not patient with My affliction should seek a lord other than
Me.”
None of these arguments hold up.
Their statement that one cannot avoid displeasure with his Lord except by
avoiding it with respect to His decrees, there being no middle ground between
pleasure and displeasure, is questionable, for there is no necessity that displeasure with the decree implies displeasure with the One who issued it. Similarly,
hatred, resentment, and the desire to repel it do not necessitate the extension
of these to the One who decreed and destined it. A servant may be displeased
with what has been decided for him but pleased with the One who decreed it.
In fact, his displeasure and pleasure are united in the same decree, as shall be
made clear presently.
Your statement that it necessitates ill thinking of Him and contestation of
His choice is also not valid. Rather, [the servant] maintains good thought of his
Lord in both cases, as he is displeased with one decree only in favor of another,
and is displeased with what is decreed only in favor of what he loves. He contests God’s decree with another decree of God, by the power of God and for the
sake of God, as in the case of seeking refuge in His pleasure from His displeasure, and in His safety from His punishment, and in Him from Him.
As for one choosing for oneself what the Lord has chosen, this requires further detail and cannot be answered with an affirmation or negation. For the
Lord chooses for His servant two kinds of things. First, the religious, normative
command, and it is an obligation upon the servant to choose nothing else in
its place. The Almighty said, “It is not for a believing man or woman when God
and His messenger have decreed a thing to have a choice in the matter” [33:36].
The servant’s choice against this is indeed contradictory to his faith and submission, and [to] his contentment with God as the lord, Islam as the religion,
and Muhammad as the messenger.
The second kind is the ontological, predestinarian choice, [questioning
which] does not displease the Lord, like the afflictions with which God tests
His servant, and escaping from these to the decree that relieves him from it
does not harm him. This does not entail contesting His lordship, even if it
involves the opposition of one decree with another. This is sometimes even
an obligation and at other times preferred and at other times neutral in which
both sides are equal, and at times it may be disliked. As for the decree that He
does not love or like, such as the decree of [moral] flaws and sins, the servant is
commanded to be displeased with it and prohibited from being content with
such.
This is the necessary detail pertaining to contentment with the decree.

‫‪557‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫قالوا‪ :‬وفي بعض الآثار الإلهية‪» :‬من لم يرض بقضائي ولم يصبر على بلائي فليتخذ ر با ًسواي«‪ ،‬ولا‬
‫حجة في شيء من ذلك‪.‬‬
‫أما قولهم‪» :‬إنه لا يتخلص من السخط على ر به إلا بالرضى عنه‪ ،‬إذ لا واسطة بين الرضا والسخط«‬
‫فكلام مدخول‪ ،‬لأن السخط بالمقضي لا يستلزم السخط على من قضاه‪ ،‬كما أن كراهة المقضي و بغضه‬
‫والنفرة عنه لا تستلزم تعلق ذلك بالذي قضاه وقدره‪ .‬فالمقضي قد يسخطه العبد وهو راض عمن قضاه‬
‫وقدره‪ ،‬بل قد يجتمع تسخطه والرضى بنفس القضاء‪ ،‬كما سيأتي‪.‬‬
‫وأما قولـكم‪» :‬إنه يستلزم سوء ظن العبد بر به ومنازعته له في اختياره« فليس كذلك‪ ،‬بل هو حسن‬
‫الظن بر به في الحالتين‪ .‬فإنه إنما يسخط المقدور و ينازعه بمقدور آخر‪ ،‬كما ينازع القدر الذي يكرهه ر به‬
‫بالقدر الذي يحبه و يرضاه‪ ،‬فينازع قدر الل ّٰه بقدر الل ّٰه بالل ّٰه لل ّٰه‪ ،‬كما يستعيذ برضاه من سخطه‪ ،‬و بمعافاته‬
‫من عقو بته و يستعيذ به منه‪.‬‬
‫وأما »كونه يختار لنفسه ما يختاره الرب« فهذا موضع تفصيل‪ ،‬لا يسحب عليه ذيل النفي‬
‫والإثبات‪ .‬فاختيار الرب تعالى لعبده نوعان‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما اختيار ديني شرعي‪ .‬فالواجب على العبد ألا يختار في هذا النوع غير ما اختاره له سيده‪.‬‬
‫سول ُه ُ َأْمرًا َأن ي َكُونَ ل َه ُم ُ اْلخـ ِيرَ َة ُ م ِْن َأْمر ِه ِْم﴾‬
‫ن و َل َا م ُؤ ْم ِنةَ ٍ ِإذ َا ق َض َى ال َل ّـه ُ و َر َ ُ‬
‫قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َم َا ك َانَ لم ِؤُ ْم ِ ٍ‬
‫]الأحزاب‪ .[36:‬فاختيار العبد خلاف ذلك مناف لإ يمانه وتسليمه‪ ،‬ورضاه بالل ّٰه ر با ًو بالإسلام دينا ً‬
‫و بمحمد رسولا‪ً.‬‬
‫النوع الثاني اختيار كوني قدري‪ ،‬لا يسخطه الرب‪ ،‬كالمصائب التي يبتلى الل ّٰه بها عبده‪ ،‬فهذا لا‬
‫يضره فراره منها إلى القدر الذي يرفعها عنه و يدفعها و يكشفها‪ ،‬وليس في ذلك منازعة للر بو بية وإن‬
‫كان فيه منازعة للقدر بالقدر‪.‬‬
‫فهذا يكون تارة ً واجبا ً وتارة ً يكون مستحبا‪ ً،‬وتارة ً يكون مباحا ً مستوي الطرفين‪ ،‬وتارة ً يكون‬
‫مكروها ًوتارة ً يكون حراما‪ً.‬‬
‫وأما القدر الذي لا يحبه ولا يرضاه—مثل قدر المعائب والذنوب—فالعبد مأمور بسخطها‪ ،‬منهي‬
‫عن الرضى بها‪.‬‬
‫وهذا هو التفصيل الواجب في الرضى بالقضاء‪.‬‬

558

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

People suffer from great confusion in this matter, and only those who attend
to the necessary distinctions and detail are saved from it. For the expression
“pleasure with the decree” is a praiseworthy and commanded thing and among
the stations of the truthful, and has acquired such reverence that for one group
its acceptance without discrimination has become an obligation. This led them
to think that everything the Lord has decreed and created must be submitted
to with contentment. Thereafter, they became divided into two groups. One
group said that the decree and contentment with it mutually necessitate each
other, and since it is known that we are commanded to hate sins, unbelief, and
oppression, the latter must not be decreed or predestined. The other group said
that reason and revelation show that they indeed happen by God’s decree and
predestination, and so we are pleased with them all.
Both groups, however, are in error and transgression against the right path.
One takes [evil] out of God’s decree and predestination and the other is pleased
with it rather than dissatisfied with it; one opposes the Lord Almighty in what
He likes and dislikes, thus voiding His Law and religion, and the other denied
the connection of His decree and predestination to [evil].
This [discrimination] is the way of many of our [Ḥanbalite] companions,
and this is how al-Qāḍī Abū Yaʿlā answered the question, as did Ibn al-Bāqillānī.
He said: If it is asked whether you agree with God’s decree and predestination,
it would be said in response: We are pleased with God’s decree that He has
created, that He has commanded us to be content with, and we are not pleased
with what He has prohibited us from agreeing with, nor do we stand above God
nor object to His judgment.
Another group said, the term contentment is applied to the decree in general, not its details that have been decreed and predestined, so we say: We are
pleased with God’s decree in general and do we not resent it, but we do not
apply the term to every single one of the decrees. Just as Muslims say: Everything vanishes and perishes, but do not say: God’s proofs vanish and perish
[even though everything is God’s proof]. Similarly, they say: God is the lord of
all things, but do not attach His lordship to evil and filthy things in particular.
Another group said: We are pleased with them in the way they are attached
to the lord as His creation and will, and we are displeased with them with
respect to their attachment to the servant as his acquisition and enactment.
Yet another group said: we are pleased with the decree but displeased with
what is decreed, thus pleasure and displeasure are not attached to the same
thing.
These answers have no mileage with one whose principle is the love of the
Lord Almighty on the one hand and His pleasure and will on the other as one
and the same thing, as is one of the sayings of the Ashʿarites and most of [al-

‫‪559‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وقد اضطرب الناس في ذلك اضطرابا ً عظيما‪ ً،‬ونجا منه أصحاب الفرق والتفصيل‪ .‬فإن لفظ‬
‫»الرضى بالقضاء« لفظ محمود مأمور به‪ ،‬وهو من مقامات الصديقين‪ ،‬فصار له حرمة أوجبت لطائفة‬
‫قبوله من غير تفصيل‪ ،‬وظنوا أن كل ما كان ]مقضيا ً للرب تعالى مخلوقا ً ينبغي له الرضى به[‪ ،‬ثم‬
‫انقسموا فرقتين‪:‬‬
‫فقالت فرقة‪ :‬إذا كان القضاء والرضى متلازمين‪ ،‬فمعلوم أنا مأمورون ببغض المعاصي والـكفر‬
‫والظلم‪ ،‬فلا تكون مقضية ً مقدرة ً‪.‬‬
‫وفرقة قالت‪ :‬قد دل العقل والشرع على أنها واقعة بقضاء الل ّٰه وقدره فنحن نرضى بها‪.‬‬
‫والطائفتان منحرفتان جا ئرتان عن قصد السبيل‪ .‬فأولئك أخرجوها عن قضاء الرب وقدره‪،‬‬
‫وهؤلاء رضوا بها ولم يسخطوها‪ .‬هؤلاء خالفوا الرب تعالى في رضاه وسخطه وخرجوا عن شرعه ودينه‪،‬‬
‫وأولئك أنكروا تعلق قضائه وقدره بها‪.‬‬
‫واختلفت طرق أهل الإثبات للقدر والشرع في جواب الطائفتين‪:‬‬
‫فقالت طائفة‪ :‬لم يقم دليل من الكتاب ولا السنة ولا الإجماع على جواز الرضى بكل قضاء‪ ،‬فضلا‬
‫عن وجو به واستحبابه‪ ،‬فأ ين أمر الل ّٰه عباده ورسوله أن يرضوا بكل ما قضاه الل ّٰه وقدره؟ وهذه طر يقة‬
‫كثير من أصحابنا وغيرهم‪ ،‬و به أجاب القاضي أبو يعلى وا بن الباقلاني‪.‬‬
‫قال‪ :‬فإن قيل‪ :‬أفترضون بقضاء الل ّٰه وقدره؟‬
‫قيل له‪ :‬نرضى بقضاء الل ّٰه الذي هو خلقه الذي أمرنا أن نرضى به‪ ،‬ولا نرضى من ذلك ما نهانا عنه‬
‫أن نرضى به‪ ،‬ولا نتقدم بين يدي الل ّٰه تعالى ولا نعترض على حكمه‪.‬‬
‫وقالت طائفة أخرى‪ :‬يطلق الرضى بالقضاء في الجملة دون تفاصيل المقضي المقدر‪ ،‬فنقول‪ :‬نرضى‬
‫بقضاء الل ّٰه جملة ًولا نسخطه‪ ،‬ولا نطلق الرضى على كل واحد من تفاصيل المقضي كما يقول المسلمون‪:‬‬
‫كل شيء يبيد و يهلك‪ ،‬ولا يقولون‪ :‬حجج الل ّٰه تبيد وتهلك‪ .‬و يقولون‪ :‬الل ّٰه رب كل شيء‪ ،‬ولا يضيفون‬
‫ر بو بيته إلى الأعيان المستخبثة المستقذرة بخصوصها‪.‬‬
‫وقالت طائفة أخرى‪ :‬نرضى بها من جهة إضافتها إلى الرب خلقا ً ومشيئة ً‪ ،‬ونسخطها من جهة‬
‫إضافتها إلى العبد كسبا لً ه وقياما بً ه‪.‬‬
‫وقالت طائفة أخرى‪ :‬بل نرضى بالقضاء ونسخط المقضي‪ ،‬فالرضى والسخط لم يتعلقا بشيء واحد‪.‬‬
‫وهذه الأجو بة لا يتمشى شيء منها على أصول من يجعل محبة الرب تعالى ورضاه ومشيئته واحدة ً‪،‬‬
‫كما هو أحد قول الأشعري وأكثر أتباعه‪.‬‬

560
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
Ashʿarī’s] followers. They hold that whatever He has willed and decreed He
loves and finds pleasing, for the universe is beloved and pleasing to Him, and
we love what He loves and are pleased with what He is pleased with. Your saying that “We agree with the decree but not with what is decreed” is valid only
for those who made the decree other than what is decreed, the action other
than what is acted on, but for those who do not discriminate between the two
it cannot be correct.
Al-Qāḍī al-Bāqillānī raises the same questions and asks:
If it is asked whether the decree is the same thing in your view as the decreed,
it would be said: It is two kinds. The decree in the sense of the creation is
the same as what is decreed, for the creation is the same as what is created.
The decree that is the necessity, the informing, and the writing [of the divine
decree], however, is different from what is decreed, because the command is
different from what is commanded, just as a report is different from what is
being reported about.
This response does not save him either, however, for the problem is not the
necessity, the informing, and the writing, but rather in the very action that is
predestined, informed, and written; is its measurer and author, the Almighty,
pleased with it or not? Is the servant commanded to be pleased with it himself
or not? This is the crux of the problem.
God Almighty has refuted those who make His will and judgment necessary
concomitants of his love and pleasure; what, then, about those who make the
two one and the same thing? The Almighty said,
Those who associated with God will say, “If God had willed, we would not
have associated, and nor would our fathers, nor would we have prohibited
anything.” Likewise did those before deny until they tasted Our punishment. Say, “Do you have any knowledge that you can produce for us? You
follow not except assumption, and you are not but telling lies.” [6:148]
The Almighty also said,
And those who associate others with God say, “If God had willed, we
would not have worshipped anything other than Him, neither we nor our
fathers, nor would we have forbidden anything through other than Him.”
Thus did those do before them. [16:35]
The Almighty also said,
And they said, “Had God desired we would not have worshiped these”:
They have no knowledge of that! [43:20]

‫‪561‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫فإن هؤلاء يقولون‪ :‬إن كل ما شاءه وقضاه فقد أحبه ورضيه‪ ،‬وإذا كان الـكون محبو با لً ه مرضيا‪ً،‬‬
‫فنحن نحب ما أحبه ونرضى ما رضيه‪.‬‬
‫وقولـكم‪ :‬إن الرضى بالقضاء يطلق جملة ً ولا يطلق تفصيلا ً]لا مخلص في هذا المقام‪ ،‬فإنه وإن لم‬
‫يطلق تفصيلا[ً فذلك في جملة المرضي به‪ ،‬فيعود الإشكال‪.‬‬
‫وقولـكم‪ :‬نرضى بها من جهةكونها خلقا لً ل ّٰه ونسخطها من جهةكونها كسبا لً لعبد‪ ،‬فكسب العبد‬
‫إن كان أمرا ً وجوديا ًفهو خلق لل ّٰه فنرضى به‪ ،‬وإن كان أمرا ً عدميا ًفلا حقيقة له ترضي ولا تسخط‪.‬‬
‫وأما قولـكم‪ :‬نرضى بالقضاء دون المقضي‪ .‬فهذا إنما يصح على قول من جعل القضاء غير المقضي‪،‬‬
‫والفعل غير المفعول‪ ،‬وأما من لم يفرق بينهما فكيف يصح هذا على أصله؟‬
‫وقد أورد القاضي الباقلانى على نفسه هذا السؤال فقال‪:‬‬
‫فإن قيل‪ :‬القضاء عندكم هو المقضي أو غيره؟‬
‫قيل‪ :‬هو على ضر بين‪ .‬فالقضاء—بمعنى الخلق—هو المقضي‪ ،‬لأن الخلق هو المخلوق‪ ،‬والقضاء—‬
‫الذي هو الإلزام والإعلام والكتابة—غير المقضي‪ ،‬لأن الأمر غير المأمور والخـبر غير المخبر عنه‪.‬‬
‫وهذا الجواب لا يخلصه أيضا ًلأن الكلام ليس في الإلزام والإعلام والكتابة‪ ،‬وإنما في نفس الفعل‬
‫المقدور المعلم به المكتوب‪ ،‬هل مقدره وكاتبه سبحانه راض به أم لا؟ وهل العبد مأمور بالرضى به‬
‫نفسه أم لا؟ هذا حرف المسألة‪.‬‬
‫وقد أنكر الل ّٰه سبحانه وتعالى على من جعل مشيئته وقضاءه مستلزمين لمحبته ورضاه‪ ،‬فكيف بمن‬
‫شاء َ ال َل ّـه ُ م َا َأش ْر َكْناَ و َل َا آباَ ؤ ُناَ و َل َا‬
‫كوا لوَ ْ َ‬
‫ن َأش ْر َ ُ‬
‫ل ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫سيقَ ُو ُ‬
‫جعل ذلك شيئا ًواحدا ً؟ قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪َ ﴿ :‬‬
‫ل عِند َك ُم مّ ِْن ع ِل ْم ٍ ف َت ُْخرِ ُ‬
‫ل هَ ْ‬
‫سن َا ۗ ق ُ ْ‬
‫ح َت ّى ذ َاقوُ ا ب ْأَ َ‬
‫ن م ِن ق َب ْل ِه ِْم َ‬
‫ب ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫يء ٍ ۚ ك َذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫ح َ َرّْمن َا م ِن ش َ ْ‬
‫ج وه ُ‬
‫ك ك َ َذّ َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫كو ا [‬
‫ن َأش ْر َ ُ‬
‫ل ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫صونَ﴾ ]الأنعام‪ .[148:‬وقال تعالى‪]﴿ :‬و َق َا َ‬
‫تخ ْر ُ ُ‬
‫ظَّن و َِإْن َأنت ُم ْ ِإ َلّا َ‬
‫ل َن َا ۖ ِإن ٺ َ َت ّب ِع ُونَ ِإ َلّا ال َ ّ‬
‫ل‬
‫ك فعَ َ َ‬
‫يء ٍ ۚ ك َذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫ن و َل َا آباَ ؤ ُناَ و َل َا ح َ َرّْمن َا م ِن د ُون ِه ِ م ِن ش َ ْ‬
‫يء ٍ َّنح ْ ُ‬
‫شاء َ ال َل ّـه ُ م َا ع َب َْدناَ م ِن د ُون ِه ِ م ِن ش َ ْ‬
‫لوَ ْ َ‬
‫ك م ِْن‬
‫ن م َا ع َب َْدناَ ه ُم ۗ َمّا ل َه ُم ب ِذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫شاء َ ال َر ّْحمَٰ ُ‬
‫ن م ِن ق َب ْل ِه ِْم﴾ ]النحل‪ ،[35:‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َق َالوُ ا لوَ ْ َ‬
‫ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫ع ِل ْم ٍ﴾ ]الزخرف‪.[20:‬‬

562

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

They argued that His decree that they worship false gods necessitates that
He loves and likes that, and by this argument they opposed His command and
prohibition. In this there is the clearest refutation of those who make His desire
identical to His love and pleasure. The confusion arose from their equating will
with love, and they only increased it by making the action the same as what
is acted on and the decree the same as what is decreed, from which it became
compulsory for them to hold that God loves and likes that, and they must too
like it.
What clears this confusion and undoes this snare is the separation between
what God has separated, which is that the will and love are neither identical
nor mutually necessary; rather, He may will what He does not love and love
what He does not desire to be. An example of the former is the existence of
Iblīs and his troops and His general will to all that is in existence, even with His
dislike for some of it. The latter is like His love for the faith of the unbelievers,
obedience of the wicked, justice of the unjust, repentance of the hard sinners,
and if He had willed any of that it would exist. For whatever God wills occurs
and whatever He does not will does not.
If this principle is established, namely, that the action is not identical to
what is acted on, nor the decree same as the decreed, and that God has not
commanded His servants to be pleased with everything that He has created
and willed, [then] all doubts vanish, confusions disappear, and the praise is all
God’s. There remains no contradiction between the Law of the lord and His predestination such that one would cancel out the other; rather, the predestination
aids the Law and the Law endorses the predestination, and each actualizes the
other.
Once this is known, it is evident that being happy with the normative, religious decree is an obligation, and that is the foundation of Islam and faith, and
a servant must be content and pleased with it without the slightest hesitation,
opposition, and objection; God Almighty said,
But no, by your Lord, they will not [truly] believe until they make you,
[O Muhammad,] judge concerning that over which they dispute among
themselves and then find within themselves no discomfort from what you
have judged and submit in [full, willing] submission. [4:65]
He takes an oath that they do not believe until they make His messenger the
judge, and any hesitation with that judgment vanishes, and they submit to his
judgment; this is the reality of pleasure and contentment with His judgment.
Making someone a judge or arbiter here takes the place of Islam, the lifting
of discomfort and hesitation the place of faith, and total submission the place
of excellence [in the well-known Hadith of Gabriel].

‫‪563‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫فهم استدلوا على محبته ورضاه لشركهم بمشيئته لذلك‪ ،‬وعارضوا بهذا الدليل أمره ونهيه‪ ،‬وفيه أبين‬
‫الرد لقول من جعل مشيئته غير محبته ورضاه‪ .‬فالإشكال إنما نشأ من جعلهم المشيئة نفس المحبة‪ ،‬ثم‬
‫زادوه بجعلهم الفعل نفس المفعول‪ ،‬والقضاء عين المقضي‪ ،‬فنشأ من ذلك إلزامهم بكونه تعالى راضيا ً‬
‫محبا لً ذلك‪ ،‬والتزام رضاهم به‪.‬‬
‫والذي يكشف هذه الغمة و يبصر من هذه العماية و ينجي من هذه الورطة‪ ،‬التفر يق بين ما فرق‬
‫الل ّٰه بينه‪ ،‬وهو المشيئة والمحبة فليسا واحدا ً‪ ،‬ولا هما متلازمين‪ ،‬بل قد يشاء ما لا يحبه و يحب ما لا‬
‫يشاء كونه‪.‬‬
‫فالأول كمشيئته لوجود إ بليس وجنوده‪ ،‬ومشيئته العامة لجميع ما في الـكون مع بغضه لبعضه‪.‬‬
‫والثاني كمحبته إ يمان الـكفار وطاعات الفجار وعدل الظالمين وتو بة الفاسقين‪ ،‬ولو شاء ذلك لوجد‬
‫كله وكان جميعه‪ ،‬فإنه ما شاء الل ّٰه كان وما لم يشأ لم يكن‪.‬‬
‫فإذا تقرر هذا الأصل‪ ،‬وأن الفعل غير المفعول‪ ،‬والقضاء غير المقضي‪ ،‬وأن الل ّٰه سبحانه لم يأمر‬
‫عباده بالرضى بكل ما خلقه وشاءه‪ ،‬زالت الشبهات وانحلت الإشكالات ولل ّٰه الحمد‪ ،‬ولم يبق بين‬
‫شرع الرب وقدره تناقض‪ ،‬بحيث يظن إ بطال أحدهما للآخر‪ ،‬بل القدر ينصر الشرع والشرع يصدق‬
‫القدر وكل منهما يحقق الآخر‪.‬‬
‫إذا عرف هذا فالرضى بالقضاء الديني الشرعي واجب‪ ،‬وهو أساس الإسلام وقاعدة الإ يمان‪.‬‬
‫فيجب على العبد أن يكون راضيا بً ه بلا حرج ولا منازعة ولا معارضة ولا اعتراض‪ .‬قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪:‬‬
‫ت و َي ُس َل ِ ّموُ ا‬
‫ضي ْ َ‬
‫يج ِد ُوا ف ِي َأنف ُس ِه ِْم ح َر َج ًا م َِّم ّا ق َ َ‬
‫يح َكِّموُ ك َ فيِ م َا َشجرَ َب َي ْن َه ُْم ث ُ َم ّ ل َا َ‬
‫ح َت ّى ُ‬
‫ك ل َا يؤُ ْم ِنوُ نَ َ‬
‫﴿ف َل َا و َر َب ِّ َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫ت َْسل ِيم ًا﴾ ]النساء‪.[65:‬‬
‫فأقسم أنهم لا يؤمنون حتى يحكموا رسوله‪ ،‬و يرتفع الحرج من نفوسهم من حكمه‪ ،‬و يسلموا لحكمه‪.‬‬
‫وهذا حقيقة الرضى بحكمه‪.‬‬
‫فالتحكيم في مقام الإسلام‪] ،‬وانتفاء الحرج في مقام الإ يمان[‪ ،‬والتسليم في مقام الإحسان‪.‬‬

564

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

When the heart is infused with the freshness of faith and its sight sharpened
by the reality of certitude and quickened by the reality of revelation, and its
natural potential is fulfilled, the blaming self has turned into one that is tranquil, content, and meek, and it receives the rulings of the Lord Almighty with
an open, welcoming, and submitting heart; he has attained total contentment
and pleasure with this normative, religious decree that is beloved to God and
His messenger.
As for contentment and pleasure with the existential, predestinarian decree
that coincides with the love and pleasure of a servant, such as good health,
wealth, safety, and delight, it is a naturally pleasing matter, as it is in suitable
to the servant and dear to him. There is no worship in contentment with such
a thing; worship, rather, is in receiving it with gratitude, acknowledgment of
the bounty, and using it in the way that God loves rather that in disobeying the
Giver.
Contentment with the existential decree that goes against the desire of the
servant, against what is suitable and dear to him, and is not a matter of his
choice, is religiously preferred, and is one of the stations of faith, and in its
being an obligation there are two opinions. The example of this kind is like illness, poverty, harm that comes to one from others, heat and cold, and suffering
in general.
Contentment with the decree that he has choice over and that God loathes
and dislikes and has prohibited, such as all kinds of oppression, wickedness,
and disobedience, is prohibited and punishable. It is opposed to the Almighty
Lord, for God is not pleased with it, so how can one love and like what the
Beloved dislikes and loathes? You must, therefore, make this distinction in the
matter of contentment with the decree.
If you say, How can God Almighty desire a matter that He does not love or
like? How does He will it and bring it to come into existence? How can God’s
will and dislike come together?
It will be said that this question is precisely the one because of which people
have become divided into groups and schools.
Know that the word “desire” is of two kinds: something that is desired for
itself and something that is desired for the sake of something else. What is
desired for its own sake is sought for the good that is in it as an end and objective.
What is desired for something else, in contrast, may be something that is not
desired by in itself, nor is there in it any benefit, it is only a means to one’s end
and objective. It may be undesirable in itself but desirable in the results it produces. Two different judgments come together in the same thing as they pertain
to two different aspects, like extremely bitter medicine taken for its remedial

‫‪565‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫ومتى خالط القلب بشاشة الإ يمان واكتحلت بصيرته بحقيقة اليقين‪ ،‬وحيي بروح الوحي وتمهدت‬
‫طبيعته وانقلبت النفس الأمارة مطمئنة ًراضية ًوادعة ً‪ ،‬وتلقى أحكام الرب تعالى بصدر واسع منشرح‬
‫مسلم‪ ،‬فقد رضي كل الرضى بهذا القضاء الديني المحبوب لل ّٰه ورسوله‪.‬‬
‫والرضى بالقضاء الـكوني القدري‪ ،‬الموافق لمحبة العبد وإرادته ورضاه—من الصحة والغنى والعافية‬
‫واللذة—أمر لازم بمقتضى الطبيعة‪ ،‬لأنه ملائم للعبد محبوب له‪ .‬فليس في الرضى به عبودية ً‪ ،‬بل‬
‫العبودية في مقابلته بالشكر والاعتراف بالمنة ووضع النعمة مواضعها التي يحب الل ّٰه أن توضع فيها‪ ،‬وألا‬
‫يعصى المنعم بها‪.‬‬
‫والرضى بالقضاء الـكوني القدري الجاري على خلاف مراد العبد ومحبته مما لا يلائمه ولا يدخل‬
‫تحت اختياره—مستحب‪ ،‬وهو من مقامات الإ يمان‪ ،‬وفي وجو به قولان‪ ،‬وهذا كالمرض والفقر‪،‬‬
‫وأذى الخلق له‪ ،‬والحر والبرد والآلام ونحو ذلك‪.‬‬
‫والرضى بالقدر الجاري عليه باختياره—مما يكرهه الل ّٰه و يسخطه و ينهى عنه—كأنواع الظلم‬
‫والفسوق والعصيان حرام يعاقب عليه‪ ،‬وهو مخالف لر به تعالى‪ .‬فإن الل ّٰه لا يرضى بذلك ولا يحبه‪،‬‬
‫فكيف ٺتفق المحبة ورضى ما يسخطه الحبيب و يبغضه؟ فعليك بهذا التفصيل في مسألة الرضى‬
‫بالقضاء‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬كيف ير يد الل ّٰه سبحانه أمرا ًلا يرضاه ولا يحبه؟ وكيف يشاؤه و يكونه؟ وكيف تجتمع‬
‫إرادة الل ّٰه له و بغضه وكراهيته؟‬
‫قيل‪ :‬هذا السؤال هو الذي افترق الناس لأجله فرقا‪ ً،‬وتباينت عنه طرقهم وأقوالهم‪.‬‬
‫فاعلم أن »المراد« نوعان‪ :‬مراد لنفسه ومراد لغيره‪.‬‬
‫فالمراد لنفسه مطلوب لذاته وما فيه من الخـير‪ ،‬فهو مراد إرادة الغايات والمقاصد‪.‬‬
‫والمراد لغيره قد لا يكون في نفسه مقصودا ً للمر يد ولا فيه مصلحة له بالنظر إلى ذاته‪ ،‬وإن كان‬
‫وسيلة ًإلى مقصوده ومراده‪ ،‬فهو مكروه له من حيث نفسه وذاته‪ ،‬مراد له من حيث إفضاؤه وإيصاله‬
‫إلى مراده‪ ،‬فيجتمع فيه الأمران‪ :‬بغضه وإرادته‪ ،‬ولا يتنافيألاختلاف متعلقهما‪ ،‬وهذا كالدواء‬

566
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
effect, or the amputation of a limb that is necessary to save the rest of the body,
or traversing long, arduous distances in order to seek one’s beloved. A wise man,
in fact, needs only sufficient rather than absolute reason to prefer such things,
even when the end is not entirely in sight. How much more so than the one
from whom no end is hidden? The Almighty dislikes and loathes a thing in
itself but that does not preclude His desiring it for some other end, and that
thing becoming a means to a desired end.

7

God’s Wisdom in Creating the Devil

An example of that is the Almighty’s creation of Iblīs, who is the source of
the corruption of people’s religion, works, belief, and pious intentions, and the
cause of the failure and infelicity of the servants, of their doing what angers
the Almighty Lord, his effort being nothing but opposing what God loves and
likes in every way possible. Despite that, he is the means to many things that
the Almighty loves that come out of his creation and whose existence is dearer
to Him than their absence.
Among them is to show the servants the power of the Almighty to create
opposed and complementary things. He created this creation (Iblīs) that is the
most wicked of beings and source of all evil in contrast to the person of Gabriel,
which is the noblest and purest of beings and source of all good. Blessed is God
for this and that. Similarly, His power becomes evident to them in the creation
of night and day, light and dark, disease and remedy, life and death, heat and
cold, beauty and ugliness, heaven and earth, water and fire, and good and evil.
This is the greatest evidence to the perfection of His power and honor, His
authority and dominion, for these opposites confront and dominate each other,
and He has created them [to be] the site of His arrangement, ordering, and wisdom, and the lack of existence of any one of them would call into question His
wisdom, perfect control, and dominion.
Among them also is the manifestation of His Names of dominance such as
“the Dominant,” “the Avenger,” “the Just,” “the One who inflicts harm,” “the Swift
in punishment,” “He who strikes with terrible might,” “He who lowers,” and “He
who humiliates.” What is signified by these names must exist, and if all of the
creation were like the angels, these names would not be manifested.
Among them also is the manifestation of His Names signifying His forbearance, lenience, forgiveness, and covering up of sins, clemency in exacting His
rights and emancipating of whoever He wishes of His slaves. Had He not created what He dislikes of the causes that would lead to these names, these gems
of wisdom and insights would vanish as well. The Prophet alluded precisely to
this in His saying,

‫‪567‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫المتناهي في الـكراهة‪] ،‬إذا علم متناوله أن فيه شفاءه‪ ،‬وكقطع العضو[ المتآكل إذا علم أن في قطعه بقاء‬
‫جسده‪ ،‬وكقطع المسافة الشاقة جدا ًإذا علم أنها توصله إلى مراده ومحبو به‪ .‬بل العاقل يكتفي في إ يثار‬
‫هذا المكروه وإرادته بالظن الغالب وإن خفيت عنه عاقبته وطو يت عنه مغبته‪ ،‬فكيف بمن لا تخفى‬
‫عليه العواقب؟ فهو سبحانه وتعالى يكره الشيء و يبغضه في ذاته ولا ينافي ذلك إرادته لغيره‪ ،‬وكونه‬
‫سببا ًإلى أمر هو أحب إليه من فوته‪.‬‬

‫مثال ذلك أنه سبحانه خلق إ بليس الذي هو مادة لفساد الأديان والأعمال‪ ،‬والاعتقادات‬
‫والإرادات‪ ،‬وهو سبب شقاوة العبيد وعملهم بما يغضب الرب تبارك وتعالى‪ ،‬وهو الساعي في وقوع‬
‫خلاف ما يحبه الل ّٰه و يرضاه بكل طر يق وكل حيلة‪ .‬فهو مبغوض للرب سبحانه وتعالى مسخوط له‪،‬‬
‫لعنه الل ّٰه ومقته وغضب عليه‪ ،‬ومع هذا فهو وسيلة إلى محاب كثيرة للرب تعالى ترتبت على خلقه‪،‬‬
‫وجودها أحب إليه من عدمها‪.‬‬
‫منها أن تظهر للعباد قدرة الرب تعالى على خلق المتضادات المتقابلات‪ .‬فخلق هذه الذات—التي‬
‫هي أخبث الذوات وشرها‪ ،‬وهي سبب كل شر—في مقابلة ذات جبر يل التي هي أشرف الذوات‬
‫وأطهرها وأزكاها‪ ،‬وهي مادة كل خير‪ .‬فتبارك الل ّٰه خالق هذا وهذا‪ ،‬كما ظهرت لهم قدرته التامة‬
‫في خلق الليل والنهار والضياء والظلام والداء والدواء والحياة والموت والحر والبرد والحسن والقبيح‬
‫والأرض والسماء والماء والنار والخـير والشر‪.‬‬
‫وذلك من أدل الدلائل على كمال قدرته وعزته وسلطانه وملـكه‪ .‬فإنه خلق هذه المتضادات وقابل‬
‫بعضها ببعض وسلط بعضها على بعض وجعلها محال تصرفه وتدبيره وحكمته‪ ،‬فخلو الوجود عن بعضها‬
‫بالكلية تعطيل لحكمته وكمال تصرفه وتدبير مملـكته‪.‬‬
‫ومنها ظهور آثار أسمائه القهر ية‪ ،‬مثل القهار والمنتقم والعدل والضار وشديد العقاب وسر يع‬
‫الحساب وذي البطش الشديد والخافض والمذل‪ ،‬فإن هذه الأسماء والأفعال كمال‪ ،‬فلا بد من وجود‬
‫متعلقها‪ .‬ولو كان الخلق كلهم على طبيعة المل َك لم يظهر أ ثر هذه الأسماء والأفعال‪.‬‬
‫ومنها ظهور آثار أسمائه المتضمنة لحلمه وعفوه ومغفرته وستره وتجاوزه عن حقه‪ ،‬وعتقه لمن شاء‬
‫من عبيده‪ ،‬فلولا خلق ما يكره من الأسباب المفضية إلى ظهور آثار هذه الأسماء لتعطلت هذه الحكم‬

568

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

If you did not sin, God would remove you and bring those who would sin
and ask for forgiveness so He would forgive them.12
Among them also is the manifestation of the names of wisdom and knowledge,
for He is the All-wise, All-knowing who places all things in their place, allotting to each its desert, not placing anything out of its place nor allotting any
share unsuitably. This is not possible without the perfection of His knowledge,
wisdom, and mastery. He neither places scarcity and deprivation in place of
bounty13 and grace, nor vice versa. He neither gives reward in place of punishment nor vice versa. He does not lower in a place fit for elevating, nor vice versa.
He neither gives honor in place of humility, nor vice versa. He neither gives a
commandment in place of prohibition, nor vice versa.
He knows, accordingly, where to inspire His revelation, who is most fit to
receive it, and is grateful to receive it, and knows also who is incapable and
undeserving of receiving it. He is too wise to hold it back from those who
deserve it and to place it in an undeserving site.
If these hated and loathed causes were to disappear, so too these effects, and
they would not manifest to His creation, and their wisdom and benefits that
ultimately result from them would be lost.
If these causes were to be eliminated because of their evil, the much greater
good that results from them too would cease to exist, like sin, the rain, and the
wind, which have benefits that are far, far greater than the evil and harm that
may come from them; if they were eliminated in order to avoid that limited evil,
the incomparably greater good that results from them too would disappear.

Among them is the attainment of the diverse forms of servitude and worship
that would be deficient without the creation of Iblīs.
The service of struggle in God’s path is among the dearest to the Almighty;
if all men were believers, this kind of worship and all that comes with it would
not exist, such as alliance and hostility for Him, love and hate for Him, the sacrifice of the ego against the enemy, the commanding of right and forbidding of
wrong, endurance and resistance against desire, and the sacrifice of personal
preferences for the sake of what God loves.

12

Muslim #2749.

‫‪569‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫والفوائد‪ .‬وقد أشار النبي إلى هذا بقوله‪» :‬لو لم تذنبوا لذهب الل ّٰه بكم‪ ،‬ولجاء بقوم يذنبون فيستغفرون‬
‫الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فيغفر لهم«‪.‬‬
‫ومنها ظهور آثار أسماء الحكمة والخـبرة‪ ،‬فإنه سبحانه الحكيم الخبير الذي يضع الأشياء مواضعها‪،‬‬
‫و ينزلها منازلها اللائقة بها‪ ،‬فلا يضع الشيء في غير موضعه ولا ينزله غير منزلته التي يقتضيها كمال‬
‫علمه وحكمته وخبرته‪ ،‬فلا يضع الحرمان والمنع موضع العطاء والفضل‪ ،‬ولا الفضل والعطاء موضع‬
‫الحرمان والمنع‪ ،‬ولا الثواب موضع العقاب ولا العقاب موضع الثواب‪ ،‬ولا الخفض موضع الرفع‬
‫ولا الرفع موضع الخفض‪ ،‬ولا العز مكان الذل ولا الذل مكان العز‪ ،‬ولا يأمر بما ينبغي النهي عنه‬
‫ولا ينهى عما ينبغي الأمر به‪.‬‬
‫فهو أعلم حيث يجعل رسالته وأعلم بمن يصلح لقبولها و يشكره على انتهائها إليه ووصولها‪ ،‬وأعلم بمن‬
‫لا يصلح لذلك ولا يستأهله‪ ،‬وأحكم من أن يمنعها أهلها و يضعها عند غير أهلها‪.‬‬
‫فلو ق ُدر عدم الأسباب المكروهة البغيضة له لتعطلت هذه الآثار‪ ،‬ولم تظهر لخلقه‪ ،‬ولفاتت الحكم‬
‫والمصالح المترتبة عليها‪ ،‬وفواتها شر من حصول تلك الأسباب‪.‬‬
‫فلو ع ُطلت تلك الأسباب—لما فيها من الشر—لتعطل الخـير الذي هو أعظم من الشر الذي في تلك‬
‫الأسباب‪ ،‬وهذا كالشمس والمطر والر ياح التي فيها من المصالح ما هو أضعاف أضعاف ما يحصل‬
‫بها من الشر والضرر‪ .‬فلو قدر تعطيلها—لئلا يحصل منها ذلك الشر الجزئي—لتعطل من الخـير ما هو‬
‫أعظم من ذلك الشر بما لا نسبة بينه و بينه‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫ومنها حصول العبودية المتنوعة التي لولا خلق إ بليس لما حصلت‪ ،‬ولكان الحاصل بعضها لا كلها‪.‬‬
‫فإن عبودية الجهاد من أحب أنواع العبودية إليه سبحانه‪ ،‬ولو كان الناس كلهم مؤمنين لتعطلت‬
‫هذه العبودية وتوابعها من الموالاة فيه سبحانه والمعاداة فيه والحب فيه والبغض فيه‪ ،‬و بذل النفس‬
‫له في محار بة عدوه وعبودية الأمر بالمعروف والنهي عن المنكر‪ ،‬وعبودية الصبر ومخالفة الهوى‪ ،‬وإيثار‬
‫محاب الرب على محاب النفس‪.‬‬

‫‪The text here must be corrupted; instead of al-ʿiqāb (bounty), the context requires al-ʿaṭāʾ‬‬
‫‪(bounty).‬‬

‫‪13‬‬

570

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Among them also is the worship of repentance, return, and seeking forgiveness, for the Almighty loves the penitent and their contrition, and if the means
that create cause for repentance were to disappear, so would the worship [in
the form] of repentance and seeking forgiveness.
Among them is the worship [in the form] of hostility to the enemy and opposition to him for God’s sake, this being among the dearest kinds of worship
to God, for God loves that His allies oppose and battle with His enemy, and
this worship cannot be appreciated except by the wise. Among them also is
to worship Him by seeking His protection and refuge from His enemy and his
deception and harm. Among them is that His servants increase in their fear and
caution when they witness the end of His enemy [Iblīs], his fall from the angelic
state to the devilish state, and dare not repose to deceptive wishing. Among
them is that they attain the reward of opposing and repelling him, which cannot be attained if they did not do so, and most acts of worship—be it of the
heart or the body—is the result of opposing him. Among them also is the fact
that the very hostility to him is among the greatest kinds of worship, as the
Almighty said, “The Satan is your enemy, so take him as your enemy” [35:6]. This
is most beneficial for the servant and dearest to the Lord. Among these is the
fact that human nature comprises the good and the bad, the wholesome and
unwholesome, infused in it like the fire is hidden in a flint stone, and Satan was
created by actualizing the potential of evil that is in the nature of the wicked,
and the prophets were derived by actualizing the potential of the righteous that
inheres in the righteous. The Most Wise thus actualizes the righteous potential
of the one group to bring about its results and the evil potential of the other
group to bring about its results, His wisdom being manifest in both, His judgment effective in both, bringing out what was already known to Him in His
prior knowledge.
This is the question that the angels asked when they said,
And when your Lord said to the angels, “I will make upon the earth a
successor,” they said, “Will You place upon it one who causes corruption
therein and sheds blood, while we declare Your praise and sanctify You?”
He said, “Indeed, I know that which you know not.” [2:30]
The angels understood that the existence of those who glorify His praise, obey
and worship Him, is better than the existence of those who disobey and oppose
Him, but the Almighty responded that He knows of wisdom, benefits, and
praiseworthy ends in the creation of this kind that the angels do not.
Among [God’s wise purposes in creating the devil] is the manifestation of
many of His miraculous signs and wonders in His creation that are accom-

‫‪571‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫ومنها عبودية التو بة والرجوع إليه واستغفاره‪ ،‬فإنه سبحانه يحب التوابين و يحب تو بتهم‪ ،‬فلو عطلت‬
‫الأسباب التي يتاب منها لتعطلت عبودية التو بة والاستغفار منها‪.‬‬
‫ومنها عبودية مخالفة عدوه ومراغمته في الل ّٰه وإغاظته فيه‪ ،‬وهي من أحب أنواع العبودية إليه‪ ،‬فإنه‬
‫سبحانه يحب من وليه أن يغيظ عدوه و يراغمه و يسوءه‪ ،‬وهذه عبودية لا يتفطن لها إلا الأكياس‪.‬‬
‫ومنها أن يتعبد له بالاستعاذة من عدوه وسؤاله أن يجـيره منه و يعصمه من كيده وأذاه‪.‬‬
‫ومنها أن عبيده يشتد خوفهم وحذرهم إذا رأوا ما حل بعدوه بمخالفته وسقوطه من المرتبة الملـكية‬
‫إلى المرتبة الشيطانية‪ ،‬فلا يخلدون إلى غرور الأمل بعد ذلك‪.‬‬
‫ومنها أنهم ينالون ثواب مخالفته ومعاداته‪ ،‬الذي حصوله مشروط بالمعاداة والمخالفة‪ ،‬فأكثر‬
‫عبادات القلوب والجوارح مرتبة على مخالفته‪.‬‬
‫شي ْطَانَ لـ َك ُْم‬
‫ن ال َ ّ‬
‫ومنها أن نفس اتخاذه عدوا ً من أكبر أنواع العبودية وأجلها‪ ،‬قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َ ّ‬
‫ع َد ُّو ٌ ف َاَّتخ ِذ ُوه ُ ع َد ًُّوا﴾ ]فاطر‪ .[6:‬فاتخاذه عدوا ً أنفع شيء للعبد‪ ،‬وهو محبوب للرب‪.‬‬
‫ومنها أن الطبيعة البشر ية مشتملة على الخـير والشر والطيب والخبيث‪ ،‬وذلك كامن فيها كمون‬
‫النار في الزناد‪ ،‬فخلق الشيطان مستخرجا لً ما في طبائع أهل الشر من القوة إلى الفعل‪ ،‬وأرسلت الرسل‬
‫تستخرج ما في طبيعة أهل الخـير من القوة إلى الفعل‪ ،‬فاستخرج أحكم الحاكمين ما في قوى هؤلاء من‬
‫الخـير الكامن فيها‪ ،‬ليترتب عليه ]آثاره‪ ،‬وما في قوى أولئك من الشر‪ ،‬ليترتب عليه آثاره وتظهر حكمته‬
‫في الفر يقين[‪ ،‬و ينفذ حكمه فيهما‪ ،‬و يظهر ما كان معلوما لً ه مطابقا لً علمه السابق‪.‬‬
‫ن‬
‫نح ْ ُ‬
‫ك الد ِّم َاء َ و َ َ‬
‫سد ُ فيِ ه َا و َي َْسف ِ ُ‬
‫ل فيِ ه َا م َن يفُ ْ ِ‬
‫تج ْع َ ُ‬
‫وهذا هو السؤال الذي سألته ملائكته حين قالوا‪َ ﴿ :‬أ َ‬
‫ل ِإن ِ ّي َأع ْل َم ُ م َا ل َا تعَ ْل َموُ نَ﴾ ]البقرة‪ ،[30:‬فظنت الملائكة أن وجود من‬
‫ك ۖ ق َا َ‬
‫س لَ َ‬
‫ن ُس َب ِّ ُ‬
‫ح ب ِحمَ ْدِك َ و َنقُ َ ّدِ ُ‬
‫يسبح بحمده و يطيعه و يعبده أولى من وجود من يعصيه و يخالفه‪ ،‬فأجابهم سبحانه بأنه يعلم من الحكم‬
‫والمصالح والغايات المحمودة في خلق هذا النوع ما لا تعلمه الملائكة‪.‬‬
‫ومنها أن ظهور كثير من آياته وعجائب صنعه حصل بسبب وقوع الـكفر والشر من النفوس‬

572
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
plished because of the occurrence of the unbelief and wickedness of some, like
the great sign of the Flood and the Wind [which destroyed the people of Noah
and ʿĀd respectively], the destruction of the people of Thamūd and the people
of Lot, the miracle of the fire turning cool and peaceful on Abraham, and the
signs that God showed at the hands of Moses, and other signs. After mentioning
each one of these God says,
Indeed in that is a sign, but most of them were not to be believers. And
indeed, your Lord—He is the Exalted in Might, the Merciful. [26:139–140]
Were it not for the unbelief of the ingrates and the animosity of the obdurate,
these signs of which men speak generation after generation would not manifest
themselves.
Among them also is the creation of complementary causes that compete
and collide with each other, and that is the perfection of His lordship, omnipotence, wisdom, and dominion. Even though the lordship would be perfect
in itself without creating these means, its creation is nonetheless a corollary
of His perfection, dominion, omnipotence, and wisdom. Their manifestation
and effect in the world of being is the realization of that perfection and its
cause. This is the plenitude of the effects of unqualified divine perfection, in
all its possibilities, kinds, and ends, in all the domains of the unseen and the
seen.
In sum, then, the worship, the signs, and the wonders that result from the
creation, predestination, and willing of what He does not love or like are dearer
to Him than the alternative.
If you ask: Is it possible for the wise purposes to come into effect without
these [evil] causes?
I say: This is an invalid question, for it requires the existence of the result
without its cause, like requiring the existence of son without a father, movement without a mover, and repentance without a penitent.
If you said: If these causes are desired because of their wise purposes, are
they loved and desired in this respect, or are they disliked in every way?
I would say that this question can be asked from two perspectives.
First, from the perspective of the Lord Almighty: Whether He loves them in
the sense that they lead to what He loves even if He dislikes them for their own
sake?
Second, from the perspective of the servant: Is it permissible for him to be
pleased with them from that perspective as well? This is a great question.
Know that all evil is ultimately from privation: I mean the privation of good
and its means, which is evil from this perspective. As for existence in itself, there

‫‪573‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫الكافرة الظالمة‪ ،‬كآية الطوفان وآية الريح وآية إهلاك ثمود وقوم لوط‪ ،‬وآية انقلاب النار على إ براهيم‬
‫بردا ً وسلاما‪ ً،‬والآيات التي أجراها الل ّٰه تعالى على يد موسى‪ ،‬وغير ذلك من آياته التي يقول سبحانه‬
‫حيم ُ﴾‬
‫ك ل َهوُ َ ال ْع َزِ يز ُ ال َر ّ ِ‬
‫ن ر َ َب ّ َ‬
‫كثرَ ُه ُم ُمّؤ ْم ِن ِين و َِإ َ ّ‬
‫ك ل َآيةَ ً ۖ و َم َا ك َانَ َأ ْ‬
‫ن ف ِي ذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫عقيب ذكر كل آية منها‪ِ﴿ :‬إ َ ّ‬
‫]الشعراء‪ .[140–139:‬فلولا كفر الكافر ين وعناد الجاحدين لما ظهرت هذه الآيات الباهرة التي يتحدث‬
‫بها الناس جيلا بً عد جيل إلى الأبد‪.‬‬
‫ومنها أن خلق الأسباب المتقابلة التي يقهر بعضها بعضا ً و يكسر بعضها بعضا ً هو من شأن كمال‬
‫الر بو بية والقدرة النافذة والحكمة التامة والملك الكامل—وإن كان شأن الر بو بيةكاملا ًفي نفسه‪ ،‬ولو‬
‫لم يخلق هذه الأسباب—لـكن خلقها من لوازم كماله وملـكه وقدرته وحكمته‪ .‬فظهور تأثيرها وأحكامها‬
‫في عالم الشهادة تحقيق لذلك الـكمال وموجب من موجباته‪ .‬فتعمير مراتب الغيب والشهادة بأحكام‬
‫الصفات من آثار الـكمال الإلهي المطلق بجميع وجوهه وأقسامه وغاياته‪.‬‬
‫و بالجملة‪ ،‬فالعبودية والآيات والعجائب التي ترتبت على خلق ما لا يحبه ولا يرضاه وتقديره ومشيئته‬
‫أحب إليه سبحانه وتعالى من فواتها‪ ،‬وتعطيلها بتعطيل أسبابها‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬فهل كان يمكن وجود الحكم بدون هذه الأسباب؟‬
‫قلت‪ :‬هذا سؤال باطل‪ ،‬إذ هو فرض وجود الملزوم بدون لازمه كفرض وجود الا بن بدون‬
‫الأب‪ ،‬والحركة بدون المتحرك‪ ،‬والتو بة دون التائب‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬فإذا كانت هذه الأسباب مرادة لما تفضي إليه من الحكم‪ ،‬فهل تكون مرضية ً محبو بة ً‬
‫من هذا الوجه‪ ،‬أم مسخوطة ً من جميع الوجوه؟‬
‫قلت‪ :‬هذا السؤال يورد على وجهين‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما من جهة الرب سبحانه وتعالى‪ .‬وهل يكون محبا ًلها من جهة إفضائها إلى محبو به وإن كان‬
‫يبغضها لذواتها؟‬
‫والثاني من جهة العبد‪ ،‬وهو أنه هل يسوغ له الرضى بها من تلك الجهة أيضا ً؟ فهذا سؤال له شأن‪.‬‬
‫فاعلم أن الشر كله يرجع إلى العدم—أعني عدم الخـير وأسبابه المفضية إليه—وهو من هذه الجهة‬
‫شر‪ .‬وأما من جهة وجوده المحض فلا شر فيه‪.‬‬

574
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
is no evil. Its example is the wicked selves whose existence is a good in the sense
that they exist, and evil occurs to them because of the severance of the substance of the good from them; they were created essentially in motion, never
stagnant, and if helped with knowledge and inspiration they move by it and if
left they move by their nature against that. Its motion inasmuch as it is movement is a good and becomes evil only when modified by something additional,
but not insofar as it is movement. All evil is a kind of injustice, which is to place
a thing where it does not belong, but if the same thing were placed in the right
place, it would no longer be injustice.
It has become known, therefore, that the aspect of evil in them is by virtue
of an additional will. This is why [legal] punishments when applied in a proper
manner are a good in themselves, even if they are an evil with respect to the
site (the criminal) on which they are applied because of the pain that they create in him and since his nature is suitable and receptive to its opposite, namely,
pleasure. That pain, in that respect, becomes an evil for it, even if it is good with
respect to its agent because and inasmuch as [the penalizing authority] applied
it in its place, for the Almighty does not create anything that is purely evil in
all its aspects. His wisdom forbids that. A creation may be evil and corrupting
in some respects, but in its creation there are benefits and wise purposes in
other respects that supersede the evil aspects, and all reality encompasses this
fact. It is not possible for the Truth Almighty to wish a thing that is corrupt in
every respect and aspect and has no benefit in creating it whatsoever. This is the
most obvious impossibility, for in His hands is all good; evil is not attributable
to Him, all that is attributable to Him is good, and evil obtains only as a result of
the absence of this addition and relation to Him. Were it attributable to Him,
it would not be evil. Reflect on this: it is the severance of a thing to Him that
turns it into an evil.
If you say: But the relation to Him has not become severed in creation and
will.
I would say: In this respect, it is not evil. It is only its existence that is
attributed to Him and in this respect it is not evil; the evil in it is only the lack of
the additional supply of the good and its means, and the absence is not a thing,
and so not attributable to God.
If you seek further clarification, know that the means of the good are three:
creation ex nihilo, preparation, and aid.
Creation ex nihilo of a good means is a good and is attributed to God, and
its preparation is a good, also attributed to God, and its addition to the agent is
also a good, and that too is His. If He did not prepare the agent and supply it,
evil occurs as a result of this absence.
If you ask: But why did He not supply it [with good] after having created it?

‫‪575‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫مثاله أن النفوس الشر يرة وجودها خير من حيث هي موجودة‪ ،‬وإنما حصل لها الشر بقطع مادة‬
‫الخـير عنها‪ ،‬فإنها خلقت في الأصل متحركة ً لا تسكن‪ ،‬فإن أعينت بالعلم وإلهام الخـير تحركت به‪ ،‬وإن‬
‫تركت تحركت بطبعها إلى خلافه‪ .‬وحركتها من حيث هي حركة خير‪ ،‬وإنما تكون شرا ً بالإضافة لا‬
‫من حيث هي حركة‪ ،‬والشر كله ظلم وهو وضع الشيء في غير موضعه‪ ،‬فلو وضع في موضعه لم يكن‬
‫شرا ً‪.‬‬
‫فعلم أن جهة الشر فيه بمشيئة إضافية‪ ،‬ولهذا كانت العقو بات الموضوعة في محالها خيرا ً في نفسها‪،‬‬
‫وإن كانت شرا ً بالنسبة إلى المحل الذي حلت به‪ ،‬لما أحدثت فيه من الألم الذي كانت الطبيعة قابلة ً‬
‫لضده من اللذة‪ ،‬مستعدة ً له‪ ،‬فصار ذلك الألم شرا ً بالنسبة إليها وهو خير بالنسبة إلى الفاعل‪ ،‬حيث‬
‫وضعه موضعه‪ .‬فإنه سبحانه لا يخلق شرا ًمحضا ًمن جميع الوجوه والاعتبارات‪ ،‬فإن حكمته تأبى ذلك‪،‬‬
‫بل قد يكون ذلك المخلوق شرا ًومفسدة ً ببعض الاعتبارات‪ ،‬وفي خلقه مصالح وحكم باعتبارات أخر‬
‫أرجح من اعتبارات مفاسده‪ ،‬بل الواقع منحصر في ذلك‪ ،‬فلا يمكن في جناب الحق—جل جلاله—‬
‫أن ير يد شيئا ً يكون فسادا ً من كل وجه و بكل اعتبار‪ ،‬لا مصلحة في خلقه بوجه ما‪ .‬هذا من أبين‬
‫المحال‪ ،‬فإنه سبحانه بيده الخـير والشر ليس إليه‪ ،‬بل كل ما إليه فخـير‪ ،‬والشر إنما حصل لعدم هذه‬
‫الإضافة والنسبة إليه‪ ،‬فلو كان إليه لم يكن شرا ً‪ ،‬فتأمله‪ ،‬فانقطاع نسبته إليه هو الذي صيره شرا ً‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬لم تنقطع نسبته إليه خلقا ًومشيئة ً‪.‬‬
‫قلت‪ :‬هو من هذه الجهة ليس بشر‪ ،‬فإن وجوده هو المنسوب إليه‪ ،‬وهو من هذه الجهة ليس بشر‪،‬‬
‫والشر الذي فيه من عدم إمداده بالخـير وأسبابه‪ .‬والعدم ليس بشيء حتى ينسب إلى من بيده الخـير‪.‬‬
‫فإن أردت مزيدا ً إ يضاح لذلك‪ ،‬فاعلم أن أسباب الخـير ثلاثة‪ :‬الإ يجاد والإعداد والإمداد‪ .‬فهذه‬
‫هي الخـيرات وأسبابها‪.‬‬
‫فإ يجاد هذا السبب خير وهو إلى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وإعداده خير وهو إليه أيضا‪ ً،‬وإمداده خير وهو إليه‪ .‬فإذا‬
‫لم يحدث فيه إعداد ولا إمداد حصل فيه الشر بسبب هذا العدم الذي ليس إلى الفاعل‪ ،‬وإنما إليه‬
‫ضده‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬فهلا أمده إذ أوجده‪.‬‬

576

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

I would say: What His wisdom requires creation and supplying, the Almighty
creates and supplies, and what His wisdom requires creating but not supplying:
He created it by His wisdom and deprived from supply of good by His wisdom.
His creation is good and the evil occurred only from lack of its supply.
If you say: Why did He not supply all of the creation?
I would say: This is an invalid question as it supposes that the equality of all
existents is greater in wisdom, and this is utter ignorance. The essence of all
wisdom is precisely in the great difference that exists among them. But in the
creation of each of these kinds there is no difference insofar as the attribute
of creation is the same, rather, the difference among them owes to matters of
absence, not creation.
If this is difficult for you to grasp properly, consider the saying,
If you cannot do a thing
Ignore it for things that you can
As it is mentioned that al-Aṣmaʿī met once with al-Khalīl [b. Aḥmad] seeking to
understand the art of prosody but it proved difficult for him, so the latter said
to the former on the day, “Parse this verse for me,” and recited this couplet, and
he understood his meaning and gave it up.
The core of the matter is that contentment with God necessitates contentment with His attributes, acts, names, and judgments, but does not require
contentment with all of the objects of His action. The reality of worship, in fact,
is that the servant be in agreement with His pleasure and displeasure, pleased
and content with what He is pleased with and displeased with what He is displeased with.
If it is said: The Almighty is pleased with the punishment of whoever deserves punishment, but how can a servant be pleased with His punishment of
him?
It would be said: If he were to be in agreement with His punishment, it would
turn into delight and joy, but such a thing will not issue from him. For if he
failed to agree with Him in His love and obedience, which constitute the pleasure of the soul, the coolness of the eyes, and life of the heart, how could he
agree with His punishment for him, which is in fact the most hated and painful
of all things to him. In reality, he had hated what He loved, namely, obedience
and monotheism, and will not love His punishment. Yet, if he were to do it, the
punishment would vanish.
If you say: How can pleasure with the decree be reconciled with the
hatred that the servant experiences for things such as disease, poverty, and
pain?

‫‪577‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫قلت‪ :‬ما اقتضت الحكمة إ يجاده وإمداده‪ ،‬فإنه—سبحانه—يوجده و يمده‪ ،‬وما اقتضت الحكمة‬
‫إ يجاده وترك إمداده أوجده بحكمته ولم يمده بحكمته‪ ،‬فإ يجاده خير‪ ،‬والشر وقع من عدم إمداده‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬فهلا أمد الموجودات كلها‪.‬‬
‫لت‪ :‬هذا سؤال فاسد يظن مورده أن التسو ية بين الموجودات أبلغ في الحكمة وهذا عين الجهل‪،‬‬
‫بل الحكمةكل الحكمة في هذا التفاوت العظيم الواقع بينها‪ ،‬وليس في خلق كل نوع منها تفاوت‪ .‬فكل‬
‫نوع منها ليس في خلقه من تفاوت‪ ،‬والتفاوت إنما وقع بأمور عدمية لم يتعلق بها الخلق‪ ،‬وإلا فليس‬
‫في الخلق من تفاوت‪.‬‬
‫فإن اعتاص ذلك عليك ولم تفهمه حق الفهم‪ ،‬فراجع قول القائل‪:‬‬

‫إذا لم تستطع شيئا فدعه‬

‫وجاوزه إلى ما تستطيع‬

‫كما ذكر أن الأصمعي اجتمع بالخليل وحرص على فهم العروض منه‪ ،‬فأعياه ذلك‪ ،‬فقال له الخليل‬
‫يوما‪ ً:‬قطع لي هذا البيت‪ ،‬وأنشده‪» :‬إذا لم تستطع … البيت«‪ ،‬ففهم ما أراد‪ ،‬فأمسك عنه ولم يشتغل‬
‫به‪.‬‬
‫وسر المسألة أن الرضى بالل ّٰه يستلزم الرضى بصفاته وأفعاله وأسمائه وأحكامه‪ ،‬ولا يستلزم الرضى‬
‫بمفعولاتهكلها‪ ،‬بل حقيقة العبودية أن يوافقه عبده في رضاه وسخطه‪ ،‬فيرضى منها بما رضي به و يسخط‬
‫منها ما سخطه‪.‬‬
‫فإن قيل‪ :‬فهو سبحانه يرضى عقو بة من يستحق العقو بة‪ ،‬فكيف يمكن العبد أن يرضى بعقو بته له؟‬
‫قيل‪ :‬لو وافقه في رضاه بعقو بته لانقلبت لذة ً وسرورا ً‪ ،‬ولـكن لا يقع منه ذلك‪.‬‬
‫فإنه لم يوافقه في محبته وطاعته التي هي سرور النفس وقرة العين وحياة القلب‪ ،‬فكيف يوافقه في‬
‫محبته للعقو بة التي هي أكره شيء إليه وأشق شيء عليه؟ بل كان كارها لً ما يحبه من طاعته وتوحيده‪،‬‬
‫فلا يكون راضيا ًبما يختاره من عقو بته‪ ،‬ولو فعل ذلك لارتفعت عنه العقو بة‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬فكيف يجتمع الرضى بالقضاء الذي يكرهه العبد—من المرض والفقر والألم—مع‬
‫كراهته؟‬

578

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

It would be said: There is no incompatibility in that, for he is pleased with
it insofar as it leads to what he loves but dislikes it in the respect that it hurts
him, like a bitter medicine that he knows will cure him, thus he combines in it
pleasure and displeasure.
If you say: How could He be pleased with a thing for His servant yet not help
him in attaining it?
I would say: Because His helping him in that act of obedience that He loves
would lead to the loss of what is more beloved to Him. It may be that that act
of obedience by the servant may lead to a consequence that would be more
loathsome to the Almighty than that act of obedience is desirable. Its occurrence would necessitate a preponderant harm or repel a preponderant benefit.
God Almighty has alluded to precisely this in His words,
And if they had intended to go forth, they would have prepared for it
something. But God disliked their being sent, so He kept them back, and
they were told, “Remain [behind] with those who remain.” Had they gone
forth with you, they would not have increased you except in confusion,
and they would have been active among you, seeking [to cause] sedition.
And among you are those who would avidly listen to them. And God is
Knowing of the wrongdoers. [9:46–47]
The Almighty has declared here that He loathed their being sent out with His
messenger for an expedition, which is an act of obedience and devotion and He
had commanded them to it, but when He loathed it for some of them, He held
them back. The Almighty then mentions some of the harms that would have
resulted from their joining of the expedition. He informed them that “had they
gone out with you they would have only increased you in confusion,” that is,
in corruption and evil, and “they would have been busybodies in your midst,”
that is, they would have striven for corruption, “seeking sedition, there being
among you those who would avidly listen to them” that is, they receive and
respond to such things, and there would have been sedition and evil as a result
that is much greater than the benefit of their going out with you. Wisdom and
mercy, therefore, required that He prevent them from going with you and held
them back.
Make this an example that serves as the foundation for your thinking on this
matter.
If you ask: This has allowed me to imagine the pleasure of the Lord Almighty
in a thing that He creates in one respect and His displeasure with the same in
another respect. How, then, do the two come together in my being as regards
sins and wickedness?

‫‪579‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫قلت‪ :‬لا تنافي في ذلك‪ ،‬فإنه يرضى به من جهة إفضائه إلى ما يحب‪ ،‬و يكرهه من جهة تألمه به‪،‬‬
‫كالدواء الـكر يه الذي يعلم أن فيه شفاءه‪ ،‬فإنه يجتمع فيه رضاه به وكراهته له‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬كيف يرضى لعبده شيئا ًولا يعينه عليه؟‬
‫قلت‪ :‬لأن إعانته عليه قد تستلزم فوات محبوب له أعظم من حصول تلك الطاعة التي رضيها له‪.‬‬
‫وقد يكون وقوع تلك الطاعة منه يتضمن مفسدة ً هي أكره إليه سبحانه من محبته لتلك الطاعة‪ ،‬بحيث‬
‫يكون وقوعها منه مستلزما ًلمفسدة راجحة‪ ،‬ومفوتا ًلمصلحة راجحة‪ ،‬وقد أشار تعالى إلى ذلك في قوله‪:‬‬
‫ن لوَ ْ‬
‫ل اق ْع ُد ُوا م ََع ال ْق َاع ِدِي َ‬
‫كن كرَ ِه َ ال َل ّـه ُ انبعِ اَ ثَه ُْم ف َث ََب ّطَه ُْم و َقيِ َ‬
‫ج ل ََأع َُّدوا ل َه ُ ع َُّدة ً و َل َٰ ِ‬
‫﴿و َلوَ ْ َأر َاد ُوا اْلخ ُر ُو َ‬
‫خل َالـ َك ُْم ي َب ْغ ُون َك ُم ُ ال ْف ِت ْنةَ َ و َفيِ ك ُْم سَ َم ّاع ُونَ ل َه ُْم ۗ و َال َل ّـه ُ ع َليِ م ٌ‬
‫ضع ُوا ِ‬
‫خب َال ًا و َل ََأْو َ‬
‫جوا فيِ ك ُم َمّا ز َاد ُوك ُْم ِإ َلّا َ‬
‫خ َر َ ُ‬
‫ظال ِم ِينَ﴾ ]التو بة‪ .[47–46:‬فأخبر سبحانه أنهكره انبعاثهم مع رسوله للغزو‪ ،‬وهو طاعة وقر بة‪ ،‬وقد‬
‫باِ ل َ ّ‬
‫أمرهم به‪ ،‬فلما كرهه منهم ثبطهم عنه‪ .‬ثم ذكر سبحانه بعض المفاسد التي كانت تترتب على خروجهم لو‬
‫ضع ُوا‬
‫خب َال ًا﴾‪ ،‬أي فسادا ًوشرا ً‪﴿ ،‬و َل ََأْو َ‬
‫جوا فيِ ك ُم َمّا ز َاد ُوك ُْم ِإ َلّا َ‬
‫خرجوا مع رسوله ﷺ‪ ،‬فقال‪﴿ :‬لوَ ْ خ َر َ ُ‬
‫خل َالـ َك ُْم﴾‪ ،‬أي سعوا فيما بينكم بالفساد والشر ﴿ي َب ْغ ُون َك ُم ُ ال ْف ِت ْنةَ َ و َفيِ ك ُْم سَ َم ّاع ُونَ ل َه ُْم﴾‪ ،‬أي قابلون‬
‫ِ‬
‫منهم مستجيبون لهم‪ ،‬فتولد من بين سعي هؤلاء بالفساد وقبول أولئك منهم من الشر ما هو أعظم من‬
‫مصلحة خروجهم‪ ،‬فاقتضت الحكمة والرحمة أن منعهم من الخروج وأقعدهم عنه‪.‬‬
‫فاجعل هذا المثال أصلا ًلهذا الباب وقس عليه‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬قد تصور لي هذا في رضى الرب تعالى لبعض ما يخلقه من وجه وكراهته من وجه آخر‪،‬‬
‫فكيف لي بأن يجتمع الأمران في حقي بالنسبة إلى المعاصي والفسوق؟‬

580

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

I would say: That too is easy to imagine, but rather a common occurrence, for
a servant dislikes and loathes these things, and hates that he committed them,
and they occurred by his own acquisition, will, and choice, yet he is pleased
with the knowledge, foreordainment, will, and existential command of God.
He is pleased with what is from God and displeased with what is from him.
This is the path of one group from the people of gnosis.
Another group recommends loathing it all in every respect.
The latter in reality do not oppose the former, for when the servant loathes
it in every way, the sentiment is applied to the aspect of [the evil] that is in fact
loathsome; they do not in fact loathe the Lord’s knowledge, writ, will, and His
existential command, nor do the former like it in the respect in which the Lord
dislikes it.
The gist of the matter is that what is God’s in this matter [of evil] is not
loathed and what is the servant’s is loathed and disliked.
If you ask: How could there be a share of the servant in it?
I would say: This would be the false kind of determinism that would not permit one to get out of this difficult question; the one who believes in free will is
more likely to find a solution than the one who rejects it, but the Ahl al-Sunna
are moderate between the Qadarites and the Jabrites, and most successful in
finding a resolution.
For if you say: How can one experience regret and repentance while also
keeping one’s eyes fixed on the wisdom of His judgment and also testifying to
His omnipotence and His irresistible judgment?
I would say: This is what the blind who misunderstand the issue have fallen
into, for they come to see those acts [of sin] as obedience because one agrees
with the divine will and predestination, saying that in disobeying the divine
command one has obeyed the divine will. It was said,
I have become the object of whatever You choose to do
To me: my acts are all acts of obedience
Such men are the most blind and ignorant of all, knowing neither God, nor His
religious commands, nor His existential ones. Obedience is nothing but agreement with the command, not with the predestination and will, otherwise Iblīs
would have been the greatest of God’s devotees, as too the people of Noah, ʿĀd,
and Thamūd, as would be the people of Lot and those of Pharaoh, and on this
view they were punished and avenged by God for obeying Him. This is the epitome of ignorance of God, His attributes, and His acts.
If you say: With this, then, lament and repentance reconcile for me with the
recognition of His omnipotence and wisdom.

‫‪581‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫قلت‪ :‬هو متصور ممكن بل واقع‪ ،‬فإن العبد يسخط ذلك و يبغضه‪ ،‬و يكرهه من حيث هو فعل له‪،‬‬
‫وواقع بكسبه وإرادته واختياره‪ ،‬و يرضى بعلم الل ّٰه وكتابته ومشيئته وإذنه الـكوني‪ ،‬فيرضى بما من الل ّٰه‬
‫و يسخط ما هو منه‪ .‬فهذا مسلك طائفة من أهل العرفان‪.‬‬
‫وطائفة أخرى رأوا كراهة ذلك مطلقا‪ ً،‬وعدم الرضى به من كل وجه‪ .‬وهؤلاء في الحقيقة لا‬
‫يخالفون أولئك‪ ،‬فإن العبد إذا كرهها مطلقا ًفإن الـكراهة إنما تقع على الاعتبار المكروه منها‪ ،‬وهؤلاء لم‬
‫يكرهوا علم الرب وكتابته ومشيئته وإلزامه حكمه الـكوني‪ ،‬وأولئك لم يرضوا بها من الوجه الذي سخطها‬
‫الرب وأبغضها لأجله‪.‬‬
‫وسر المسألة أن الذي إلى الرب منها غير مكروه‪ ،‬والذي إلى العبد منها هو المكروه والمسخوط‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬ليس إلى العبد شيء منها‪.‬‬
‫قلت‪ :‬هذا هو الجـبر الباطل الذي لا يمكن صاحبه التخلص من هذا المقام الضيق‪ ،‬والقدري أقرب‬
‫إلى التخلص منه من الجـبري‪ ،‬وأهل السنة المتوسطون بين القدر ية والجـبر ية هم أسعد بالتخلص منه‬
‫من الفر يقين‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬كيف يتأتى الندم والتو بة مع شهود الحكمة في التقدير ومع شهود القيومية والمشيئة‬
‫النافذة؟‬
‫قلت‪ :‬هذا هو الذي أوقع من عميت بصيرته في شهود الأمر على خلاف ما هو عليه‪ ،‬فرأى تلك‬
‫الأفعال طاعات لموافقته فيها المشيئة والقدر‪ ،‬وقال‪ :‬إن عصيت أمره فقد أطعت إرادته في ذلك‪،‬‬
‫قيل‪:‬‬

‫أصبحت منفعلا لما تختاره‬

‫مني ففعلي كله طاعات‪.‬‬

‫وهؤلاء أعمى الخلق بصا ئر وأجهلهم بالل ّٰه وأحكامه الدينية والـكونية‪ .‬فإن الطاعة هي موافقة الأمر لا‬
‫موافقة القدر والمشيئة‪ ،‬ولو كانت موافقة القدر طاعة ً لل ّٰه لكان إ بليس من أعظم المطيعين لل ّٰه‪ ،‬وكان‬
‫قوم نوح وعاد وثمود وقوم لوط وقوم فرعون‪ ،‬كلهم مطيعين له‪ ،‬فيكون قد عذبهم أشد العذاب على‬
‫طاعته‪ ،‬وانتقم منهم لأجلها‪ ،‬وهذا غاية الجهل بالل ّٰه و بأسمائه وصفاته وأفعاله‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬ومع ذلك فاجمع لي بين الندم والتو بة‪ ،‬و بين مشهد القيومية والحكمة‪.‬‬

582

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

I say: The servant witnesses his incapacity and the enactment of divine predestination upon himself, his perfect dependence on Him, His incapacity to
protect himself even for the wink of an eye; and his falling into sin cannot occur
in such a state when he is fortified by Him who says, “By Me he hears, by Me
he sees, by Me he strikes, and by Me he walks,” it is unimaginable that such a
one would sin in such a state. When he is barred from such a state and falls to
his natural existence, being left to himself, he is now dominated by the forces
of the ego, the nature, and desire, and this natural existence is one in which
many a trap and hunter lie in wait for him, and he must fall into one of the
many such snares; this existence is veiled from his Lord. When the veil falls, the
drives rage, the prohibitions weaken, the darkness deepens, the faculties dim,
nowhere can he find a way to escape the snares and false gods. When the mist
of that nature lifts and the darkness recedes and you turn to your Lord from
your ego and habit,
The secret that you had long hidden is unveiled
The morning you were whose night has appeared
When you vanished
it encamped in [your heart] and settled
It is you who is the veil of your heart from its own secret
Were it not for you it would not have been sealed
A speech has come whose listener is never filled
Lured we are to its prose and its verse
The soul is rejuvenated when it mentions it
And the tormented heart’s darkness disappears
He is visited by contrition, penitence, and return, for he was in disobedience
when he subsisted by his ego, veiled from his Lord and His obedience; when
that being parted from him and he became another, he subsisted by His Lord,
not by his ego.
When this is known, repentance and contrition become in this being in
which he dwells by his Lord, and this in no way contradicts His wisdom and
omnipotence, but is rather reconciled with it and derives from it. All success is
from God.

‫‪583‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫قلت‪ :‬العبد إذا شهد عجز نفسه ونفوذ الأقدار فيه وكمال فقره إلى ر به وعدم استغنائه عن عصمته‬
‫وحفظه طرفة عين‪ ،‬كان بالل ّٰه في هذه الحال لا بنفسه‪ ،‬فوقوع الذنب منه لا يتأتى في هذه الحال‬
‫البتة‪ ،‬فإن عليه حصنا ًحصينا ًمن‪» :‬فبي يسمع‪ ،‬و بي يبصرن و بي يبطشن و بي يمشي«‪ ،‬فلا يتصور منه‬
‫الذنب في هذه الحال‪ ،‬فإذا حجب عن هذا المشهد وسقط إلى وجوده الطبيعي و بقي بنفسه‪ ،‬استولى‬
‫عليه حكم النفس والطبع والهوى وهذا الوجود الطبيعي قد نصبت فيه الشباك والأشراك‪ ،‬وأرسلت‬
‫عليه الصيادون‪ ،‬فلابد أن يقع في شبكة من تلك الشباك وشرك من تلك الأشراك‪ ،‬وهذا الوجود هو‬
‫حجاب بينه و بين ر به‪ .‬فيقع الحجاب و يقوى المقتضى و يضعف المانع وتشتد الظلمة وتضعف القوى‪،‬‬
‫فأنى له بالخلاص من تلك الأشراك والشباك‪ .‬فإذا انقشع ضباب ذلك الوجود الطبيعي وإنجاب‬
‫ظلامه وزال قتامه وصرت بر بك ذاهبا ًعن نفسك وطبعك‪.‬‬

‫بدا لك سر طال عنك اكتتامه‬

‫ولاح صباح كنت أنت ظلامه‬

‫فإن غبت عنه حل فيه وطنبت‬

‫على منكب الـكشف المصون خيامه‬

‫فأنت حجاب القلب عن سر غيبه‬

‫ولولاك لم يطبع عليه ختامه‬

‫وجاء حديث لا يمل سماعه‬

‫شهي‬

‫ونظامه‬

‫إذا ذكرته النفس زال عناؤها‬

‫وزال عن القلب المعنى قتامه‬

‫إلينا‬

‫نثره‬

‫فهنالك يحضره الندم والتو بة والإنابة‪ ،‬فإنهكان في المعصية بنفسه محجو با ًفيها عن ر به وعن طاعته‪،‬‬
‫فلما فارق ذلك الوجود وصار في وجود آخر‪ ،‬بقي بر به لا بنفسه‪.‬‬
‫وإذا عرف هذا‪ ،‬فالتو بة والندم يكونان في هذا الوجود الذي هو فيه بر به‪ ،‬وذلك لا ينافي مشهد‬
‫الحكمة والقيومية‪ ،‬بل يجامعه و يستمد منه‪ ،‬و بالل ّٰه التوفيق‪.‬‬

584
8

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Sixty-Two Virtues of Contentment and Indifference to Pleasure and
Pain

[Al-Harawī’s] words,
[Joyful contentment] is rectified by three conditions: the equality of
states with the servant, giving up of competition with the creation, and
purification from asking and begging.
He means that contentment with God can only be realized if these three conditions are met. A joyfully content person finds the states of bounty and calamity
equally acceptable, being pleased with God’s choice for him.
{He doesn’t mean that the various states are the same with respect to his natural suitability to some and repulsion to others, for this would be against the
human nature, nay, but the nature of all living beings.}
Nor is the meaning here the equality of states of obedience and disobedience, for this is opposed to worship and service in every way. The calamity and
bounty are equal in many other ways, however:
First, he has relegated his affairs to God and such a person is pleased with
whatever the One to whom he has relegated chooses for him, especially if he is
certain of His perfect wisdom, subtle bounties, and good judgment. Second,
he is certain that there is no changing God’s words, nor repelling His judgment; whatever He wills occurs and whatever He does not will does not, and
knows that whatever has come to him of bounty or calamity is a fait accompli.
Third, [he knows] that he is merely a slave, and a slave cannot be displeased
with the shepherding of the commands of his compassionate, benevolence,
earnest, and munificent master, but rather receives them with joyful contentment. Fourth, he is a lover, and a true lover is pleased with whatever his beloved
does with him. Fifth, he is ignorant of the end result of his affairs and his master knows his benefit and welfare. Sixth, he does not desire his benefit from
every way even if he knew how to attain it, he being not only ignorant but also
a wrongdoer, whereas his Almighty Lord desires his benefit and drives him to
its means, and among the greatest of means to it is what the servant hates, his
benefit in what he hates being manifold that in what he loves. The Almighty
said,
Fighting has been enjoined upon you while it is hateful to you. But perhaps you hate a thing and it is good for you; and perhaps you love a thing
and it is bad for you: God Knows and you know not. [2:216]

‫‪585‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫قوله‪» :‬و يصح بثلاثة شرائط‪ :‬باستواء الحالات عند العبد‪ ،‬وسقوط الخصومة مع الخلق‪،‬‬
‫و بالخلاص من المسألة والإلحاح«‪.‬‬
‫يعني أن الرضى عن الل ّٰه إنما يتحقق بهذه الأمور الثلاثة‪ ،‬فإن الراضي الموافق تستوي عنده‬
‫الحالات—من النعمة والبلية—في رضاه بحسن اختيار الل ّٰه له‪.‬‬
‫]وليس المراد استواؤها عنده في ملاءمته ومنافرته‪ ،‬فإن هذا خلاف الطبع البشري‪ ،‬بل خلاف‬
‫الطبع الحيواني[‪.‬‬
‫وليس المراد أيضا ًاستواء الحالات عنده في الطاعة والمعصية‪ ،‬فإن هذا مناف للعبودية من كل‬
‫وجه‪ ،‬وإنما تستوي النعمة والبلية عنده في الرضى بهما لوجوه‪.‬‬
‫أحدها أنه مفوض‪ ،‬والمفوض راض بكل ما اختاره له ]من فوض إليه‪ ،‬ولا سيما إذا علم كمال‬
‫حكمته ورحمته ولطفه وحسن اختياره له[‪.‬‬
‫الثاني أنه جازم بأنه لا تبديل لكلمات الل ّٰه ولا راد لحكمه وأنه ما شاء الل ّٰه كان وما لم يشأ لم يكن‪.‬‬
‫فهو يعلم أن كلا ًمن البلية والنعمة سابق وقدر حتم‪.‬‬
‫الثالث‪ :‬أنه عبد محض‪ ،‬والعبد المحض لا يسخط جر يان أحكام سيده المشفق البار الناصح المحسن‪،‬‬
‫بل يتلقاها كلها بالرضى به وعنه‪.‬‬
‫الرابع‪ :‬أنه محب والمحب الصادق من رضي بما يعامله به حبيبه‪.‬‬
‫الخامس‪ :‬أنه جاهل بعواقب الأمور وسيده أعلم بمصلحته وما ينفعه‪.‬‬
‫السادس‪ :‬أنه لا ير يد مصلحته من كل وجه‪ ،‬ولو عرف أسبابها فهو جاهل ظالم‪ ،‬ور به تعالى‬
‫ير يد مصلحته و يسوق إليه أسبابها‪ .‬ومن أعظم أسبابها ما يكرهه العبد‪ ،‬فإن مصلحته فيما يكره‬
‫ل و َه ُو َ كرُ ْه ٌ ل َـ ّك ُْم ۖ و َع َس َى َأن‬
‫ب ع َل َي ْك ُم ُ ال ْق ِت َا ُ‬
‫أضعاف مصلحته فيما يحب‪ .‬قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪ُ ﴿ :‬‬
‫كت ِ َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫شي ْئ ًا و َه ُو َ ش َر ّ ٌ ل َـ ّك ُْم ۗ و َال َل ّـه ُ يعَ ْل َم ُ و َ َأنت ُم ْ ل َا تعَ ْل َموُ نَ﴾‬
‫تح ِ ُب ّوا َ‬
‫شي ْئ ًا و َه ُو َ خ َي ْر ٌ ل َـ ّك ُْم ۖ و َع َس َى َأن ُ‬
‫تكَ ْر َه ُوا َ‬
‫ٰ‬

586

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

And also,
It may happen that you hate a thing wherein God has placed much good.
[4:19]
Seventh, that he is a Muslim, and a Muslim is he who has surrendered his soul
to God and has no objection to nor shows displeasure with the passing of His
judgments over him. Eighth, he is a knower of his Lord, expecting nothing but
good of Him, not questioning Him in any of His judgments and decrees; his
good thought of Him makes him feel the same about all his states in respect
of his contentment with his master. Ninth, he knows his share of predestination is what he inevitably receives of delight or resentment: if he is delighted,
that is his share, and if he is resentful, that is his share. Tenth, his knowledge
that his pleasure and contentment will turn his trial into a blessing, mitigate
the difficulty of bearing pain, and he will be helped in it, and if he is resentful,
his burden will redouble and no good will come of it. If resentment were of any
help, it would have been some comfort, but nothing is better for him than contentment. The point here is that his faith in the decree of the Almighty Lord is
good for him, as the Prophet said, “By Him in whose hands is my soul, God does
not decree a thing for the believer but that it is good for him: if it be a bounty,
it is good, and if it be a calamity, it is good, and this only for a believer.”
Eleventh, he should know that the perfection of service is the occurrence
of divine judgments on him, otherwise, if only good things happened to him, it
would be the farthest thing from service to his Lord. The worship of endurance,
trusting reliance, joyful contentment, humility, begging and meekness, and
others, would not occur if not for the fulfilment of decrees that he loathes.
Contentment has no meaning in decrees that one loves, but only in ones that
pain and repulse him. Twelfth, he should know that his contentment with his
Almighty Lord in all states results in the Lord’s pleasure with him. If he is
happy with the little of what he has been given, God is pleased with the little he puts forth by way of works. If he is pleased with Him in all his states
and circumstances, and the good and the bad are the same to him, he will find
it the quickest way to His pleasure. Thirteenth, the greatest of his pleasures,
comforts, and luxuries will be his contentment with his Lord in all his states,
for contentment is the greatest of God’s gates, the respite of His knowers, the
Garden of the world, and it behooves anyone who wishes well for himself to
desire it with all he has and settle for nothing else. Fourteenth, resentment or
discontentment opens the door of worry, grief, sorrow, and dispersion of the
heart and misery and bad thoughts, of thoughts of Him that are unfit for Him,
whereas contentment removes all of that and opens a door for the Garden even

‫‪587‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫كث ِير ًا﴾‬
‫ل الَلّـه ُ ف ِيه ِ خَيْر ًا َ‬
‫يج ْع َ َ‬
‫شي ْئًا و َ َ‬
‫]البقرة‪ .[216:‬وقال تعالى‪﴿ :‬فَِإن كَرِه ْتُم ُوه ُ َّن ف َع َس َى َأن تَك ْر َه ُوا َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫]النساء‪.[19:‬‬
‫السابع‪ :‬أنه مسلم‪ ،‬والمسلم من قد سلم نفسه للّٰه ولم يعترض عليه في جر يان أحكامه عليه ولم يتسخط‬
‫بذلك‪.‬‬
‫الثامن‪ :‬أنه عارف بربه حسن الظن به‪ ،‬لا يتهمه فيما يجر يه عليه من أقضيته وأقداره‪ .‬فحسن ظنه‬
‫به يوجب له استواء الحالات عنده ورضاه بما يختاره له سيده‪.‬‬
‫التاسع‪ :‬أنه يعلم أن حظه من المقدور ما يتلقاه به من رضي أو سخط‪ ،‬فلا بد له منه‪ ،‬فإن رضي فله‬
‫الرضى وإن سخط فله السخط‪.‬‬
‫العاشر‪ :‬علمه بأنه إذا رضي انقلب في حقه نعمة ًومنحة ً‪ ،‬وخف عليه حمله وأعين عليه‪ ،‬وإذا سخطه‬
‫تضاعف عليه ثقله وكله‪ ،‬ولم يزدد إلا شدة ً‪ ،‬فلو أن السخط يجدي عليه شيئا ًلكان له فيه راحة أنفع‬
‫له من الرضى به‪.‬‬
‫ونكتة المسألة إيمانه بأن قضاء الرب تعالى خير لهكما قال النبي ﷺ‪» :‬والذي نفسي بيده‪ ،‬لا يقضي‬
‫اللّٰه للمؤمن قضاء ً إلا كان خيرا ًله‪ ،‬إن أصابته سراء شكر فكان خيرا ًله‪ ،‬وإن أصابته ضراء صبر فكان‬
‫خيرا ًله‪ ،‬وليس ذلك إلا للمؤمن«‪.‬‬
‫الحادي عشر‪ :‬أن يعلم أن تمام عبوديته في جر يان ما يكرهه من الأحكام عليه‪ ،‬ولو لم يجر عليه منها إلا‬
‫ما يحب لكان أبعد شيء عن عبودية ربه‪ ،‬فلا تتم له عبوديته—من الصبر والتوكل والرضى والتضرع‬
‫والافتقار والذل والخضوع وغيرها—إلا بجر يان القدر له بما يكرهه‪ ،‬وليس الشأن في الرضى بالقضاء‬
‫]الملائم للطبيعة‪ ،‬إنما الشأن في الرضى بالقضاء[ المؤلم المنافر للطبع‪.‬‬
‫الثاني عشر‪ :‬أن يعلم أن رضاه عن ربه سبحانه وتعالى في جميع الحالات يثمر له رضى ربه عنه‪ .‬فإذا‬
‫رضي عنه بالقليل من الرزق رضي اللّٰه عنه بالقليل من العمل‪ ،‬وإذا رضي عنه في جميع الحالات‬
‫واستوت عنده‪ ،‬وجده أسرع شيء إلى رضاه إذا ترضاه وتملقه‪.‬‬
‫الثالث عشر‪ :‬أن أعظم راحته وسروره ونعيمه في الرضى عن ربه في جميع الحالات‪ .‬فإن الرضى‬
‫باب اللّٰه الأعظم ومستراح العارفين وجنة الدنيا‪ ،‬فجدير بمن نصح نفسه أن تشتد رغبته فيه‪ ،‬لا يستبدل‬
‫بغيره منه‪.‬‬
‫الرابع عشر‪ :‬أن السخط باب الهم والغم والحزن وشتات القلب وكسف البال وسوء الحال‬
‫والوسواس‪ ،‬والظن خلاف ما هو أهله‪ ،‬والرضى يخلصه من ذلك كله و يفتح له باب جنة الدنيا‬
‫قبل جنة الآخرة‪.‬‬

588

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

before the afterlife. Fifteenth, contentment brings tranquility, coolness of the
heart, and serenity, whereas resentment causes disturbance, doubt, and restlessness. Sixteenth, contentment descends upon him tranquility which is of
unmatched benefit, for that accords him stability, and all his affairs are set right;
resentment, in contrast, distances him from [tranquility] in proportion to its
intensity, and along with tranquility go all his happiness, peace, and motivation and goodness in life. Tranquility is among the greatest of God’s blessings
upon a servant and its single greatest cause is to be delightfully content with
Him in all states. Seventeenth, contentment brings him wholeness, making his
heart sound, free of deception, cloudiness, and hatred, and no one can be saved
from God’s penalty except him who comes to Him with a sound heart, which is
impossible with the feeling of resentment. The soundness of his heart increases
in proportion to his contentment; filth, deception, and corruption. Eighteenth,
resentment leads him to volatility instead of steadfastness to God, for he is only
pleased with what is gratifying to his body and ego, but divine decrees are everturning, sometimes gratifying and at other times not, and he is resentful whenever he is not gratified, which prevents him from being steadfast in service to
God. Contentment in all circumstances, in contrast, establishes his feet firmly.
Nothing, in fact, rids the servant of volatility better than contentment. Nineteenth, resentment leads him to doubt God and His decree and predestination,
His wisdom and knowledge; rarely can a resentful person avoid doubt stirring
in his heart even if he is unaware of it, but if he carefully inspected his heart he
would find his certitude in God deficient and compromised, for contentment
and certitude are brothers and friends, whereas doubt and resentment too are
companions. This is the meaning of the Hadith reported in al-Tirmidhī [and]
elsewhere, “If you can act in contentment with certitude, do so, but if you cannot, there is much good in enduring what you dislike.”14
Twentieth, contentment with the predestination is part of the [ultimate]
felicity of a son of Adam and resentment part of his [ultimate] failure, as in
the Musnad and [Sunan of] al-Tirmidhī in the Hadith of Saʿd b. Abī Waqqāṣ,
God be pleased with him, who said that the Messenger of God, God grant him
blessing and peace, said,
Of the felicity of the son of Adam is his seeking God’s guidance and of his
felicity is his contentment with what God has decreed, and of the failure
is his resentment of what God Almighty has decreed and of the failure of
the son of Adam is his giving up seeking God’s guidance.

14

Tirmidhī #2516.

‫‪589‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫الخامس عشر‪ :‬أن الرضى يوجب له الطمأنينة و برد القلب وسكونه وقراره‪ ،‬والسخط يوجب‬
‫اضطراب قلبه ور يبه وا نزعاجه وعدم قراره‪.‬‬
‫السادس عشر‪ :‬أن الرضى ينزل عليه السكينة التي لا أنفع له منها‪ ،‬ومتى نزلت عليه السكينة استقام‬
‫وصلحت أحواله وصلح باله‪ .‬والسخط يبعده منها بحسب قلته وكثرته‪ ،‬وإذا ترحلت عنه السكينة‬
‫ترحل عنه السرور والأمن والدعة وطيب العيش‪ .‬فمن أعظم نعم الل ّٰه على عبده تنز يل السكينة عليه‪،‬‬
‫ومن أعظم أسبابها الرضى عنه في جميع الحالات‪.‬‬
‫السابع عشر‪ :‬أن الرضى يفتح له باب السلامة فيجعل قلبه سليما نً قيا ًمن الغش والدغل والغل‪،‬‬
‫ولا ينجو من عذاب الل ّٰه إلا من أتى الل ّٰه بقلب سليم‪ .‬وتستحيل سلامة القلب مع السخط وعدم الرضى‪،‬‬
‫وكلما كان أشد رضى كان قلبه أسلم‪ .‬فالخبث والدغل والغش قر ين السخط‪ ،‬وسلامة القلب و بره‬
‫ونصحه قر ين الرضى‪ ،‬وكذلك الحسد هو من ثمرات السخط‪ ،‬وسلامة القلب من ثمرات الرضى‪.‬‬
‫الثامن عشر‪ :‬أن السخط يوجب تلون العبد وعدم ثباته مع الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فإنه لا يرضى إلا بما يلائم طبعه‬
‫ونفسه‪ ،‬والمقادير تجري دائما بما يلائمه و بما لا يلائمه‪ ،‬وكلما جرى عليه منها ما لا يلائمه سخطه فلا‬
‫ٺثبت له على العبودية قدم‪ ،‬فإذا رضي عن ر به في جميع الحالات استقرت قدمه في مقام العبودية‪،‬‬
‫فلا يز يل التلون عن العبد شيء مثل الرضى‪.‬‬
‫التاسع عشر‪ :‬أن السخط يفتح عليه باب الشك في الل ّٰه وقضائه وقدره وحكمته وعلمه‪ .‬فقل إن‬
‫يسلم الساخط من شك يداخل قلبه و يتغلغل فيه وإن كألا يشعر به‪ ،‬فلو فتش غاية التفتيش لوجد‬
‫يقينه معلولا ًمدخولا‪ ً،‬فإن الرضى واليقين أخوان مصطحبان‪ ،‬والشك والسخط قر ينان‪ ،‬وهذا معنى‬
‫الحديث الذي في الترمذي—أو غيره‪» :‬إن استطعت أن تعمل بالرضى مع اليقين فافعل‪ ،‬فإن لم‬
‫تستطع فإن في الصبر على ما تكره النفس خيرا ً كثيرا ً«‪.‬‬
‫العشرون‪ :‬أن الرضى بالمقدور من سعادة ا بن آدم وسخطه من شقاوتهكما في المسند و الترمذي من‬
‫حديث سعد بن أبى وقاص رضي الل ّٰه عنه قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬من سعادة ا بن آدم استخارة‬
‫الل ّٰه عز وجل‪ ،‬ومن سعادة ا بن آدم رضاه بما قضى الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ومن شقوة ا بن آدم سخطه بما قضى الل ّٰه عز‬
‫وجل‪ ،‬ومن شقاوة ا بن آدم ترك استخارة الل ّٰه«‪ .‬فالرضا بالقضاء من أسباب السعادة‪ ،‬والتسخط على‬
‫القضاء من أسباب الشقاوة‪.‬‬

590

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Twenty-first, contentment rids him of despair of what he has lost and also
of being over-excited about what He has given him, and this is the noblest
qualities of faith. Its prevention of despair is obvious, as for its prevention
of over-excitement, it is because he knows that there is calamity in the very
attainment of bounty, how can he then be over-excited about what he knows
inevitably has a trial hidden in it. Twenty-second, whose heart is filled with
contentment with divine predestination, God fills it with richness, peace, and
conviction, emptying his heart for God’s love, repentance, reliance, and whoever lacks it his heart is filled with the opposite. Contentment empties the heart
for God whereas resentment empties the heart of God. Twenty-third, contentment breeds gratitude, which is among the loftiest stations of faith, rather it
is the essence of faith; resentment, in contrast, breeds its opposite, ingratitude toward the bounties and even ingratitude and unbelief in the Bounteous.
When he is content with Him in all circumstances, he is grateful; and if he
fails to be content, he becomes resentful and treads the path of the unbelievers. Twenty-fourth, contentment repels the maladies of greed and competition
for this world, which is the headspring of all error and calamity, the source of
all nastiness, and his contentment with his Lord rids him of these diseases.
Twenty-fifth, the Satan has his way with man only when he is given to resentment or desire, that is where he hunts them, especially if his resentment is
so deep that he utters, does, and intends things that do not please the Lord.
This is why the Prophet said when his son Ibrāhīm died: “The heart grieves
and the eye tears but we say nothing but what pleases the Lord.”15 The death
of sons is a calamity that breeds resentment with the decree, so the Prophet
declared that even in such a state he says nothing—even in this circumstance
that causes resentment in most men who are then led to say and do things
that displease God—but what pleases the Lord Almighty. This is when the
son of al-Fuḍayl b. ʿIyāḍ, he was found laughing in the funeral. When asked,
“Do you laugh when your son has died?” He said, “God has decreed a decree
and I love to be pleased with it.” A group of scholars objected to al-Fuḍayl at
this, saying: The Messenger of God wept the day his son died and said that
the heart grieves and the eyes shed tear, even though he occupied the highest stations of joyful contentment; how should this conduct count as a virtue
of al-Fuḍayl?

15

Bukhārī #1303.

‫‪591‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫الحادي والعشرون‪ :‬أن الرضى يوجب له ألا يأسى على ما فاته ولا يفرح بما آتاه‪ ،‬وذلك من أفضل‬
‫خصال الإ يمان‪.‬‬
‫أما عدم أساه على الفائت فظاهر‪ ،‬وأما عدم فرحه بما آتاه فلأنه يعلم أن المصيبة فيه مكتو بة من‬
‫قبل حصوله‪ ،‬فكيف يفرح بشيء يعلم أن له فيه مصيبة ً منتظرة ً ولا بد؟‬
‫الثاني والعشرون‪ :‬إن من ملأ قلبه من الرضى بالقدر ملأ الل ّٰه صدره غنى ً وأمنا ًوقناعة ً وفرغ قلبه‬
‫لمحبته والإنابة إليه والتوكل عليه‪ ،‬ومن فاته حظه من الرضى امتلأ قلبه بضد ذلك واشتغل عما فيه‬
‫سعادته وفلاحه‪ .‬فالرضى يفرغ القلب لل ّٰه والسخط يفرغ القلب من الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫الثالث والعشرون‪ :‬أن الرضى يثمر الشكر الذي هو من أعلى مقامات الإ يمان‪ ،‬بل هو حقيقة الإ يمان‪.‬‬
‫والسخط يثمر ضده وهو كفر النعم‪ ،‬ور بما أثمر لهكفر المنعم‪ ،‬فإذا رضي عن ر به في جميع الحالات‬
‫أوجب له ذلك شكره فيكون من الراضين الشاكر ين‪ ،‬وإذا فاته الرضى كان من الساخطين وسلك‬
‫سبيل الكافر ين‪.‬‬
‫الرابع والعشرون‪ :‬أن الرضى ينفي عنه آفات الحرص والكل َب على الدنيا‪ ،‬وذلك رأس كل خطيئة‬
‫وأصل كل بلية وأساس كل رز ية‪ .‬فرضاه عن ر به في جميع الحالات ينفي عنه هذه الآفات‪.‬‬
‫الخامس والعشرون‪ :‬أن الشيطان إنما يظفر بالإنسان غالبا ًعند السخط والشهوة‪ ،‬فهناك يصطاده‬
‫ولا سيما إذا استحكم سخطه‪ ،‬فإنه يقول ما لا يرضى الرب و يفعل ما لا يرضيه و ينوي ما لا‬
‫يرضيه‪ ،‬ولهذا قال النبي عند موت ابنه إ براهيم‪» :‬يحزن القلب وتدمع العين‪ ،‬ولا نقول إلا ما‬
‫يرضي الرب«‪ .‬فإن موت البنين من العوارض التي توجب للعبد التسخط على القدر‪ ،‬فأخبر النبي‬
‫أنه لا يقول في مثل هذا المقام—الذي يسخطه أكثر الناس‪ ،‬فيتكلمون بما لا يرضي الل ّٰه و يفعلون‬
‫ما لا يرضيه—إلا ما يرضي ر به تبارك وتعالى‪ ،‬ولهذا لما مات ا بن الفضيل بن عياض رؤي في‬
‫الجنازة ضاحكا‪ ً،‬فقيل له‪ :‬أتضحك وقد مات ابنك؟ فقال‪ :‬إن الل ّٰه قضى بقضاء فأحببت أن أرضى‬
‫بقضائه‪.‬‬
‫فأنكرت طائفة هذه المقالة على الفضيل وقالوا‪ :‬رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ بكى يوم مات ابنه‪ ،‬وأخبر أن »القلب‬
‫يحزن والعين تدمع« وهو في أعلى مقامات الرضى‪ ،‬فكيف يعد هذا من مناقب الفضيل؟‬

592

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The fact is that the heart of the Messenger of God God grant him blessing
and peace is expansive enough to perfect all the levels of contentment with
God and weeping out of love16 for his son, as his was the station of contentment as well as the stations of compassion and softness of the heart, whereas
al-Fuḍayl could not encompass that [which is why his station of contentment
overwhelmed him from the station of compassion], and the two did not come
together for him. People in this respect are four levels. First, those who combine contentment with the decree with compassion and love for the child, such
that his eyes water while the heart is content; those whose contentment overwhelms his compassion; those whose compassion and feeling overwhelms his
contentment; and fourth, one who has neither contentment nor compassion,
and whose grief is the loss of his own pleasure from the deceased, this being the
state of most men: neither excellence in faith nor contentment with the Most
Compassionate. God alone is sought for help.
Twenty-sixth, contentment is to choose what God has chosen for the servant and resentment is to loathe it, which is a kind of challenge to God that
cannot be eliminated except with contentment in all states. Twenty-seventh,
contentment expels capricious desire from the heart and makes one accord
with the Lord’s decree—I meant the decree that He loves and likes—for contentment and desire do not ever come together in a heart, even if it may have a
part of this and a part of that, but it belongs to the one that dominates it of the
two. Twenty-eighth, contentment with God in all circumstances yields contentment of God with him, as presented earlier in the discussion of contentment
with Him as Lord, the general principle being that reward is of a piece with the
works, and in an Israelite tradition it says that when Moses asked his Lord about
what brings him closer to His contentment, He said, “My contentment is in your
contentment with My decree.”17 Twenty-ninth, contentment with the decree is
the hardest thing for the ego, indeed it is like slaughtering it, as it requires opposition to desire and the very nature and will of the ego, which does not ever
become tranquil until it agrees with the decree, and only then does it deserve to
be called on thus: “O tranquil self: return to thy lord, pleased and well-pleasing.
Enter into My servants, enter into My Garden” [89:27–30]. Thirtieth, he who
is content receives the decrees of his Lord, both religious and existential, with
openness and submission, and happiness and surrender, whereas the resentful receives them in the opposite way except when they accord with his own
16
17

The Arabic here is raḥma, usually translated as ‘mercy’ and ‘compassion’, but this usage
shows the limitation of translation: one cries upon a son’s death out of love, not mercy.
This lore appears in the early spiritual treatises like Qūt al-qulūb and Iḥyāʾ; Ibn Taymiyya
calls these into question (al-Istiqāma 2:82).

‫‪593‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫والتحقيق أن قلب رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ اتسع لتكميل المراتب‪ ،‬من الرضى عن الل ّٰه والبكاء رحمة‬
‫للصبي‪ ،‬فكان له مقام الرضى ومقام الرحمة ورقة القلب‪ ،‬والفضيل لم يتسع ]لذلك فغيبه مقام‬
‫الرضى ومقام الرحمة[ فلم يجتمع له الأمران‪ ،‬والناس في ذلك على أر بع مراتب‪.‬‬
‫أحدها‪ :‬من اجتمع له الرضى بالقضاء ورحمة الطفل‪ ،‬فدمعت عيناه رحمة والقلب راض‪.‬‬
‫الثاني‪ :‬من غيبه الرضى عن الرحمة فلم يتسع للأمرين‪.‬‬
‫الثالث‪ :‬من غيبته الرحمة والرقة عن الرضى فلم يشهده‪.‬‬
‫الرابع‪ :‬من لا رضى عنده ولا رحمة‪ ،‬وإنما يكون حزنه لفوات حظه من الميت‪ ،‬وهذا حال أكثر‬
‫الخلق‪ .‬فلا إحسان ولا رضى عن الرحمن والل ّٰه المستعان‪.‬‬
‫السادس والعشرون‪ :‬أن الرضى هو اختيار ما اختاره الل ّٰه لعبده‪ ،‬والسخط كراهة ما اختاره الل ّٰه‬
‫له‪ ،‬وهذا نوع محادة‪ ،‬فلا يتخلص منه إلا بالرضى عن الل ّٰه في جميع الحالات‪.‬‬
‫السابع والعشرون‪ :‬أن الرضى يخرج الهوى من القلب‪ .‬فالراضي تبع لمراد ر به منه‪ ،‬أعني الذي يحبه‬
‫ر به و يرضاه‪ ،‬فلا يجتمع الرضى واتباع الهوى في قلب أبدا ً‪ ،‬وإن كان معه شعبة من هذا وشعبة من‬
‫هذا‪ ،‬فهو للغالب عليه منهما‪.‬‬
‫]الثامن والعشرون‪ :‬أن الرضى عن الل ّٰه في جميع الحالات يثمر للعبد رضى الل ّٰه عنه—كما تقدم بيانه‬
‫في الرضى به ر با—فإن الجزاء من جنس العمل‪ .‬وفي أ ثر إسرائيلي أن موسى سأل ر به عز وجل عما‬
‫يدني من رضاه فقال‪» :‬إن رضاي في رضاك بقضائي«[‪.‬‬
‫التاسع والعشرون‪ :‬أن الرضى بالقضاء أشق شيء على النفس‪ ،‬بل هو ذبحها في الحقيقة‪ .‬فإنه‬
‫مخالفة هواها وطبعها وإرادتها‪ ،‬ولا تصير مطمئنة ً قط حتى ترضى بالقضاء‪ ،‬فحينئذ تستحق أن يقال‬
‫ج َن ّت ِي﴾‬
‫ض َي ّة ً ف َاْدخ ُل ِي ف ِي عِب َادِي و َاْدخ ُل ِي َ‬
‫ضيةَ ً َمّْر ِ‬
‫ك ر َا ِ‬
‫جع ِي ِإل َى ٰ ر َب ِّ ِ‬
‫س ال ْم ُْطم َئنَِ ّة ُ اْر ِ‬
‫لها‪﴿ :‬ياَ َأ َي ّت ُه َا ال َن ّْف ُ‬
‫]الفجر‪.[30–27:‬‬
‫الثلاثون‪ :‬أن الراضي متلق أوامر الرب—الدينية والقدر ية—بالانشراح والتسليم وطيب النفس‬
‫والاستسلام‪ ،‬والساخط يتلقاها بضد ذلك إلا ما وافق طبعه وإرادته منها‪.‬‬

594

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

disposition and will. We have explained that such contentment has no benefit
or reward, for he is not content with it being God’s will and decree but only
because it pleases his own desire and disposition, and he is thus content only
with himself, not his Lord.
Thirty-first, all infractions result from lack of contentment whereas obedience from contentment, and this is truly known to only one who knows his
self and its works of obedience and disobedience. Thirty-second, lack of contentment opens the door of heretical innovation, whereas contentment closes
that door: if you reflected on the innovations of the Rāfiḍa, the Nāṣibites, and
the Khārijites,18 you would see them stemming from lack of contentment with
the existential decree or normative decree or both. Thirty-third, contentment
is the knot that ties the system of religion both externally and internally, for
all issues fall into one of these five categories. First, they are divided into two
kinds, religious and existential, [the former kind] being those that are commanded, prohibited, and permitted, [and the latter kind] being pleaSūrable
bounties and painful calamities. If the servant employs contentment in all of
these, he has the lion’s share of Islam and passed with flying colors. Thirtyfourth, contentment removes disputation with God, for resentment is a kind of
dispute, and the essence of Iblīs’s dispute with God was his lack of contentment
with His religious and existential decrees; had he been content he would not
have been demoted from his angelic status to his devilish reality. Thirty-fifth,
everything in existence has been willed by God in His wisdom and dominion
and is a corollary of His names and attributes, and whosoever is not content
with it is not content with His names and attributes and hence with Him as
his Lord. Thirty-sixth, every decree that the servant hates is either a punishment for a sin, the remedy for a disease which if not cured would lead to death,
or the cause for a bounty that cannot be attained except through this loathsome means, and what is loathed will vanish whereas the resulting blessing
will continue. If the servant sees these two realities, the door of contentment
will open to him. Thirty-seventh, the decree of the Lord is in effect upon the
servant, and His decree is justice, as in the Hadith, “Your judgment is in effect
upon me and Your decree is justice in my respect,” and whosoever resents
justice is wrongful and wicked. [The Prophet’s] words “Your decree is justice
in my respect” is inclusive of the decree that the servant commit a sin and

18

“Rāfiḍī” is a derogatory term for the groups of Shīʿa that rejected the legitimacy of the first
two caliphs in the wake of the revolt of Zayd b. ʿAlī, “Nāṣibite” for those who oppose or
hate ʿAlī and his family, and “Khārijite” for those who rebelled against ʿAlī as well as the
Umayyads.

‫‪595‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وقد بينا أن الرضى بذلك لا ينفعه ولا يثاب عليه‪ ،‬فإنه لم يرض به لـكون الل ّٰه عز وجل قدره‬
‫وقضاه وأمر به‪ ،‬وإنما رضي به لموافقته هواه وطبعه‪ ،‬فهو إنما رضي بنفسه وعن نفسه لا عن ر به‪.‬‬
‫الحادي والثلاثون‪ :‬أن المخالفات كلها أصلها من عدم الرضى‪ ،‬والطاعات كلها أصلها من الرضى‪،‬‬
‫وهذا إنما يعرفه حق المعرفة من عرف صفات نفسه وما يتولد عنها من الطاعات والمعاصي‪.‬‬
‫الثاني والثلاثون‪ :‬أن عدم الرضى يفتح باب البدعة‪ ،‬والرضى يغلق عنه ذلك الباب‪ .‬ولو تأملت‬
‫بدع الروافض والنواصب والخوارج لرأيتها ناشئة ً من عدم الرضى بالحكم الـكوني أو الديني أو كليهما‪.‬‬
‫الثالث والثلاثون‪ :‬أن الرضى معقد نظام الدين ظاهره و باطنه‪ ،‬فإن القضايا لا تخلو من خمسة أنواع‪:‬‬
‫فتنقسم قسمين‪ :‬دينية ً وكونية ً‪ ،‬وهي مأمورات ومنهيات ومباحات ونعمٌ م ُلذة و بلايا مؤلمة‪.‬‬
‫فإن استعمل العبد الرضى في ذلك كله فقد أخذ بالحظ الوافر من الإسلام وفاز بالقدح المعُ لَ ّى‪.‬‬
‫الرابع والثلاثون‪ :‬أن الرضى يخلص العبد من مخاصمة الرب تعالى في أحكامه وأقضيته‪ ،‬فإن السخط‬
‫عليه مخاصمة له فيما لم يرض به العبد‪ ،‬وأصل مخاصمة إ بليس لر به من عدم رضاه بأقضيته وأحكامه‬
‫الدينية والـكونية‪ ،‬فلو رضي لم يمسخ من الحقيقة الملـكية إلى الحقيقة الإ بليسية‪.‬‬
‫الخامس والثلاثون‪ :‬أن جميع ما في الـكون أوجبته مشيئة الل ّٰه وحكمته وملـكه‪ ،‬فهو موجب أسمائه‬
‫وصفاته‪ ،‬فمن لم يرض بما رضى به ر به لم يرض بأسمائه وصفاته‪ ،‬فلم يرض به ر با‪.‬‬
‫السادس والثلاثون‪ :‬أن كل قدر يكرهه العبد ولا يلائمه لا يخلو إما أن يكون عقو بة على الذنب‪،‬‬
‫فهو دواء المرض لولا تدارك الحكيم إ ياه بالدواء لترامى به المرض إلى الهلاك‪ ،‬أو يكون سببا لً نعمة‬
‫لا تنال إلا بذلك المكروه‪ ،‬فالمكروه ينقطع و يتلاشى‪ ،‬وما ترتب عليه من النعمة دائم لا ينقطع‪ .‬فإذا‬
‫شهد العبد هذين الأمرين انفتح له باب الرضى عن ر به في كل ما يقضيه و يقدره‪.‬‬
‫السابع والثلاثون‪ :‬أن حكم الرب تعالى ماض في عبده وقضاؤه عدل فيه‪ ،‬كما في الحديث‪» :‬ماض‬
‫في حكمك عدل في قضاؤك«‪ .‬ومن لم يرض بالعدل فهو من أهل الظلم والجور‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬عدل في قضاؤك« يعم قضاء الذنب وقضاء أ ثره وعقو بته‪ ،‬فإن الأمرين من قضائه عز‬
‫وجل‪ ،‬وهو أعدل العادلين في قضائه بالذنب وفي قضائه بعقو بته‪.‬‬

596
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
face its effects and punishment, and He is just in both respects. As for His justice in punishment, that is obvious, but [as for] His justice in decreeing that
he sin, the sin is a punishment of his heedlessness, the evasion of his heart
from his Lord and Patron and his deficiency in purification. Or else, had he
been totally pure and accepting of God Almighty and His remembrance, the
sin would be impossible, as the Almighty said, “Thus we removed evil and
shameless wickedness from [Joseph], he truly is among Our pure servants”
[12:24].
If you ask: Of what is His decree of the servant’s evasion, heedlessness, impurity, and insincerity, etc., a punishment? I say: This is the natural disposition of
the ego, for when the Almighty does not will the good for His servant, He leaves
him to his ego, his own disposition and desire, whose effects include heedlessness, forgetfulness, lack of purity, and pursuit of temptations, and these causes
necessitate suffering and loss of good and delightful things just as all causes
have their effects. If you ask: Why did He not create him with a different nature?
I say: This question is invalid, for it is like saying why He created him as a human
being rather than angel. If you ask: Why did He not give him the efficacy to rid
himself of his own evil and injustice? I would say: This question is tantamount
to saying why He did not create all creation the same, why He created opposition and diversity, and this is the most invalid of questions, as the wisdom of
the necessity of such based on His wisdom, mastery, and dominion has been
discussed before.
Thirty-eighth, the lack of contentment is either because of the loss of something desirable that one has missed or affliction of something one dislikes.
When one is certain, however, that what he missed he could not have attained
and what he experienced he could not have missed, there is not use in resentment with such a realization, except that it will make him lose some benefit
or cause further harm. Third-ninth, contentment is an action of the heart just
as jihad is an act of the body and each of them is an epitome of faith, as Abū
al-Dardāʾ said, “The epitome of faith is enduring the command and contentment with predestination.” Fortieth, the first sin in this world against God came
from nothing but lack of contentment, for Iblīs was pleased neither with God’s
decree in creation, as He gave superiority and honor to Adam, nor with God’s
decree in religion, as He commanded him to bow down. Adam, similarly, was
not content with what was permissible to him in the Garden until he fell to eating from the prohibited tree; the sins of his children also result from deficiency
in patience and contentment.
Forty-first, he who is content goes with God’s choice for him rather than
his own. This is because of the strength of his knowledge of God and of his
ego.

‫‪597‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫أما عدله في العقو بة فظاهر‪ ،‬وأما عدله في قضائه بالذنب فلأن الذنب عقو بة على غفلته وإعراض‬
‫قلبه عن ر به ووليه ونقص إخلاصه‪ ،‬وإلا فمع كمال الإخلاص والإقبال على الل ّٰه سبحانه وتعالى‬
‫سوء َ و َال ْف َْحشَاء َ ۚ ِإ َن ّه ُ م ِْن‬
‫ف ع َن ْه ُ ال ُ ّ‬
‫ك ل ِن َص ْر ِ َ‬
‫وذكره‪ ،‬يستحيل صدور الذنب‪ ،‬كما قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬ك َذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫صينَ﴾ ]يوسف‪.[24:‬‬
‫عِب َادِناَ ال ْم ُخْل َ ِ‬
‫وإن قلت قضاؤ ُه على عبده بإعراضه عنه ونسيانه إ ياه وعدٍم إخلاصه عقو بة ٌعلى ماذا؟‬
‫قلت‪ :‬هذا طبع النفس وشأنها‪ .‬فهو سبحانه إذا لم يرد الخـير بعبده خلى بينه و بين نفسه وطبعه‬
‫وهواه‪ ،‬وذلك يقتضي أ ثرها من الغفلة والنسيان وعدم الإخلاص واتباع الهوى‪ ،‬وهذه الأسباب‬
‫تقتضي آثارها من الآلام وفوات الخـيرات واللذات‪ ،‬كاقتضاء سا ئر الأسباب لمسبباتها وآثارها‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬فهلا خلقه على غير تلك الصفة‪.‬‬
‫قلت‪ :‬هذا سؤال فاسد‪ ،‬ومضمونه هلا خلقه ملكا ًلا إنسانا‪ً.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬فهلا أعطاه التوفيق الذي يتخلص به من شر نفسه وظلمة طبعه‪.‬‬
‫قلت‪ :‬مضمون هذا السؤال‪ :‬هلا سوى بين خلقه‪ .‬ولم خلق المتضادات والمختلفات؟ وهذا من أفسد‬
‫الأسئلة‪ .‬وقد تقدم بيان اقتضاء حكمته ور بو بيته وملـكه لخلق ذلك‪.‬‬
‫الثامن والثلاثون‪ :‬أن عدم الرضى إما أن يكون لفوات ما أخطأه مما يحبه و ير يده وإما لإصابة ما‬
‫يكرهه و يسخطه‪ .‬فإذا تيقن أن ما أخطأه لم يكن ليصيبه وما أصابه لم يكن ليخطئه‪ ،‬فلا فائدة في سخطه‬
‫بعد ذلك إلا فوات ما ينفعه وحصول ما يضره‪.‬‬
‫التاسع والثلاثون‪ :‬أن الرضى من أعمال القلوب نظير الجهاد من أعمال الجوارح‪ .‬فإن كل واحد‬
‫منهما ذروة سنام الإ يمان‪ .‬قال أبو الدرداء‪» :‬ذروة سنام الإ يمان الصبر ُ للحكم والرضى بالقدر«‪.‬‬
‫الأر بعون‪ :‬أن أول معصية ع ُصي الل ّٰه بها في هذا العالم إنما نشأت من عدم الرضى‪ .‬فإ بليس لم يرض‬
‫بحكم الل ّٰه الذي حكم بهكونا‪ ً،‬من تفضيل آدم وتكر يمه‪ ،‬ولا بحكمه الديني من أمره بالسجود له‪ ،‬وآدم‬
‫لم يرض بما أبيح له من الجنة حتى يضم إليه الأكل من شجرة الح ِمى‪ ،‬ثم ترتبت معاصي الذر ية على عدم‬
‫الصبر وعدم الرضى‪.‬‬
‫الحادي والأر بعون‪ :‬أن الراضي واقف مع اختيار الل ّٰه له معرض عن اختياره لنفسه‪ ،‬وهذا من‬
‫قوة معرفته بر به تعالى ومعرفته بنفسه‪.‬‬

598

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Wuhayb b. al-Ward, Sufyān al-Thawrī, and Yūsuf al-Asbāṭ once got together,
and al-Thawrī said, “I used to hate sudden death before today, as for today, I
wish I were dead.” Yūsuf said, “Why is that?” He said, “I fear temptation.” Yūsuf
said, “But I do not hate to live long.” Al-Thawrī said, “Why do you dislike death?”
He said, “Because I might chance upon a day when I will repent and do a good
deed.”
It was said to Wuhayb, “What do you say?” He said, “I do not prefer either,
rather I hold dear whichever of these is dearer to God.” Al-Thawrī kissed between his eyes and said, “This, by God, is spirituality.”
This is the state of a servant to whom life and death are equal as he prefers
whichever of the two God prefers for him.
Forty-second, he should know that God’s deprivation of a believing servant is
a gift and His causing him affliction is safety. Sufyān al-Thawrī said, “God’s denying me is a gift for He denies not because of stinginess or lack but for choice and
good judgment.”
It is as the author, God have mercy on him, said, that the Almighty does not
decree for a believer anything but good, whether he likes it or not; His decree
to a believer is a gift even if comes in the form of denial and a blessing even
if comes in the form of a trial. His affliction is protection even in the form of
a calamity, but because of his ignorance and transgression the servant sees as
blessing and gift only those things that he finds immediately gratifying and suitable to his disposition. If he had a sufficient share of inner knowledge, he would
see denial as God’s blessing that is greater than blessings that he loves. One of
the knowers said, “O son of Adam, God’s blessing on you in what you dislike is
greater than that in what you like.” The Almighty said, “And perhaps you hate a
thing and it is good for you” [2:216]. One of the knowers said, “Be pleased with
God in all He does to you, for He does not deny you without giving you, nor test
you without protecting you, nor give you sickness without giving you healing,
nor give you death without giving you life. Beware of giving up contentment
for even the wink of an eye lest you fall from His eye.”
Forty-third, the Almighty is the First before all things, the Last after all things,
who makes all things apparent, who is the owner of all things, who creates what
He wills and chooses, the servant nor anyone else having no choice, nor is anyone a partner in His authority. The servant was once nothing and the Almighty
chose to bring him into existence however He wishes, preordaining his safety
and calamity, wealth and poverty, honor and dishonor, fame and obscurity; just

‫‪599‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫واجتمع وهيب بن الورد وسفيان الثوري و يوسف بن أسباط‪ ،‬فقال الثوري‪ :‬قد كنت أكره‬
‫موت الفجاءة قبل اليوم‪ ،‬وأما اليوم فوددت أني ميت‪.‬‬
‫فقال له يوسف‪ :‬ولم؟ قال‪ :‬لما أتخوف من الفتنة‪.‬‬
‫فقال يوسف‪ :‬لـكني لا أكره طول البقاء‪.‬‬
‫فقال الثوري‪ :‬ولم تكره الموت؟‬
‫قال‪ :‬لعلي أصادف يوما ًأتوب فيه وأعمل صالحا‪ً.‬‬
‫فقيل لوهيب‪ :‬أي شيء تقول أنت؟‬
‫ح ُب ّه إلى الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫حب ذلك إلي أ َ‬
‫فقال‪ :‬أنا لا أختار شيئا‪ ً.‬أ َ‬
‫فقبل الثوري بين عينيه وقال‪ :‬روحانية ورب الـكعبة‬
‫فهذا حال عبد قد استوت عنده حالة البقاء والموت‪ .‬وقف مع اختيار الل ّٰه له منهما‪.‬‬
‫الثاني والأر بعون‪ :‬أن يعلم أن منع الل ّٰه سبحانه وتعالى لعبده المؤمن المحب عطاء‪ ،‬وابتلاءه إ ياه‬
‫عافية‪ .‬قال سفيان الثوري‪ :‬منع الل ّٰه عطاء لأنه يمنع عن غير بخل ولا عدم‪ ،‬فمنعه اختيارا وحسن‬
‫نظر‪.‬‬
‫وهذا كما قال المصنف—رحمه الل ّٰه—فإنه سبحانه لا يقضي لعبده المؤمن قضاء ً إلا كان خيرا لً ه‪،‬‬
‫ساءه ذلك القضاء أو سره‪ ،‬فقضاؤه لعبده المؤمن عطاء وإن كان في صورة المنع‪ ،‬ونعمة وإن كانت‬
‫في صورة محنة‪ ،‬و بلاؤه عافية وإن كانت في صورة بلية‪ ،‬ولـكن لجهل العبد وظلمه لا يعد العطاء‬
‫والنعمة والعافية إلا ما التذ به في العاجل‪ ،‬وكان ملائما لً طبعه‪ ،‬ولو رزق من المعرفة حظا ًوافرا ً لعد‬
‫المنع نعمة الل ّٰه عليه فيما يكرهه‪ ،‬أعظم من نعمه عليه فيما يحبهكما قال بعض العارفين‪ :‬يا ا بن آدم نعمة‬
‫شي ْئ ًا و َه ُو َ‬
‫الل ّٰه عليك فيما تكره أعظم من نعمته عليك فيما تحب‪ .‬وقد قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َع َس َى َأن تكَ ْر َه ُوا َ‬
‫ٰ‬
‫خ َي ْر ٌ ل َـ ّك ُْم﴾ ]البقرة‪.[216:‬‬
‫وقال بعض العارفين‪ :‬ارض عن الل ّٰه في جميع ما يفعله بك‪ ،‬فإنه ما منعك إلا ليعطيك‪ ،‬ولا ابتلاك‬
‫إلا ليعافيك‪ ،‬ولا أمرضك إلا ليشفيك‪ ،‬ولا أماتك إلا ليحييك‪ ،‬فإ ياك أن تفارق الرضى عنه طرفة‬
‫عين فتسقط من عينه‪.‬‬
‫الثالث والأر بعون‪ :‬أن يعلم أنه سبحانه هو الأول قبل كل شيء والآخر بعد كل شيء‪ ،‬والمظهر‬
‫لكل شيء والمالك لكل شيء‪ ،‬وهو الذي يخلق ما يشاء و يختار‪ ،‬وليس للعبد أن يختار عليه‪ ،‬وليس‬
‫لأحد معه اختيار‪ ،‬ولا يشرك في حكمه أحدا ً‪ .‬والعبد لم يكن شيئا ً مذكورا ً‪ ،‬فهو سبحانه الذي‬
‫اختار وجوده واختار أن يكون كما قدره له وقضاه من عافية و بلاء‪ ،‬وغنى وفقر‪ ،‬وعز وذل‪،‬‬

600
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
as the Almighty is the only one who creates, He is the only one who chooses and
preordains, the servant having nothing of it. God said to His Prophet, “Nothing
of the command belongs to you” [3:128]. When the servant is certain that the
command is God’s and not his, he has no choice but to be content with his
circumstances.
Forty-fourth, the pleasure of God with the servant is greater than the Garden and all that is in it, for [delight] is His attribute whereas the Garden is His
creation, and God Almighty said, “God has promised the believing men and
believing women gardens beneath which rivers flow, wherein they abide eternally, and pleasant dwellings in gardens of perpetual residence; but approval
from God is greater. It is that which is the great attainment” [9:72]. This pleasure is the reward for their pleasure and contentment with Him in the world;
just as it is the greatest recompense, its cause similarly was the greatest of
actions.
Forty-fifth, when the servant is content and pleased with Him in all circumstances, he is no longer picky about his requests of Him as his contentment with whatever He chooses for him leaves him in no need of that. Rather,
he replaces his requests with His remembrance, and indeed his request is
nothing but His support in remembering Him and attaining His pleasure.
Such a one is given the best of what someone who prays for his needs is
given, as in a well-known report, “Whoever is kept busy from asking of his
needs by My remembrance, I give him the best of what I give the askers.”
For the askers ask Him and He gave them what they asked, whereas He gave
the ones who are content and pleased His pleasure with them. Their contentment with Him does not negate their asking for causes of contentment
and pleasure; indeed, his Companions were particularly eager to ask Him for
that.
Forty-sixth, the Prophet used to encourage seeking the highest stations, but
if someone was incapable, he would allow a moderate aim, as he said, “Worship God as if you see Him,” this being the station of watchfulness that unites
within it the stations of submission, faith, and excellence; then he said, “If you
do not see Him, then [know that] He sees you,” thus lowering the aim, due
to one’s incapacity, to simply the awareness of His watch and sight over the
servant. Similarly, in another [aforementioned] Hadith, “If you can work for
God with contentment and certitude, do so, but if you cannot, in enduring
what your ego dislikes there is much good.” He raised [the aim] to the highest stations, then lowered it to a moderate goal if one cannot attain it. The
former is the station of excellence and the latter, to which he lowered the
goal, is the station of faith. Lower than that there is nothing but the station
of loss.

‫‪601‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫ونباهة وخمول‪ .‬فكما تفرد سبحانه بالخلق تفرد بالاختيار والتقدير والتدبير—وليس للعبد شيء من‬
‫ذلك—فإن الأمر كله لل ّٰه‪ ،‬وقد قال تعالى لنبيه‪:‬‬
‫يء ٌ﴾ ]آل عمران‪ .[128:‬فإذا تيقن العبد أن الأمر كله لل ّٰه وليس له[ من‬
‫ن اْلَأْمر ِ ش َ ْ‬
‫ك مِ َ‬
‫سلَ َ‬
‫]﴿ل َي ْ َ‬
‫الأمر قليل ولا كثير‪ ،‬لم يكن له معول—بعد ذلك—غير الرضى بمواقع الأقدار وما يجري به من ر به‬
‫الاختيار‪.‬‬
‫لرابع والأر بعون‪ :‬أن رضى الل ّٰه عن العبد أكبر من الجنة وما فيها‪ ،‬لأنه صفته والجنة خلقه‪ .‬قال‬
‫ن َطي ِّبةَ ً‬
‫ك َ‬
‫ن فيِ ه َا و َم َسَا ِ‬
‫تح ْت ِه َا اْلَأْنه َار ُ خ َال ِد ِي َ‬
‫تج ْرِي م ِن َ‬
‫ت َ‬
‫ج َن ّا ٍ‬
‫ت َ‬
‫الل ّٰه تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َع َد َ ال َل ّـه ُ ال ْمؤُ ْم ِن ِينَ و َال ْمؤُ ْم ِن َا ِ‬
‫ك ه ُو َ ال ْف َو ْز ُ ال ْع َظ ِيم ُ﴾ ]التو بة‪ .[72:‬وهذا الرضى جزاء ً على‬
‫كبرَ ُ ۚ ذ َٰل ِ َ‬
‫ن ال َل ّـه ِ َأ ْ‬
‫ن مّ ِ َ‬
‫ضو َا ٌ‬
‫ن ۚ و َرِ ْ‬
‫ت ع َْد ٍ‬
‫ج َن ّا ِ‬
‫ف ِي َ‬
‫رضاهم عنه في الدنيا‪ .‬فكما كان هذا الجزاء أفضل الجزاء كان سببه أفضل الأعمال‪.‬‬
‫الخامس والأر بعون‪ :‬أن العبد إذا رضي به وعنه في جميع الحالات لم يتخير عليه المسائل‪ ،‬وأغناه‬
‫رضاه بما يقسمه له و يقدره و يفعله به عن ذلك‪ ،‬وجعل ذكره في محل سؤاله‪ ،‬بل يكون من سؤاله له‬
‫الإعانة على ذكره و بلوغ رضاه‪ .‬فهذا يعطى أفضل ما يعطاه سائل كما الأ ثر المعروف‪» :‬من شغله ذكري‬
‫عن مسألتي أعطيته أفضل ما أعطي السائلين«‪ .‬فإن السائلين سألوه فأعطاهم الفضل الذي سألوه‪،‬‬
‫والراضون رضوا عنه فأعطاهم رضاه عنهم‪ ،‬ولا يمنع الرضى سؤاله أسباب الرضى‪ ،‬بل أصحابه ملحون‬
‫في سؤاله ذلك‪.‬‬
‫السادس والأر بعون‪ :‬أن النبي كان يندب إلى أعلى المقامات‪ ،‬فإن عجز العبد عنه حطه إلى‬
‫المقام الوسط كما قال‪» :‬اعبد الل ّٰه كأنك تراه«‪ .‬فهذا مقام المراقبة الجامع لمقامات الإسلام والإ يمان‬
‫والإحسان‪ .‬ثم قال‪» :‬فإن لم تكن تراه فإنه يراك«‪ .‬فحطه عند العجز عن هذا إلى مقام العلم باطلاعه‬
‫ورؤ يته ومشاهدته لعبده‪ .‬وكذا الحديث الآخر‪» :‬إن استطعت أن تعمل لل ّٰه بالرضى مع اليقين فافعل‪،‬‬
‫فإن لم تستطع فإن في الصبر على ما تكره النفس خيرا ً كثيرا ً«‪ .‬فرفعه إلى أعلى المقامات ثم رده إلى‬
‫أوسطها إن لم يستطع الأعلى‪ .‬فالأول مقام الإحسان‪ ،‬والذي حطه إليه مقام الإ يمان‪ ،‬وليس دون‬
‫ذلك إلا مقام الخسران‪.‬‬

602

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Forty-seventh, He praises those who are content with the passing decrees
for their wisdom, knowledge, and understanding, and nearness to the rank
of prophethood, as in the Hadith of the delegation that came to the Prophet,
God grant him blessing and peace. He said, “What {who} are you?” They said,
“Believers.” He said, “What is the sign of your belief?” They said, “Endurance
in calamity, gratitude in ease, contentment with the passing decrees, truthfulness on the occasions of meeting [the enemy in battle], and staying away from
cursing the enemies.” He said, “Wise and knowledgeable, as if in their understanding they are like prophets!”19
Forty-eighth, contentment is as if it holds the reins of all of the stations of
religion, it is their spirit and life; for it is the spirit and reality of trusting reliance,
and the spirit of certitude, the spirit of love and the attribute of a lover and
proof of his love, and the spirit and proof of gratitude. Al-Rabīʿ b. Anas (of Marv,
d. 139/757) said, “A sign of the love of God is the frequency of His mention, for if
you love something, you mention it frequently; the sign of religion is purity for
God; the sign of gratitude is contentment with God’s predestination and submission to His decree.”20 Aḥmad b. Abī al-Ḥawārī21 said, “I mentioned to Abū
Sulaymān [al-Dārānī] the report that ‘The first to be called to the Garden will be
the Praisers,’ he replied, ‘Woe to you, it is not that you praise with your tongue
and your heart resists you, for if so, return to the patient ones. Praise, rather, is
that you praise Him with a heart surrendered in peace.’” Contentment, in short,
is like the spirit of all these stations, the foundation on which they are built, and
none of them can be sound without it.
Forty-ninth, contentment equals many kinds of worship that are hard on the
body, whereas contentment is easy, delightful, and higher in rank. It is mentioned in an Israelite report, “A worshipper devoted himself to God for a long
time. He was shown in a vision that a certain shepherdess will be his companion in the Garden. He asked about her until he found her, and hosted her for
three days to see her acts of worship. He spent his nights in prayer while she
slept and he fasted while she did not. He asked her, ‘Do you do anything other
than what I have seen?’ She said, ‘Nothing other than what you have seen.’ He
kept insisting, ‘Try to think if there is anything else’ until she said, ‘A little thing
that I have is that when I am in hardship I do not wish to be in ease, when I
am in illness I do not wish to be in health, when in the sun, I do not wish that
I were in the shade.’ The worshipper put his hand on his head and said, ‘This is
a little thing! By God this is a great virtue that [most] servants cannot attain!’ ”
19
20
21

Abū Nuʿaym, Ḥilya; the report is declared weak, see Madārij(Ṣ), 1982.
This attribution to al-Rabīʿ is questionable, see Madārij(Ṣ), 1983n4.
A Damascene disciple of Abū Sulaymān al-Dārānī, a Sufi and a renunciant.

‫‪603‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫السابع والأر بعون‪ :‬أنه أثنى على الراضين بمر القضاء بالحكم والعلم والفقه‪ ،‬والقرب من درجة النبوة‬
‫كما في حديث الوفد الذين قدموا على النبي ﷺ فقال‪» :‬ما أنتم؟ فقالوا‪ :‬مؤمنون‪ .‬فقال‪ :‬ما علامة إ يمانكم؟‬
‫فقالوا‪ :‬الصبر عند البلاء‪ ،‬والشكر عند الرخاء‪ ،‬والرضى بمر القضاء‪ ،‬والصدق في مواطن اللقاء‪ ،‬وترك‬
‫الشماتة بالأعداء‪ .‬فقال‪ :‬حكماء علماء‪ ،‬كادوا من فقههم أن يكونوا أنبياء«‪.‬‬
‫الثامن والأر بعون‪ :‬أن الرضى آخذ بزمام مقامات الدين كلها‪ ،‬وهو روحها وحياتها‪ ،‬فإنه روح‬
‫التوكل وحقيقته‪ ،‬وروح اليقين وروح المحبة‪ ،‬وصحة المحب ودليل صدق المحبة‪ ،‬وروح الشكر ودليله‪.‬‬
‫قال الر بيع بن أنس‪ :‬علامة حب الل ّٰه كثرة ذكره‪ .‬فإنك لا تحب شيئا إً لا أكثرت من ذكره‪ .‬وعلامة‬
‫الدين الإخلاص لل ّٰه‪ ،‬وعلامة الشكر الرضى بقدر الل ّٰه والتسليم لقضائه‪.‬‬
‫وقال أحمد بن أبي الحواري‪ :‬ذاكرت أبا سليمان في الخـبر المروي »أول من يدعى إلى الجنة‬
‫الحم ّادون« فقال‪ :‬و يحك ليس هو أن تحمده على المصيبة وقلبك يتعصى عليك‪ ،‬إذا كنت كذلك فارجع‬
‫إلى الصا بر ين‪ ،‬إنما الحمد أن تحمده وقلبك مسلم راض‪.‬‬
‫فصار الرضى كالروح لهذه المقامات والأساس الذي تنبني عليه‪ ،‬ولا يصح شيء منها بدونه البتة‪.‬‬
‫التاسع والأر بعون‪ :‬أن الرضى يقوم له مقام كثير من التعبدات التي تشق على البدن فيكون رضاه‬
‫أسهل عليه وألذ له وأرفع في درجته‪ .‬وقد ذكر في أ ثر إسرائيلي إن عابدا ً عبد الل ّٰه دهرا ً طو يلا‪ ً،‬فأري‬
‫في المنام أن فلانة ً الراعية رفيقتك في الجنة‪ ،‬فسأل عنها إلى أن وجدها‪ ،‬فاستضافها ثلاثا ً لينظر إلى‬
‫عملها‪ .‬فكان يبيت قائما ًوتبيت نائمة ً‪ ،‬و يظل صائما ًوتظل مفطرة ً‪ ،‬فقال لها‪ :‬أما لك عمل غير ما رأيت؟‬
‫قالت‪ :‬ما هو والل ّٰه غير ما رأيت لا أعرف غيره‪ ،‬فلم يزل يقول لها‪ :‬تذكري‪ ،‬حتى قالت‪ :‬خصيلة واحدة‬
‫هي في‪ ،‬أني إن كنت في شدة لم أتمن أني في الرخاء‪ ،‬وإن كنت في مرض لم أتمن أنى في صحة‪ ،‬وإن‬
‫كنت في الشمس لم أتمن أنى في الظل‪ .‬قال‪ :‬فوضع العابد يده على رأسه وقال‪ :‬أهذه خصيلة؟ هذه‬
‫والل ّٰه خصلة عظيمة يعجز عنها العباد‪.‬‬

604

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

It is reported on the authority of Ibn Masʿūd that whoever is pleased with
what has come down from heaven shall be forgiven.
In another report raised [to the Prophet], “The best thing a servant is given
is contentment with what God has apportioned for him.”
In another report, “When God loves a servant, He afflicts him: if he is patient, he selects him, and if he is joyfully content, he makes him among the
elect.”
In another report the Israelites are said to have asked Moses to ask his Lord
about a thing that would earn them His pleasure. Moses said, “Lord, You hear
what they say.” He replied, “Say to them to be pleased with Me until I am pleased
with them.”
In another report on the authority of the Prophet, God grant him blessing
and peace, “Whoever loves to know what he has for him with God should look
at what he has for God with him, for God ranks the servant where the servant
ranks himself.”
In another report, “Whoever is content with God with a little bit of sustenance God is pleased with him with a little bit of works.”
One of the knowers said, “I know many of the dead in their graves, looking at
their places in the Garden, are given their sustenance from the Garden day and
night, but they are in the Barzakh in such grief and pain that if spread over the
people of this town they would die.” It was asked, “What were their deeds?” He
said, “They were Muslim and believing, but they lacked trusting reliance and
joyful contentment.”22
The testament of Luqmān to his son has it, “I enjoin on you traits that will
draw you near to God and distance you from His wrath, that you worship God
and associate no partners to Him, that you remain content with God’s predestination in what you love and what you hate.”
One of the knowers said, “Whoever relies on God and is pleased with His
predestination has established faith, leaving his hands and feet free to earn
goodness, and has established virtues that rectify a servant’s affairs.”
Fiftieth, contentment opens the door of good morals and etiquette with God
and with people, for good etiquette comes from contentment and bad etiquette
comes from resentment. Good morals and manners raise one to the rank of a
worshipper who perpetually fasts and prays, whereas bad ones consume good
deeds like fire consumes dry wood.

22

This and the foregoing reports appear in al-Makkī’s Qūt and the Sufi literature that ensued
and are graded as weak.

‫‪605‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وقد روي عن ا بن مسعود رضي الل ّٰه عنه‪» :‬من رضي بما أ نزل من السماء إلى الأرض غفر له«‪.‬‬
‫وفي أ ثر مرفوع‪» :‬من خير ما أعطي العبد الرضى بما قسم الل ّٰه له«‪.‬‬
‫وفي أ ثر آخر‪» :‬إذا أحب الل ّٰه عبدا ابتلاه‪ ،‬فإن صبر اجتباه‪ ،‬فإن رضي اصطفاه«‪.‬‬
‫وفي أ ثر أن بني إسرائيل »سألوا موسى أن يسأل ر به أمرا ً إذا هم فعلوه رضي عنهم‪ ،‬فقال موسى‪:‬‬
‫رب إنك تسمع ما يقولون‪ .‬فقال‪ :‬قل لهم يرضون عني حتى أرضى عنهم«‪.‬‬
‫وفي أ ثر آخر عن النبي ﷺ‪» :‬من أحب أن يعلم ماله عند الل ّٰه فلينظر ما لل ّٰه عنده‪ ،‬فإن الل ّٰه ينزل العبد‬
‫منه حيث ينزله العبد من نفسه«‪.‬‬
‫وفي أ ثر آخر‪» :‬من رضي من الل ّٰه بالقليل من الرزق‪ ،‬رضي الل ّٰه منه بالقليل من العمل«‪.‬‬
‫وقال بعض العارفين‪ :‬أعرف في الموتى عالما ً ينظرون إلى منازلهم في الجنان في قبورهم‪ ،‬يغدي‬
‫عليهم و يراح برزقهم من الجنة بكرة ً وعشيا‪ ً،‬وهم في غموم وكروب في البرزخ‪ ،‬لو قسمت على أهل بلد‬
‫لماتوا أجمعين‪.‬‬
‫قيل وما كانت أعمالهم؟ قال‪ :‬كانوا مسلمين مؤمنين‪ ،‬إلا أنهم لم يكن لهم من التوكل ولا من‬
‫الرضى نصيب‪.‬‬
‫وفي وصية لقمألابنه‪» :‬أوصيك بخصال تقر بك من الل ّٰه وتباعدك من سخطه‪ :‬أن تعبد الل ّٰه لا تشرك‬
‫به شيئا ًوأن ترضى بقدر الل ّٰه فيما أحببت وكرهت«‪.‬‬
‫وقال بعض العارفين‪ :‬من يتوكل على الل ّٰه و يرض بقدر الل ّٰه فقد أقام الإ يمان‪ ،‬وفرغ يديه ورجليه‬
‫لـكسب الخـير‪ ،‬وأقام الأخلاق الصالحة التي تصلح للعبد أمره‪.‬‬
‫الخمسون‪ :‬أن الرضى يفتح باب حسن الخلق مع الل ّٰه تعالى ومع الناس‪ .‬فإن حسن الخلق من‬
‫الرضى وسوء الخلق من السخط‪ ،‬وحسن الخلق يبلغ بصاحبه درجة الصائم القائم‪ ،‬وسوء الخلق‬
‫يأكل الحسنات كما تأكل النار الحطب‪.‬‬

606

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Fifty-first, contentment gives rise to happiness of the heart in all affairs,
benevolence and tranquility in all situations, calmness against any tumult and
disturbance in worldly affairs, sweet conviction, gratification with the Lord’s
portion for him, happiness with his Patron’s oversight and submission to Him in
everything, and trust in the Lord’s wise management of one’s affairs. It requires
giving up complaining of God to others. This is why some knowers have called
contentment good etiquette with God, as it prevents objection to Him in His
dominion and useless speech that violates good etiquette before God. He does
not, therefore, say, “People could really use rain today!” or “How cold it is today!”
or “What a hot day!” or “Being poor is such a pain!” or “Children are nothing but
worry and grief!” He does not give anything God has decreed a negative name,
for God has not given it that name. All of these go against contentment.
ʿUmar b. ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz said, “Today I have no delight except in God’s decree!”
Ibn Masʿūd said, “Poverty and wealth are two rides; I do not care which of the
two I mount; if poverty there is patience, and if wealth there is spending [in
charity].”
Ibn Abū al-Ḥawārī said, or it was said to him, “I wish the night were longer
than it is.” He said, “He did good and bad. Good in desiring more of it to worship
more, bad to love that which God has not loved.”
ʿUmar b. al-Khaṭṭāb said, “I do not mind how I enter the morning or the
evening, in ease or comfort.” One day he said to his wife, ʿĀtika, the sister of
Saʿīd b. Zayd, in anger, “By God, I will make you suffer!” She said, “Can you take
my Islam from me after God has guided me?” She said, “How can you make me
suffer, then?” She meant that she is pleased with all things predestined for her
and nothing would cause her to suffer except parting from Islam, and that is
not in his power.
Al-Thawrī said one day in the company of Rābiʿa, “O God, be pleased with
us.” She said, “Are you not ashamed to ask Him for being pleased when you are
not pleased with Him?” He said, “I seek God’s forgiveness.” Jaʿfar b. Sulaymān
then said to her, “When is the servant pleased with God?” She said, “When he
is as delighted with affliction as with bounty.”
In a Divine Report, “What do my allies have to do with the worry about this
world? Such a worry takes away the sweetness of prayers from their hearts.”
It has been said, “Those who worry most in this life will worry most in the
Afterlife {and vice versa}.”23 Faith in and contentment with predestination
saves the servant from anxiety, sadness, and grief.

23

These stories are reported by al-Makkī in Qūt; they are most likely instructive rather than
factual.

‫‪607‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫الحادي والخمسون‪ :‬أن الرضى يثمر سرور القلب بالمقدور في جميع الأمور‪ ،‬وطيب النفس وسكونها‬
‫في كل حال‪ ،‬وطمأنينة القلب عند كل مفزع مهلع من أمور الدنيا‪ ،‬و برد القناعة واغتباط العبد بقسمه‬
‫من ر به‪ ،‬وفرحه بقيام مولاه عليه واستسلامه لمولاه في كل شيء ورضاه منه بما يجر يه عليه‪ ،‬وتسليمه‬
‫له الأحكام والقضايا‪ ،‬واعتقاد حسن تدبيره وكمال حكمته‪ ،‬و يذهب عنه شكوى ر به إلى غيره وتبرمه‬
‫ن الخلق مع الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فإنه يوجب ترك الاعتراض عليه في‬
‫بأقضيته‪ .‬ولهذا سمى بعض العارفين الرضى حس َ‬
‫ملـكه‪ ،‬وحذف فضول الكلام التي تقدح في حسن خلقه‪ ،‬فلا يقول‪ :‬ما أحوج الناس إلى مطر‪ ،‬ولا‬
‫يقول‪ :‬هذا يوم شديد الحر أو شديد البرد‪ ،‬ولا يقول‪ :‬الفقر بلاء والعيال هم وغم‪ ،‬ولا يسمي شيئا ً‬
‫قضاه الل ّٰه وقدره باسم مذموم إذا لم يذمه الل ّٰه سبحانه وتعالى‪ ،‬فإن هذا كله ينافي رضاه‪.‬‬
‫وقال عمر بن عبد العز يز رحمه الل ّٰه‪» :‬أصبحت وما لي سرور إلا في مواقع القدر«‪.‬‬
‫وقال ا بن مسعود رضي الل ّٰه عنه‪» :‬الفقر والغنى مطيتان ما أبالي أيهما ركبت‪ ،‬إن كان الفقر فإن‬
‫فيه الصبر‪ ،‬وإن كان الغنى فإن فيه البذل«‪.‬‬
‫وقال ا بن أبي الحواري—أو قيل له—إن فلانا ًقال‪ :‬وددت أن الليل أطول مما هو‪ ،‬فقال‪ :‬قد‬
‫أحسن وقد أساء‪ .‬أحسن حيث تمنى طوله للعبادة‪ ،‬وأساء إذ أحب ما لم يحبه الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وقال عمر بن الخطاب رضي الل ّٰه عنه‪» :‬ما أبالي على أي حال أصبحت وأمسيت من شدة أو‬
‫رخاء«‪.‬‬
‫وقال يوما ً لامرأته عاتكة‪ ،‬أخت سعيد بن ز يد—وقد غضب—‪» :‬والل ّٰه لأسوئنك‪ .‬فقالت‪:‬‬
‫أتستطيع أن تصرفني عن الإسلام بعد إذ هداني الل ّٰه؟ قال‪ :‬لا‪ ،‬فقالت‪ :‬فأي شيء تسوءني به إذا؟‬
‫تر يد أنها راضية بمواقع القدر لا يسوءها منه شيء إلا صرفها عن الإسلام‪ ،‬ولا سبيل له إليه‪.‬‬
‫وقال الثوري يوما ًعند رابعة‪ :‬اللهم ارض عنا‪ .‬فقالت‪ :‬أما تستحي أن تسأله الرضى وأنت غير راض‬
‫عنه؟ فقال‪ :‬أستغفر الل ّٰه‪ .‬ثم قال لها جعفر بن سليمان‪ :‬متى يكون العبد راضيا ً عن الل ّٰه؟ فقالت‪ :‬إذا‬
‫كان سروره بالمصيبة مثل سروره بالنعمة‪.‬‬
‫وفي أ ثر إلهي‪» :‬ما لأوليائي والهم بالدنيا؟ إن الهم بالدنيا يذهب حلاوة مناجاتي في قلو بهم«‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪ :‬أكثر الناس هما بً الدنيا أكثرهم هما ًفي الآخرة‪] ،‬وأقلهم هما بً الدنيا أقلهم هما ًفي الآخرة[‪.‬‬
‫فالإ يمان بالقدر والرضى به يذهب عن العبد الهم والغم والحزن‪.‬‬

608

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Once a saint who ate nothing but scraps from garbage was mentioned before
Rābiʿa. A man said, “It would not hurt this one to ask God to give him food other
than this!” She said, “Be quiet, you good-for-nothing, do you not know that the
saints of God are too content with Him to choose that He move them to another
state until He is the one who chooses to do so?”
In an Israelite tradition, Moses asks his Lord about His pleasure so He
revealed to him, “My pleasure is in your displeasure, but you cannot be patient
over what you hate.” He said, “Lord, guide me to it.” He said, “My pleasure is
in your pleasure with My decree.” In another one, “Moses said, ‘Lord, which of
your creation is the dearest to You?’ He said, ‘He whose beloved I take away
still surrenders to me.’ He said, ‘Which of your creation is detestable to You?’
He said, ‘He who asks Me to choose what is good for him and when I do is displeased with it.’ ”
In another report, “I am God, there is no god but Me, I have apportioned destinies and judged all things and perfected the creation; whosoever is pleased
will have My pleasure until he meets Me and whoever is displeased will have
My displeasure until he meets Me.”
Fifty-second, the best of the states is the desire for God and its causes, which
does not come except with certitude in and pleasure with God. This is why
Sahl said, “The share people have in certitude is proportional to their share
of pleasure, and the share of their pleasure is proportional to their desire for
God.”
Fifty-third, contentment prevents him from faulting what God has not
faulted and blaming what God has not blamed. When one is not pleased with
a thing he finds all kinds of faults in it and blames it, and this is because of
his lack of shame before God and blaming things that are not to blame and
finding faults with His creation. This lowers the servant in His eyes. If a man
were to prepare a meal for him and present it to him and he were to blame and
denounce it, he would open himself to his dislike and loathing, encouraging
him to cease that favor.
Fifty-fourth, the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, asked God for
contentment with the Decree, as in the Musnad and the Sunan,
O God, by Your knowledge of the unseen, and Your power over the creation, give me life so long as life is good for me, and receive me back when
death is better for me. I ask You for Your fear in private and public, I ask
You for the word of truth in anger and contentment, I ask you for moderation in poverty and wealth, I ask You for the bounty that will not pass, I
ask you for the coolness of the eye that will not cease, I ask You for joyful
contentment after the Decree, I ask You for the coolness of life after death,

‫‪609‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وذكر عند رابعة ولي لل ّٰه قوته من المزابل‪ ،‬فقال رجل‪ :‬ما ضر هذا أن يسأل الل ّٰه أن يجعل قوته في غير‬
‫هذا؟ فقالت‪ :‬اسكت يا بطال‪ ،‬أما علمت أن أولياء الل ّٰه هم أرضى عنه من أن يتخيروا عليه أن ينقلهم‬
‫إلى معيشة حتى يكون هو الذي يختار لهم‪.‬‬
‫وفي أ ثر إسرائيلي‪» :‬أن موسى سأل ر به عما فيه رضاه‪ ،‬فأوحى إليه‪ :‬إن رضائي في كرهك وأنت لا‬
‫تصبر على ما تكره‪ ،‬فقال‪ :‬رب دلني عليه‪ ،‬فقال‪ :‬إن رضائي في رضاك بقضائي«‪.‬‬
‫وفي أ ثر آخر أن موسى عليه السلام قال‪» :‬يا رب‪ ،‬أي خلقك أحب إليك؟ فقال‪ :‬من إذا أخذت‬
‫منه محبو به سالمني‪ ،‬قال‪ :‬فأي خلقك أنت عليه ساخط؟ قال‪ :‬من يستخيرني في أمر فإذا قضيته له سخط‬
‫قضائي«‪.‬‬
‫وفي أ ثر آخر‪» :‬أنا الل ّٰه لا إله إلا أنا‪ ،‬قدرت المقادير ودبرت التدبير‪ ،‬وأحكمت الصنع‪ ،‬فمن رضي‬
‫فله الرضى مني حتى يلقاني‪ ،‬ومن سخط فله السخط حتى يلقاني«‪.‬‬
‫الثاني والخمسون‪ :‬أن أفضل الأحوال الرغبة في الل ّٰه ولوازمها‪ ،‬وذلك لا يتم إلا باليقين والرضى عن‬
‫الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ولهذا قال سهل‪ :‬حظ الخلق من اليقين على قدر حظهم من الرضى‪ ،‬وحظهم من الرضى على‬
‫قدر رغبتهم فى الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫الثالث والخمسون‪ :‬أن الرضى يخلصه من عيب ما لم يعبه الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ومن ذم ما لم يذمه‪ ،‬فإن العبد إذا لم‬
‫يرض بالشيء عابه بأنواع المعايب وذمه بأنواع المذام‪ ،‬وذلك منه قلة حياء من الل ّٰه وذم لما لا ذنب له‬
‫وعيب لخلقه‪ ،‬وذلك يسقط العبد من عينه‪ .‬ولو أن رجلا ًصنع لك طعاما ًوقدمه إليك فعبته وذممته‬
‫لـكنت متعرضا ًلمقته وإهانته‪ ،‬ومستدعيا ًمنه أن يقطع ذلك عنك‪ .‬وقد قال بعض العارفين‪ :‬إن ذم‬
‫المصنوع وعيبه—إذا لم يذمه صانعه—غيبة له وقدح فيه‪.‬‬
‫الرابع والخمسون‪ :‬أن النبي ﷺ سأل الل ّٰه الرضى بالقضاء كما في المسند والسنن‪» :‬اللهم بعلمك الغيب‬
‫وقدرتك على الخلق‪ ،‬أحيني إذا كانت الحياة خيرا ً لي‪ ،‬وتوفني إذا كانت الوفاة خيرا ً لي‪ ،‬وأسألك‬
‫خشيتك في الغيب والشهادة‪ ،‬وأسألك كلمة الحق في الغضب والرضى‪ ،‬وأسألك القصد في الفقر‬
‫والغنى‪ ،‬وأسألك نعيما ًلا ينفد‪ ،‬وأسألك قرة عين لا تنقطع‪ ،‬وأسألك الرضى بعد القضاء‪ ،‬وأسألك‬

610

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

and I ask You for the delight of looking at Your Face and yearning for Your
meeting without distressful harm and misguiding trial. O God, adorn us
with faith and make us rightly-guided guides.24
I heard Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyya say, “He asked contentment after the
decree, because it is only then that the reality of contentment is known; for
contentment before it (the decree) is resolve to be content, but it is realized
only after it.”
Al-Bayhaqī reported the supplication of the Prophet, God grant him blessing
and peace, “O God I ask for good health, chastity, integrity, good character, and
contentment with predestination.”
Fifty-fifth, contentment with predestination saves the servant from having
to please men at the expense of God’s displeasure, or to blame them for what
God has not given him, or to praise them for what is God’s pure grace: he would
be wrong in the first case, taking them as partners to God in the second. If he
is pleased with the divine decree he avoids their displeasure or praise for them
{as contentment rids him of all that}.
ʿUmar b. Qays al-Mulāʾī has reported from ʿAṭiyya al-ʿAwfī on the authority of Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī, God be pleased with him, that the Prophet of God,
God grant him blessing and peace, said, “The weakness of belief is that you
please men at the expense of God’s displeasure, praise them for God’s provisions, blame them for what God has withheld from you. The provision of God
cannot be prevented by the greed or hate of anyone. God in His wisdom has
made relief and delight in contentment and certitude and anxiety and grief in
doubt and displeasure.”25 This may also have been narrated by al-Thawrī, from
Manṣūr, from Khaythama, from Ibn Masʿūd, from the Prophet, God grant him
blessing and peace.
Fifty-sixth, contentment frees the heart and reduces its worries and sadness,
leaving the heart free of the burdens of the world to be devoted to the worship
of its Lord. Ibn Abī al-Dunyā reported from Bishr b. Bashshār al-Mujāshiʿī, one
of the worshippers: He said to a worshipper, “Advise me.” He said, “Throw yourself with the divine decree wherever it throws you, for that will free up your
heart and reduce your worry. Beware resentment for it invites resentment upon
you without you noticing it.”

24
25

Aḥmad, Musnad 4:264.
Considered fabricated by some critics; for questions about this report’s isnād, see Madārij(Ṣ), 1998n2.

‫‪611‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫برد العيش بعد الموت‪ ،‬وأسألك لذة النظر إلى وجهك والشوق إلى لقائك‪ ،‬في غير ضراء مضرة ولا‬
‫فتنة مضلة‪ .‬اللهم ز ينا بز ينة الإ يمان واجعلنا هداة مهتدين«‪.‬‬
‫فسمعت شيخ الإسلام ا بن تيمية يقول‪ :‬سأل الرضى بعد القضاء لأنه حينئذ تبين حقيقة الرضى‪،‬‬
‫وأما الرضى قبله فإنما هو عزم على أنه يرضى إذا أصابه‪ ،‬وإنما يتحقق الرضى بعده‪.‬‬
‫قال البيهقي‪ :‬ورو ينا في دعاء النبي ﷺ‪» :‬اللهم إني أسألك الصحة والعفة والأمانة وحسن الخلق‬
‫والرضى بالقدر«‪.‬‬
‫الخامس والخمسون‪ :‬أن الرضى بالقدر يخلص العبد من أن يرضي الناس بسخط الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وأن يذمهم‬
‫على ما لم يؤته الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وأن يحمدهم على ما هو محض فضل الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فيكون ظالما ً لهم في الأول‪—،‬مشركا ً‬
‫بهم فى الثانى—‪ ،‬فإذا رضي بالقضاء تخلص من ذمهم وحمدهم‪] ،‬فخلصه الرضى من ذلك كله[‪.‬‬
‫وقد روى عمرو بن قيس الملائي عن عطية العوفي عن أبي سعيد الخدري رضي الل ّٰه عنه قال‪ :‬قال‬
‫رسول الل ّٰه صلى الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬إن من ضعف اليقين أن ترضي الناس بسخط الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وأن تحمدهم على رزق‬
‫الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وأن تذمهم على ما لم يؤتك الل ّٰه‪ .‬إن رزق الل ّٰه لا يجره حرص حر يص ولا يردهكرهكاره‪ ،‬وإن‬
‫الل ّٰه—بحكمته—جعل الروح والفرح في الرضى واليقين‪ ،‬وجعل الهم والحزن في الشك والسخط«‪.‬‬
‫وقد رواه الثوري عن منصور عن خيثمة عن ا بن مسعود عن النبي ﷺ‪.‬‬
‫السادس والخمسون‪ :‬أن الرضى يفرغ قلب العبد و يقلل همه وغمه‪ ،‬فيتفرغ لعبادة ر به بقلب خفيف‬
‫من أثقال الدنيا وهمومها وغمومها‪ ،‬كما ذكر ا بن أبي الدنيا عن بشر بن بشار المجاشعي‪ ،‬وكان من العابدين‬
‫قال‪ :‬قلت لعابد‪ :‬أوصني‪ ،‬قال‪ :‬ألق نفسك مع القدر حيث ألقاك‪ ،‬فهو أحرى أن يفرغ قلبك وأن يقلل‬
‫همك‪ ،‬وإياك أن تسخط ذلك فيحل بك السخط وأنت عنه في غفلة لا تشعر به‪.‬‬

612

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

One of the Predecessors said, “Give up planning and choice and you will live
well, for planning and choice spoil people’s lives.”
Abū al-ʿAbbās b. ʿAṭāʾ said, “Happiness is in God’s plan for us and failure in
our own planning.”
Sufyān b. ʿUyayna said, “If one cannot do well with God’s plan for him, he
cannot do well with his own plan for himself.”
Abū al-ʿAbbās al-Ṭūsī said, “Whoever gives up planning lives in comfort.”
One of them said, “You will not find safety until you become in your planning
like the dwellers of the graves.”
Someone said that contentment is to give up disagreement with God about
what He does to His servant.
ʿUmar b. ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz said, “I have given up all those supplications and I have
no need left in any of my affairs. I accept whatever God has apportioned for
me.” He would often pray, “O God, make me pleased with Your decree, bless me
in Your apportionment for me so that I do not seek to hasten what You have
delayed or seek to delay what You have hastened.”
He also said, “I have no desire left in anything other than what God Almighty
has decreed.”
Shuʿba said, “Yūnus b. ʿUbayd said to me, ‘I do not desire anything at all.’ ”
Al-Fuḍayl said, “One who is contended does not wish to anything above his
station.”
Dhū l-Nūn said, “Three things are from signs of submission. Meeting divine
decree with contentment, affliction with patience, and ease with gratitude.
Three things are from signs of delegation: suspending your will for His demand,
keeping your eyes on His plan for you, and ridding yourself of objection to the
divine judgment. Three things are from the signs of the testimony of divine
unicity: seeing that everything is from God, accepting everything from Him,
attributing everything to Him.”
One of the knowers said, “The essence of worship is in three things: Do not
reject any of His judgements, do not ask anyone else for anything, and do not
horde anything from Him.”
Ibn Shamʿūn (a Baghdadi Sufi) was asked about contentment, so he said,
“That you are pleased with Him as the planner and chooser, as the distributer,
giver, and withholder, and as god, object of worship, and lord.”
One of the knowers said, “Contentment is the giving up of your choice, the
heart’s delight in the passing decree, abandoning planning for one’s self, until
God decides for or against it.”
It was said, “The content is he who does not lament or mourn what has been
lost of this world.”
What a beautiful saying,

‫‪613‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وقال بعض السلف‪» :‬ذروا التدبير والاختيار تكونوا في طيب من العيش‪ ،‬فإن التدبير والاختيار‬
‫يكدر على الناس عيشهم«‪.‬‬
‫وقال أبو العباس بن عطاء‪» :‬الفرح في تدبير الل ّٰه لنا والشقاء كله في تدبيرنا«‪.‬‬
‫وقال سفيان بن عيينة‪» :‬من لم يصلح على تقدير الل ّٰه لم يصلح على تقديره نفسه«‪.‬‬
‫وقال أبو العباس الطوسي‪» :‬من ترك التدبير عاش في راحة«‪.‬‬
‫وقال بعضهم‪» :‬لا تجد السلامة حتى تكون في التدبير كأهل القبور«‪.‬‬
‫وقال‪] :‬الرضاء ترك الخلاف على الرب فيما يجر يه على العبد[‪.‬‬
‫وقال عمر بن عبد العز يز رحمه الل ّٰه‪» :‬لقد تركتني هؤلاء الدعوات وما لي في شيء من الأمور كلها‬
‫أرب‪ ،‬إلا في مواقع قدر الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وكان كثيرا ً ما يدعو‪ :‬اللهم رضني بقضائك و بارك لي في قدرك‪ ،‬حتى‬
‫لا أحب تعجيل شيء أخرته‪ ،‬ولا تأخير شيء عجلته«‪.‬‬
‫ى في شيء سوى ما قضى الل ّٰه عز وجل«‪.‬‬
‫وقال‪» :‬ما أصبح لي هو ً‬
‫وقال شعبة‪» :‬قال يونس بن عبيد‪ :‬ما تمنيت شيئا ًقط«‪.‬‬
‫وقال الفضيل‪» :‬الراضي لا يتمنى فوق منزلته«‪.‬‬
‫وقال ذو النون‪» :‬ثلاثة من أعلام التسليم‪ :‬مقابلة القضاء بالرضى والصبر عند البلاء والشكر عند‬
‫الرخاء‪ .‬وثلاثة من أعلام التفو يض‪ :‬تعطيل إرادتك لمراده والنظر إلى ما يقع من تدبيره لك وترك‬
‫الاعتراض على الحكم‪ .‬وثلاثة من أعلام التوحيد‪ :‬رؤ يةكل شيء من الل ّٰه وقبول كل شيء عنه وإضافة‬
‫كل شيء إليه«‪.‬‬
‫وقال بعض العارفين‪ :‬أصل العبادة ثلاثة‪» :‬لا ترد من أحكامه شيئا ً ولا تسأل غيره حاجة ً ولا‬
‫تدخر عنه شيئا ً«‪.‬‬
‫وسئل ا بن شمعون عن الرضى فقال‪» :‬أن ترضى به مدبرا ًومختارا ً‪ ،‬وترضى عنه قاسما ًومعطيا ًومانعا‪ً،‬‬
‫وترضاه إلها ًومعبودا ً ور باص«‪.‬‬
‫وقال بعض العارفين‪» :‬الرضى ترك الاختيار وسرور القلب بمر القضاء وإسقاط التدبير من النفس‬
‫حتى يحكم الل ّٰه لها أو عليها«‪.‬‬
‫وقيل‪» :‬الراضي من لم يندم على فائت من الدنيا ولم يتأسف عليها«‪.‬‬
‫ولل ّٰه در القائل‪:‬‬

614

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

The servant is fretter, the Lord the Apportioner
Time ever cycles through, the provisions have been doled out
The good is all gathered in what our Creator has chosen
And the choosing of anyone else is blameworthy and shameful26
Fifty-seventh, if not content with predestination, one falls into blaming the
apportioned shares either through [the actions] of his body or in his heart and
[psychological] state, and to blame the portions is to blame their Apportioner.
Similarly, one falls into blaming the creation and both God and the people
blame him, thus he becomes the blamer and the blamed. All this is contradictory to servanthood.
Anas [b. Mālik] said,
I served the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, for ten
years and he never said about something I did, “Why did you do it?” nor
for something I failed to do, “Why did you not do it?” Nor did he ever say
about a thing, “I wish it was not so,” nor about a thing that was not, “I wish
it were so.” If someone in the family blamed me he would say, “Leave him
be, it was destined to be and it happened.”
His saying, “it was destined to be and it happened” includes two points. First,
it was different from what the servant desired. Second, something distasteful
happened including the loss of what he loved and occurrence of something
dislikeable; if the first one was destined, it happened, and if the opposite of the
second one was destined, it would have happened. When the two states are
equal with respect to the decree, [true] servanthood consists in the equality
of the two states with respect to his contentment with the decree. This is the
requirement and corollary of servanthood. It is further explained below.
Fifty-eighth, when the two outcomes are equal with respect to one’s joyful
contentment with the Lord Almighty, one being what He was pleased with for
His servant and He decreed it and the other being what He was not pleased with
for His servant, the perfection of accord with Him lies in that the two outcomes
are equal with respect to the servant, and he becomes pleased with whatever
the Lord is pleased with in either case.
26

Many of the preceding statements are found in al-Bayhaqī’s Shuʿab al-īmān. It is worth
noting that, apart from his especial emphasis on Qurʾanic verses and Hadith, Ibn alQayyim’s quotations, here as elsewhere, of the statements of Sufis and mystics are found
and repeated in standard Sufi works like al-Makkī’s Qūt, Abū Nuʿaym’s Ḥilya, Qushayrī’s
al-Risāla, and al-Ghazālī’s Iḥyāʾ.

‫‪615‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫العبد ذو ضجر والرب ذو قدر‬

‫والدهر ذو دول والرزق مقسوم‬

‫والخـير أجمع فيما اختار خالقنا‬

‫وفي اختيار سواه اللوم والشوم‪.‬‬

‫السابع والخمسون‪ :‬أنه إذا لم يرض بالقدر وقع في لوم المقادير‪ ،‬إما بقالبه وإما بقلبه وحاله‪ .‬ولوم المقادير‬
‫لوم لمقدرها‪ ،‬وكذلك يقع في لوم الخلق‪ ،‬والل ّٰه والناس يلومونه فلا يزال لائما ً ملوما‪ ً،‬وهذا مناف‬
‫للعبودية‪.‬‬
‫قال أنس رضي الل ّٰه عنه‪» :‬خدمت رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ عشر سنين‪ ،‬فما قال لي لشيء فعلته‪ :‬لم فعلته؟‬
‫ولا لشيء لم أفعله‪ :‬ألا فعلته‪ .‬ولا قال لشيء ليته لم يكن‪ ،‬ولا لشيء لم يكن‪ :‬ليتهكان‪ .‬وكان بعض أهله‬
‫إذا لامني يقول‪ :‬دعوه لو قضي لكان«‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬لو قضى شيء لكان« يتناول أمرين‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬مالم يوجد من مراد العبد‪.‬‬
‫والثاني‪ :‬ما وجد مما يكرهه وهو يتناول فوات المحبوب وحصول المكروه‪ .‬فلو قضي الأول لكان‪ ،‬ولو‬
‫قضي خلاف الآخر لكان‪ ،‬فإذا استوت الحالتان بالنسبة إلى القضاء فعبودية العبد ]أن يستوي عنده‬
‫الحالتان بالنسبة إلى رضاه[‪ ،‬وهذا موجب العبودية ومقتضاها‪ ،‬يوضحه‪:‬‬
‫الثامن والخمسون‪ :‬أنه إذا استوى الأمران بالنسبة إلى رضى الرب تعالى‪ ،‬فهذا رضيه لعبده فقدره‬
‫وهذا لم يرضه له فلم يقدره‪ .‬فكمال الموافقة أن يستو يا بالنسبة إلى العبد فيرضى ما رضيه له ر به في الحالين‪.‬‬

616

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Fifty-ninth, God has prohibited stepping ahead of Him and His Messenger
with respect to His normative-legal [or deontological] decree, which is servanthood in this matter. The requirement of servanthood in His ontological,
predestined command is that the servant not step ahead of Him in whatever
has the prepondering benefit. If his obligation or preferred course of action in
this case was patience or joyful contentment, by failing to do it he has stepped
ahead of Him in both His Law and predestination.
Sixtieth, love, purity, and repentance cannot but stand on the foot of contentment. A lover is pleased with his beloved in every state. ʿImrān b. Ḥuṣayn
(a Companion, d. 52/672) became ill in his stomach and was bed-ridden for a
long time, unable to stand or sit, having to relieve himself there as well. Muṭarrif b. ʿAbdallāh b. al-Shikhkhīr (d. 86/705, a senior Successor) visited him and
began to cry seeing his state. He said, “Why do you cry?” He said, “Seeing you in
this state of great [misery].” He said, “Do not cry. I love what He loves.” And he
said further, “I will tell you something, perhaps God will benefit you by it, keep
it secret until I die. The angels visit him and I seek comfort in them, and they
greet me and I hear their greeting.”
When Saʿd b. Abī Waqqāṣ came to Mecca, having lost his sight, people rushed
to him to ask him to supplicate on their behalf, which he did. ʿAbdallāh b. alSāʾib (a young Companion of Makhzūm clan, d. c. 70/690) said that he too went
to him as a boy and introduced himself, and he recognized him. He said, “O my
uncle, you supplicate for all these people. Why do you not pray for yourself so
God will return your sight to you?” He smiled and said, “My dear son, God’s
decree in my view is dearer to me than my sight.”
One of the knowers said, “A sin that I committed has made me weep for thirty
years.” “What is it?” he was asked. I said about something that happened, “I wish
it did not happen.” One of the Predecessors similarly said, “I prefer my body to
be combed with iron shears than to say about something God has decreed, ‘I
wish He had not decreed it!’ ”
It was said to ʿAbd al-Wāḥid b. Zayd that there is a man who has worshipped
for fifty years, so he set out to meet him and said, “My dear, tell me about yourself. Are you content with Him?” [The worshipper] said, “No.” He asked, “Do you
feel intimate with Him?” He said, “No.” He asked, “Are you pleased with Him?”
He said, “No.” He asked, “So all you have increased for Him is fasting and praying?” He said, “Yes.” He said, “If I were to be candid with you, I would tell you
that your affair for fifty years has been deficient.”
That is, He did not draw him near granting him the station of the near ones
or grant him the experiences of the knowers, so that he would increase in the
actions of the heart that happen with regard to every sought-after beloved. [You
have failed] to attain conviction, which is the state of those given certainty; or

‫‪617‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫التاسع والخمسون‪ :‬أن الل ّٰه تعالى نهى عن التقدم بين يديه و يدي رسوله في حكمه الديني الشرعي‪،‬‬
‫وذلك عبودية هذا الأمر‪ .‬فعبودية أمره الـكوني القدري ألا يتقدم بين يديه إلا حيث كانت المصلحة‬
‫الراجحة في ذلك‪ ،‬فيكون التقدم أيضا بأمره الـكوني والديني‪ ،‬فإذا كان فرضه الصبر وندبه أو فرضه‬
‫الرضى حتى ترك ذلك‪ ،‬فقد تقدم بين يدي شرعه وقدره‪ .‬الستون‪ :‬أن المحبة والإخلاص والإنابة لا‬
‫تقوم إلا على ساق الرضى‪.‬‬
‫فالمحب راض عن حبيبه في كل حالة‪ .‬وقد كان عمران بن حصين رضى الل ّٰه عنه استسقي بطنه‬
‫فبقي ملقًى على ظهره مدة ً طو يلة ً‪ ،‬لا يقوم ولا يقعد‪ ،‬وقد نقب له في سر يره موضع لحاجته‪ .‬فدخل‬
‫عليه مطرف بن عبد الل ّٰه ا بن الشخير‪ ،‬فجعل يبكي لما رأى من حاله‪ ،‬فقال‪ :‬لم تبكي؟ فقال‪ :‬لأني أراك‬
‫على هذه الحال العظيمة‪ ،‬فقال‪ :‬لا تبك‪ ،‬فإن أحبه إلي أحبه إليه‪ ،‬وقال‪ :‬أخبرك بشيء لعل الل ّٰه أن‬
‫ينفعك به‪ ،‬واكتم علي حتى أموت‪ .‬إن الملائكة تزورني فآنس بها وتسلم علي فأسمع تسليمها‪.‬‬
‫ولما قدم سعد بن أبي وقاص رضي الل ّٰه عنه إلى مكة—وقد كف بصره—جعل الناس يهرعون‬
‫إليه ليدعو لهم‪ ،‬فجعل يدعو لهم‪ .‬قال عبد الل ّٰه بن السائب‪ :‬فأتيته وأنا غلام‪ ،‬فتعرفت إليه فعرفني‪،‬‬
‫فقلت‪ :‬يا عم‪ ،‬أنت تدعو للناس‪ ،‬فلو دعوت لنفسك لرد الل ّٰه عليك بصرك‪ ،‬فتبسم ثم قال‪ :‬يا بني‪،‬‬
‫قضاء الل ّٰه عندي أحب إلي من بصري‪.‬‬
‫وقال بعض العارفين‪ :‬ذنب أذنبته‪ ،‬أنا أبكي عليه ثلاثين سنة ً‪ .‬قيل‪ :‬وما هو؟ قال‪ :‬قلت لشيء كان‬
‫ليته لم يكن‪.‬‬
‫وقال بعض السلف‪» :‬لو قرض جسمي بالمقار يض كان أحب إلي من أن أقول لشيء قضاه الل ّٰه‪:‬‬
‫ليته لم يقضه«‪.‬‬
‫وقيل لعبد الواحد بن ز يد‪ :‬هاهنا رجل قد تعبد خمسين سنة فقصده‪ .‬فقال‪ :‬حبيبي‪ ،‬أخبرني عنك‪،‬‬
‫هل قنعت به؟ قال‪ :‬لا‪ .‬قال‪ :‬فهل أنست به؟ قال‪ :‬لا‪ .‬قال‪ :‬فهل رضيت عنه؟ قال‪ :‬لا‪ .‬قال‪ :‬فإنما‬
‫مزيدك منه الصوم والصلاة‪ .‬قال‪ :‬نعم‪ .‬قال‪ :‬لولا أني أستحي منك لأخبرتك أن معاملتك خمسين سنة ً‬
‫مدخولة‪.‬‬
‫يعني أنه لم يقر به فيجعله في مقام المقر بين‪ ،‬فيوجده مواجيد العارفين‪ ،‬بحيث يكون مزيده لديه‬
‫أعمال القلوب التي يستعمل بها كل محبوب مطلوب‪ ،‬لأن القناعة حال الموقن‪ ،‬والأنس به مقام‬

618
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
intimacy, which is the station of the lover; or contentment, which is the trait
of those who trustingly rely: you are with Him among the People of the Right
Hand, and your increase is in nothing but actions of the limbs. His comment
that “your affair has been deficient” could mean one of two things. First, that it
falls short of the deeds of those near to God, one that earn them such a state.
Second, if they had been sound and complete, the Lord Almighty is thankful;
when a servant’s deed reaches Him, He beautifies the servant by it inside and
out, rewarding him with the realities of inner awareness and faith in accordance with his action. When one finds no effect of his action in his heart,
such as intimacy and love, this suggests that it is deficient, afflicted by some
flaws.
Sixty-first, the actions of the limbs can increase to a clear limit; as for the
actions of the heart, there is no limit to their doubling and redoubling potential. Physical actions can continue up to a limit and then must cease, and so
is their reward, whereas the actions of the heart are constant and unbroken,
even if they are hidden from the servant. An example is the state of love and
contentment that is permanent for a loving, contented servant, never parting
from him, and he is in constant, uninterrupted increase so long as his state lasts
and even after his limbs fatigue. In fact, his increase [in reward and nearness]
may be immeaSūrably greater in his state of stillness than the increase of the
worshippers given to supererogatory acts, so much so that his increase while
asleep is greater than the one standing the night in prayer {and his increase
while eating might supersede that of one who is fasting and starving}.
If you find this odd, consider the increase of the one asleep but connected to
God and the standing in prayer of one who is heedless of God. God the Exalted
looks at the hearts, aspirations, and resolutions, not the outer form of the deeds.
The worth of a servant is equal to the extent of his aspiration and willpower.
One who is not content with other-than-God is incomparable to one someone who is content with the smallest of worldly advantages, even though their
deeds on the surface are the same, or the latter might work more and harder.
This is the grace of God that He grants whomsoever He wills, and He is great in
His bounty.
The masters of this affair have differed on the question of whether contentment has any limit. Abū Sulaymān al-Dārānī said, “Three stations have
no limits: renunciation, scrupulousness, and contentment.” However, his son
Sulaymān disagreed—he too was a knower, so much so that some people considered him better than his father—and said, “No, whoever is scrupulous about
everything has reached its limit; whoever renounces for other-than-God has
reached the limit of renunciation; and whoever is pleased with everything from
God has reached the limit of contentment.”

‫‪619‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫المحب‪ ،‬والرضى وصف المتوكل‪ ،‬يعني أنت عنده في طبقات أصحاب اليمين‪ ،‬فمز يدك عنده مزيد العموم‬
‫من أعمال الجوارح‪.‬‬
‫وقوله‪» :‬إن معاملته مدخولة« يحتمل وجهين‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬أنها ناقصة عن أعمال المقر بين التي أوجبت لهم هذه الحال‪.‬‬
‫الثاني‪ :‬أنها لو كانت صحيحة ً سالمة ً لا علة فيها لأثمرت له الأنس والرضى والمحبة والأحوال العلية‪.‬‬
‫فإن الرب تعالى شكور‪ ،‬إذا وصل إليه عمل عبده جمل به ظاهره و باطنه‪ ،‬وأثابه عليه من حقائق‬
‫المعرفة والإ يمان بحسب عمله‪ ،‬فحيث لم يجد له أ ثرا ً في قلبه من الأنس والرضى والمحبة استدل على أنه‬
‫مدخول غير سالم من الآفات‪.‬‬
‫الحادي والستون‪ :‬أن أعمال الجوارح تضاعف إلى حد معلوم محسوب وأما أعمال القلوب فلا‬
‫ينتهي تضعيفها‪ ،‬وذلك لأن أعمال الجوارح لها حد تنتهي إليه وتقف عنده‪ ،‬فيكون جزاؤها بحسب‬
‫حدها‪ ،‬وأما أعمال القلوب فهي دائمة متصلة وإن توارى شهود العبد لها‪.‬‬
‫مثاله أن المحبة والرضى حال المحب الراضي لا تفارقه أصلا‪ ً،‬وإن توارى حكمها‪ .‬فصاحبها في مزيد‬
‫متصل‪ ،‬فمز يد المحب الراضي متصل بدوام هذه الحال له‪ ،‬فهو في مزيد ولو فترت جوارحه‪ ،‬بل قد‬
‫يكون مزيده في حال سكونه وفتوره أكثر من مزيد كثير من أهل النوافل بما لا نسبة بينهما‪ ،‬و يبلغ‬
‫ذلك بصاحبه إلى أن يكون مزيده في حال نومه أكثر من مزيد كثير من أهل القيام ]وأكله أكثر‬
‫من مزيد كثير من أهل الصيام والجوع[‪.‬‬
‫فإن أنكرت هذا فتأمل مزيد نائم بالل ّٰه وقيام غافل عن الل ّٰه‪ .‬فالل ّٰه سبحانه ينظر إلى القلوب والهمم‬
‫والعزائم‪ ،‬لا إلى صور الأعمال‪ .‬وقيمة العبد همته وإرادته‪ ،‬فمن لا يرضيه غير الل ّٰه—ولو أعطي الدنيا‬
‫بحذافيرها—له شأن‪ ،‬ومن يرضيه أدنى حظ من حظوظها له شأن‪ ،‬وإن كانت أعمالهما في الصورة‬
‫واحدة‪ ،‬وقد تكون أعمال هذا أكثر وأشق‪ ،‬وذلك فضل الل ّٰه يؤتيه من يشاء‪ ،‬والل ّٰه ذو الفضل العظيم‪.‬‬
‫وقد اختلف أر باب هذا الشأن في مسألة وهي‪ :‬هل للرضى حد ينتهي إليه أم لا؟ فقال أبو سليمان‬
‫الداراني‪ :‬ثلاث مقامات لا حد لها‪ :‬الزهد والورع والرضى‪ .‬وخالفه سليمان ابنه—وكان عارفا‪ ً،‬حتى‬
‫إن من الناس من كان يقدمه على أبيه—فقال‪ :‬بل من تورع في كل شيء فقد بلغ حد الورع‪ ،‬ومن‬
‫زهد في غير الل ّٰه فقد بلغ حد الزهد‪ ،‬ومن رضي عن الل ّٰه في كل شيء فقد بلغ حد الرضى‪.‬‬

620

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

They have disagreed furthermore about related matters. The people of stations are three types. First, one who loves death, yearning to meet God. Second,
one who loves life in order to serve and draw nearer. Third, one who says I do
not choose, rather, I am pleased with what my Patron has chosen for me, He
can give me life or death as He wishes. They presented their case before one of
the knowers who said, “The one of contentment [with the decree] is the best
of them, as he is the most precise.”
No doubt, the station of contentment is higher than the stations of yearning or renunciation of the world. It remains to decide which of the other two
is better. One group preferred the station of those who love death due to their
yearning and love to meet God; however one loves to meet God, God loves to
meet him. The other preferred the station of one who desires to live to implement the commands of the Lord Almighty, and argue that the first one loves
God for his own share from God whereas this one loves God for God’s desire
from him. They said this was the state of Moses, God’s peace and blessings be
upon him, when he slapped the face of the Angel of Death and blinded him in
one eye, not for the love of this world but to put into action His commands and
what pleases Him among people. It is as if he said, “You are His servant as am
I, You are in His obedience as am I, and in putting into action His commands.”
This is why we say in the sixty-second point that the state of the one who
is joyfully contented brings together the states of both of these with additional
submission and abjuring of choice, for he has passed away into the Lord’s desire
for him in his life and death from his own desire for either. Every lover yearns
for the meeting of his beloved and also prefers his pleasure over his own; this
one brings together both stations and says, “The more beloved to me is what
is more beloved to Him. I will not choose anything over and against what He
loves and is pleased with.” This is sufficient on this point here, and God alone
gives success.

9

Returning to al-Harawī

We now turn to the explanation of [al-Harawī’s] words:
Second, giving up of dispute with the creation.
He means that contentment is completed only by giving up disputation with
the creation, for disputation contradicts the state of contentment and attribution of all things to Him who holds the knot of destiny and decree. Disputing,
therefore, is rife with diseases.

‫‪621‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وقد اختلفوا في مسألة ٺتعلق بذلك‪ ،‬وهي أهل مقامات ثلاثة‪:‬‬
‫أحدهم‪ :‬يحب الموت شوقا ًإلى الل ّٰه ولقائه‪.‬‬
‫والثاني‪ :‬يحب البقاء للخدمة والتقرب‪.‬‬
‫الثالث قال‪ :‬لا أختار‪ ،‬بل أرضى بما يختار لي مولاي‪ .‬إن شاء أحياني وإن شاء أماتني‪.‬‬
‫فتحاكموا إلى بعض العارفين فقال‪ :‬صاحب الرضى أفضلهم‪ ،‬لأنه أقلهم فضولا‪ً.‬‬
‫ولا ر يب أن مقام الرضى فوق مقام الشوق والزهد في الدنيا‪.‬‬
‫بقي النظر في مقامي الآخر ين‪ :‬أيهما أعلى؟‬
‫فرجحت طائفة مقام من أحب الموت‪ ،‬لأنه في مقام الشوق إلى لقاء الل ّٰه ومحبة لقائه‪ ،‬ومن أحب‬
‫لقاء الل ّٰه أحب الل ّٰه لقاءه‪.‬‬
‫ورجحت طائفة مقام مريد البقاء لتنفيذ أوامر الرب تعالى‪.‬‬
‫واحتجوا بأن الأول محب لحظه من الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وهذا محب لمراد الل ّٰه منه‪ ،‬لم يشبع منه ولم يقض منه‬
‫وطرا ً‪.‬‬
‫قالوا‪ :‬وهذا حال موسى—صلوات الل ّٰه وسلامه عليه—حيث لطم وجه ملك الموت ففقأ عينه‪،‬‬
‫لا محبة ً للدنيا ولـكن لينفذ أوامر ر به ومراضيه في الناس‪ ،‬فكأنه قال‪ :‬أنت عبده وأنا عبده‪ ،‬وأنت في‬
‫طاعته وأنا في طاعته وتنفيذ أوامره‪.‬‬
‫وحينئذ فنقول في الوجه الثاني والستين‪ :‬إن حال الراضي المسل ّم ينتظم حاليهما جميعا ً مع ز يادة‬
‫التسليم وترك الاختيار‪ ،‬فإنه قد غاب بمراد ر به منه—من إحيائه وإماٺته—عن مراده هو من هذين‬
‫الأمرين‪ ،‬وكل محب فهو مشتاق إلى لقاء حبيبه مؤثر لمرضاته فقد أخذ بزمام كل من المقامين واتصف‬
‫بالحالين‪ .‬وقال‪» :‬أحب ذلك إلي أحبه إليه« لا أتمنى غير رضاه ولا أتخـير عليه إلا ما يحبه و يرضاه‪،‬‬
‫وهذا القدر كاف في هذا الموضع‪ ،‬و بالل ّٰه التوفيق‪.‬‬

‫فلنرجع إلى شرح كلامه‪ ،‬قال‪:‬‬
‫»الثاني‪ :‬سقوط الخصومة مع الخلق«‪.‬‬
‫يعني أن »الرضى« إنما يصح بسقوط الخصومة مع الخلق‪ .‬فإن الخصومة تنافي حال الرضى وتنافي‬
‫نسبة الأشياء كلها إلى من بيده أزمة القضاء والقدر‪ .‬ففي الخصومة آفات‪.‬‬

622

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

One of them is the contention itself, which opposes contentment. Second,
deficiency in the affirmation of divine unicity by attributing the disputed object
to the servant rather than to the Creator. Third, forgetting the means and
cause that led to the dispute, and if one were to go back and investigate it,
repelling the cause would be better and more beneficial than disputing with
the one who was merely its instrument, even if he was wrong, for it is he
who gave [the oppressor] authority over himself by his own wrongful conduct, as the Almighty said, “And so when an affliction strikes you twice, the
like of which struck you before, you said, ‘Where is this from?’ Say [O Prophet,
to them], ‘It is from your own selves’” [3:165]. He thus informed them that
their enemy’s harm to them and edge over them is due to their own injustice to themselves. The Almighty also said, “And whatever affliction strikes
you it is what your own hands have earned, yet much it is that He overlooks”
[42:30].
When the insight of the servant concentrates on the divine predestination,
unicity, wisdom, and justice, the door of disputing with the creation is closed
except in God’s and His Messenger’s rights. The joyfully contented one does not
dispute or take to task except on account of the right of God, as was the case
with the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, for he would
never dispute or quarrel with anyone except on account of God’s right, never
for himself, but when God’s limits were crossed, his anger was irresistible until
he avenged it for the sake of God. Disputing for one’s own sake puts out the light
of contentment and saps its delight, replacing its sweetness with bitterness and
clouding its essence.
The third condition is to stay clear of asking and begging of them.
It is so because asking and begging contain an element of disputation, contention, and fighting, and turning from asking the Master of benefit and harm
to those who neither own benefit nor harm even for themselves except through
their Lord, and this constitutes neglecting the Giver and the Preventer. Begging
contradicts the very meaning of contentment. The Almighty praises those who
do not ask others, saying,
[Charity is] for the poor who have been constrained owing to their pursuit of the cause of God, unable to move about in the land. An ignorant
[person] would think them self-sufficient because of their modesty, but
you will know them by their sign. They do not ask people persistently [or
at all]. [2:273]

‫‪623‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫أحدها‪ :‬المنازعة التي تضاد الرضى‪.‬‬
‫الثاني‪ :‬نقص التوحيد بنسبة ما يخاصم فيه إلى العبد دون الخالق‪.‬‬
‫الثالث‪ :‬نسيان الموجب والسبب الذي جر إلى الخصومة‪ .‬فلو رجع العبد إلى السبب والموجب لكان‬
‫اشتغاله بدفعه أجدى عليه وأنفع له من خصومة من جرى على يديه‪ ،‬فإنه—وإن كان ظالما ً—فهو‬
‫ل‬
‫صب ْت ُم مّ ِث ْليَ ْه َا قلُ ْت ُم ْ َأ َن ّى ٰ هَٰ ذ َا ۖ ق ُ ْ‬
‫صيبةَ ٌ ق َْد َأ َ‬
‫صاب َت ْك ُم ُمّ ِ‬
‫الذي سلطه على نفسه بظلمه‪ .‬قال الل ّٰه تعالى‪َ ﴿ :‬أو َل ََم ّا َأ َ‬
‫سك ُْم﴾ ]آل عمران‪ .[165:‬فأخبر أن أذى عدوهم لهم وغلبتهم بسبب ظلمهم‪ .‬وقال الل ّٰه‬
‫ه ُو َ م ِْن عِندِ َأنف ُ ِ‬
‫كثيِ رٍ﴾ ]الشورى‪.[30:‬‬
‫ت َأي ْدِيك ُْم و َ يعَ ْف ُو ع َن َ‬
‫كسَب َ ْ‬
‫صيبةَ ٍ ف َب ِم َا َ‬
‫صاب َك ُم مّ ِن ُمّ ِ‬
‫تعالى‪﴿ :‬و َم َا َأ َ‬
‫فإذا اجتمعت بصيرة العبد على مشاهد القدر والتوحيد والحكمة والعدل‪ ،‬انسد عنه باب خصومة‬
‫الخلق إلا فيما كان حقا لً ل ّٰه ورسوله‪ .‬فالراضي لا يخاصم ولا يعاتب إلا فيما يتعلق بحق الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وهذه‬
‫كانت حال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪ ،‬فإنه لم يكن يخاصم أحدا ولا يعاتبه إلا فيما يتعلق بحق الل ّٰه‪ ،‬كما أنهكألا‬
‫يغضب لنفسه‪ ،‬فإذا انتهكت محارم الل ّٰه لم يقم لغضبه شيء حتى ينتقم لل ّٰه‪ .‬فالمخاصمة لحظ النفس‬
‫تطفيء نور الرضى وتذهب بهجته‪ ،‬وتبدل بالمرارة حلاوته وتكدر صفوه‪.‬‬
‫»الشرط الثالث‪ :‬الخلاص من المسألة لهم‪ ،‬والإلحاح«‪.‬‬
‫وذلك لأن المسألة والإلحاح فيها ضرب من الخصومة والمنازعة والمحار بة‪ ،‬والرجوع عن مالك‬
‫الضر والنفع إلى من لا يملك لنفسه ضرا ً ولا نفعا ًإلا بر به‪ ،‬وفيها الغيبة عن المعطي المانع‪.‬‬
‫والإلحاح ينافي حال الرضى ووصفه‪ ،‬وقد أثنى الل ّٰه سبحانه على الذين لا يسألون الناس‪ ،‬فقال الل ّٰه‬
‫يح ْسَب ُه ُم ُ اْلجا َه ِ ُ‬
‫ض َ‬
‫ل ال َل ّـه ِ ل َا ي َْست َط ِيع ُونَ ض َرْ باً ف ِي اْلَأْر ِ‬
‫حص ِر ُوا ف ِي َ‬
‫ن ُأ ْ‬
‫تعالى‪﴿ :‬ل ِل ْف ُق َر َاء ِ ال َ ّذ ِي َ‬
‫سبيِ ِ‬
‫ل َأْغنيِ َاء َ‬
‫س ِإْلحا َف ًا﴾ ]البقرة‪.[273:‬‬
‫ن ال َت ّع َُّف ِ‬
‫مِ َ‬
‫ف تعَ ْرِفهُ ُم ب ِِسيم َاه ُْم ل َا ي َْس َألوُ نَ ال َن ّا َ‬

624

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

One group says [concerning them] that they ask people only to the extent
that their need requires but do not do so importunately or degradingly; God
has negated only this, not any asking. Ibn ʿAbbās said, “If he has enough for
lunch, he does not ask for supper, and if he has enough for supper, he does not
ask for lunch.” Another group said, among them al-Zajjāj, al-Farrāʾ, and others,
that the verse requires giving up asking altogether, since they have been characterized with modesty and their being identifiable only through their faces
without explicitly asking, for had they explicitly asked, the ignorant one would
not have thought of them as well-off. They disagreed about the meaning of
“they do not ask the people because of their modesty”: al-Zajjāj said that it
means that since they do not ask, asking importunately is out of the question.
This is like when the Almighty said, “the intercession of the interceders will
not avail them,” meaning that there will be no intercession to begin with. He
also said, “no equivalent will be accepted from them,” that is, there can be no
equivalent [for their lack of faith on Judgment Day] to begin with. The examples of this are numerous. Imraʾu l-Qays said, “On a clear path, guidance is
not sought of a lighthouse.” That is, he has no lighthouse by which to seek the
path.
Ibn al-Anbārī27 said, “The verse means that they did not ask at all, for asking
even one time could in certain cases be importunate. This is like saying, ‘his
help is not hoped for,’ that is, he has no good and so it cannot be hoped for.”
Abū ʿAlī said, this verse does not affirm their asking, for it means that they
did not ask for there to be any importunacy on their part. He said it is like the
saying of the poet,
No rabbit is frightened by its horror
Nor do you see the lizard rush to its hole by it
That it has no rabbit to be frightened by its horror
Nor does it have a lizard for it to rush anywhere
Al-Farrāʾ28 said, “He denied importunacy on their part, by which is meant the
negation of any kind of asking.”

27
28

Muḥammad b. Jaʿfar ibn al-Anbārī (d. 360/970–971), a Hadith scholar of Baghdad.
Yaḥyā b. Ziyād al-Farrāʾ (d. 207/822), grammarian (naḥwī) from Kufa, companion of alKisāʾī.

‫‪625‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫فقالت طائفة‪ :‬يسألون الناس ما تدعو حاجتهم إلى سؤاله‪ ،‬ولـكن لا يلحفون‪ .‬فنفى الل ّٰه عنهم سؤالهم‬
‫الإلحاف‪ ،‬لا مطلق السؤال‪.‬‬
‫قال ا بن عباس‪ :‬إذا كان عنده غداء لم يسأل عشاء ً‪ ،‬وإذا كان عنده عشاء لم يسأل غداء ً‪.‬‬
‫وقالت طائفة—منهم الزجاج والفراء وغيرهما—‪ :‬بل الآية اقتضت ترك السؤال مطلقا ًلأنهم وصفوا‬
‫بالتعفف‪ ،‬والمعرفة بسيماهم دون الإفصاح بالمسألة‪ ،‬لأنهم لو أفصحوا بالسؤال لم يحسبهم الجاهل‬
‫أغنياء‪.‬‬
‫س ِإْلحا َف ًا﴾‪.‬‬
‫ثم اختلفوا في وجه قوله تعالى‪﴿ :‬ل َا ي َْس َألوُ نَ ال َن ّا َ‬
‫شف َاع َة ُ‬
‫فقال الزجاح‪ :‬المعنى لا يكون منهم سؤال‪ ،‬فيقع إلحاف‪ ،‬كما قال تعالى‪﴿ :‬ف َم َا ت َنف َع ُه ُْم َ‬
‫ل﴾ ]البقرة‪،[123:‬‬
‫ل م ِْنه َا ع َْد ٌ‬
‫شاف ِعيِ نَ﴾ ]المدثر‪ ،[48:‬أي لا تكون شفاعة فتنفع‪ .‬وقوله‪﴿ :‬و َل َا يقُ ْ ب َ ُ‬
‫ال َ ّ‬
‫أي لا يكون عدل فيقبل‪ ،‬ونظا ئره‪.‬‬
‫قال امرؤ القيس‪:‬‬

‫ب لا يُهتدى لمناره‪.‬‬
‫على لاح ٍ‬

‫أي ليس له منار يُهتدى به‪ .‬قال ا بن الأنباري‪ ،‬وتأو يل الآية‪ :‬لا يسألون البتة‪ ،‬فيخرجهم السؤال في‬
‫بعض الأوقات إلى الإلحاف‪ ،‬فجرى هذا مجرى قولك‪ :‬فلألا يرُ جى خيره‪ ،‬أي ليس له خير فيرجى‪.‬‬
‫وقال أبو علي‪ :‬لم يثبت في هذه الآية مسألة منهم‪ ،‬لأن المعنى‪ :‬ليس منهم مسألة ًفيكون منهم إلحاف‪.‬‬
‫قال‪ :‬ومثل ذلك قول الشاعر‪:‬‬

‫لا يفُ زع الأرنب أهوالها‬

‫ضب بها يْنج َحر‬
‫ولا ترى ال َ ّ‬

‫أي ليس بها أرنب فيفزع لهولها ولا ضب فينجحر‪.‬‬
‫وقال الفراء‪» :‬نفى الإلحاف عنهم‪ ،‬وهو ير يد نفي جميع وجوه السؤال«‪.‬‬

626

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

9.1
Prohibition of Asking the Creation except in Dire Need
Asking [as in begging and solicitation for material help29] is in essence prohibited, and has been permitted only for need or dire necessity, for it is a wrong
with respect to lordship, wrong with respect to the one asked, and wrong with
respect to the one asking. As for the first, it is so because it entails directing one’s
begging, poverty, humility, and request to someone other than God, which is a
kind of worship. Such a person, therefore, has directed his asking in the wrong
direction, placing it in the wrong place, and violated his affirmation of unicity
and its purity, his neediness toward God and reliance on Him and contentment
with His apportionment. His asking of the people makes him needless of asking of Him, which is against the testimony of unicity and puts out his light and
weakens his strength.
As for the wrong with respect to the one asked, it is so because he asked him
for what he does not in fact possess; his asking assumed his right of possession
that he in fact did not have. He also exposed him to the difficulty of spending or
the blame of refusing. If he gives, he does so unwillingly; if he refuses, he does
so with shame. This applies, of course, if he is demanding anything other than
his right. If he asks for his right, the aforementioned does not apply to him.
As for the wrong with respect to oneself, it is so because he sweated in
shame and humbled himself before other-than-the-Creator, degraded himself
and contended himself with the lower of the two states, agreeing to debase
himself and lose his honor and comfort of contentment. He is as if he sells his
patience, contentment, reliance, and satisfaction with what He has given him,
making him in no need of other people’s help. This is precisely his wronging of
his own ego, for he has lowered it in the wrong place, lowering its honor and
value, accepting humiliation and debasement with regard to the one he asked.
Were it not for dire necessity, the Law would never allow it.
It is reported in the two Ṣaḥīḥ books in the Hadith of ʿAbdallāh b. ʿUmar who
said that the Messenger, God grant him blessing and peace, said, “A man keeps
asking people until he comes on the Day of Judgment without a piece of flesh
on his face.”30 Also in the Ṣaḥīḥ of Muslim on the authority of Abū Hurayra, God
be pleased with him, the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace,
said, “Whoever solicits [favors] from people in order to increase his wealth is
asking for pebbles [of hell] (see below), so let him ask as much as he likes.”
29

30

The practice of asking for material help (masʾala) is inclusive of begging, as in panhandling
on the street; but also the practice of solicitation for money and favors by those lacking in
self-respect and responsibility to take advantage of others’ generosity or courteous inability to refuse.
The reference here is to the loss of honor and self-respect involved in the practice.

‫‪627‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫و»المسألة« في الأصل حرام‪ ،‬وإنما أبيحت للحاجة والضرورة‪ ،‬لأنها ظلم في حق الر بو بية‪ ،‬وظلم في حق‬
‫المسؤول‪ ،‬وظلم في حق السائل‪.‬‬
‫أما الأول فلأنه بذل سؤاله وفقره وذله واستعطاءه لغير الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وذلك نوع عبودية‪ .‬فوضع المسألة في‬
‫غير موضعها وأ نزلها بغير أهلها‪ ،‬وظلم توحيده وإخلاصه وفقره إلى الل ّٰه وتوكله عليه ورضاه بقسمه‪،‬‬
‫واستغنى بسؤال الناس عن مسألته‪ ،‬وذلك كله هضم من التوحيد‪ ،‬و يطفيء نوره و يضعف قوته‪.‬‬
‫وأما ظلمه للمسؤول فلأنه سأله ما ليس عنده فأوجب له بسؤاله عليه حقا ًلم يكن له عليه‪ ،‬وعرضه‬
‫لمشقة البذل أو لوم المنع‪ ،‬فإن أعطاه أعطاه على كراهة‪ ،‬وإن منعه منعه على استحياء‪ .‬هذا إذا سأله‬
‫ما ليس عليه‪ ،‬وأما إذا سأله حقا ًهو له عنده لم يدخل في ذلك ولم يظلمه بسؤاله‪.‬‬
‫وأما ظلمه لنفسه فإنه أراق ماء وجهه وذل لغير خالقه‪ ،‬وأ نزل نفسه أدنى المنزلتين ورضي لها‬
‫بأبخس الحالتين‪ ،‬ورضي بإسقاط شرف نفسه وعزة تعففه وراحة قناعته‪ ،‬و باع صبره ورضاه وتوكله‬
‫وقناعته بما قسم له‪ ،‬واستغناءه عن الناس بسؤالهم‪ ،‬وهذا عين ظلمه لنفسه إذ وضعها في غير موضعها‪،‬‬
‫وأخمل شرفها ووضع قدرها‪ ،‬وأذهب عزها وصغرها وحقرها‪ ،‬ورضي أن تكون نفسه تحت نفس‬
‫المسؤول‪ ،‬و يده تحت يده‪ .‬ولولا الضرورة لم يبح ذلك في الشرع‪.‬‬
‫وقد ثبت في الصحيحين من حديث عبد الل ّٰه بن عمر رضي الل ّٰه عنهما قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪:‬‬
‫»ما يزال الرجل يسأل الناس حتى يأتي يوم القيامة ليس في وجهه مزعة لحم«‪ .‬وفي صحيح مسلم عن‬
‫أبي هر يرة—رضى الل ّٰه عنه—قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬من سأل الناس أموالهم تكثرا ً‪ ،‬فإنما يسأل‬
‫جمرا ً‪ ،‬فليستقل أو ليستكثر«‪.‬‬

628
ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn
In the two Ṣaḥīḥs on the authority of Abū Hurayra, God be pleased with him,
that the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, said, “By Him in
whose hands is my soul, that one of you picks up a rope and goes out collecting
wood on his back is better for you than to come to another man and ask him
[for a handout] for him to give you or withhold.”
{In the Ṣaḥīḥ of Muslim also [Abū Hurayra] said that the Messenger of God,
God grant him blessing and peace, said, “That one of you goes out in the morning and collects wood on his back and gives charity by it and this makes him
self-sufficient from people is better than if he asks another man who may give
or withhold.} This is because the upper hand is better than the lower hand, and
you must begin with your dependents.” Imam Aḥmad [b. Ḥanbal] added, “And
that one takes dirt and puts it in his mouth is better than putting anything illicit
into it.”
In the Ṣaḥīḥ of al-Bukhārī on the authority of al-Zubayr b. al-ʿAwwām, that
the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, said, “That one of you will take
a rope and bring a load of wood on his back, sell it, and thereby God saves your
face by it, is better for you than to beg people for them to give or withhold.”
Also in the two Ṣaḥīḥs on the authority of Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī, God be
pleased with him, who said that some men from among the Helpers [of Medina] asked the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, so he gave them,
then they asked again and he gave them again, then they asked again and he
gave them again, until he had nothing left. He said to them after spending
everything he had, “Whatever goods I have I will not hoard it from you, and
whosoever is modest [and desists from asking] God will cover him up, whosoever seeks to endure God will give him endurance, and none has been given a
gift better than patience.”
ʿAbdallāh b. ʿUmar, God be pleased them both, said that the Messenger of
God, God grant him blessing and peace, said while on his pulpit mentioning
charity, modesty, and asking [for material help], “The upper hand is better than
the lower hand, for the upper hand is the one giving and the lower hand is the
one asking.”
Ḥakīm b. Ḥizām said I asked the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing
and peace, and he gave me, then I asked again and he gave me again. Then he
said, “O Ḥakīm, this wealth is verdant and sweet, whoever takes it with a generous heart it is blessed for him, and whoever takes it with greed he is not blessed
in it, like he who eats but is not sated. The upper hand is better than the lower
hand.” Ḥakīm said that I said, “O Messenger of God, by Him in whose hands
is my soul, I will not take from anyone after you until I leave this world.” [The
Prophet’s First Successor] Abū Bakr used to call him to offer him his stipend
but he would refuse to accept it, as did ʿUmar, God be pleased with him. ʿUmar

‫‪629‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وفي الصحيحين عن أبي هر يرة—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—أن رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ قال‪» :‬والذي نفسي بيده‪،‬‬
‫لأن يأخذ أحدكم حبله فيحتطب على ظهره خير له من أن يأتي رجلا ًفيسأله‪ ،‬أعطاه أو منعه«‪.‬‬
‫]وفي صحيح مسلم عنه أيضا ً قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬لأن يغدو أحدكم فيحتطب على ظهره‬
‫فيتصدق به‪ ،‬و يستغني به عن الناس‪ ،‬خير له من أن يسأل رجلا أً عطاه أو منعه[‪ ،‬ذلك بأن اليد العليا‬
‫أفضل من اليد السفلى‪ ،‬وابدأ بمن تعول«‪ .‬زاد الإمام أحمد‪» :‬ولأن يأخذ ترابا ًفيجعله في فيه خير له‬
‫من أن يجعل في فيه ما حرم الل ّٰه عليه«‪.‬‬
‫وفي صحيح البخاري عن الز بير بن العوام رضي الل ّٰه عنه عن النبي ﷺ قال‪» :‬لأن يأخذ أحدكم حبله‬
‫فيأتي بحزمة من الحطب على ظهره فيبيعها‪ ،‬فيكف الل ّٰه وجهه‪ ،‬خير له من أن يسأل الناس أعطوه أو‬
‫منعوه«‪.‬‬
‫وفي الصحيحين عن أبي سعيد الخدري—رضى الل ّٰه عنه—أن أناسا ًمن الأنصار سألوا رسول الل ّٰه‬
‫ﷺ فأعطاهم حتى نفد ما عنده‪ ،‬فقال لهم—حين أنفق كل شيء بيده—‪» :‬ما يكون عندي من‬
‫خير فلن أدخره عنكم‪ ،‬ومن يستعفف يعفه الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ومن يتصبر يصبره الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وما أعطي أحدٌ عطاء ً خيرا ً‬
‫وأوسع من الصبر«‪.‬‬
‫وعن عبد الل ّٰه بن عمر—رضي الل ّٰه عنهما—أن رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ قال—وهو على المنبر‪ ،‬وذكر الصدقة‬
‫والتعفف والمسألة—‪» :‬اليد العليا خير من اليد السفلى‪ ،‬فاليد العليا المنفقة‪ ،‬واليد السفلى هي السائلة«‪.‬‬
‫رواه البخاري ومسلم‪.‬‬
‫وعن حكيم بن حزام قال‪ :‬سألت رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ فأعطاني‪ ،‬ثم سألته فأعطاني‪ ،‬ثم قال‪» :‬يا حكيم‪،‬‬
‫إن هذا المال خضرة حلوة‪ ،‬فمن أخذه بسخاوة نفس بورك له فيه‪ ،‬ومن أخذه بإشراف نفس لم يبارك‬
‫له فيه‪ ،‬وكان كالذي يأكل ولا يشبع‪ ،‬واليد العليا خير من اليد السفلى«‪ .‬قال حكيم‪ :‬فقلت‪» :‬يا رسول‬
‫الل ّٰه‪ ،‬والذي بعثك بالحق‪ ،‬لا أرزأ أحدًا بعدك شيئا ًحتى أفارق الدنيا«‪.‬‬
‫وكان أبو بكر—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—يدعو حكيما ًإلى العطاء فيأبى أن يقبله منه‪ ،‬ثم إن عمر—رضي‬
‫الل ّٰه عنه—دعاه ليعطيه فأبى أن يقبل منه شيئا‪ ً،‬فقال عمر‪ :‬إني أشهدكم يا معشر المسلمين على حكيم‪.‬‬

630

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

then said, “I make you my witnesses, O Muslims, concerning Ḥakīm, I present to
him his right from this conquest-revenue but he refuses to take it.” Ḥakīm never
took anything from anyone after the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing
and peace, until he died.31 The authenticity of this report is agreed upon.
It is reported from al-Shaʿbī that the scribe of al-Mughīra b. Shuʿba said,
“Muʿāwiya wrote to al-Mughīra b. Shuʿba, ‘Write to me something you heard
from the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace,’ so he wrote
to him, ‘I heard the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, say, “God dislikes three things for you: idle talk, wasting of wealth, and frequent asking.”’ ”
Reported by al-Bukhārī and Muslim.
On the authority of Muʿāwiya, God be pleased with him, who said that the
Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, said, “Do not debase
yourself by soliciting, for by God none of you solicits anything of me and takes
something from me while I am reluctant but that he is not blessed in it.”32 In
another wording, “I am only a treasurer, whomever I give willingly he is blessed
and whomever I give because of his incessant solicitation and greed he will be
like one who eats but is not sated.”
On the authority of Abū Muslim al-Khawlānī, God be pleased with him, who
said “The beloved and trustworthy reported to me—beloved he is to me and
trustworthy he is with me—ʿAwf b. Mālik al-Ashjaʿī who said, ‘We were with
the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, some nine, eight, or
seven of us, he said, “Will you take a pledge with the Messenger of God?” We
had recently pledged our allegiance to him, so we stretched our hands and said,
“We have already pledged allegiance to you, O Messenger of God, what shall we
pledge to you now?” He said, “That you worship God and not associate anything
with Him, the five prayers, and obey,” then he said quietly, “Do not ask people
for anything.” I saw some of them later would not ask anyone for help, even if
their whip fell off their ride, they would not ask anyone to hand it to them, and
pick it up themselves.’”33
Samura b. Jundub, God be pleased with him, reported that the Messenger
of God said, “Solicitation is a cut that a man inflicts upon his face except if
he was asking the ruler or in a matter he cannot avoid.” Al-Tirmidhī recorded
it and graded it acceptable.34 In the Musnad of Imam Aḥmad [b. Ḥanbal] on
the authority of Zayd b. ʿAqaba al-Fazārī who said he entered upon al-Ḥajjāj b.
Yūsuf and said, “May God rectify your affairs, O commander, shall I not report
a report to you that I heard from Samura b. Jundub from the Messenger of God,
God grant him blessing and peace?” He said, “Of course.” He said, “I heard him

31

Bukhārī #1472; Muslim #1034.

‫‪631‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫إني أعرض عليه حقه من هذا الفيء فيأبى أن يأخذه‪ ،‬فلم يرزأ حكيم أحدا ًمن الناس بعد رسول الل ّٰه‬
‫ﷺ حتى توفي‪ .‬متفق على صحته‪.‬‬
‫وعن الشعبي قال‪ :‬حدثني كاتب المغيرة بن شعبة قال‪ :‬كتب معاو ية إلى المغيرة بن شعبة أن اكتب‬
‫إلي شيئا ًسمعته من رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ فكتب إليه‪ :‬سمعت النبي ﷺ يقول‪» :‬إن الل ّٰه كره لـكم ثلاثا‪ ً،‬قيل‬
‫وقال‪ ،‬وإضاعة المال‪ ،‬وكثرة السؤال«‪ .‬رواه البخاري ومسلم‪.‬‬
‫وعن معاو ية—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬لا تلُحفوا في المسألة‪ ،‬فوالله لا يسألني‬
‫أحد منكم شيئا‪ ً،‬فتخرج له مسألته مني شيئا ًوأنا لهكاره‪ ،‬فيبارك له فيما أعطيته«‪ .‬وفي لفظ‪» :‬إنما أنا‬
‫خازن‪ ،‬فمن أعطيته عن طيب نفس فيبارك له فيه‪ ،‬ومن أعطيته عن مسألة وشرهكان كالذي يأكل‬
‫ولا يشبع«‪ .‬رواه مسلم‪.‬‬
‫وعن أبي مسلم الخولاني رضي الل ّٰه عنه قال‪ :‬حدثني الحبيب الأمين—أما هو فحبيب إلي‪ ،‬وأما هو‬
‫عندي فأمين—عوف بن مالك الأشجعي قال‪ :‬كنا عند رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ تسعة ً—أو ثمانية ً أو سبعة ً—‬
‫فقال‪» :‬ألا تبايعون رسول الل ّٰه؟« وكنا حديثي عهد ببيعة—فقلنا‪ :‬قد بايعناك يا رسول الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ثم قال‪:‬‬
‫»ألا تبايعون رسول الل ّٰه؟« فقلنا‪ :‬قد بايعناك يا رسول الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ثم قال‪» :‬ألا تبايعون رسول الل ّٰه؟« قال‪:‬‬
‫فبسطنا أيدينا وقلنا‪ :‬قد بايعناك يا رسول الل ّٰه‪ ،‬فعلام نبايعك؟ قال‪» :‬أن تعبدوا الل ّٰه ولا تشركوا به شيئا‪ً،‬‬
‫والصلوات الخمس‪ ،‬وتطيعوا—وأسر كلمة خفية—ولا تسألوا الناس شيئا ً«‪ ،‬فلقد رأيت بعض أولئك‬
‫النفر يسقط سوط أحدهم فما يسأل أحدا ً يناوله إ ياه«‪ .‬رواه مسلم‪.‬‬
‫وعن سمرة بن جندب رضي الل ّٰه عنه قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬إن المسألةكد يكد بها الرجل‬
‫وجهه‪ ،‬إلا أن يسأل الرجل سلطانا‪ ً،‬أو في أمر لا بد منه«‪ .‬رواه الترمذي وقال حديث حسن صحيح‪.‬‬
‫وفي مسند الإمام أحمد عن ز يد بن عقبة الفزاري‪ ،‬قال‪ :‬دخلت على الحجاج ا بن يوسف فقلت‪:‬‬
‫أصلح الل ّٰه الأمير‪ ،‬ألا أحدثك حديثا ًسمعته من سمرة بن جندب عن رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ؟ قال‪ :‬بلى‪ ،‬قال‬

‫‪Muslim #1038.‬‬
‫‪Muslim #1043.‬‬
‫‪Report graded ḥasan-ṣaḥīḥ.‬‬

‫‪32‬‬
‫‪33‬‬
‫‪34‬‬

632

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

say, ‘Solicitation is a cut that a man inflicts on his face, so whoever wishes can
keep it on his face and whoever wishes can leave it, except if a man asks a man
in authority or in a matter he cannot avoid.’”
Thawbān, God be pleased with him, said that the Messenger of God, God
grant him blessing and peace, said, “Whoever guarantees me one thing I will
guarantee him the Garden.” I said, “I [do].” He said, “Do not ask people for anything.” Thawbān, after this, would drop his whip while riding but never ask
anyone to hand it to him but come down himself and pick it up. This was
recorded by Aḥmad [b. Ḥanbal] and authors of the Sunan.
Ibn Masʿūd, God be pleased with him, reports that the Messenger of God,
God grant him blessing and peace, said, “Whoever is afflicted with destitution
and he brings it before people, his destitution does not cease, whereas one who
brings it before God, it is likely that God will satisfy him either with death or
wealth.” Abū Dawūd and al-Tirmidhī reported it and noted that it is acceptable.35
Sahl b. al-Ḥanẓaliyya said, “ʿUyayna b. Ḥiṣn and al-Aqraʿ b. Ḥābis (two Arab
leaders who entered Islam late and were given wealth) came and asked the
Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, so he satisfied their
requests and told Muʿāwiya to write it. As for al-Aqraʿ, he took his script, wrapping it in his turban, and left, whereas ʿUyayna brought his script to the Prophet,
God grant him blessing and peace, and said, ‘O Muhammad, I see that I carry a
script to my people not knowing what is in it like the scroll of Mutalammis.’36
Muʿāwiya informed the Messenger of God of his statement so he said, ‘Whoever solicits for more when he already possesses what is sufficient for him, he
only increases in fire,’ and in another report, ‘pebbles of fire.’ They said, ‘O Messenger of God, what is sufficient for one?’ and in another report, ‘What is good
enough possession beyond which asking is not fitting?’ He said, ‘The measure
that is enough to feed him for a day and a night,’ and in another report, ‘whatever suffices him for a day and a night.’” This was related by Abū Dawūd and
Imam Aḥmad [b. Ḥanbal].
Ibn al-Firāsī reports that he said to the Messenger of God, God grant him
blessing and peace, “Shall I ask of you, O Messenger of God?” He said, “No. But
if you must ask, ask only of the righteous.” Narrated by al-Nasāʾī.

35
36

Report graded ḥasan-ṣaḥīḥ.
In the account or legend of al-Mutalammis, an Arab poet, he along with his nephew Ṭarafa
was sent with a scroll containing the order to execute them, but he opened it and escaped,
whereas his nephew did not. See “al-Mutalammis” in EI2.

‫‪633‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫سمعته يقول‪» :‬المسائل كد يكد بها الرجل وجهه‪ ،‬فمن شاء أبقى على وجهه‪ ،‬ومن شاء ترك‪ ،‬إلا أن‬
‫يسأل رجلا ًذا سلطان‪ ،‬أو يسأل في أمر لابد منه«‪.‬‬
‫وعن ثو بان—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬من يتقبل لي بواحدة وأتقبل له بالجنة«‬
‫قال‪ :‬قلت‪ :‬أنا‪ ،‬قال‪» :‬لا تسأل الناس شيئا ً«‪ .‬فكان ثو بان يقع سوطه وهو راكب فلا يقول لأحد‬
‫ناولنيه‪ ،‬حتى ينزل هو فيتناوله«‪ .‬رواه الإمام أحمد وأهل السنن‪.‬‬
‫وعن عبد الل ّٰه بن مسعود—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬من أصابته فاقة فأ نزلها‬
‫بالناس لم تسد فاقته‪ ،‬ومن أ نزلها بالل ّٰه أوشك الل ّٰه له بالغنى‪ ،‬إما بموت عاجل أو غنى عاجل«‪ .‬رواه أبو‬
‫داود والترمذي‪ ،‬وقال‪ :‬حديث حسن صحيح‪.‬‬
‫وعن سهل بن الحنظلية قال‪» :‬قدم على رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ عيينة ا بن حصن والأقرع بن حابس‬
‫فسألاه‪ ،‬فأمر لهما بما سألاه‪ ،‬وأمر معاو ية فكتب لهما بما سألا‪ .‬فأما الأقرع فأخذ كتابه فلفه في‬
‫عمامته وانطلق‪ ،‬وأما عيينة فأخذ كتابه فأتى النبي ﷺ بكتابه فقال‪ :‬يا محمد‪ ،‬أراني حاملا إلى قومي كتابا ً‬
‫لا أدري ما فيه‪ ،‬كصحيفة المتلمس‪ ،‬فأخبر معاو ية بقوله رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪ ،‬فقال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬من‬
‫سأل وعنده ما يغنيه فإنما يستكثر من النار—وفي لفظ—من جمر جهنم«‪ .‬قالوا‪ :‬يا رسول الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وما‬
‫يغنيه؟—وفي لفظ‪ :‬ما الغنى الذي لا تنبغي معه المسألة؟—قال‪» :‬قدر ما يغديه وما يعشيه« وفي لفظ‪:‬‬
‫»أن يكون له شبع يوم وليلة« رواه أبو داود والإمام أحمد‪.‬‬
‫وعن ا بن الفراسي أن الف ِراسي قال لرسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪ :‬أسأل يا رسول الل ّٰه؟ قال‪» :‬لا‪ ،‬وإن كنت‬
‫سائلا ًلا بد‪ ،‬فسل الصالحـين«‪ .‬رواه النسائي‪.‬‬

634

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Qabīṣa b. Mukhāriq al-Hilālī (a Companion) said that he incurred a debt and
came to the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, to solicit help concerning it. He said, “Stay until the Alms come to us so we shall apportion some of
it for you.” Then he said, “O Qabīṣa, solicitation is not permissible except for
three: a man who has incurred a loan, who may ask to repay it and no more;
a man inflicted with blight (i.e., crop-failure) that consumed his wealth, it is
permissible for him until he can provide for himself; and a man afflicted with
such destitution that three men of reliable opinion among his people would
say, ‘So-and-so is destitute,’ asking becomes permissible for him until he can
provide for himself. Apart from these, O Qabīṣa, anything acquired by asking is
ill-gotten.” This was reported by Muslim.
On the authority of ʿĀʾidh b. ʿAmr, God be pleased with him, a man came to
the Prophet and asked him and he granted his request. When the men placed
his foot on the doorsill [as he walked out], the Messenger of God, God grant him
blessing and peace, said, “If you all knew what is in solicitation no one would
walk to another soliciting anything.” This was reported by al-Nasāʾī.
Mālik b. Naḍla said that the Messenger of God said, “Hands are three: the
Hand of God is the highest, and hand of the one who gives follows it, and the
hand of he who begs is the lowest; give whatever you do not need and do not be
helpless.” This was reported by Imam Aḥmad [in his Musnad] and Abū Dawūd.
Thawbān relates from the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, that
he said, “Whoever solicits for something that he does not need, it will appear
as a scar of disgrace on his face on the Day of Resurrection.”37
ʿAbd al-Raḥmān b. ʿAwf, God be pleased with him, reported that the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, said, “Three things, by Him in
whose hands is Muhammad’s soul, if I were to swear on then I would: Wealth
does not decrease by charity, so give charity; there is no wrong that a servant
forgives seeking God’s Face except that God raises his ranks by it; no servant
opens the door of begging but that God opens the door of poverty upon him.”
Narrated by Aḥmad [in his Musnad].
Abū Saʿīd al-Khudrī said that his mother sent him to the Messenger of God,
God grant him blessing and peace, to solicit. I came and sat and he faced me
and said, “Whoever avoids solicitation God enriches him, whoever has shame
God covers him, whoever seeks to be sufficient God suffices him, and whoever
solicits while possessing an ounce of gold38 acts importunately.” [Abū Saʿīd]
said that he said to himself, “My she-camel is more in value than an ounce, and
so I did not ask him.” This was narrated by Imam Aḥmad [in Musnad] and Abū
Dāwūd.
37

Aḥmad, Musnad 5:281.

‫‪635‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وعن قبيصة بن مخارق الهلالي‪ ،‬قال‪ :‬تحملت حمالة‪ ،‬فأتيت النبي ﷺ أسأله فيها فقال‪» :‬أقم حتى‬
‫تأتينا الصدقة فنأمر لك بها«‪ ،‬ثم قال‪» :‬يا قبيصة‪ ،‬إن المسألة لا تحل إلا لأحد ثلاثة‪ :‬رجل تحمل‬
‫حمالة ً فحلت له المسألة حتى يصيبها ثم يمسك‪ ،‬ورجل أصابته جائحة اجتاحت ماله فحلت له المسألة‬
‫حتى يصيب قواما ًمن عيش—أو قال‪ :‬سدادا ًمن عيش—‪ ،‬ورجل أصابته فاقة حتى يقول ثلاثة من‬
‫ذوي الحجى من قومه‪ :‬لقد أصابت فلانا ًفاقة فحلت له المسألة حتى يصيب قواما ًمن عيش—أو قال‪:‬‬
‫سدادا ً من عيش—‪ .‬فما سواهن من المسألة يا قبيصة سحت يأكلها صاحبها سحتا ً«‪ .‬رواه مسلم‪.‬‬
‫وعن عائذ بن عمرو رضي الل ّٰه عنه أن رجلا أتى النبي ﷺ فسأله‪ ،‬فأعطاه‪ .‬فلما وضع رجله على‬
‫أسكفة الباب‪ ،‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬لو تعلمون ما في المسألة ما مشى أحد إلى أحد يسأله شيئا«‪ .‬رواه‬
‫النسائي‪.‬‬
‫وعن مالك بن نضلة رضي الل ّٰه عنه قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬الأيدي ثلاثة‪ :‬فيد الل ّٰه العليا‪ ،‬و يد‬
‫المعطي التي تليها‪ ،‬و يد السائل السفلى‪ ،‬فأعط الفضل ولا تعجز عن نفسك«‪ .‬رواه الإمام أحمد وأبو‬
‫داود‪.‬‬
‫وعن ثو بان عن رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ قال‪» :‬من سأل مسألة ً وهو عنها غني كانت شينا ً في وجهه يوم‬
‫القيامة«‪ .‬رواه الإمام أحمد‪.‬‬
‫وعن عبد الرحمن بن عوف—رضي الل ّٰه عنه—أن رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ قال‪» :‬ثلاث‪ ،‬والذي نفس‬
‫محمد بيده‪ ،‬إن كنت لحالفا ًعليهن‪ :‬لا ينقص مال من صدقة فتصدقوا‪ ،‬ولا يعفو عبد عن مظلمة يبتغي‬
‫بها وجه الل ّٰه إلا رفعه الل ّٰه بها‪ ،‬ولا يفتح عبد باب مسألة إلا فتح الل ّٰه عليه باب فقر«‪ .‬رواه الإمام‬
‫أحمد‪.‬‬
‫وعن أبي سعيد الخدري‪ ،‬قال‪ :‬سرحتني أمي إلى رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ أسأله‪ ،‬فأتيته فقعدت‪ .‬قال‪:‬‬
‫فاستقبلني‪ ،‬فقال‪» :‬من استغنى أغناه الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ومن استعف أعفه الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ومن استكفى كفاه الل ّٰه‪ ،‬ومن‬
‫سأل وله قيمة أوقية فقد ألحف«‪ .‬فقلت‪ :‬ناقتي الياقوتة هي خير من أوقية‪ ،‬ولم أسأله‪ .‬رواه الإمام‬
‫أحمد وأبو داود‪.‬‬

‫;‪The original word is awqiya: an awqiya of gold is an ounce, or about 31.75 grams of gold‬‬
‫‪an awqiya of silver is about 112.5 grams of silver.‬‬

‫‪38‬‬

636

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

Khālid b. ʿAdī al-Juhanī (a Companion) reports that the Messenger of God,
God grant him blessing and peace, said, “Whoever obtains from his brother any
good thing without importunacy or solicitation should accept it and not return
it, for that is a provision God has extended to him.” This was reported by Imam
Aḥmad [in Musnad].
This is one of the two meanings of [al-Harawī’s] saying, “One of the conditions of contentment [with God] is to give up importunacy in asking,” and it is
the more fitting of the two, as he coupled it with giving up disputation with the
creation. It would thus mean that he neither disputes with them concerning
his own rights nor demands anything from his rights.
The second meaning would be that one should not be importunate in supplicating [to God] and exaggerate in it, for that diminishes his contentment.
This is correct in one way and not so in another way. It is correct if one supplicates importunately for his short-term needs and desires; if, however, he prays
excessively in asking for something that has His pleasure and nearness, that
does not diminish from his state of contentment at all. In one report it says,
“God loves those who are excessively persistent in supplication.” Abū Bakr the
Truth-lover, God be pleased with him, said to the Prophet, God grant him blessing and peace, on the day of [the Battle of] Badr, “O Messenger of God, you
supplicate excessively to your Lord, your beseeching your Lord is sufficient.”
This persistence or importunacy is the essence of worship.
In the Sunan of Ibn Māja, there is the Hadith of Abū Ṣaliḥ from Abū Hurayra
who said that the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, said,
“God is angry with one who does not ask God.”
If asking pleases Him, doing so with importunacy could not be opposed to
His pleasure.
The reality of contentment is accord with the Exalted in His pleasure; what
opposes His pleasure is the one who is importunate against Him, choosing
someone else as judge over Him in what he does not know whether it pleases
Him or not: like someone who insists upon his Lord about the sainthood of a
person, or demanding that he be given wealth or his need be fulfilled, and this
contradicts His pleasure, for one cannot be certain of God’s pleasure in these
things.
If it is said: The servant may be in great need and supplication with importunacy may be permitted in order that he is inducted into the truly delightful
prayers and begging, humility, and flattery before Him, seeking His nearness
by His names and attributes and His unicity, freeing up his heart for Him, and
cutting off his heart from anyone else. This may not occur without his importunacy in worldly things, shall we say, then, that this importunacy [in devotional
matters] is also disliked?

‫‪637‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫وعن خالد بن عدي الجهني عن رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ قال‪» :‬من جاءه من أخيه معروف من غير إشراف‬
‫ولا مسألة فليقبله ولا يرده‪ ،‬فإنما هو رزق ساقه الل ّٰه إليه«‪ .‬رواه الإمام أحمد‪ .‬فهذا أحد المعنيين في‬
‫قوله‪» :‬إن من شروط الرضى ترك الإلحاح في المسألة«‪ ،‬وهو أليق المعنيين وأولاهما‪ ،‬لأنه قرنه بترك‬
‫الخصومة مع الخلق‪ ،‬فلا يخاصمهم في حقه ولا يطلب منهم حقوقه‪.‬‬
‫والمعنى الثاني أنه لا يلح في الدعاء ولا يبالغ فيه‪ ،‬فإن ذلك يقدح في رضاه وهذا يصح من وجه‬
‫دون وجه‪ ،‬فيصح إذا كان الداعي يلح في الدعاء بأغراضه وحظوظه العاجلة‪ ،‬وأما إذا ألح على الل ّٰه‬
‫في سؤاله ما فيه رضاه والقرب منه‪ ،‬فإن ذلك لا يقدح في مقام الرضى أصلا‪ ً.‬وفي الأ ثر‪» :‬إن الل ّٰه‬
‫يحب الملحين في الدعاء«‪ .‬وقال أبو بكر الصديق رضي الل ّٰه عنه—يوم بدر—للنبي ﷺ‪ :‬يا رسول الل ّٰه‪،‬‬
‫قد ألححت على ر بك‪ ،‬كفاك بعض مناشدتك لر بك‪ .‬فهذا الإلحاح عين العبودية‪.‬‬
‫وفي سنن ا بن ماجه من حديث أبي صالح عن أبي هر يرة عنه قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬من لم‬
‫يسأل الل ّٰه يغضب عليه«‪.‬‬
‫فإذا كان سؤاله يرضيه لم يكن الإلحاح فيه منافيا ًلرضاه‪.‬‬
‫وحقيقة الرضى موافقته سبحانه في رضاه‪ ،‬بل الذي ينافي الرضى أنه يلح عليه‪ ،‬متحكما ًعليه متخيرا ً‬
‫عليه‪ ،‬ما لم يعلم هل يرضيه أم لا‪ ،‬كمن يلح على ر به في ولاية شخص أو إغنائه أو قضاء حاجته‪ ،‬فهذا‬
‫ينافي الرضى‪ ،‬لأنه ليس على يقين أن مرضاة الرب في ذلك‪.‬‬
‫فإن قيل‪ :‬فقد يكون للعبد حاجة يباح له سؤالها فيلح على ر به في طلبها حتى يفتح له من لذيذ مناجاته‬
‫وسؤاله‪ ،‬والذل بين يديه وتملقه‪ ،‬والتوسل إليه بأسمائه وصفاته وتوحيده‪ ،‬وتفر يغ القلب له وعدم تعلقه‬
‫في حاجته بغيره ما لم يحصل له بدون الإلحاح‪ ،‬فهل يكره له هذا الإلحاح وإن كان المطلوب حظا ًمن‬
‫حظوظه؟‬

638

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

It would be said that there are three issues here.
First, he passes into his desire and quest from His desire and His pleasure
with him, making the Lord Almighty a means to his quest, such that it is more
important than Him. This contradicts the perfection of contentment and pleasure with him.
Second, that it opens to his heart the state of begging for His love and knowledge, humility and praise, such that he forgets his worldly need and what opens
to him in the course of his supplication becomes dearer to him than his need
and he loves to persist in that state more than fulfilling his need, and his delight
in it is greater than in the satisfaction of his need. This does not contradict joyful contentment.
One of the knowers said, “Sometimes I have a need for which I ask God,
which opens to me some of the invocations and inner awareness, humility and
flattery before Him, such that I wish that He delays its fulfilment and I stay in
that state.”
According to another tradition, “A servant calls on his Lord so God says to
His angels, ‘Fulfill his need and delay it for I love to hear his supplication,’ and
another one calls and God tells His angels, ‘Fulfill his need and hasten it for I
hate to hear his voice.’”39
Al-Tirmidhī and others record that ʿAbdallāh b. Masʿūd said that the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, said, “God loves to be asked and
the best of worship is to wait for the relaxation [of affliction].” He also reported
from the Hadith of Abū Hurayra who said that the Messenger of God, God grant
him blessing and peace, said, “Whoever wants God to respond to him in calamities should increase his supplication in times of ease.” He also reported from the
Hadith of Anas that the Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace,
said, “Let each of you ask his Lord for his need so much so that he should [even]
ask for salt and even for a shoelace when it breaks.” [Al-Tirmidhī] also has it on
the authority of the son of ʿUmar, God be pleased with them both, that the
Messenger of God, God grant him blessing and peace, said, “God is not asked
for a thing dearer to Him than when He is asked for safety, and the supplication
benefits in what has happened and what has not yet happened, so supplicate,
O servants of God.”
Third, that [his persistent asking God] cuts off his desire from the creation,
and he is attached to his Lord in asking for his needs, making him exclusive in
his beseeching, turning to none other. This may bring a benefit that comes from

39

I have not been able to locate this Hadith except in one late reference, for which see
Madārij(Ṣ), 2035.

‫‪639‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫قيل‪ :‬هاهنا ثلاثة أمور‪:‬‬
‫أحدها‪ :‬أن يفنى بمطلو به وحاجته عن مراده ورضاه عنه‪ ،‬و يجعل الرب تعالى وسيلة ً إلى مطلو به‬
‫بحيث يكون أهم إليه منه‪ .‬فهذا ينافي كمال الرضى به وعنه‪.‬‬
‫الثاني‪ :‬أن يفتح على قلبه—حال السؤال—من معرفته ومحبته والذل له والخضوع والتملق ما ينسيه‬
‫حاجته‪ ،‬و يكون ما فتح له من ذلك أحب إليه من حاجته‪ ،‬بحيث يحب أن تدوم له تلك الحال وتكون‬
‫آ ثر عنده من حاجته‪ ،‬وفرحه بها أعظم من فرحه بحاجته لو عجلت له وفاته‪ ،‬ذلك فهذا لا ينافي رضاه‪.‬‬
‫قال بعض العارفين‪ :‬إنه لتكون لي الحاجة إلى الل ّٰه فأسأله إ ياها‪ ،‬فيفتح علي من مناجاته ومعرفته‬
‫والتذلل له والتملق بين يديه ما أحب معه أن يؤخر قضاءها‪ ،‬وتدوم لي تلك الحال‪ .‬وفي أ ثر‪ :‬إن العبد‬
‫ليدعو ر به عز وجل فيقول الل ّٰه لملائكته‪ :‬اقضوا حاجة عبدي وأخروها‪ ،‬فإني أحب أن أسمع دعاءه‪.‬‬
‫و يدعوه آخر‪ ،‬فيقول الل ّٰه لملائكته‪ :‬اقضوا حاجته وعجلوها فإني أكره صوته‪.‬‬
‫وقد روى الترمذي وغيره عن عبد الل ّٰه بن مسعود رضي الل ّٰه عنه قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬إن‬
‫الل ّٰه يحب أن ي ُسأل‪ ،‬وأفضل العبادة انتظار الفرج«‪.‬‬
‫وروي أيضا ًمن حديث أبي هر يرة رضي الل ّٰه عنه قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬من سره أن يستجيب‬
‫الل ّٰه له عند الشدائد‪ ،‬فليكثر من الدعاء في الرخاء«‪.‬‬
‫وروي أيضا ًمن حديث أنس رضي الل ّٰه عنه أن رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ قال‪» :‬ليسأل أحدكم ر به حاجته‬
‫حتى يسأله المل ِح‪ ،‬وحتى يسأله شسع نعله إذا انقطع«‪.‬‬
‫وفيه أيضا ًعن ا بن عمر—رضي الل ّٰه عنهما—قال‪ :‬قال رسول الل ّٰه ﷺ‪» :‬ما سئل الل ّٰه شيئا ًأحب‬
‫إليه من أن يسأل العافية‪ ،‬وإن الدعاء لينفع مما نزل ومما لم ينزل‪ ،‬فعليكم عباد الل ّٰه بالدعاء«‪.‬‬
‫فإذا كان هذا محبة الرب تعالى للدعاء‪ ،‬فلا ينافي الإلحاح فيه الرضى‪.‬‬
‫الثالث‪ :‬أن ينقطع طمعه عن الخلق و يتعلق بر به في طلب حاجته‪ ،‬وقد أفرده بالطلب لا يلوي‬
‫على ما وراء ذلك‪ .‬فهذا قد تنشأ له المصلحة من نفس الطلب وإفراد الرب بالقصد‪ .‬والفرق‬

640

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

the act of asking. The difference between this and the last point is that in the
former there may open to him something dearer than his need, such that he
does not care about his need. And God alone grants success.

10

Third Level

[Al-Harawī] said,
The third level is contentment with the contentment of God, such that
the servant sees no right to be displeased or pleased on account of his ego
in anything, leading him to give up the arbitrariness and decisiveness of
choice, and give up discrimination even if he was thrown into fire.
This level is higher than the ones before it in his view only because it is the
rank of one who has attained union, passed away from his ego and its attachments into his Lord, and the experience of God’s pleasure has erased for him
any witnessing of his own contentment; he sees that the contentment is God’s
and from Him in reality, seeing his own ego as bound to perish and disappear.
He feels separated from his ego, its attributes, its pleasure and displeasure.
He works to be absent to his being and all its attachments, seeking absolute
nothingness, his being, ego and its attributes disappearing into the being of
his True Patron and His attributes and acts, just as the light of a weak lamp is
lost into the light a full sun. Attending to the pleasure of his Lord he becomes
absent to his own pleasure in His decrees and apportionment. Becoming nothing in this station, he sees no pleasure or displeasure. This annihilation leads
him to give up judging on God in any of His matters, to give up choosing
against His decision. As judgment and choice and their very source disappear, so does the discrimination of the servant. This is the meaning of his
words.
Now there are two issues here. First, this is a state that should be avoided, not
sought after or worked toward. When it occurs to someone, his discrimination
is lost; this state cannot be permanent and sooner or later his discrimination
returns. The one in this state is overwhelmed, either intoxicated from his condition or passed away from his own existence. Perfection is past this station,
which is that his annihilation occurs with respect to his will into the will of
his Lord, such that he subsists in another existence other than his natural existence, which is a purified being that is through God, for God, and with God.
In this state he is accompanied by [the Divine Hadith] “Through Me he hears
and through Me he sees and through Me he strikes.” He is annihilated from

‫‪641‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫بينه و بين الذي قبله أن ذلك قد ف ُتح عليه بما هو أحب إليه من حاجته‪ ،‬فهو لا يبالي بفواتها بعد ظفره‬
‫بما فتح عليه‪ ،‬و بالل ّٰه التوفيق‪.‬‬

‫فصل‬
‫قال‪» :‬الدرجة الثالثة‪ :‬الرضى برضى الل ّٰه‪ .‬فلا يرى العبد لنفسه سخطا ًولا رضىً فيبعثه على ترك التحكم‬
‫وحسم الاختيار‪ ،‬وإسقاط التمييز‪ ،‬ولو أدخل النار«‪.‬‬
‫إنما كانت هذه الدرجة أعلى مما قبلها من الدرجات عنده لأنها درجة صاحب الجمع الفاني بر به عن‬
‫نفسه وعما منها‪ ،‬قد غيبه شاهد رضى الل ّٰه بالأشياء في وقوعها على مقتضى مشيئته عن شاهد رضاه هو‪،‬‬
‫فيشهد الرضى لل ّٰه ومنه حقيقة‪ ،‬و يرى نفسه فاني ًا ذاهبا ًمفقودا ً‪ ،‬فهو يستوحش من نفسه ومن صفاتها‬
‫ومن رضاها ومن سخطها‪ ،‬فهو عامل على التغيب عن وجوده وعما منه‪ ،‬مترام إلى العدم المحض‪،‬‬
‫قد تلاشى وجوده ونفسه وصفاتها في وجود مولاه الحق وصفاته وأفعالهكما يتلاشى ضوء السراج‬
‫الضعيف في جرم الشمس‪ ،‬فغاب برضى ر به عن رضاه هو عن ر به في أقضيته وأقداره‪ ،‬وغاب‬
‫بصفات وجود ر به عن صفاته‪ ،‬و بأفعاله عن أفعاله‪ ،‬فتلاشى وجوده وصفاته وأفعاله في جنب وجود‬
‫ر به وصفاته‪ ،‬بحيث صار كالعدم المحض‪ .‬وفي هذا المقام لا يرى لنفسه رضىً ولا سخطا‪ ً،‬فيوجب له‬
‫هذا الفناء ترك التحكم على الل ّٰه بأمر من الأمور‪ ،‬وترك التخير عليه‪ ،‬فتذهب مادة التحكم وتفنى وتنحسم‬
‫مادة الاختيار وٺتلاشى‪ ،‬وعند ذلك يسقط تمييز العبد و يتلاشى‪ ،‬هذا تقدير كلامه‪.‬‬
‫و بعد‪ ،‬فهاهنا أمران‪:‬‬
‫أحدهما‪ :‬أن هذا حال يعرض لا مقام يطلب و يشمر إليه‪ ،‬فإن هذه الحال متى عرضت له وارت‬
‫عنه تمييزه ولا يمكن أن يدوم له ذلك‪ ،‬بل يقصر زمنه و يطول ثم يرجع إلى تمييزه وعقله‪ ،‬وصاحب‬
‫هذه الحال مغلوب‪ .‬إما سكران بحاله وإما فان عن وجوده‪ ،‬والـكمال وراء ذلك‪ ،‬وهو أن يكون فناؤه‬
‫عن إرادته بإرادة ر به منه‪ ،‬فيكون باقيا ً بوجود آخر غير وجوده الطبيعي‪ ،‬وهو وجود مطهر كا ئن‬
‫بالل ّٰه ولل ّٰه ومع الل ّٰه‪ ،‬وصاحبه هذا في مقام‪» :‬فبي يسمع و بي يبصر و بي يبطش«‪ ،‬قد فني عن وجوده‬

642

ibn qayyim al-jawziyya, madārij al-sālikīn

his nature- and self-bound existence and subsists in this higher, sacred being,
returning to his discrimination and distinction, and his pleasure with the Lord
Almighty and stations of faith. This is a more perfect and higher state than the
annihilation that leaves him like a drunk.
If you ask whether it is possible for one to attain this state without the path
of annihilation and crossing its bridge, I would say that there is disagreement
about it. One group thinks that one cannot attain subsistence and this purified
existence except after crossing the bridge of annihilation, counting it as one of
the necessary parts of the journey to God.
Another group said that it is possible to attain to God without the path of
annihilation, for annihilation in their view is an obstacle, not a necessity, and its
cause is the strength of the incident experience, combined with the weakness
of the site [the seeker] and his excessive effort in summoning [such a state].
The confirmed truth is that he cannot attain this station except after crossing
the bridge of annihilation of his will into the will of his Master. So long as this
annihilation has not occurred to him, he cannot attain that subsistence. As for
the annihilation from his existence, it is neither a precondition nor a condition
for this subsistence. The one who attains this station is pleased with his Lord,
not by virtue of himself but as a favor and grace; [the seeker] being merely a
tool that is being used rather than the [actor] who accomplishes it. He is standing between the witnessing of “Whoever of you wishes to stand fast” and the
witnessing of “And you do not wish except if He wishes, God, the Lord of all
worlds” [81:28–29].
And it is God alone whose help is sought.

‫‪643‬‬

‫‪chapter 32‬‬

‫الطبيعي والنفسي‪ ،‬و بقي بهذا الوجود العلوي القدسي فيعود عليه تمييزه وفرقانه ورضاه عن ر به تعالى‪،‬‬
‫ومقامات إ يمانه‪ ،‬وهذا أكمل وأعلى من فنائه عنها كالسكران‪.‬‬
‫فإن قلت‪ :‬فهل يمكن وصوله إلى هذا المقام من غير درب الفناء وعبوره إليه على غير جسره؟‬
‫قلت‪ :‬اختلف في ذلك‪ ،‬فطائفة ظنت أنه لا يصل إلى البقاء وإلى هذا الوجود المطهر إلا بعد عبوره‬
‫على جسر الفناء‪] ،‬فعدوه لازم ًا من لوازم السير إلى الل ّٰه‪.‬‬
‫وقالت طائفة‪ :‬بل يمكن الوصول إلى الل ّٰه على غير درب الفناء‪ ،‬والفناء عندهم عارض لا لازم‪،‬‬
‫وسببه قوة الوارد وضعف المحل واستجلابه بتعاطي أسبابه‪.‬‬
‫والتحقيق أنه لا يصل إلى هذا المقام[ إلا بعد عبوره على جسر الفناء عن مراده بمراد سيده‪ ،‬فما‬
‫دام لم يحصل له هذا الفناء فلا سبيل له إلى ذلك البقاء‪ .‬وأما فناؤه عن وجوده فليس بشرط لذلك‬
‫البقاء ولا هو من لوازمه‪.‬‬
‫وصاحب هذا المقام هو في رضاه عن ر به بر به لا بنفسه‪ ،‬فيرى ذلك كله من عين المنة والفضل‬
‫شاء َ م ِنك ُْم َأن ي َْستقَ ِيم َ﴾‪،‬‬
‫مستعملا ًفيه‪ ،‬قد أقيم فيه‪ ،‬لا أنه قد قام هو به‪ ،‬فهو واقف بين مشهد ﴿م َن َ‬
‫ب ال ْعاَ لم َي ِنَ﴾ ]التكو ير‪ ،[29–28:‬والل ّٰه المستعان‪.‬‬
‫ومشهد ﴿و َم َا ت َش َاء ُونَ ِإ َلّا َأن ي َش َاء َ ال َل ّـه ُ ر َ ُ ّ‬

Glossary
Note: For a more complete glossary, see glossary in volume one, and generally consult
indexes in both volumes.
Exegetes (mufassirūn)
– Abū l-ʿĀliya Rufayʿ b. Mihrān al-Riyāḥī (d. 93/712) of Basra. A scholar of the Successor’s generation, reportedly born toward the end of the Prophet’s life, client of a
woman from Banū Riyāḥ who manumitted him. He was a major Qurʾan reciter of
his generation who reportedly recited to ʿUmar b. al-Khaṭṭab thrice, and was senior
to al-Ḥasan al-Baṣrī. He was known for his exegesis, piety, trustworthy in Hadith. In
a curious report, a certain ʿAbd al-Karīm Abū Umayya visited him wearing a woolen
tunic (ṣūf ) to which he remarked, “This is the way of the monks (ruhbān); when
Muslims visit each other, they dress up.” Siyar, 4:213.
– Al-Baghawī, Abū Muḥammad Ḥasan bin Masʿūd al-Baghawī (d. ca. 510/1117). He is
also known as al-Farrāʾ, author of Maʿālim al-tanzīl, a work on Qurʾanic exegesis. He
was a Shāfiʿī jurist, traditionist, and exegete, who hailed from a place called Bāgh
near the Afghan city of Herat, hence his name. See Siyar 19:439.
– Al-Ḍaḥḥāk b. Muzāḥim. Abū Muḥammad al-Ḍaḥḥāk b. Muzāḥim al-Hilālī (d. 102
or 106), originally from Transoxania (Balkh), known for his renunciant piety and
knowledge of Qurʾanic exegesis, but of debated reputation in Hadith—al-Bukhārī
and Muslim do not report from him but the other four do; his status as a Successor
(one who met with and learned from the Companions) is also generally disputed.
Al-Dhahabī calls him truthful but unreliable in Hadith.
– Al-Kalbī. A Kufan scholar of Qurʾanic tafsīr and grammar, Akhbārī (tribal folklorist),
Muḥammad b. al-Sāʾib Abū l-Naḍr al-Kalbī (d. 146/763); Sunni Hadith critics reject
him as a Shīʿī and unreliable in ḥadīth. See Siyar 6:248.
– al-Kisāʾī. Abū l-Ḥasan ʿAlī al-Kisāʾī (d. 189/805), an early Qurʾanic scholar of Persian extraction, known as the Imām of the Kufans in grammar (naḥw); he was the
transmitter and eponym of one of the canonical recitations of the Qurʾan. Siyar
9:131.
– Mujāhid b. Jabr Abū al-Ḥajjāj al-Makkī al-Aswad (d. ca. 104 or 107). He was a client of
al-Sāʾib a Companion from Banū Makhzūm. Mujāhid was a distinguished Successor,
who learned and transmitted exegesis and other hadith from Ibn ʿAbbās and others.
See Siyar, 4:449.
– Qatāda b. Diʿāma (d. 118/). He was a noted scholar of Qurʾanic exegesis and Hadith,
from Basra, known for his immaculate memory and vast collection of knowledge
(that is, opinions of Companions and Successors, their mutual disagreements about
such questions, about Qurʾan and practical questions), generally held in high esteem

646

glossary

by the Sunni Traditionalists for his piety, memory, understanding, and integrity, even
though he held Qadarite views. Siyar 5:269.
– Al-Suddī. Ismāʿīl b. ʿAbd al-Raḥmān (d. 127/745). He was a freedman (mawlā) of a
woman Companion Zayban b. Qays from Quraysh, of Kufa, was a popular exegete,
who got his name presumably from his wont to sit at the threshold (sudd) of the
mosque and explain the Qurʾan. Although his reputation as a narrator is quite mixed,
and he is accused of rāfiḍī tendencies, his opinions are extensively reported in the
exegetical literature, including Tafsīr al-Ṭabarī the most comprehensive record of
such opinions. See G.H.A. Juynboll, “al-Suddī,” in EI2.
– Ṭāwūs b. Kaysān. A Yemeni scholar of Persian origin, a close companion and disciple
of ʿAbdallāh b. ʿAbbās, known for his mastery of command and prohibition in the
Qurʾan, met and learned from some fifty Companions. He was held in high esteem
and known for his worship and integrity.
– Al-Wāḥidī. Abū al-Ḥasan ʿAlī al-Wāḥidī (d. 468/1076), a leading Shāfiʿī exegete from
Nishapur, the author of a well-known treatise Asbāb al-Nuzūl (The Occasions of Revelation), identified by one scholar as the last of the Nishapuri school of exegesis. He
was a student of a popular exegete al-Thaʿabī (d. 427/1035)—both he and al-Wāḥidī
are criticized by Ibn Taymiyya for transmitting weak traditions. Al-Wāḥidī’s major
work, referred to here by Ibn al-Qayyim is al-Basīṭ (The Large Commentary). See
Walid Saleh, “The Last of the Nishapuri School of Tafsīr: Al-Wāḥidī (d. 468/1076) and
His Significance in the History of Qurānic Exegesis,” Journal of the American Oriental
Society 126.2 (2006).
Ibn al-Qayyim’s works
– Rawḍat al-muḥibbīn wa-nuzhat al-mushtāqīn (The Garden of Lovers and the Promenade of Those Who Yearn), also known as Qurrat ʿuyūn al-muḥibbīn, it discusses
love in a theological vein. See Holtzman, “Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya.”
– al-Kalām ʿalā masʾala al-samāʿ, ed. Rāshid ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz al-Ḥamad (Riyadh: Dār alʿĀṣima, 1409), a treatise on the prohibition of music; extends over 500 pages in
published form.
qaḍāʾ wa-qadar (decree and predestination). Qaḍāʾ is literally “final judgment” and
qadar is “measuring out.” When combined into one expression, these two words have
the overall meaning of the Decree of God, both the eternal Decree (the most frequent
meaning of qaḍāʾ) and the Decree given existence in time (the most frequent sense of
qadar). Other translations are possible: for example, qaḍāʾ, predetermination (usually
eternal but according to some schools operating within time); qadar, decree (usually operating within time but according to some schools eternal) or fate, destiny, in
the sense of determined or fixed. It is also possible to use qaḍāʾ alone for Decree in
its broadest sense and define qadar more precisely as existential determination. The

glossary

647

expression combining them is in general use and has become a kind of binary technical term of Muslim theology and kalām.
Reality (ḥaqīqa). The word ḥaqīqa (lit., reality), has a particular meaning in the Sufi
discourse, opposed to the Law (sharīʿa), and is hence capitalized in translation: Reality.
Zindīq (heretic). This term was used by Muslim authors to refer to pseudo-Muslims who
were thought to have kept some pre-Islamic beliefs and worked to undermine Islam;
it was applied in particular to followers of Manicheanism, which was a heretical tendency in Zoroastrian Persia. Literally, the Persian root of zindīq may have mean “fire
or spark,” and, according to recent speculation, was a distortion of an Aramaic word
ṣaddiq, which referred to clandestine Manichaean believers. From its Persian origin,
the word came to be used in the Islamic period to those who expressed similar ideas,
and expanded it to include atheists or agnostics. See F.C. De Blois, “Zindīq,” in EI2, 11:511;
Ovadia, 49n71.

Index
abad 142, 143
ʿAbdallāh b. Masʿūd 12, 58, 80, 110, 130, 178,
192, 374, 448, 470, 604, 606, 610, 632,
638
ʿAbdallāh b. Salām 10
ʿAbdallāh b. ʿAbbās 34, 58, 76, 174, 178, 188,
198, 250, 282, 302, 362, 394, 410, 438,
540, 612, 624
ʿAbdallāh b. ʿAmr 402, 536
ʿAbdallāh b. ʿUmar 118, 446, 626, 628
ablution 500, 524
Abraham 2, 48, 80, 82, 340, 410, 418, 420,
518, 572
abstinence 14, 86, 212, 220, 224, 232, 234,
236
Abū al-Dardāʾ ʿUwaymir 218, 596
Abū Bakr 10, 22, 114, 158, 282, 394, 476, 628,
636
Abū Dharr al-Ghifārī 218, 532
Abū Musā al-Ashʿarī 114
acknowledge 184, 324
ʿĀd 572, 580
admonition 2, 24, 26, 28, 30, 34, 42
adultery 118, 130
aghrāḍ 34
Aḥmad b. Ḥanbal 114, 214, 216, 444, 486,
628, 630, 632
alcohol 158, 302
ʿAlī b. Abī Ṭālib 60, 111, 216, 250, 360, 394,
532, 594
All-hearing (divine name) 70, 318, 446
allies (God’s) 4, 14, 34, 42, 70, 76, 106, 134,
136, 212, 342, 404, 410, 420, 424, 506,
570, 606
All-knowing (divine name) 18, 130, 342, 378,
568
All-merciful (divine name) 178, 186, 206, 212
All-wise (divine name) 130, 378, 568
analogy 124, 326, 356, 360, 476, 478
Anas b. Mālik 132, 368, 412, 614, 638
angels 6, 10, 11, 42, 66, 236, 342, 394, 438,
488, 506, 536, 566, 570, 594, 616, 638
anger 12, 28, 122, 276, 286, 470, 490, 492,
502, 606, 608, 622
annihilation 62, 66, 70, 72, 74, 88, 94, 96,
144, 176, 184, 242, 244, 254, 256, 274, 278,

282, 294, 300, 304, 330, 332, 404, 406,
476, 482, 540, 640, 642
anthropomorphism 358, 360
Antichrist 284
anxiety 146, 148, 434, 470, 492, 606, 610
audition (listening) 104, 136, 140, 142
Avenger (divine name) 566
awe 10, 152, 158, 160, 162, 166, 168, 182, 234,
236, 288, 294, 336, 510
azal 142, 143
ʿazm 78
backbiting 122
Baghawī, al- 76, 199, 358
Bāqillānī, al- 558, 560
bashfulness 246
Basīṭ, al- (divine name) 190
batūl 248, 249
beauty 26, 94, 110, 114, 122, 136, 150, 216, 240,
294, 496, 566
beggar 186, 446
belief 30, 42, 78, 128, 312, 330, 440, 470, 478,
566, 602, 610
benevolence 48, 288, 584, 606
Benevolent (divine name) 272, 274
Bilāl b. Rabāḥ 390
Bishr al-Ḥāfī 416, 432, 532
Bisṭāmī, Abū Yazīd al- 66, 206
cadaver 50
carrion 54, 218, 300, 302, 444, 524
casuistry 96, 302
causality 176, 274, 364, 408, 422, 424, 426,
442, 464, 526
Causer (divine attribute) 16, 416, 418,
438
cauterize 410
contemplation (station) 18, 20, 24, 26, 34,
36, 105, 244, 246, 290
contentment (station) 132, 211, 232, 244,
252, 264, 278, 286, 384, 416, 430, 470,
508, 522
contraction 152, 464
contrition 2, 8, 570, 582
corporealism 362
corruptors 40, 44

index
covenant 6, 58, 238
customs 292, 438, 526
dance 112
Ḍaḥḥāk, al- 230, 536
Daqqāq, Abū ʿAlī al- 420, 498, 534
Dārānī, Abū Sulaymān al- 162, 170, 214, 232,
268, 370, 432, 602, 618
David (prophet) 4, 114, 216, 338
demonstration 28, 42, 108, 130
deontological 278, 402, 404, 616
devil 42, 50, 54, 282, 314, 324, 370, 374, 384,
400, 402, 412, 566, 570
devotion (station) 8, 12, 68, 74, 118, 124, 126,
190, 248–250, 252, 254, 266, 288, 300,
308, 352, 388, 400, 476, 524, 578
devotions 32, 190, 470
Dhū al-Nūn al-Miṣrī 162, 216, 316, 416, 496,
532
disciplining (station) 90, 92, 94, 186, 292,
382, 498
disclosure 254, 378, 386
diversion 112, 116, 126, 132, 400, 472
dominion 194, 274, 276, 422, 454, 458, 518,
566, 572, 594, 596, 606
doubt 44, 62, 64, 68, 70, 80, 82, 98, 108, 130,
134, 144, 148, 174, 184, 200, 202, 226, 230,
294, 298, 322, 348, 364, 386, 416, 424,
470, 476, 524, 562, 588, 610, 620
dread 161, 180, 182
dream 52, 230, 268, 530
ecstasy 105, 114, 124, 126, 128, 134, 166
ecstatic 156, 166, 186, 266, 268, 286, 318, 326,
338, 362
effacement 538
ego 12, 30, 34, 62, 66, 82, 84, 86, 90, 102, 130,
132, 140, 154, 172, 180, 182, 186, 200, 204,
206, 216, 224, 230, 232, 244, 246, 250,
252, 254, 262, 264, 266, 280, 282, 286,
292, 296, 302, 310, 314, 318, 326, 328,
332, 336, 352, 354, 356, 370, 372, 374,
376, 378, 382, 384, 388, 396, 400, 404,
406, 416, 418, 428, 442, 444, 452, 454,
492, 496, 498, 500, 504, 506, 510, 512,
524, 528, 540, 546, 568, 582, 588, 592,
596, 600, 626, 640
elite 18, 28, 66, 68, 80, 84, 88, 92, 94, 96, 98,
106, 140, 142, 152, 166, 168, 216, 220, 221,

649
228, 244, 284, 328, 330, 338, 350, 414,
420, 436, 438, 440, 442, 458, 476, 534,
540, 546
endurance 244, 280, 486, 500, 502, 504,
506, 510, 512, 516, 520, 568, 586, 602,
628
envy 90, 117
epiphany 282, 450
erasure 74, 246, 314
erotic 130
escape 20, 582
estrangement 526
eternal 16, 48, 72, 142, 144, 188, 328, 330, 392,
406, 528, 554, 600
eternity 32, 36, 38, 142, 143, 212, 330, 394,
404, 406, 424, 472, 548, 554
ethics 211, 301
etiquette 150, 156, 168, 242, 362, 376, 382,
604, 606
evanescence 36, 330, 404
exaltation 234, 236, 336
faith 6, 10, 12, 18, 22, 40, 42, 52, 60, 62, 76,
80, 82, 84, 94, 96, 100, 102, 104, 108,
124, 126, 134, 138, 146, 150, 154, 164, 166,
176, 194, 196, 204, 222, 236, 238, 240,
244, 260, 282, 294, 298, 320, 324, 330,
340, 344, 374, 378, 384, 390, 396, 410,
412, 414, 418, 430, 436, 438, 440, 442,
452, 456, 468, 470, 476, 480, 486, 488,
490, 500, 506, 508, 510, 524, 542, 548,
550, 552, 554, 556, 562, 564, 586, 590,
592, 596, 600, 604, 606, 610, 618, 624,
642
falcon 160
fanāʾ, see annihilation
Farrāʾ, Yaḥyā b. Ziyād al- 204, 624
fasting 10, 54, 60, 234, 300, 302, 384, 402,
530, 616, 618
fear 30, 72, 102, 146, 158, 160, 172, 174, 220,
262, 274, 288, 510, 512
feminine 122, 124
Firdaws 98
fiṭra, see natural disposition
flattery 184, 186, 636, 638
fleeing (station) 76, 78, 80, 84, 88, 160, 162,
278, 292, 298
forbearance 2, 262, 276, 566
fornication 118, 130, 158

650
friendship 278, 530
fright 160, 161, 498
frivolity 106, 264, 266, 278, 280, 282, 314,
320, 322, 326, 328, 444
Fuḍayl b. ʿIyāḍ, al- 180, 366, 370, 532, 590,
592, 612
Gabriel 116, 316, 418, 562, 566
garment 212, 230, 232
gluttony 54
gnat 228
gospel 69, 306
gossip 60
grace 10, 16, 22, 40, 98, 120, 138, 140, 148, 152,
170, 184, 206, 260, 262, 264, 274, 276,
280, 284, 286, 290, 312, 320, 372, 374,
380, 396, 430, 462, 464, 506, 526, 568,
610, 618, 642
gratification 388, 606
grave 104, 284, 296, 526, 604, 612
grief (station) 46, 48, 132, 134, 135, 146, 148,
150, 152, 156, 164, 470, 502, 586, 592,
604, 606, 610
guidance 20, 22, 24, 42, 108, 142, 144, 154,
176, 182, 424, 440, 452, 524, 588, 624
Ḥassān b. Thābit 116, 122
hayba, see awe
ḥazan 146
ḥ-dh-w 70
Ḥīrī, Abū ʿUthmān al- 148, 164, 214, 532, 534
holding fast (station) 58, 62, 64, 66, 68, 74,
200, 400
hoopoe 290
hope (station) 12, 14, 16, 24, 30, 34, 36, 38,
72, 76, 78, 80, 136, 138, 152, 170, 214, 242,
244, 250, 260, 262, 264, 266, 270, 272,
274, 276, 278, 280, 286, 288, 290, 292,
294, 298, 300, 304, 318, 338, 340, 346,
424, 426, 428, 434, 502, 514, 516, 524,
528, 550
ḥurma 334
hypocrisy 6, 84, 110, 112, 148, 158, 162, 180,
196, 238
ḥ-z-n 146
Iblīs 56, 162, 562, 566, 568, 570, 580, 596
Ibn Taymiyya 16, 18, 32, 46, 149, 164, 184, 186,
188, 212, 240, 320, 322, 396, 398, 422,

index
430, 434, 444, 482, 490, 492, 494, 502,
522, 530, 592, 610
Ibrahīm b. Adham 232
iḥrām 52
inebriation 286, 352, 362
infatuation 136
inspiration 42, 128, 142, 394, 568, 574
integrity 211, 610
intellect 24, 30, 32, 34, 324, 346, 358, 508,
512
intercourse 224, 302, 350, 424
ishfāq 172
ʿiṣma 58
isolation 248, 526
Israelites 40, 148, 149, 336, 490, 502, 522,
592, 602, 604, 608
ittiḥādī 62
iʿtiṣām, see holding fast (station)
jabrites 580
Jacob 148, 502, 518
jāhilī 117
Jahmites 96, 360, 422
Jesus 248, 306
jidd 78
jihad 12, 48, 154, 596
jinn 64, 104, 362, 412
Job 502, 518
John 78, 338
Joseph 76, 77, 492, 518, 596
joy 24, 114, 132, 244, 530, 576
joyful contentment (station) 416, 430, 476,
522, 554, 584, 586, 590, 604, 608, 614,
616, 638
See also contentment
Junayd b. Muḥammad, al- 160, 178, 212,
214, 268, 316, 370, 384, 404, 494, 528,
530
jurists 190, 308, 334
justice 40, 56, 66, 140, 264, 276, 324, 470,
480, 562, 594, 596, 622
Juwaynī, Abū l-Maʿālī al- 358
Kalam 360, 408, 476
Kashf 366
khabt 198
Khārijites 402, 594
khashya 158, 160, 162
Khawwāṣ, Ibrahīm al- 318, 450, 496

651

index
khawf 158, 160, 162, 354
kh-l-ṣ 366
khushūʿ 178, 180, 182
Kirmānī, Shāh [b. Shujāʿ] al- 262
knowers 18, 46, 68, 98, 108, 160, 178, 180, 184,
202, 214, 216, 228, 240, 306, 310, 316,
320, 322, 338, 340, 352, 384, 396, 430,
450, 456, 464, 474, 528, 586, 598, 604,
606, 612, 616, 618, 620, 638
libertines 120
licenses 298, 300, 302
listening (station) 100, 102, 104–106, 108,
110, 114, 118, 120, 122, 124, 134, 136, 138,
140, 142, 144
litanies 104, 190, 268
loathing 110, 204, 348, 404, 564, 566, 580,
586, 608
love 4, 10, 14, 28, 46, 48, 50, 66, 70, 72, 74, 96,
98, 102, 108, 110, 112, 118, 120, 122, 130,
132, 134, 136, 162, 164, 168, 170, 182, 202,
204, 214, 216, 226, 236, 240, 244, 250,
256, 260, 264, 266, 270, 272, 274, 276,
278, 284, 286, 288, 292, 294, 296, 300,
320, 322, 336, 338, 348, 350, 352, 362,
368, 372, 382, 388, 390, 392, 396, 414,
434, 446, 462, 486, 494, 498, 504, 506,
508, 512, 516, 524, 528, 530, 532, 540,
542, 544, 550, 556, 558, 560, 562, 564,
568, 572, 576, 584, 590, 592, 602, 604,
606, 616, 618, 620, 638
lover 74, 96, 108, 168, 220, 224, 256, 266, 272,
274, 276, 292, 294, 336, 384, 390, 392,
434, 504, 506, 508, 552, 584, 602, 616,
618, 620
Luqmān 163, 604
lust 162, 172, 200, 276
magnanimity 496, 528
Manāzil al-sāʾirīn 4, 18, 24, 60, 62, 69, 76, 90,
136, 150, 164, 172, 180, 198, 220, 234, 264,
290, 292, 298, 310, 318, 334, 372, 382,
398, 436, 458, 468, 474, 504, 534
Makḥūl 370
Makkī 604, 606, 614
Mālik b. Anas 60, 308, 356
manṭiq 233
Mary 248, 306
meek 198, 564

meekness (station) 182, 198, 200, 202, 204,
242, 436, 586
Muḥāsibī, Ḥārith al- 14
Mujāhid 34, 58, 198, 204, 230, 394, 438
mujassima 362
mukāshafa, see unveiling
mukhbit/ūn, see meek
Munificent (divine name) 274, 286, 326,
380
Muqātil 34, 60, 204
murābiṭ 498
musk 214
Mutalammis, al- 632
Muwaṭṭa, al- 60
mystical 104, 105, 126
mystico-ascetic 105
nabīdh 302
Nakhaʿī, Ibrāhīm al- 198, 230
Nāṣibite 362, 594
nations 40, 114, 288, 512
natural disposition 2, 596
See also fiṭra
nature 2, 28, 56, 68, 92, 102, 112, 120, 124, 152,
182, 200, 204, 324, 346, 352, 358, 404,
414, 434, 532, 554, 570, 574, 582, 584,
592, 596, 642
Noah 518, 572, 580
noetic 406
Nuʿmān b. Bashīr, al- 220, 221
oath 562
obedience 4, 6, 60, 76, 106, 118, 134, 136, 138,
150, 174, 238, 262, 272, 310, 318, 368,
380, 384, 390, 394, 402, 492, 494, 500,
506, 510, 512, 516, 518, 524, 540, 544,
550, 562, 576, 578, 580, 582, 584, 594,
620
oft-returning (station) 2, 4, 10, 12, 18, 20, 434
omens 410
ontological 94, 278, 402, 404, 406, 552, 556,
616
ostentation 176, 184, 186, 192, 312, 336, 354,
370, 402
outwardly 68, 90, 156, 180, 182, 314, 318, 322,
326, 330, 370, 406, 416
pagan 452, 542
Pardoner (divine name)

434

652
passion 108, 122, 134, 178, 434, 476
patience (station) 10, 50, 132, 134, 138, 148,
198, 244, 288, 296, 418, 470, 472, 486,
488, 490, 492, 494, 496, 498, 500, 502,
504, 506, 508, 510, 512, 514, 516, 518,
520, 522, 530, 540, 546, 596, 606, 612,
616, 626, 628
perfection 42, 46, 62, 68, 70, 84, 88, 96, 140,
254, 262, 276, 290, 328, 352, 424, 518,
538, 542, 566, 568, 572, 586, 614, 638,
640
perseverance 32, 296, 370, 472, 490, 492,
506
Pharaoh 338, 456, 460, 580
philosopher 233, 408, 422
piety 60, 80, 108, 180, 234, 240, 286, 316, 368,
384, 490, 506
pilgrimage 10, 48, 52, 310, 334, 384, 452
polytheism 4
purification (station) 14, 68, 86, 90, 148, 184,
186, 188, 200, 230, 250, 254, 304, 310,
314, 322, 328, 332, 366, 368, 370, 372,
380, 382, 390, 450, 476, 510, 542, 584,
596
Qādir, al- (divine name) 138
Qurʾan 20, 28, 30, 32, 34, 36, 40, 42, 58, 60,
100, 104, 106, 108, 110, 112, 114, 122, 132,
134, 136, 140–142, 146, 212, 246, 248, 249,
266, 344, 354, 368, 386, 412, 458, 460,
486, 542
Qushayrī, al- 68, 149, 268, 496
Qūt al-qulūb 592, 604, 606, 614
Rāfiḍa 360, 362, 594
Raḥmān, al- (divine name) 163, 216, 634
rajaz 116
rancor 50
rational 154, 322, 414, 478
realities 2, 18, 82, 84, 194, 226, 228, 254, 318,
324, 384, 400, 404, 418, 430, 434, 480,
524, 526, 594, 618
reality 12, 16, 32, 40, 50, 72, 74, 76, 82, 84, 88,
102, 110, 112, 138, 140, 144, 182, 202, 214,
218, 228, 252, 258, 274, 286, 288, 298,
304, 312, 322, 326, 330, 348, 358, 364,
374, 378, 380, 402, 404, 406, 408, 418,
420, 428, 432, 434, 438, 448, 454, 480,
482, 484, 494, 504, 506, 516, 524, 528,

index
530, 544, 550, 562, 564, 574, 576, 580,
594, 602, 610, 636, 640
reason 60, 100, 102, 104, 122, 124, 218, 222,
226, 252, 308, 324, 326, 352, 358, 362,
406, 448, 450, 476, 478, 480, 504, 506,
552, 558, 566
rectitude 42, 108, 396, 408, 520
refinement (station) 234, 382, 384, 386, 388,
390, 504
reflection 24, 34, 40, 106, 134, 142, 152, 290
reform 4, 8, 90, 230
refuge 48, 54, 76, 108, 146, 162, 180, 226, 346,
372, 412, 442, 454, 540, 556, 570
relegation (station) 420, 428, 430, 432, 454,
456, 458, 460, 462, 468, 474, 526
reliance 72, 80, 174, 211, 216, 244, 250, 260,
264, 288, 300, 348, 408, 410, 412, 414,
416, 418, 420, 422, 424, 426, 428, 430,
432, 434, 436, 438, 440, 442, 444, 448,
450, 452, 454, 456, 458, 460, 462, 468,
474, 480, 490, 506, 520, 522, 524, 526,
550, 586, 590, 602, 604, 626
remembrance (station) 10, 18, 20, 24, 26, 36,
46, 48, 50, 60, 72, 152, 160, 164, 244, 328,
596, 600
renegade 248
renunciant 68, 80, 214, 216, 218, 445, 496,
602
renunciation (station) 126, 210, 212, 214, 216,
218, 220, 224, 226, 228, 236, 244, 306,
406, 418, 518, 532, 618, 620
repentance 2, 4, 8, 26, 86, 138, 236, 238, 244,
262, 290, 310, 412, 510, 524, 550, 562,
570, 572, 580, 582, 590, 616
ribāṭ 500
riḍā 211, 546
See also joyful contentment
rukhṣa 300, 301
Sabeans 360
ṣabr 492, 498, 500
sacrifice 52, 228, 290, 568
Sahl al-Tustarī 76, 180, 234, 370, 416, 418,
460, 608, 632
saint 444, 458, 608
sainthood 444, 636
Salmān the Persian 218
samāʿ, see listening (station)
Saʿīd b. al-Jubayr 230

index
Saʿīd b. Masʿada al-Akhfash 199
scrupulousness (station) 211, 212, 230, 232,
234, 236, 238, 240, 242, 244, 618
servanthood 256, 482, 614, 616
Shāfiʿī, Muḥammad b. Idrīs al- 166, 216, 238,
360
shame 30, 48, 334, 376, 378, 608, 626, 634
Shaykh al-Islam 16, 32, 46, 164, 184, 186, 212,
240, 264, 290, 322, 360, 388, 396, 398,
434, 490, 492, 502, 522, 530, 610
shepherding (station) 306, 308, 310, 312,
314, 584
Shiblī 214
Shuʿayb (prophet) 28
Sībawayh 199
ṣiddīq 476, 494
See also Truth-lover
signs (of God) 2, 18, 20, 22, 24, 30, 34, 36,
40, 104, 114, 158, 178, 210, 246, 276, 408,
410, 442, 488, 490, 506, 532, 570, 572,
612
silk 120, 230
sincerity 4, 6, 60, 76, 78, 90, 132, 192, 202,
244, 250, 262, 264, 266, 300, 306, 312,
366–368, 400, 445
singing 50, 108, 110, 112, 114, 116, 118, 120, 122,
124, 130, 132, 134, 302
slave 190, 236, 250, 266, 272, 302, 336,
348, 374, 384, 444, 446, 452, 492, 542,
584
slave-girl 108, 236, 302
sleep 32, 34, 44, 56, 206, 224, 290, 402
socialization 48
sorcerer 64
sorrow 78, 132, 150, 586
soul 8, 10, 12, 32, 40, 44, 50, 56, 68, 74, 78, 90,
92, 114, 118, 122, 164, 182, 184, 186, 204,
206, 212, 226, 230, 232, 236, 238, 240,
242, 250, 252, 272, 278, 310, 312, 322,
326, 348, 352, 360, 367, 386, 390, 396,
398, 428, 468, 490, 492, 498, 502, 522,
530, 534, 536, 538, 550, 576, 582, 586,
628, 634
standing firm (station) 20, 394, 396
submission (station) 60, 64, 69, 72, 104, 178,
182, 188, 264, 266, 278, 280, 324, 326,
366, 388, 390, 460, 474, 476, 478, 480,
482, 484, 490, 506, 524, 556, 562, 592,
600, 602, 606, 612, 620

653
Sufi 69, 82, 84, 94, 104, 105, 112, 114, 150, 154,
168, 214, 262, 268, 384, 460, 482, 602,
604, 612, 614
Sufism 68, 105, 206, 212, 254, 301, 392, 418,
450, 460, 496, 530, 532
Sufyān al-Thawrī 68, 212, 216, 232, 396, 598,
612
Sufyān b. ʿUyayna 502, 612, 632
supererogatory 70, 548, 618
superstition 414
supplication 32, 154, 192, 250, 274, 282, 284,
288, 340, 342, 422, 424, 430, 610, 612,
636, 638
surrendering 252, 278, 420, 436, 438, 442,
458, 478, 482, 484
synagogues 272
tabaṣṣur 18
tabattul, see devotion
tadhakkur 18
tafahhum 18, 248
tajrīd 81
tajsīm 362
Tamattuʿ 52
tambour 108, 112
taqlīd 524
taṣabbur 498
taṣawwuf 68, 72, 126, 163
tasbīḥa 194
tashabbuʿ 312
tattoo 110
tawakkul, see reliance
Ṭāwūs 230
Thamūd 572, 580
thankfulness 42, 218
Thawbān 396, 397, 448, 632, 634
theologians 350, 476
trembling (station) 160, 161, 172, 174, 176
trusting (station) 211, 410, 412, 414, 416, 418,
424, 426, 428, 430, 432, 434, 436, 438,
440, 442, 448, 450, 452, 454, 458, 460,
474, 480, 506, 522, 526, 550, 586, 602,
604
truthfulness 78, 86, 90, 184, 230, 244, 264,
268, 312, 370, 380, 392, 396, 450, 554,
602
Truth-lover 12, 22, 86, 124, 158, 282, 284, 338,
348, 394, 494, 636
See also ṣiddīq

654
Uḥud 350, 452
ʿUmar b. al-Khaṭṭāb 36, 114, 128, 134, 172, 174,
180, 394, 412, 490, 534, 638
ʿUmar b. ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz 606, 612
ʿumra 52
unseen 172, 178, 304, 430, 476, 478, 572, 608
unveiling 70, 82, 96, 128, 142, 144, 154, 184,
186, 202, 252, 254, 316, 326, 366, 470,
480, 482, 518, 526, 582
ʿUthmān b. ʿAffān 114, 216, 394
vain 110, 120, 170, 252, 284, 340, 442, 478
venerating (station) 334, 354, 356
veneration 354, 356, 550
vice 50, 240, 288, 402, 568, 606
vigilance 14, 164, 176, 316, 332, 356

index
virtue 10, 228, 268, 296, 404, 506, 550, 574,
590, 602, 642
virtues 66, 268, 502, 584, 604
Wāsiṭī, Abū Bakr al- 530, 532
watchfulness (station) 316, 318, 322, 326,
328, 330, 362, 486, 510, 600
Zajjāj, al- 334, 624
Zam Zam 432, 434
ẓann 260
Zechariah (prophet) 56, 338
zindīq 404
zuhd 210, 211
zulfā 338

