Www.IslamicBooks.Website

'%sfiya

& Cfttrbiya '
Pu'li/ication and Cultivation
And The Need Which The
Muslims Have For Them

The G reat scholar, the Muhaddith

Abu Abdir-Rahman Muhammad Naasir-ud-deen Al-Albaanee
(d. 1420 H ijra- May Allah have mercy on him)

Translated By

Abu Yusuf, Sagheer Ibn Abdir-Rasheed Al-Kashmeeree

Www.IslamicBooks.Website

'crasfiya & CTarh~JO ' . Cf>urijicalion & Cullivalion - and !lx need which !he CJt!IIJiims have for !hem
+-© 2004/1425 Ar-Risala
All Rights Reserved. No parr of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, phorocopying, recording or otherwise without the express written
permission of the copyright owner.

r; ~)G.:~~ J.::i; ~J ~~ y.-; 0\5- ~)

(i~r ~J ~~~ !J

( So whoever hopes for the Meeting with his Lord, let him
work righteousness and associate none as a partner in the
worship of his Lord.)
The Noble Qm·'an- Soorah ai-Kahf, Aayah 110

Translation

Abu Yusuf, Sagheer Ibn Abdir-Rasheed
Al-Kashmeeree

Cover design

Ar-Risala

Layout

Ar-Risala

Published by

Ar-Risala
London
Ar-risal @ lycos.co.uk

Printing

lmpeks
020 8808 6111

Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'To:ifiyo & 'Torbiyo · 'Puri/icolion & Cullioolion · and !lx! need which !lx! 91/us/ims Moo /or llx!m

+---

91 guide lo 5llrabic lenns used in !his book
( ~ ) - May He be glorified and exalted. A term used when
mentioning Allah, the creator of the heavens and the earth
( ~ )-

May the peace and blessings of Allah be upon him. A term
used when mentioning the last Prophet to humanity,
Muhammad Ibn Abdullah (~)

( ~\ ) - Upon him be peace. A term used when mentioning all
other Prophets or Angels
( ~ ) - May Allah be pleased with him. A term used for a
companion of the Prophet Muhammad (~)

Www.IslamicBooks.Website

·<fA</t!Ja & Cf(!.-biga · - "Purijblion & CJ!Iioolion • tmd the ne.:>d which I& 91/u.<blrn M~ /or lkm

----- -- - - - ----.
~-

Www.IslamicBooks.Website

.,.._ &
· CTaifi!f/J

%rh(tfll · • cpuri/!colivn & Cullioo!ion - and !he need which the CJtlu../im..1 hove for them

Conlenls
Contents......... ....... .. ..... .. ................................ ................. 5
Translators Introduction.................................................. 7
A Brief Biography of the Author.....................................

11

Tasfiya and Tarbiya.......................... ...............................

17

Appendix 1..... ......................................................... .......

51

Appendix 2.....................................................................

55

Glossary............................. .............................................

61

5
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· CJC,1f..qa & 'Tarhifra · . 'Puriflcalion (~ Gt!linalion

tmd !he n.ccd which lb..- <JIIu.•hins hm><' for !hem

+---------------------------

Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· <Tosf1Ja & cri1rhiya · <Purification & Cultioalion · and lbc need which lh<! Cfllu.~lirns haw for !hem

+-

--------

•

q;.tJns!tJfors 9ntroduclion
All praises are due to Allah, we praise Him, we seek His aid and we
seek His forgiveness. We seek refuge in Allah from the evil of our
souls and from the evil of our actions. Whomsoever Allah guides,
then there is no one to misguide him and whomsoever Allah leaves to
go astray, then there is no one to guide him. I bear witness that that
none has the right to be worshipped except Allah, alone, without any
partner and that Muhammad is His slave and Messenger.
To proceed;
The present treatise which is before you is a translation of 'At-Tasfiya
Wa Tarbiya Wa Haajatttl-Mmlimeen Ilayhimaa>l (Purification and
cultivation and the need which the Muslims have for them) by the
great scholar of our time, Sheikh Muhammad Naasir-ud-deen AlAlbaanee (may Allah have mercy on him). The treatise was originally
a lecture which was given by the sheikh at the Sharee'ah Institute in
Amman, Jordan, in 1393 Hijra2 .
In a time of so much confusion and chaos amongst the Muslims, the
Muslim communities - especially those in the West - are in dire need
of authentic and realistic direction to rescue them from the diseases
and afflictions which befall them on a daily basis. This direaion can
1

Al-Maktaba-tul-Islaameeyah, Amman, 1" Edition, 1421 - {Translator}
Silsaltul-Ahaadeech Ad-Daeefah Wal-Maudooah, Vol. 2 (introduction), Riyadh,
Maktabat-ul-Maaa'rif, 2"d Edition, 1420/2000- [Translator)
2

7
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

' CT(I.if/..l{tJ & 'Tarb(l{a' . cpunjicalion & Cullioollon - and !IN ll<'cd which !he Cfllu.<!trns bm><J }or 1/xm

only come by way of the true scholars who firmly hold on to the
Qur'an and Sunnah as understood by the early righteous generations.
Without doubt, the author of this treatise was from amongst these
scholars, and I hope that by presenting this beneficial treatise, the
English speaking Muslims can implement this scholarly direction and
seek to practice their religion as it was revealed, inshallah.
Throughout the course of this book I have added some explanatory
footnotes which I have highlighted with the term '[Translator}' to
make some of the text easier to understand and provide
supplementary information. I have also used some of the footnotes of
Saleem Al-Hilaalee, a student of knowledge from Jordan, which were
taken from his book 'Al-Fawaaid al-Hisaan min hadeethi Thawbaan tadaa'ee al-umum' (Exquisite benefits from the hadeeth of Thawbaan
['The nations will gather together.. :W. Although Saleem AlHilaalee is not a reference point for the issues which concern the
Muslims in the West, I have included some of his explanatory
footnotes on this text because they add some detail and clarity which
would otherwise be unknown. Some of his footnotes have also been
used to form appendix 2, which clarifies some of the doubts regarding
this very important subject matter. All footnotes by Al-Hilaalee have
been highlighted with '(Saleem Al-Hilaalee}'. All unmarked footnotes
are from the sheikh himself In addition, I have added a further
appendix (No.1) which throws more light on the issue of 'tasfiya'
(purification) and 'tarbiya' (cultivation) as well as a brief biography of
the sheikh so that the Muslims can make themselves aware of their
scholars.
In conclusion, I would like to thank my wife, Umm Yusuf, for her
help in the initial translation of this beneficial work as well as our
brother, Abu Abdullah Muhammed Akhtar Chaudry (from
Madeenah University), for his help in translating a few of the
expressions in this work which were difficult for me.
3 Casablanca, Daar-lbn Affaan, 1sc Edition, 1422/2001

8
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

... -

· CJ'<kifi!la & 'Tarblj{C · - 'Purificalion & Cullivolio11 · a11d lh~ 11~1Yd wh.!ch IM !)1/whin.< havC' /or lkm

May Allah make this work a means of guidance for all those who seek
to look for alternative methodologies in delivering the Muslims from
their problems. May He - free is He from all imperfection - make this
work purely for His sake and add it to our scales of good deeds on the
Day of Judgement:

( The Day when neither wealth nor children will
avail, except (for) the one who comes to Allah with a
sound heart) (Surah Ash-Shu'araa 26:88)
May the peace and blessings of Allah be upon His final Messenger,
Muhammad, his family, his companions and all those who follow
their way until the last day.

Abu Yusuf
london
17'h R.amadaan 1425 Hijra/31" Ocrober 2004 CE

9
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

.

· 'ta..ifiya & 'Tarbiya · - 'Puri}fcalion & Cul!iuali<>n • and /he need rvbic:h /~ 'Jlfu,fim.~ haoa for !hem

------

Www.IslamicBooks.Website

'<Ta..•fi!ta & 'Ttirhrya · - 'Purifica!ion & Cul/i()(}/fon · and !be need wbkh !he Cfl!uslirm bave for lbcm

....

91 CJ3rief CJ3iography of lhe 9/ulhor

4

He is the Sheikh, the muhaddith of this time, the rev1ver of the
religion, the suppressor of innovations, the sheikh of Islam:
Abu Abdir-Rahman Muhammad Naasir-ud-deen Bin Nooh Najaatee
Bin Aadam Al-Albaanee.
He was born in the year 1332 Hijra/1914 CE in the city of
Ashkodera, the capital of Albania at that time. He was brought up in
a poor but religious family. His father, Al-Haaj Nooh Najaatee, had
studied and graduated from the sharee'ah institutes of Istanbul, the
capital of the Ottoman caliphate, and had returned to Albania as a
scholar. He was considered as one of the major hanafee scholars of
Albania during that time and the people would refer back to him and
learn from him.
After Albania was overtaken by the atheist secularists under the
leadership of Ahmed Zogo, Al-Haaj Nooh fled with his family to
safeguard his religion to Damascus, modern day Syria. At that time,
sheikh Al-Albaanee was just nine years old.

4

This brief biography is taken from various biographies of the sheikh, primarily
'Kawkabah Min Aaimmarul-Huda Wa Masaabeeh Ad-Duja' (A group from
amongst the imaams of guidance and the lamps of gloom) by Dr. Aasim Bin
Abdillah Al-Qaryootee (1 >~Edition 1420/2000)- (Translator)

11

Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'Ta_,fiya & 'Tarbiya · <J>urificolfon & Cullioalion - and !he ll<!<.!d which lb.., Cfl/u.<lims baa.' for !hem

As a child in Damascus, the sheikh completed his initial education
and learnt the Arabic language and became very proficient in it. He
chen learnt from his father the science of tajweed (of the Qur'an), the
science of morphology of the Arabic language and the fiqh of the
hanafee madhhab. He also learnt from other hanafee sheikhs who
were friends of his father, such as sheikh Saeed Al-Burhaanee, from
whom he learned the science of Arabic rhetoric.
The sheikh's interest in the science of hadeeth began when he
purchased a copy of 'Al-Manaar' magazine which addressed the issue
of weak narrations which were found in famous books' . Soon, the
sheikh began to specialise in the field of hadeeth and its related
sciences. The sheikh's study of the Prophetic ahaadeech, led him to
turn away from the blind following of madhhabs and he openly called
to the Qur'an and Sunnah as understood by the salaf (the pious
predecessors). Although he was often opposed by the local sufi imams
and innovators, the sheikh didn't fear the blame of the blamer and
carried on calling to the correct way. He was also encouraged by some
of the noble scholars of Damascus who urged him to continue such as
sheikh Muhammad Bahjatul Baitaar, sheikh Abdul-Fattah Al-Imaam
and sheikh Tawfeeq Al-Barzah (may Allah have mercy on them). The
reputation of the sheikh's knowledge and da'wah was so great, that
the great historian and muhaddith of Aleppo, Muhammad Raaghib
At-Tabaakh (may Allah have mercy on him) even requested to meet
him. And when he did meet the sheikh, he was so impressed by him
that he wanted to give the sheikh his permission to narrate from him
(which he did) with his chains of narration which go back co the
Prophet (~). This was whilst the sheikh was very young, around the
age of 20 or so.
, Although the articles in Al-Mannar magazine helped to direct the sheikh
towards the study of hadeeth, this didn't stop the sheikh from speaking the
truth about the editOr of the magazine, Muhammad Rasheed Rida. In a number
of his works the sheikh refuted Muhammad Rasheed Rida on his modernist
interpretations of Islam. - [Translator]

12
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· CTa..•f«<a & CTarbiyn ' - C!Junficalion & Cu!lfoalion - and lb.: need wblcb !he Cflluslirn..l have for them

.....

--+

As for the sheikh's trade, then originally he set out to be a carpenter,
but when he found that it was taking up too much of his time, he
decided to find another profession. He then learnt the art of clock and
watch repair from his father and became very skilled in it and became
famous for it. He opened up his own shop and derived his earnings
through it. Along with the emigration of his father to Damascus, the
sheikh considered his profession to be the second great blessing which
Allah had favoured him with as it allowed him time to study and
research. Thus, the sheikh was known to sometimes close his shop
and head for the famous library of Damascus, 'MakatabutuDhaahireeyah', where he would study. Sometimes he would remain in
the library for over twelve hours, often arriving before the employees
and leaving well after they had left. Such dedication made the library
authorities grant the sheikh his own room for study and his own key
to access the library before normal opening hours. This is something
which has not been granted to anyone else in the history of the
famous library. During his time at the library, the sheikh had
unlimited access to many rare manuscripts which were not to be
found anywhere else in the world and as a result he authored many
useful works, many of which are still unpublished.
After a while the sheikh started monthly da'wah journeys to the
various cities of Syria and Jordan as well as giving regular classes on
various famous books of aqeedah and fiqh. When some of his books
appeared in print, the sheikh was invited by the grand mufti of Saudi
Arabia - Muhammad Bin Ibraheem Aala-Sheikh (may Allah have
mercy on him) - to come and teach hadeeth in the famous Islamic
university of Madeenah. The sheikh taught there for three years, from
1381H to 1383H. Mter this he returned to his studies at
Makatabutu-Dhaahireeyah. Throughout his life, the sheikh was asked
to undertake high positions on the boards and committees of various
universities around the Muslim world, but he very graciously excused
himself due to his knowledge-based commitments.

13
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'Tasftya & %rhiya' - cpuriftcalion & GJ/Iivalion- and lbG need which !he 9'!/us/im.s baiX! for !hem

+Throughout his life he visited many countries to gtve da'wah.
Amongst them were Egypt, Morocco, Qatar, Kuwait, the Emirates,
Spain, Germany and England.
During his life the sheikh faced many trials and tribulations and was
forced to emigrate from Syria to Jordan, then Syria again, then
Lebanon, then the Emirates and then finally back to Jordan where he
lived his last days. Attempts were made on his life and he was also
imprisoned, with one of his spells of imprisonment placing him in the
same prison in Damascus as that of the great scholar of Islam, Taqiud-deen Ahmed Ibn Abdul-Haleem Ibn Taymeeyah (may Allah have
mercy on him).
Apart from being known with the knowledge that he possessed, the
sheikh was known for his beautiful manners and humility towards the
people. He was a man who was without arrogance and he would find
no problem in retracting from his mistakes and then thanking those
who had advised him and pointed his errors out to him. Despite the
extreme poverty and material hardships which he faced in his early
life, he was someone who was very generous and charitable. Not only
was he a scholar, but he was also a dedicated worshipper of Allah(£).
He was known to spend long periods of time in his voluntary prayers
and very rarely did he leave out the optional fasts on Mondays and
Thursdays.
His connection to the salafee scholars of our time is well known and
many of them have praised him. At the head of them was the great
scholar, the sheikh of Islam, sheikh Abdul-Azeez Ibn Abdullah Ibn
Baz (may Allah have mercy on him) who said:
'I do rzot know of anyone rmder the sky who is more knowledgeable of the
hadeeth of the Messenger of Allah (~)than sheikh Naasir'.

14
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

''Tasfiya & cTarbiya · . tPuri}icalion & G'ul!ioalion . and fix! need which !be Wuslims have /or !hem

During the course of his life the sheikh wrote, annotated and checked
over 200 works, with many of them running into many volumes.
Amongst them are his two priceless works 'Silsalatul-Ahaadeeth-AsSaheehah Wa Shayun Min Fiqhihaa Wa Fawaaidihaa' (A series of
authentic ahaadeeth and something from their understanding and
their benefits) and 'Silsaltul-Ahaadeeth Ad-Daeefah Wal-Maudooah Wa
Atharohaa As-Sayyiah Fil-Ummah' (A Series of weak and fabricated
ahaadeeth and their evil effect upon the ummah).
As a result of the efforts of the sheikh through his works and his
da'wah, he was awarded the King Faisal International Award for
Islamic studies in 1419/1999 for his 'valuable efforts in the service of
the Prophetic hadeeth'.
On Saturday 22"d Jumaada Ath-Thaaneeyah 1420 Hijra/2"d October
1999 CE, after the Asr prayer, sheikh Muhammad Naasir-ud-deen
Al-Albaanee breathed his last breath, at the age of around 88, and
passed away in the city of Amman, the capital of Jordan. In his will,
he bequeathed his huge entire library to the University of Madeenah,
because of the fond memories he had of that place whilst working
there. He left behind him seven sons and six daughters.
May Allah have mercy upon his soul and reward him with AlFirdaws, the highest place in paradise. Aameen.

15

Www.IslamicBooks.Website

''Tasfign & 'Torhiya · <Punjicaflon & Cullionlion · and !he need which !he 9Ylwlim,l have for !hem

.....

Www.IslamicBooks.Website

.cra.sfiyo & <Torbiyo' • 'l>unji'colion & Cufliooliorl - ond !he need which !he <Jlluslims hooc for !hem

%sfiya and Cfarbiya
J. J.
.

...
....

...

$

0

,_

. Ill

'/
·

,.J

,.

""

,

""

0

....

.

0 / 0

~

....

""

(Jl

J\; ~ ;;. ) ,~ ~ J\; ~I
...

"

"'

,

;p

,.

...

/

,.

,,~ )
...

i f .W'-1 ;)_r> )

J).?

,

J J

;'0

:;;

J J .... 0

,.

~ )

...

0~

...

't

$

$

,

,

0

....

II ;~ ,\

...

/ ..

.w ~

... ..,

o-4-! ;;. dJ~I
.,:.J~
,,
,.
,

...

$

' . II

""·

J

,

,

""

d.:....A;i

::,_. )

,

,

IM 0i ~i) ' ~ ~_? 'j ~~) ~~ 'jl ~1 'j 0i ~4.\i) ,~ ~;)0.
/

/

All praises are due to Allah, we praise Him, we seek His aid and we
seek His forgiveness. We seek refuge in Allah from the evil of our
souls and from the evil of our actions. Whomsoever Allah guides,
then there is no one to misguide him and whomsoever Allah leaves to
go astray, then there is no one ro guide him. I bear witness that that
none has the right to be worshipped except Allah, alone, without any
partner and that Muhammad is His slave and Messenger.

( 0 you who believe, fear Allah as He should be
feared and do not die except in the state of Islam)
(Surah Aali-Imran 3: 102)

17
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

' 'Tasjlya & 'Tarbiya' · 'Purificalion & Cuflioalion · and tha Mad tohtch lha 9YiuJiims have for them

....

( 0 mankind, fear your lord who created you from a
single person and from it He created its wife and
from them both He created many men and women.
And fear Allah through whom you demand your
mutual rights and do not cut ties with the wombs
that bore you. Indeed Allah is ever an All-Watcher
over you) ( Surah An-Nisaa 4: 1)

( 0 you who believe, fear Allah and speak the truth.
He will direct you do righteous deeds and forgive
you of your sins and whosoever obeys Allah and His
Messenger, then indeed he has achieved a great
achievement) (Surah Al-Ahzab 33: 70-71)

~~ ~ ~ ~Jj, ~.J,, ~ :, ,JJ, f% i~' P>- j~ :J;.; cf
II

,

"'

,

,

y J '~~ ~~ y J ,4-f~~ !;.~\ ? ) '~J ~\) ~
,,

)\S\ d 4J')(.;:,

""

.. , ,

18
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

rP J.

,. , ,

y J ,4J')(p ~~,
~....

...

'CTasfiyn & CTarbiyn' Cf>urijicalion & Cul!ioalion - and fix! need mhich lha 91/u,<linM haoe for !hem

Indeed, the best of speech ts the speech of Allah and the best of
guidance is the guidance of Muhammad (~). The worst of affairs are
the novelties and every novelty is an innovation. Every innovation is
misguidance and every misguidance is in the hellfire.
To proceed;
So today we - as all of you know - are in a time in which the Muslims
have reached a certain point; (a point) which cannot get worse for the
Muslim who believes in Allah and the last day, in terms of
humiliation and subjugation tO others. Thus, due to the sensitivity of
everyone amongst us about this prevailing humiliation - which is
unfortunately upon all the Islamic lands and all the different classes of
the people - we are always and forever asking one another in our
societies - the general and the specific- and in our assemblies about
the reason which has led the Muslims to this evil despicable state.
(We ask what has lead the Muslims to) this insulting and shameful
condition and what is the real reason for them reaching this rock
bottom degradation from the humiliation (upon them). Likewise, we
also ask one another as to what is the cure and remedy, so that we are
capable of being saved from this humiliation and sadness. Opinions
are diversifying and observations are multiplying, and everyone is
coming with a methodology or path which in his opinion is the
solution to this problem and the cure for this dilemma.
And I believe that this problem is something which the Prophet (~)
mentioned, described and made clear its cure as in some of his
narrations which are established from him. From these narrations is
his (~) saying:

19
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'Ttlif~ta & <Tarbiya · · cpurificalion & Cul/il)(J/ion · and fhe n"cd which !he! Cjlft,,<lims htme for !hem

''When you deal in eena and you hold onto the tails of
cows and you are content with agricuit1~re and yor~
abandon Jihaad, Allah will inflict humiliation upon
you and will not remove it until you return to your
religion". 6
So, we find that in this hadeeth - despite its conciseness - there is a
mention of the disease which had spread out until it surrounded the
Muslims. Thus, the Messenger of Allah (~) mentioned two types of
the disease as an example and not just to restrict it to these two only.
The First type of this disease: - is that the Muslims have fallen into
some of the forbidden actions deceptively, with the knowledge that
they are forbidden - and this is the underlying factor in his (;i) saying:

''When you deal in eena . .. ".
Eena, as it is known from the books of fiqh, is a type of transaction
whose prohibition is indicated by this hadeeth. Despite this, some of
the scholars - not to mention other than them - have held that this
transaction is permissible. An illustration of eena is if a man buys any
commodity from a trader e.g . a car. He buys the car for a price which
is paid in instalments over a fixed period of time. Then he sells the car
back to the one who sold it to him, but for a price less than that for
which he bought it originally. However, this time it is in exchange for
cash and the original seller- now the buyer- pays a cash payment less
than the instalments and the debt by which the car was bought. So,
in order for this car to be sold - for example - for 10,000 lira7 on
credit, the buyer would then carry out the transaction for 8000 lira
with the original seller, therefore registering a surplus of 2000 which
he still has to fulfil.
6

7

As-Saheehah No 11
Lira - The currency used in Syria - (Translator}

20
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'To.ifiya & 'Tarbiya · - (Puri/icalion & Clll!iotJ!ion - ond fix! need which !he Cflluslims hnvc for lkm

+This surplus is riba (usury/interest). Thus, it is obligatory upon the
Muslim - the one who has heard the aayaats of Allah (~) and the
ahaadeeth of the Prophet (;i) which prohibit riba - that he does not
make lawful this type of eena transaction whilst there is a surplus
there to be fulfilled. And this is because this surplus is clear riba.
However, some of the people have deemed the permissibility of this
because it comes under the category of buying and selling. They have
drawn their conclusions from the generalities which show the
permissibility of trade, such as the well known aayah :

( ... Allah has permitted trade and forbidden riba .. .)
(Surah Al-Baqarah 2:275).

So they said: 'This is buying and selling and there is no problem if there is
an increase or decrease!'. However, the reality is that the buyer who
bought for 10,000 on credit and then sold for 8000 in cash, indeed
his intent behind this was to but obtain the 8000. And when he knew
that this seller - a Muslim in his estimation - would not lend him the
8000 (in exchange for 8000 given back later) for the sake of Allah
alone, then indeed he intended only to take a surplus from that.
Thus, both of them have deceptively made this surplus lawful in the
name of trade.
So, the Messenger of Allah (~) was first of all, one who clarified for
the people, as our lord the Blessed, the Most High has said:

( And We have revealed to you the reminder so that
you may clearly explain to the people what has been

sent down to them) (Surah An-Nahl 16:44).

21
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'Ta..jtya & 'Tarbiya · - 'Purification & Cu!lioalion · and !be mxd mhkh the 9>7u,,fims lxme for them

Secondly, he was as described by our Lord the Blessed, the Most High
in His statement:

( ... with the believers (he is) full of pity and mercy)
(Surah At-Tauba 9: 128).

From his (~) pity and mercy, was that he notified us about the
ambushes of shaytaan's deception which are in store for humanity,
and he (~) warned us from falling into the snares of shaytaan, as is
mentioned in many narrations. From these narrations is the subject
matter at hand. So, when he (~) said:

"When you deal in eena ... "
he meant when you make lawful what Allah has made forbidden with
the lowest type of deception and call it trade. However, the reality is,
that this (calling it trade) is actually an excuse and an incurrence of
debts in exchange for a surplus - and this is clear riba.
So, the Messenger of Allah <m> warned us in this hadeeth from falling
into the likes of this deception in making lawful what Allah has made
forbidden. And this is more dangerous than a Muslim falling into the
forbidden things knowingly, because (when he does so ), it is hoped
from him that one day he will return to his lord and repent - and this
is because he knows that what he is doing is forbidden. However, if
the evil of his action was made pleasing to him due to a certain reason
- be it a false interpretation or a far-reaching ignorance - then he will
think that there is nothing wrong with his action. Naturally, it will
not then occur to him that one day that he will have to repent to

22
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

. 'Tosf(w' (ti (Tt~rhiya . - (Purijicalio" & C,ffioahon

and lb.· need whicb the 'fllu.,fims haoc for !hem

--

-+

Allah (~) . The danger of the forbidden thing which is made lawful
in thought and in belief, is far more severe than the (danger of the)
open forbidden thing. Thus, the one who consumes riba and knows it
is riba and believes it is riba - despite the fact that he makes war upon
Allah and His Messenger as in the text of the aayah8 - his danger is
consequently more insignificant than the one who consumes riba
believing that he is consuming something lawful. This is like the
example of one who drinks an intoxicant believing that it is
forbidden, with it being hoped from him that he will repent to Allah
(~). As for the one who drinks the intoxicant believing - due to some
reason - that it is a lawful drink, then this is more dangerous than the
former. And this is because he will never imagine making repentance
from it as long as he misunderstands the ruling of this affair. 9
The Messenger of Allah (~) mentioned the eena transaction in this
hadeeth - as we have mentioned from the onset - in order to set a
specific example without restricting it to this alone. So, he (~)
indicated that the consequences of every forbidden action committed
8

And that is the saying of Allah:

(O' you who believe, fear Allah and give up what remains
from riba, if you are believers. And if you do n't, then take
notice of war from Allah and His Messenger ... )
(Surah Al-Baqarah 2:278-279) - (Translator)
9

I (sheikh Al-Albaanee) say: And this is like innovation, for it is more dangerous
than the sin which is known ro be a sin by the one who commits it.

This saying of the sheikh has precedence from the scholars of the salaf such as
Sufyan Ach-Thawree who said; 'lnn()Vation is more beloved to lblees than sin. A sin
may be t'epented from, bttt inn()Vation is not repented from' (Reported by Al-Laalikaaee
in Sharh-Usooli-I'ciqaadi-Ahl-is-Sunnnah-wal-Jammah No.238, Vol. 1, page
149, Riyadh, Daar Taybah, 8'h Edition, 1423/2003) - [Translacor)

23
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'Tllifi!ID & "Tarbiya · (Puri(icalion & Culfioolion · and tfx. need which liN 9Yfn,fim.l have for !hem

-+
by a Muslim - which is made lawful for him due to some kind of
interpretation - will be that Allah (~) will humiliate him. And when
this (making lawful what Allah has forbidden) spreads and circulates
amongst the Muslims, Allah will humiliate them (too) because of it.
Then he(~) mentioned the second type (of this disease): -which
is from the things which all the people share in, with the knowledge
that these things oppose the sharee'ah. So, when he (:fi) said:

'When you deal in eena and you hold onto the tails of
cows and you are content with agriculture ... ",
then he meant; when you busy yourselves with running after the
vanities of the world and gaining sustenance with the excuse that
Allah (~) ordered us with running after this sustenance. Thus, the
Muslims exaggerate in this and they have forgotten what Allah has
enjoined upon them from the obligatory actions. They are amused
with running after agriculture and stock farming and that which
resembles them by way of making profit. This has made them forget
what Allah has made obligatory upon them from the obligatory
duties. And he (~) mentioned as an example of these obligatory
duties, jihaad in the path of Allah. So, he (~)said:

24
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

' 'Ta.ifiya & <Tarbiya · · Cf>urifical[on & Cul!ivalion · and !h~ need which !he <Jrluslims lxma /or !ham

..--

--+
''When you deal in eena and you hold onto the tails of
cows and you are content with agriculture AND YOU
ABANDON }IHAAD, Allah will inflict humiliation
upon you and will not remove it until you return to
yot4r religion".

This hadeeth is from the signs of Prophethood as you can see. And
indeed, this humiliation has become a fact amongst us as is
unfortunately visible. It is obligatory upon us that we acquire the
remedy from this hadeeth after the disease has been described along
with the humiliation it will produce. Indeed, we have hung on
persistently to the illnesses which have led us to the disease; which is
none other than humiliation. Therefore, it is upon us that that we
return to the application of the remedy which the Messenger of Allah
(~) described and which he made clear, that if we return to it, Allah
(~)will lift this humiliation from us.
The people read this hadeeth and they listen a great deal to his (~)
statement:

11

•••

until you return to your religion".

They think that the return to this religion is a simple matter. As for
me, then I see that the return tO this religion requires - as it is said
amongst us:

to 'shrttg the shoulders ' 10 .
10
This expression from the lands of Shaam (The area comprising modern day
Syria, Jordan, Lebanon and Palestine) means that the return to the religion

requires effort. - [Translator}
25
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'TmfifiO & crorhi!Jll · - cpurf/fcolion & Cullioah'on - and IN need which IN 91/u~/ims hove /or !hem

...,_,...

.

And that is because all of us know that this religion has been attacked
by many attempts to change many of its realities. Thus, some people
have managed to achieve the likes of this change or distortion, with
some of it being known amongst many of the people and some of it
not. This is in opposition to the general masses who see certain
matters - some belief related and some subsidiary fiqh issues - as (all)
being from the religion. However, these issues have nothing to do
with the religion and the preceding example, being the first reason
(for humiliation) mentioned by the Messenger of Allah (ti) in this
hadeeth ("When you deal in eena ... ), is not far from us. The
transaction of eena is something which is not accepted or known with
the majority of the people as being forbidden. Rather, there still exist
many scholars in some of the Islamic lands - those lands which we
hope will be the fortress of Islam and far from being influenced with
what has influenced other Islamic lands - who have given verdicts for
the transaction of eena; a transaction which involves the deception of
making riba lawful. This is just one of the examples from the
numerous examples which those who occupy themselves with Islamic
fiqh are aware of. This type of transaction - coupled with its
prohibition by the Messenger (~) and the fact that he placed it as the
reason for the Muslims falling into humiliation - is just one of dozens
of examples which show what we have mentioned;

And that is, that it is obligatory upon us to understand this
religion again in light of the Qur'an and the Sunnah.
Whilst this is so, we also point out that there exist scholars out there
who are making permissible some of the things which have been
made forbidden by a clear text from the Sunnah. Our intent behind
this is not to attack or take from the knowledge of the one who has
made permissible what the hadeeth has forbidden and rebuked.
Rather, we want to advise the Muslims and to co-operate with all of
them -especially those who occupy themselves with the Islamic fiqh by understanding the deviation which has befallen some of the people

26
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

' Cfa.!}iya & 'rarbr}JO · 'Purificalion & Cullioalion - tmd IN 11c12d which lb..· 9'1/uslrim have for them

---

...

due to whatever reason. And this is by returning to the decision of the
noble Qur'anic aayah which is known amongst all of us. However,
how few are those who strive for its application. This aayah is the
saying of Allah, the Blessed, the Most High:

r~-~ 01 ...J~):, JJ1 J1 ~_,~J <J- J ~j8 0~~
"

,..

""

""

~

""'

~tL_,u ~f)~~~ _r:-DI i~l) JJ~ 0~y
""

""

"'"'

""

"'

""

"'

( And if you differ in anything among yourselves,
then refer it to Allah and His Messenger if you
believe in Allah and the last day. That is better and
more suitable for final determination)
(Surah An-Nisaa 4:59).

Those who study fiqh know that the scholars of the past - not to
mention those of the present day - had a difference of opinion about
eena and many other transactions. And what are the scholars doing
coday with the likes of these issues which have a difference of opinion?
That which I know, is that the overwhelming majority of them
silently approve of this differing leaving that which is ancient - as its
said - to its antiquity 11 • Whilst this is happening, I say: How will the
Muslims return to their religion, with it being that which the
Messenger (~) laid down as a cure so that if they take hold of it, the
humiliation will be lifted from them? Otherwise (if they don't take
hold of it), it will not be lifted, as it is mentioned in the hadeeth:

11
i.e. they leave che face chat there has been a segment of opinion from the past
which has forbade transactions such as eena and then they uphold its
permissibility due co the fact that there was a difference of opinion about it! -

[Translator)

27
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

'qwftya & 'Tarh«ta ' - 'Puri}ictt!icm & Gilliottlion - and the need which th,, 'flluslims M()(! for them

+-

''When you deal in eena and you hold onto the tails of
cows and you are content with agriculture and you
abandon jihaad, ALLAH WILL INFLICT HUMILIATION
UPON YOU AND WILL NOT REMOVE IT UNTIL YOU
RETURN TO YOUR RELIGION".

Thus, the only cure is a return to the religion. However, this religion
as everyone knows -and in particular those who study fiqh - is differed
upon with the severest of differing. This differing is not only
restricted to a few subsidiary issues as many of the writers or scholars
say and think. Rather, it has exceeded the subsidiary issues and has
reached the issues of aqeedah. So, in one place there is a big difference
between the Ash'arees 12 and the Maatureedees 13 • In another place
there is difference between these (the Maatureedees) and the
Mu'tazilla 14 - not to mention (all) the other sects. All of these sects are
considered by us as Muslims and all of them are the ones who are
addressed by the hadeeth when it says:

" .. .Allah will inflict humiliation upon you and will not
remove it until yot~ return to your religion".

12

Ash'arees- See g lossary - (Translator}

'' Maatureedees - See glossary - {Translator]
14 Mu'razilla- See glossary- {Translator]

28
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'rasfiya & 'Tarhiya · · <Puriftcalion & Cuflioa!ion . and !he nc>cd which fix 9'1/u.•flms have for !hem

So, which (interpretation of the) religion do we have to return to? Is it
upon the understanding of the madhhab (school of thought) of such
and such? Or all the other madhhabs out there?!
Let us then just restrict ourselves (momentarily) to the difference
between the four main madhhabs, the madhhabs which we say are
from the madhhabs of Ahlus-Sunnah. Which (interpretation of the)
religion is it then, that is the cure that will lift the humiliation from
us? For if we return to any of the madhhabs, we will find that there
exist several issues, or ten issues, or dozens of issues which conflict
with the Sunnah - not to mention that some of these issues (also)
conflict with the Qur'an. Because of this, I believe that any
reformation by the callers to Islam and those who pursue the
establishment of the Islamic state, has to be built on them being
sincere. It has to be built upon them returning to making themselves
understand - first and foremost - the religion which the Messenger
(;i) came with, and then secondly, to make the ummah understand
the religion. It has to be built upon the fact that there is no way
towards it and no way back to the understanding of the religion in
the reality in which Allah (£) revealed it, except by studying the
Qur'an and the Sunnah. And this is what I believe to be a consensus
amongst all the jurists.

Without doubt, the imaams of the past (may Allah have mercy upon
them)- due to their excellence and the excellence which their lord had
given them - warned their early followers , who were upon knowledge,
from being attached to them, from following them blindly and from
placing them as the origin of the return (to the religion). (They
warned them that if they did these things), then they would forget
the origin of the sharee'ah; the Qur'an and the Sunnah.
None of you are in need that we quote for you the sayings of the
imaams which all revolve around the statement which is authenticated from all of them;

29
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

...

· CTmjiya & %rbiya' . Cf>uriflcation & Cul!ioation

and the nacd which th,, Cfl!u.vlims haoa for them

'When a hadeeth is authentic, then it is my madhhab' 1 ~.

~ The sayings of the imaams with respect to following the Sunnah
and rejecting their own statements which contradict the Sunnah 1

Imaam Abu Haneefah, Nu'man Bin Thaabit (May Allah have mercy on him)
said:

'When a hadeeth is attthentic, then it is my madhhab'. (Reported by Ibn Aabideen
in Al-Haashiya {1/63} and sheikh Saalih Al-Fulaani in Eeqaz al-Himam
{page 62}).
'It is not permitted for anyone to accept om· saying when he ®es not ktww where we took it
from'. (Reported by Ibn Al-Qayyum in I'laam al-Muwaqi'een {2/3 09]).
'If I say a statement which opposes the Book of Allah the Most High and a report of the
Messenger (~), then aban®n my statement'. (Reported by Al-Fulaani in Al-Eeqaz
[page 50})
Imaam Maalik Bin Anas (May Allah have mercy on him) said:

'Indeed I am only but a man, I mctke mistakes and I am cot-rect. So, look into my opinion
and everything which corresponds to the Book and the Stmnah, then accept it, and
everything which does not correspond to the Book and the S11nnah, then abandon it'.
(Reported by Ibn Abdil Barr in J aami' -ul-ilm wal- Fadlihi [2/3 2] )
'There is not anyone after the Prophet (~) except that his sayitJg can be taken or
abandoned - except for the Prophet (~)'. (Reported by Ibn Abdil-Haadi in Irshaad
As-Saalik (1/227} and Ibn Abdil Barr in J aami' -ul-IIm wal- Fadlihi (2/91])
Imaam Muhammad Ibn Idrees Ash-Shaafi'ee (May Allah have mercy on
him) said:

'When a hadeeth is attthentic, then it is my madhhab'. (Reported by An-Nawaawi in
Al-Majmoo' [ 1/63} and Ash-Sha'raanee in Al-Meezan [1/57})

30
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

...

· CftJ.sfl!la & Cfarbiya · · 'Purification & Cufliva!ion and !IN need which !he 9'1/usltrns have for !hem

Thus, this statement is sufficient for us for now. It is a proof that
every imaarn from those irnaams advised himself, advised his ummah
and advised his followers by ordering them to return to the hadeeth if
it differed from his ijtihaad 16 or his opinion. This therefore opens the
way - even if it be by way of blind-following the imaams - for a return
to the Qur' an and Sunnah. 17
='If you see me saying a statement and that which is in opposition to it has been
authenticated fi'om the Prophet (~), then know that indeed my intellect has departed'.
(Reported by Ibn Abee Haatim in Aadaab-ush-Shaafi'ee [page 93} and Ibn
Asaakir in Taareekh Dimishq [1/10/ 15) with an authentic chain of narration )
'In everything I have said and there was somethir1g which was authentic from the Prophet
(~ in opposition to my statement, then the hadeeth of the Prophet (;I) comes first. So do
not blind follow me'. (Reported by Ibn Abee H aatim in Aadaab-ush-Shaafi'ee
(page 93) and Ibn Asaakir in Taareekh Dimishq (2/9/15} with an authentic
chain of narration )
lrnaarn Ahmed Bin Hanbal (May Allah have mercy on him) said:

'Do not blind follow me and do not blind follow Malik or Shaaft'ee or AI-Awzaa'ee or
Ath-Thawri, and take from where they take from'. (Reported by Ibn Al-Qayyim in
I'laam ai-Muwaqi'een (2/302])
'Whosoever rejects a hadeeth of the Messenger of Allah (;1), then he is on the bri11k of
destmction' (Reported by Ibn Al-Jawzi in Manaaqib-ul-Imaami-Ahmed (page
182))

T aken from 'Siffatu-Salaati-Nabee (;!!¥) Min-at-Takbeer ila-Tasleem kaannakataraahaa' of sheikh Al-Aibaanee (Pp. 46-53, Riyadh, Maktabatui-Ma'aarif, 2"d
new edition, 1417 /1996).
By the grace of Allah (~), this valuable work has been translated into the
English language under the title: 'The Prophet 's Prayer described from the
beginning co the end as though you see it' and it is the most comprehensive
guide to performing the prayer available in the English language. It is a must
for all English speaking Muslims who cannot understand the Arabic language (Translator}
16
lj tihaad- See glossary. -(Translator}
17
Here, t he sheikh is not endorsing the bigoted blind following which is so
rampant in our times. Rather, those who uphold blindly following the imaams,
by necessity, have to therefore return back to the Qu r'an and Sunnah as the

31
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· CftuJi!l" & <Torhi_qo · 'Puri}icnlion & Cullioalion - and tho need mbich !he Cfilmlims haoc }or !lxm

So, we will mention some of the examples (which conflict with the
Sunnah) which are still present in our books which are taught in all
the schools of sharee'ah and colleges and that which resembles them.
The first example is from one of the Islamic madhhabs and it is that
of the worshipper who begins his prayer by letting his hands fall by
the side and not placing them on the chest 18 . And why is this so?
Because the madhhab says so!!! And this is whilst all of the scholars of
hadeeth have endeavoured to bring a single hadeeth, even if it be
weak -rather, even if it be fabricated - that the Messenger(~) did not
place his right hand on his left when he stood up to pray. However, it
does not exist. So, is this Islam?
I know that some of you will then say: 'This is from the subsidiary
matters'. Indeed, some of them will even become careless with their
utterance and say: 'This is from the insignificant matters'. I believe that
everything that the Messenger of Allah (f4i) came with which has a
connection to the religion and worship, then it is not from the
insignificant matters. We believe that everything that the Messenger
(~) came with, then it is obligatory that we adopt it firstly as the
religion according to its strength in relation to the proofs of the
sharee'ah. If it is obligatory, then it is obligatory and if it is
recommended, then it is recommended. As for calling a matter
insignificant or secondary (simply) because it is recommended, then
this is not from the general Islamic etiquette for anything. This is
moreso (due to the fact) that it is not possible for us to preserve the
primary matters except through the preservation of the secondary
matters. I say this if I wished to debate with them in word.
So, why have the Muslims persisted in acting upon this simple matter
(letting the hands fall down by the side) whilst the ahaadeeth come
one after another in all the books of the Sunnah that the Messenger of
= imaams have ordered them to do so (as the previous statements of the imaams
show) . - (Translator}
18
As is the case of chose who ascribe themselves co the madhhab of Imaam
Maalik (May Allah have mercy on him). - [Translacor)

32
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

.crosfiya & 'Tarbiya . • Cf>urificalion & GJ!tioalion - and tiN need which the C)llu•hin.s haoo for tbem
+Allah (:i) placed his hands on his chest?? 19 This is nothing more than
blind-following and stubbornness and in contradiction to the imaams
in their saying:

'When a hadeeth is authentic, then it is my madhhab'.
Indeed, this simple example will not please some of the people. So, we
will mention another example. Some of the books of fiqh of the
madhhabs still mention that alcohol is of two types: a type which is
extracted from grapes- a small amount of it or a large amount both
being forbidden - and another type which is extracted from other
than grapes. This other type is from barley, or maize, or dates or
other than that from what the non-Muslims have specialised in today
in the extraction of alcohol. Not all of this type of alcohol is
considered forbidden. Rather, only that which intoxicates is
forbidden!!
19 From amongst the books of Sunnah which report that the Prophet (:fi) used to

place his hands on the chest and order it, is 'Al-Muwatta' of imaam Maalik
himself. ('Al-Muwatta' (English translation], Pp. 74-75, No's 370, 371, Chapter
94, Lahore, 4'h reprint, 1991).
These narrations in imaam Maalik's book coincide with the fact that he used to
order with the placing of the hands on the chest, as is authentically reported
from him. ('At-Ta'leeqaat Ar-Radeeyah Alaa-Rawdat-in-Nadiyya' by sheikh
Albaanee, page 287, Vol.l, Daar Ibn Affaan, Cairo, 1" Edition, 1420/1999).
As for the fact that imaam Maalik used to pray with his hands by his sides, then
th is can not be used as a proof for he only did it out of necessity. In the year
146H the governor of Al-Madeenah, ]afar Ibn Sulayman, lashed imaam Maalik
and stretched out his arms until his hands became dislocated and he was not
able to place them over one another on his chest. He authored his book, 'AJMuwatta', two years later, wherein he included the reports about placing the
hands on the chest. ('Al-lntiqaa' of Ibn AbdiJ Barr [p.44] as quoted in 'Blind
Following of Madhhabs' by sheikh Muhammad Sultan Al-Ma'soomee AlKhajnadee, page 13, (English translation), 1" Edition, Birmingham (U.K),

1414/1993)- (Translator}
33

Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· CTosjlyo & CTi.1rhiyo · . cPurijictJ!ion & Cu//i()(l/ion . tJnd !be need which lh~ 9'1/uslims !xwe /or !hem

So why is this statement still written in the books?!!
Indeed, some of the people defend this with different types of
argumentation. However, it is nothing more than the fact that an
imaam 20 from amongst the imaams of the Muslims made ijtihaad and
said this statement! This is in light of the fact that all of us - despite
our different madhhabs and the different sources which we take from
- read in the books of Sunnah with authentic chains of narration that
he(~) said:

"That which intoxicates in large amounts, is forbidden
in small amounts" 21
and:

"Every intoxicant is khamr (alcohol) and every khamr
is forbidden" 22 •
So, why does the likes of this dangerous statement still continue to

persist? A statement which encourages the people - those who are on
the edge of the pit of sinfulness or have indeed fallen into it in reality
- and makes p leasing to them the drinking of a small amount of
alcohol which is from other than grapes. And this is based upon the
proof that imaam such and such - with him being a virtuous scholar said so!
20

The imaam who allowed this was Abu Haneefah (May Allah have mercy on
him). See 'Bidaayatul-Mujtahid' of Ibn Rushd, Vol 2, pag e 421 , Daar Ibn
Hazm, Beirut, 1" Edition, 1424/2003 -[Translator]
21

Al-lrwa No.2 375

22

Al-Irwa No.2373

34

Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· CftJ..jiya & Cfarhtj{O ' · cpurificalion & Cullioa!ion

tmd !he nNd a•h.icb lh..• Cfllus!tin.s have for !hem

0' What a proof!!!
We also believe that this scholar is virtuous. However, the difference
is that we don't forget that he is a virtuous scholar who is not
protected from error. They pretend to forget this reality and they
persist in defending this statement. Some of them even take
advantage of this statement by circulating intoxicating substances
amongst the Muslims. Others just defend the imaam and not the
statement.
Perhaps many of you will have heard that the 'Arab Magazine'
published an article a few years ago, by one of these people, in which
he embraces and adopts this statement i.e. in respect to (alcoholic)
drinks extracted from other than grapes and that the majority of the
(alcoholic) drinks of today, in what is apparent, are from other than
grapes. So, he published an article in the 'Arab Magazine' and
permitted the Muslims to drink what they like from these modernday intoxicants upon the pretext of: 'Don't drink that which will
intoxicate yott'. This is an unrealistic action because in reality - as all of
us know - the first drop (of alcohol) brings about the second drop and
the third drop brings about the fourth drop and so on. The small
amount which does not intoxicate, is a procedure which cannot be
determined and reg ulated with precision. Thus, it will eventually
bring about the large amount which will intoxicate.
So, I say: Why does the likes of this statement still remain in the
books of fiqh whilst it clashes with the irrefutable ahaadeeth which
are established from the Messenger(~) in negating it?! Why do we
give a free hand to a biased writer who then publicises this statement
and builds loft y towers and palaces upon it and who permits for the
Muslims the drinking of forbidden drinks with the condition: 'Don't
drink that which intoxicates and drink a little and don't drink a lot'?!!!

35
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

•

· 'Tas/Iyo & 'Torbiyo · - CPuri}icalion & Cu!!iotl!ion - and lbe need which lbe CJrluslims haoe /or !hem

It is possible that the man who wrote this article is biased. It is also
possible that he is of good intention and wishes to take the path of
some of the people by saying: '0 ' people, do not be harsh upon the
Muslims. As long as there exists a saying of an imaam from amongst the
imaams ofthe Muslims which permits for them this drinking, then why should
we forbid it?!'. It is possible that the writer of this article is like this.
However, why is it also that we see one of the learned scholars of
Shaam23 then authoring a treatise24 in refutation of this article, with
you able to see confusion in his refutation? Sometimes he is on the
side of the one who said the statement which is adopted by the writer
and sometimes he quotes the ahaadeeth - some of which we have
mentioned - which are a refutation of the writer and whomsoever he
relies on. Why do we see this learned scholar wavering about?! It is
because he reveres this statement (permitting alcohol) due it
originating from one of the great scholars from amongst the scholars
of the Muslims. And this great scholar (according to him) does not
speak from desire or ignorance. I say, in agreement with him, that
(this great scholar) does not speak from desire or ignorance. However,
is he infallible in his ijtihaad which is far from ignorance and desire?
All of us will say no and we will all remember the statement of the
Messenger (:!):

~ 1~1,. j ,JI/,-f
ili 'YL:of ~ ~u ~~~
~ 1~1,.
,.
,.
,.

,.,.

,..,..

,.

~

J

,.

?i ili ,~i ~ ~lj

''When a scholar judges and makes ijtihaad and is
correct (in his decision), then he gets two rewards. And
when he judges and makes ijtihaad and then makes a
mistake, he gets one reward". 25
23

He is sheikh Muhammad Al-Haamid Al-Hamawi.- {Saleem Al-Hilaalee}
The treatise is entitled: 'Al-Mashroobaat al-Muskirah' (Intoxicating Drinks).(Saleem Al-Hilaalee}
25
Al-Bukhari No.7352 and Muslim No. 1716
24

36
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· <Ta..ifi!1a & <Tarbiya · - C/)urificalion & Cullivalion

and !he need a>bich !he <Jlluslims have for !hem

So, why do we forget that the mujtarud (scholar who makes ijtihaad)
will indeed be rewarded with (at least) one reward? Why can we not
say that he has made a mistake? The reason for crus is that it is
difficult for some of the people to hear a person saying; 'Indeed, such
and such; the i1T14m, has made a mistake'. However,

All the paths - as they say - are ttnder inspection.
We then say: Why such stubbornness? Or, why do we fear ro say chat
indeed an imaam from amongst the imaams of the Muslims has erred
in a matter, or in making ijtihaad, or in his opinion and that he will
be rewarded with one reward instead of two?? So why don't we say
crus as a starting point firstly, and secondly as an application of some
of the subsidiary matters? And from amongst these subsidiary matters
is the subject matter at hand (making alcohol permissible).
When you read the treatise which this scholar has authored m
refutation of that writer, you do not come away with the conclusion
that the writer has made a mistake in rus reliance upon the opinion of
an imaam from amongst the imaams of the Muslims. This is because
(in reality), after this opinion was thoroughly examined and

submitted in front of the proofs of the sharee' ah, some of the
followers of crus imaam himself were obliged to reject this matter leaving it as one reward for the imaam - and then to adhere to the
authentic ahaadeeth. So, why do we not read in this treatise that the
imaam has made a mistake but is rewarded, and that the writer has
no right to be in opposition to the Sunnah with the opinion of this
imaam?
The answer: Because indeed it (the opinion), has overcome us and in
our hearts there is a reverence and respect for the imaams more than
that which Allah made obligatory upon us. And we believe in rhe
saying of the Messenger (;i) for ourselves:

37
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

• 'll11j~qll & Cforbiytt · - 'Purific{l/ion & Culiioolion

and 1/x nC•'d which t!>J Cfllu.slims h{IO<? for /hem

+--=

..

0 fi ) IS~

r.;-; ) ,1Sft:5" ~ rJ :; G ~
~w~

"Not from us is the one who does not honour our elder,
or who does not have mercy on our young or who does
not recognise the right ofour scholar" 26 .
This is from that which the Messenger (:i) urged the Muslims to do,
in recognising the right of t he scholar. However, is it from the right
of the scholar that we raise him to the level of Prophethood and
Messengership until we eventually give him infallibility with our
silent language? And the language of silence is clearer than the
language of speech.
Therefore, if it is upon us to respect the scholar, give him his due
right and to follow him when he shows us the proof, then it is not
upon us that we promote from his saying whilst we diminish from the
saying of the Messenger (~)- Nor is it upon us to that we prefer his
saying over the saying of the Messenger (~). This is just another one
of the examples which are still in effect amongst us without rejection
or opposition from those people who have knowledge of the Qur'an
and Sunnah. Indeed, I mentioned this (issue of alcohol) in a published
treatise of mine and that it was required from the reader to depart
from it with one conclusion, and that is: That the matter is as the
Messenger (~) has said as one statement:

"That which intoxicates in large amounts, is forbidden
in small amounts" 2 7 •
26

27

Saheeh A1-Jaami' No.:>443
Al-Irwa No.237S

38
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· Cfa.Ji!ta & 'TatblffO ' • cpurifk·a!ion & Cul!ioalion · and !he need which ll>c '0/u,<lirns have for !hem

--+
Thus, the writer of the article in the 'Arab Magazine' is mistaken.
Whomsoever he has relied on from the people of knowledge, then he
is also mistaken - and we do not have any favouritism for anyone
when he makes a mistake. A mistake is a mistake and disbelief is
disbelief. W hether it comes from young or old or male or female,
then it is still all a mistake. And the mistake does not differ (in it
being a mistake) due to the source it came from.
Another example out there is with respect to marriage, which is still
in force today amongst the laws which are termed as personal statute.
It is known today, unfortunately, that the laws have been imposed
upon as an obligation (to be followed) duty and that they contain
things which are unanimously held to be contrary to the sharee'ah.
However, this ruling (on marriage) still remains to be held as a
respectable Islamic position. It is still decreed (in the Muslim lands)
that the Muslim girl of legal age can marry herself off without the
permission of her guardian; and this is despite the announcement of
the Messenger (;i) with his statement:
,..

.,.

,-

""

""

u-.
~
,

""

.;

, -.~~, IL.t_; 1-:.~ ~ ,t'. T
~

""'

~J
,.

o

0~1
...

~

•... ~
... ""

""

~

~

M

or•\
r.... W~

... ...

~

Jb~ ~~' 'Jb~

-

1

-

-

~ny woman who marries without the permission ofher

guardian, then her marriage is false, then her marriage
is false, then her marriage is false" 28 •
So, this hadeeth is not applied and that ruling is applied and is
decreed according to. Maybe some of the people will say: 'Has nobody
understood the hadeeth except you?!'

28

Al-lrwa No. 1840

39
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

...

· Cfrujiya & Cfarbiya · - Cf>urificalion & GI!Iivalion

and !he need which lh<> Cfllwhin,s have for !hem

I say: Indeed, this hadeeth was understood by one who had the best
understanding from amongst the imaams of the Arabic language and
its stylistic particularities - and that is imaam Ash-Shaafi'ee29 • So, it is
not the opinion of a man whose origin is known to be from Albania.
Rather, this Albanian came across a hadeeth and came across an
understanding of an imaam - an imaam whose ancestry goes back to
the Quraish and Abdul-Muttalib. Why is it then that this authentic
opinion - which is linked to this authentic hadeeth - is left out in
favour of an opinion of another imaam from amongst the imaams of
the Muslims?! Yes, indeed the ijtihaad of the imaam is at the
forefront with us. However, the ijtihaad (only) has value when it does
not conflict with the infallible text from the Qur'an and Sunnah. All
of us read in the books of usool, their saying:

'When the narration is found, then the opinion is invalid'
and:

'When the river ofAllah comes, then the rive1' of Ma'qil stops' 30

and:

'There is no ijtihaad in the place of the text'.

29

Imaam Ash-Shaafi'ee's explanation of chis hadeech can be found in his book
'Kicaab-ui-Umm', Pp 31-35, VoL6, Daar-ui-Wafaa, Al-Mansoorah, 1" Edition,
1422/2001 (Translator]
30
i.e. when the clear proof comes, then it nullifies everything else which opposes
it. -(Translacor}

40
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'Ta...ifiya & 'Tarbi!!t1 · · 'Purification & Cultioation and the need which the :71/uslims have for !hem

All of these principles are known knowledge-wise. So, why do we not
give importance to the application of these principles practically and
(still) persist in adhering to some of the subsidiary matters which
differ from the Sunnah? If we want tO adopt the cure which the
Messenger (~) described (as being):

" ... until you return to your religion"
after he described the disease, chen is the return to the religion only
with speech? Or is it with belief and action?
Indeed, many from amongst the Muslims bear witness that 'none has
the right to be worshipped except Allah and that Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah' but do not undertake the requirements of these
two testimonies - and this is a long discussion. So, many from the
Muslims today - even those who are counted as being from the guides
to the right way - do not give :1!1 ~~ j! ~ (faa ilaha ilal Allah) its due
right of explanation. Indeed, many fro'm amongst the Muslim youth
and the Muslim writers have become aware of this; and that is that
from the right of this testimony is that all sovereignty belongs to
Allah . Yes, I want to say it clearly; Indeed, the Muslim youth and the
Muslim writers have become aware of this reality today. And that is,
that the sovereignty belongs to Allah alone and that the domination
of the earthly laws and dependence on them to solve the problems
existing today, negate the existence of the sovereignty of Allah (.~).
However, I see that that many of those writers are not in harmony
with this dangerous awareness which they have become aware of and that is the existence of the sovereignty of Allah. And the
sovereignty of Allah is the sovereignty of the Qur'an and the Sunnah.

41
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· <Ttu(i!fa <~ 'Tarhit(d · Cflunjicalion & GJI!ioalion

and 1/x f/C<'d which !he Cfllu.<lim• bao<J /or !hem

....

I wonder, would a ruling coming from a certain disbeliever which
conflicted (with the Qur'an and Sunnah), be in conflict with the
sovereignty of Allah but if it came from the ijtihaad of a mujtahid
who made a mistake, then it would not conflict with the sovereignty
of Allah?? I believe that there is no difference, since it is obligatory
upon the Muslim not to adopt any statement - whatever its source
was - whilst it. conflicts with the Qur'an and the Sunnah. However,
there is a difference between the one who stated that disbelief - and
he is a disbeliever eternally in the fire - and the one who stated that
mistake from the Muslims - and he is rewarded for his mistake as the
remark about it has preceded in the authentic hadeeth.
Thus, the return to the religion is obligatory after endeavouring and
traversing upon the path of the understanding of this religion. And
that will be with the application of the fiqh which is known as today
as the 'comparative fiqh'. It is obligatory that this fiqh be taught by
those who are duly qualified from those who hold Islamic certificates
in fiqh and hadeeth.
So, when we call for the establishment of the Muslim state, then
without doubt there has to be for this state a clear constitution and
the clearest of law. But upon which madhhab will this constitution be
established? And upon which madhhab will this constitution of law
be explained?!
One of the Muslim writers out there today31, details some of the
rulings upon which the law of the desired Muslim state has to be built
upon. So, we find that this law is not built upon learning upon the
way which we have pointed out - and that is the comparative fiqh or
with our terminology, learning in accordance with the Qur' an and
Sunnah. Indeed, the man (the Muslim writer) studied a madhhab and
; t He is sheikh Taqi-ud-deen An-Nabahaani the founder of Hizb-ut-Tahrir (The

Party of Liberation) - and it is a party political in inclination and Mu'cazilli in

belief. - [Saleem Al-Hilaalee}

42
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· Cfa<}iya & Cfarhi!Ja · • 'Purificalion & Cul!ioalion . and !be !ux•d which !be CJ>h,slim' Nn>c for !hem

then conveyed the opinion of this madhhab in many of the subsidiary
matters which he classified as laws. Then he placed this in the book
on the basis that when the Islamic state will be established - and
perhaps that will be soon - then this will be its law. In reality he has
come with nothing new just as the author of the treatise
('Intoxicating Drinks') came with nothing new.
And the new thing which we want, is that we instruct the Muslims.
However, less it is said: 'Indeed, another statement is authentic which
another imaam has adopted because it is supported by the Sunnah'. So, this
which I am pointing out occurs in the subject of when a Muslim kills
a non-Muslim citizen (in an Islamic state) and then is killed because
of him (in retaliation). This is a well known opinion in Islamic fiqh.
However, there is another opinion out there which confronts this and
is its opposite and it is: When a Muslim kills a non-Muslim citizen,
then he is not killed because of him due to his (:J/i) saying in Saheeh
Al-Bukhari:

'~Muslim is not killed because ofa non-Mmlim" 32 .

What has made this learned scholar and modern day writer place in
the Islamic system and Islamic law that the Muslim is killed because
of the non-Muslim in opposition to the hadeeth of the Prophet (;i)? I
believe that the reason is because he studied the fiqh which he was
brought up on and then he made it an obligation (to follow).
So is this the return to the religion?!
Indeed, the religion says:

32

Al-Irwa No. 2209

43
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'TrufiytJ & 'Tt~rbiytJ · · 'Purification & GJ!Iioolion . tJnd the need wbtch !be Cflfusfims baD(! for them

"A Muslim is not killed because ofa non-Mmlim"
but the madhhab says: 'He is killed because ofhim'.
Likewise, the writer himself says about the same subject: 'If a Muslim
kills a non-Muslim citizen by mistake, then what is his blood-money? His
blood-money is the (same) bloody-money (if he killed) a Muslim!'. This is
what the law says in accordance with the madhhab which it relies
upon 33 whilst the Messenger(~) said:

"The blood-money of a non-Muslim is half the bloodmoney ofa Muslim" 34 .
Thus, do we then take on this law or that statement which opposes
it? And there are many other examples out there (similar to this).
The return to the religion is the return to the Qur'an and the Sunnah.
That is the religion according to the consensus of the imaams and
that is what is the protection from deviation and falling into
misguidance. Due to that, he (~) said:

" And that is the hanafee madhhab. - [Saleem Al-Hilaalee)
~ Saheeh Al-Jaami' No.3397

44
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'Tasfiga & 'Tarbiya' - Cf>urifica!ion & Cu/!ioafion - and !he need which !he Wuslims have for !hem

"I have left amongst you two things (which if you
adhere to), you will never go astray: The book of Allah
and my Sunnah. They will not become separated until
they return back to me at the pool 3 ~" 36 .
So, we have given some of the examples which make it obligatory
upon the people of knowledge today to return to the understanding
of the religion by way of its two aforementioned foundations; the
Qur' an and the Sunnah. This is so that the Muslims do not fall into
making lawful what Allah has made forbidden, being deluded into

thinking that it is from what Allah has made permissible.
And now, my final word around the return to the religion.
If we want honour from Allah, the Blessed, the Most High and that
he lifts the humiliation from us and helps us against the enemy, then
it is not (simply) sufficient for that in what we have pointed out. (It is
not sufficient to just know) the obligation of correcting the concepts
and removing the opinions which have misinterpreted the proofs of
the sharee'ah amongst the people of knowledge and specialist fiqh.
Rather, there is something else out there which is very important and it is the essence of correcting the concepts; Indeed, it is action.
Knowledge is the vehicle for action and when a person learns and his
knowledge is absolutely clear and then he does not act upon it, then it
is extremely obvious that this knowledge will not bear any fruits.
Thus, it is necessary that the action be linked with this knowledge.
35

The pool: - This is the pool of the Prophet (:i) on the day of Judgement. The
Prophet (:\1) said: "I shall go to the pool before you and he who comes will drink
and he who drinks will never feel thirsty, and there will come to me people
whom I will know and who will know me. Then there would be an
intervention between me and them ... they are my followers, and it will be said
to him (the prophet): You do not know what they did after you and I will say
to them: Woe to him who changes after me." (Saheeh Muslim- Eng. Trans. Vol.
4, p.l236 No. 5682). The Prophet (saws) said: " ... Its water is whiter than
milk and sweeter than honey". (Sahih Muslim- Eng. Trans. Vol. 4, p.l238 No.
5701)- [Translator]
36 Saheeh Al-Jaami' No.2937

45
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

' 'Trufl!ftl & 'Torbiya ' - q>urijicolion & Cullioalion - and !be need mbich lh<! 'flluslims haoc /or them

.,._

-

-+

It is obligatory upon the people of knowledge that they assume
responsibility for the 'tarbiya' (cultivation) of the new Muslim
generation in light of what has been established from the Qur'an and
Sunnah. It is not permissible for us to leave the people tO that which
they have inherited from concepts and mistakes, with some of these
being definitely false according to the consensus of the lmaams and
others being differed upon having some validity by way of
observation, ljtihaad and opinion. And some of chis ljtihaad and
opinion is in conflict with the Sunnah.
So, after the 'tasfiya' (purification) of these matters and the
clarification of what is obligatory to proceed and advance upon, it is
necessary to cultivate the new generation upon this authentic
knowledge. This is the 'Tarbiya' which will produce for us the pure
Islamic society and consequently estabLsh for us an Islamic state.
Without these two premises (the authentic knowledge and the correct
'Tarbiya' upon the authentic knowledge) it is impossible - in my
belief - that the base of Islam or the rule of Islam or the Islamic state
will be established. So, I will give an example of the necessity of this
correct 'Tarbiya': Amongst us in Shaam there is a Muslim group37
which wanes to act according to Islam, bring new life into it and to be
cultivated with it and cultivate the new generation upon it. However,
we feel in entirety that many of those who guide others out there, are
in need of extensive learning about Islam (themselves) upon the
sound and authentic methodology which we have pointed out as has
preceded . We see many of these young Muslim youth calling one
another to the gathering on Friday night for its revival. This calling
one another is for the obedience of Allah and for His worship - and
chis is something very beautiful. However, because they have not
studied the Sunnah and they have not studied its fiqh and they have
not found a generation which cultivated them upon it since their
tender age, then they are falling into what opposes the Sunnah. And
we point chat out with his(~) statement:
" This group is AI-Ikhwaan-ui-Muslimoon (The Muslim Brotherhood). (Saleem Al- Hilaalee)

46
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

·'Ta.sfiya & 'Tarbiya · • 'Purificalion & Gdlioolion · and !he need wbtcb lbe Cflluslims MD<! for /hem

uDo not single out the night of Friday from the other
nights for prayer and do not single out the day of Friday
from the other days for fasting" 38 .
So why do we revive the night of Friday whilst the Messenger (~)
prohibited us from that?
The answer: Because we have no knowledge.
What is required, is that the direction comes from the people of
knowledge that it is not permissible to revive this night due to his(~)
above mentioned saying.
You will find others from amongst those good youth who make
lawful the listening of songs and musical instruments! 39 And this is
because they find the radio broadcasts filling up the ears. There does
not exist out there any general direction for this new Muslim
generation that indeed the Messenger (;Wi) prohibited stringed
instruments, and warned against listening to them. He (~)
threatened those who enter into the evening with entertainment and
amusement and who listen to stringed instruments that they will be
transformed into apes and swine40 .
38

Muslim No. 1144
Rather, some of them have produced musical bands and have given them
Islamic names! - (Saleem Al-Hilaalee} An example of t his extreme modernism can be seen today in many of the
different branches of lkhwaan-ul-Muslimoon in the West. Groups such as YM
(Young Muslims) and ISB (Islamic Society of Britain) in rhe UK often hold
international conferences which comprise so-called Islamic rap and pop groups,
not to mention non-Muslim musicians!! - [Translator]
40
As-Saheehah No 91
39

47
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

' crufi!Ja & CTarbi!la ' Cf>uri}icalion & Cultioalion - and !he need which !he CfiltJSiims hao<? for !hem
+This new generation has not been cultivated upon the knowledge of
what is allowed and what is not allowed because it finds many
statements (out there). So for example, this generation finds Ibn
Hazm the Imaam who has a treatise on the permissibility of musical
instruments41 • Before long, this treatise is published and propagated
amongst the people and corresponds to their desire. Maybe some of
chose who guide ochers and some of those who claim co reform will
say: 'As long as there exists this imaam who has the likes of this opinion, then

we will follow him or blind-follow him in ottr listening to music, especially as
this has become a general necessity' 42 .
But where is the Sunnah then?!
Indeed, the Sunnah has become completely forgotten.
When the Messenger (~) appointed a cure for the lifting of the
prevailing humiliation from us, then indeed it is nothing more than
the return co the religion. Therefore, it is obligatory upon us to
understand the religion through the people of knowledge with a
correct understanding - corresponding co the Qur' an and the Sunnah
- and that we cultivate the righteous good generation upon that. This
is the way to cure the problem which every Muslim complains about.

41

Sheikh Al-Albaanee (May Allah have mercy on him) has refuted Ibn Hazm
and all those who blindly follow him on this issue in his book 'Tahreem AalaatiTarb' (The prohibition of musical instruments), Maktabat-ut-daleel, Jubail, 2od
Edition, 1418/ 1997. - [Translator]
42
Such as the likes of Doctor Yusuf ibn Abdillah Al-Qardaawee from Egypt and
then Qatar, the one who has filled up his books and religious verdicts with the
permissibility of that. Rather, he (even) boasts across select satellite channels and
in the pages of newspapers and journals that he sometimes walks along the
corniche taking pleasure in and listening to the (Egyptian) singer Faiza Ahmed!
And (in this) he is following his sheikh, Muhammad Al-Ghazzali As-Saqqaa!! [Saleem Al-Hilaalee)

48
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

.crasflya & <TarbiJJa . - '7>uri}icalion & Cultivation - and the need which the 91/uslims have for them
Indeed, the statement of one of the reformers tn the present age43
pleases me. In reality, it is as if it is a summary of what I have said or
explained above. In my opinion, it is as if it is inspiration from the
sky. He says:

'Establish the Islamic state in your hearts (and) it will be established for you
upon your earth' 44 _
Without doubt, we have to rectify ourselves on the foundation of our
Islam and our religion up until the Islamic state is established upon
chis earth of ours. And this - as we have mentioned - cannot happen
with ignorance. Rather, it only happens with knowledge.
In conclusion, I advise every individual who is able to participate in
this great matter, that he and other than him co-operate - with those
who are qualified - in explaining the Islam which came from the
Qur'an and the Sunnah and (that he co-operate) in the 'tarbiya' of the
generation upon that.
This is a reminder, and t he reminder benefits the believers.
May the peace and mercy and blessings of Allah be upon you.

4
} He is Hasan Al-Hudaibee, the second public leader of Al-lkhwaan-ulMuslimoon. - [Saleem Al-Hilaalee)
44
And our sheikh - may Allah have mercy on him - revolved around chis
statement a great deal - and chis is not a promotion of the thought of the one
who said it or the methodology of his group. On the contrary, for indeed our
sheikh - may Allah have mercy on him - was from the first of the people of
knowledge who m ade clear the deviation of the group Al-Ikhwaanul-Muslimoon
in belief, da'wah and methodology. - [Saleem Al-Hilaalee)

49
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

'<Trufiya & cTarbiya · 'Purificolion & Cul/i()(J/ion - and !he need which !he <Jrluslims haoe for !hem

+--

Www.IslamicBooks.Website

''TMjiya & 'Tarbiyn' 'Purijicolion & Cullioalion - and fix need which !he <fllush'rns haoe for !lxrn

9/ppendix 1
'Establish the Islamic state in yourselves (and) it will be established
for you upon yottr earth.'
Said the muhaddith of this era, the reviver of the religion in this
century, the sheikh of Islam, Muhammad Naasir-ud-deen AlAlbaanee (may Allah have mercy on him) 45:
"And from the oddities of some of the callers, is that they give
importance to the affairs which they are not able to establish and they
leave that which is obligatory upon them and that which is within
easy reach - and that would be by striving against their own souls as
that Muslim caller has said, the one who advised his followers with his
statement:

'Establish the Islamic state in yourselves (and) it wilt be established for yott.
upon your earth'.
In light of this, we find many of his followers opposing that, making
the bulk of their call in singling out Allah (.~) for sovereignty and

expressing that with the well known expression 'The Haakimeeyah 46
(sovereignty) is for Allah'.
45

'At-tawheed awwalan yaa duaacal-Islaam' (T awheed is first 0 ' callers of Islam)
- Pp.45-47, Riyadh, Maktabatul-Ma'aarif, 2"d new edit ion, 1422/ 2001) [Translator)
46
From amongst the deviations of many of the groups and parties that exist in
our time, is chat they have made 'Al-Haakimeeyah' into a separate category of
tawheed! T his deviation has been clarified and rebutted by all the major scholars
of our time like sheikh Al-Albaanee, sheikh Abdul-Azeez Ibn Abdullah Ibn Baz,
sheik h Muhammad Ibn Saaleh Al-Uthaymen and ochers. For more on the
statements of the scholars see: salafipublications.com (manhaj section). [Translator}

51
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

..

· 'Tosfiya & 'Tarhiya' · cpurificalion & Cullioalion · and !he need which !he C)l!u,!limJ have for lhem

Without doubt, the sovereignty is for Allah alone without any
partner in chat or in ocher than chat. H owever, from them are those
who blind follow a madhhab from amongst the four madhhabs today
and chen say - when the clear authentic Sunnah comes to him - 'this is
a difference in schools of thought'! So where is the ruling by what
Allah has revealed in adhering to the Sunnah?! From them are those
whom you will find worshipping Allah in accordance co the Sufi
orders!47 So where is the ruling by what Allah has revealed in
cawheed?!
They call ochers co return back tO that which they themselves do not
return back to!

47
The most striking example of chis is in Hassan Al-Banna, che founder of Allkhwaan-ui-Muslimoon, who belonged to the Hasaafeeyah Shaadhilliah order of
sufism. In face, before he set up Al-Ikhwaan-ul-Muslimoon, Al-Banna
participated in setting up a sufi H asaafeeyah organisation in the city of
Mahmoodeeyah, Egypt, and was voted in as its secretary. AI-Banna was so
devoted to his brand of Sufism, that he would regularly walk nearly 20
kilometres on Fridays co visit che graves of ad-Dasooqee and as-Sinjar, two
'saints' of the Hasaafeeyah order, and chen walk 20 kilometres back again. H e
regularly visited, the tombs of Zainab and others, wherein major shirk takes
place, yet he would not speak out against it. Because of his sufi upbringing and
attachment, he would often hold the innovated dhi kr sessions which are
common amongst sufis and would attend and participate in innovated
gatherings such as the celebration of the Prophet's (:liS) birthday. Such was AlBanna's ignorance of cawheed, that he would utter phrases of 'wahdac-ulwujood' (che unity of existence i.e. Allah and the creation are one entity) in his
poetical compositions. A thorough exposition on Hassan Al-Banna and the
deviant methodology of his group can be found in the magnificent book 'AlMawrid al-Adhb az-Zulaal Feemamuqada Alaa Ba'd il-Manaahij ad-Da'awiyyah
Min al-'Aqaa'id wal-A'maal' (The Cold Sweet [Flowing} Spring Water [That
Quenches (the T hirst)} Concerning W hat Can Be Criticised Of Beliefs and
Actions Of Some of the Methodologies of Da'wah) - Dammaam, 1" Edition,
1418) by one of the major scholars of our t ime, sheikh Ahmed Bin Yahya Bin
Muhammad An-Najmi, may Allah preserve him. -[Translator}

52
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'Tosjiya & Cfarhiya · . CfJunjicolion & Cul!ioafion . and !ha need which !he 0/us/ims haoe /or !ham

+Indeed, it is very easy that you apply the ruling of what Allah has
revealed in your aqeedah, in your worship, in your behaviour, in your
house, in cultivating your children and in your buying and selling.
On the other hand, it is extremely difficult that you force or remove
that ruler who rules in many of his laws by other than what Allah has
revealed. So why do you abandon that which is within easy reach for
that which is difficult?!
This indicates one of two things; either there exists out there a bad
'tarbiya'(cultivation) and bad direction or there exists a corrupt
aqeedah48 which pushes and directs their attention towards the
48

The best example chat can be cited of what the sheikh is referring co, is chat of
Sayyid Qutb, the famous spokesman of Al-Ikhwaan-ul-Muslimoon during the
1950's and 60's. Although the popular impression of Sayyid Qutb is one of a
reformer and a man of knowledge, a detailed look at his works cells us the exact
opposite. His aqeedah was so corrupt, chat it seems as if he has gathered all che
deviations of the misguided groups of che past and put them together as one.
From his corrupt beliefs were:
* His belief in 'wahdac-ul-wujood'
* His belief in 'hulool' (that Allah dwells inside the creation)
* His denial of some of Allah's attributes
*His saying that the Qur'an was like magic
* His saying that Islam is a mixture of Christianity and Communism
* His denial of the Prophet Eesa Uesus} (~) being raised to heaven
* His rebuke and censure of the Prophet of Allah, Moosaa (&;;E\) and making
him the object of ridicule
* His severe attacks on a number of companions of the Prophet (~), including
the third righteous caliph, Uthmaan Ibn Affaan ( ~)
* His declaration that all Muslim societies have aposcaced from Islam, whether
they are the rulers or the ordinary people
The deviations of Sayyid Qutb have been exposed by many scholars, but none
has been more prolific then the great scholar of our time, the imaam, sheikh
Rabee' Ibn Haadee Al-Madkhalee, who resides in Makkah, may Allah preserve
him. The most revealing of his works on Sayyid Qucb are:
* 'Adwaa-ul-Islaameeyah Alaa Aqeedti-Sayyid Qutb wa Fiqrihi' (The Islamic
llluminacions on the aqeedah of Sayyid Qucb and his thought)
* 'Macaa'in Sayyid Qutb Fee Ashaabi-Rasool-illah' (The attacks of Sayyid Qurb
upon the companions of the Messenger of Allah (~))

53
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· <Tt~.ififlll & 'Tmviya · r:purificotion & Cultiootion · and the nct•d wl:>kh the 91/uslims !:>om! for them

..,_

--+

endeavour which they are not able co establish, away from chat
endeavour which is within their capability. As for today, then I do not
see (anything to be done) except to be devoted - in all devotion - with
tasfiya (purification) and tarbiya (cultivation).
Everyone is according to the limits of his ability, and Allah does not
burden a soul more than it can bear."

* 'Al-Awaasim Mimma Fee Kucubi Sayyid Qucb Min-ul-Qawaasim' (The
defences against what is in the books of Sayyid Qutb from [their} catastrophies)
These efforts of sheikh Rabee' have been praised by all the major scholars of our
time including sheikh Al-Albaanee. Shortly before his death in 1999, sheikh AlAlbaanee completed his reading of sheikh Rabee's book 'Al-Awaasim ... ' and
then in his own copy he wrote:
'Everything tvith which you have refitted Sayyid Qittb iJ the tmth and iJ correct, and from
it (the book) it will become clear to every MriSiim t·eader who knowJ anything abortt the
lJ!amic heritage, that Sayyid Qtttb had no knowledge of Islam, its frmdamentals
or its subsidiary matten So, may Allah reward you with the beJt oj1-eward 0' brother
Rabee' for your fitlfilment of the obligation in explaining and exposing his ignoratzce
atzd his deviatiotz from Islam. '

A copy of sheikh Al-Albaanee's handwritten note can be found in the beginning
of the published version of 'Al-Awaasim .. .' (Maktabat-ul-Furqaan, Ajmaan, 2nd
Edition, 1421/2001)- (Translator]

54
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'Ti.JSJi!fn c~ 'Tnr!JJfflJ · Cf>uri}icallon & Cul!ioalion - and the need whicb lb.-. 91/u,,fim,, have /or them

9/ppendix 2 -49
Is the methodology of Tasfiya and Tarbiya a Sufi 50
methodology??
Said Saleem Al-Hilaalee:
"Some of our companions from the students of knowledge called my
attention to the book entitled 'A!-jihaad wa! Ijtihaad,· Ta aamu!aat filManhaj' (Jihaad and ijtihaad; reflections on methodology) by the one
known as Umar bin Mahmood Abee Amr - and he has the title of
Abu Qatadah Al-Filisteeni - the one who resides, by choice, in the
lands of disbelief and freethinking, London51 (and is) the promoter of
the methodology of the Khwaarij 52 and their thought!!
49

This appendix has been taken from the footnotes of Pages 86-88 of 'AlFawaaid al-Hisaan min hadeethi Thawbaan - tadaa'ee al-umum' (Exquisite
benefits from the hadeerh of Thawbaan ['The nations will gather together.._'})
by Saleem AI-Hilaalee. - [Translator)
50
Sufism: A movement which seeks co get its participants closer to Allah
through spiritualism and intensive acts of worship. These acts of worship often
involve anti-Islamic and innovatory practices which are far from the way of the
Prophet (j'S) and his companions. The polytheistic spiritualism and innovations
of Sufism negleCL all che ocher practical issues which Islam came with and render
it a movement devoid of knowledge. Well known figure heads in the West who
are upon the deviation of sufism include Nuh Ha Meem Keller and the ex'Islamic' advisor to US president George W. Bush, Hamza Yusuf _For more on
Sufism see: 'The Reality of Sufism in light of the Qur'aan and the Sunnah' by
Shaykh Muhammad Ibn Rabee' Ibn Haadee Al-Madkhalee (English translation)
Birmingham, 1" Edition, 1416/1995.- [TranslatOr}
51
This is the same Abu Qatadah who whilst being the upholder of jihaad
against the non-Muslims and enemies of Islam, felt no shame in seeking asylum
in non-Muslim Britain and freely taking from its state benefits!! After being
protected and sheltered (!) by the British intelligence organisation MI5 for 10
months (whilst on the run after September 11 'h), he was finally arrested and
placed in prison where he still languishes. - [Translator)
52
Khwaarij: The first seer in the hisrory of Islam. From amongst their
distinguishing characteristics is that they declare any Muslim who commits a

55
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

''Ta.ifiya & 'Tarbiya ' cpurijictllion & Ctflioalion - and !he need which !ha Cflluslims ha1X! for !hem

+In it he acts haphazardly and he was like the woodcutter at night 53
when he claimed that this is a saying of the methodology of the Sufis.
H e says on page 2 18: 'Indeed, many of the learned ones have become
influenced by the Sttfi methodology in change and progress. A nd perhaps the
dearest saying which has been designated in this time which gives expression to
the Sufi methodology, is the saying which has become a slogan for some of the
Islamic groups and organisations. This saying is:'Establish the Islamic state
in yottr hearts (and) it will be established for yott upon yotJr earth'. Likewise,
similar to this call are the companions of the call to 'Tasfiya' (pttrification)
and 'Tarbiya' (cultivation) with the ttnderstanding of cttltivation which the
followers of these slogans have introduced.. .So, indeed, with all boldness we
are able to call the companions of this slogan (Establish ... it will be
established) and they are the companions of change upon the way of Tasfiya
and Tarbiya, that they are Salafee in belief and Sufi in methodology. '
Then, on page 219, he begins to analyse this saying on the basis of his
personal ideas and (says) that it is linked with the belief of J abr54 and
Irja55 . On page 220 he states: 'So the saying, as it is with its companions;
'Establish the Islamic state in your hearts {is the innovation of Irja} (and) it
will be established for yott upon your earth. '{is the innovation ofjabr}'.
And now is not the time for me to give a clarification concerning his
ig norance, his distortion, his deceit and his satisfaction with what

he has not been given...and all the other guises of falsehood and
= m ajor sin to be a disbeliever and that the Muslims rulers can be fought and
rebelled against. Besides Abu Qatadah, many ocher well-known figure heads in
the west also represent the Kharariji methodology_ They include such extremists
as Abdullah Faisal, O mar Bakri Mohamm ed, and Abu Hamza AI-Misri. (Translator}
H An Arabic expression which means that he didn't know what he was doing (Translator]
s4 Jabr: The deviant belief that people have no free will and chat they are not
responsible fo r their actions because they are fo rced (by Allah). - (Translator)
'' lrja: The deviant belief that sins, major or minor, do not affect faith and that
faith neither increases or decreases. - [Translator}

56
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

''Tasfiya & 'Tarhiya · CfJuri/icalion & Cullioalion - and lhc nrcd which lba 9Y!uslims boO<? for !hem

+delusion with which he covers himself with. Rather, m any a clothed
woman is naked. However, I will point out the (following) matters:
1. It is not possible to understand from the saying 'establish the Islamic
state in your hearts (and) it will be established for you upon your earth' what
the aforementioned writer has alleged due to the following reasons:

[i} - The one who said this saying, Al-Hudaibee, his methodology of
change was not Sufi. Rather, the writer knows, before others, that he
(Al-Hudaibee) was Mu'tazilli and Khaariji. And may Allah have
mercy upon Sheikh 1\.bul-i\.shbaal Ahmed Shaakir56 when he said:
'AI-Ikhwaan-ai-Mttslimoon are the Khwaarij of the 20'h century'. The
history of this group is full of political tragedies due to their continual
clash with those of authority whenever they try to take away the
affair from its people with the smallest of doubts. So, their situation in
Egypt, Syria, Iraq and in Algeria is not hidden from t he one who has
insight in the field of da'wah.
[ii} -The one who transmitted this saying - and he is our sheikh (may
Allah have mercy on him) - was a thorn in the throat of Sufism in the
lands of Shaam and the whole world even until his death - may Allah
have mercy on him.
2. The saying 'establish the Islamic state in your hearts (and) it will be
established for you upon your earth' was used by the one who transmitted
it - may Allah have mercy on him - as a proof against the
companions of the one who said it, from the perspective of

6

Sheikh Ahmed Shaakir (may AHah have mercy on him) was a great salafee
scholar of hadeeth from Egypt during this century.- (Translator}
)

57
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'Tmfiyo & 'Torhiyo · . 'Purijicolion & Cullioofion . ond !be nc('d a'bich lb.., 91/u.llims hove for them

....

( ... and a witness from her
witness ... ) (Surah Yusuf 12:26)

household

bore

as is apparent from his words57.
3. The saying is confirmed by the saying of Allah the Most High:

( Indeed, Allah will not change the condition of a
people until they change that which is in
themselves) (Surah Ar-Ra'd 13: 11).
So, this noble aayah is the methodology of Islam in change and from
it the Salafee methodology takes its guide-posts in change.
And for you is a clarification:
(i] - Allah - May He be glorified - mentions 'change' two times (in
the aayah):

( Indeed, Allah will not CHANGE the condition of a
people until they CHANGE that which is in
themselves)
(ii} - In the first instance He attributes the change back to His Noble
Self and in the other instance He attributes the change back to His
worshippers.

57 See Appendix 1 - [Translator}

58
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

'crwf{qa & (Tarb~tll . 'Pur/fica/ion & Cuflioalfon

and/~ need mbtch /h.; 91/u.v!ims hove for !hem

----+
[iii] - The change which is attributed back to Allah - may He be
glorified, the Most High - is to change what has befallen the
worshippers and what is upon them in terms of humiliation,
insignificance, degradation and weakness. The change which is
attributed to the worshippers is to change what is in themselves by
way of weakness, disobedience and corruption.
[iv] - Changing what is in the inner-selves of the worshippers is a
condition in changing what has befallen the worshippers.
(v] - If the aayah was understood as the writer understood the saying,
then it would be equivalent to:

( Indeed, Allah will not change the condition of a
people UABR) ... )
and:

( ... until they change that which is in themselves
(IRJA) )

And this understanding is topsy-turvy, haphazard and confusing.
4. This saying indicates the (following) matters:
(i] - Without doubt, Islam has to take form in a state. However, does

the sufi methodology call towards the Islamic state and the
application of Allah's judgement on the earth? (Does it call for) the

59
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

'CToif;yn & %rbiyo · (Pun/lcnlk.>n & CJ!ionlion

and lk need which !he <Jllu.•h'ms have for !hom

-+
establishment of a righteous khilaafah upon the Prophetic
methodology and the resumption of an Islamic lifestyle ?!~ 8
(ii} - Without doubt, the Islamic state has to be firmly established
within the hearts of those who call towards it until they are able to
establish it in their reality (around them) and on their earth.
(iii} - The one who is not able to apply the judgement of Allah and
establish His methodology upon himself, then it is not possible that
he will apply that to his reality (around him). The one who is without
something cannot give anything, even if he alleges that which he does
not have and is satisfied with that which is not from it!
(iv] - The actions of the limbs require eeman (belief) in the hearts.
And whosoever firmly establishes the correct eeman in his heart, then
the existence of the actions of the limbs are made necessary.
Otherwise, it indicates the absence of it (eeman) or its weakness.
5. When we understand the saying in light of the aayah, then the
conclusion is 'Tasfiya' and 'Tarbiya' with the understanding of the
Salafee methodology which our sheikh - may Allah have mercy on
him- explained."

lB This

is what the methodology of 'tasfiya' and 'tarbiya' calls for, thus being
very distinct and far from the sufi methodology of change as alleged by the likes
of Abu Qatadah. [Translacor)

60
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'Tasfiya & 'Tarbtj{a · - cpurificalion & Cultioaliorr · arrd the rreed which !he 'flluslimJ have for them

Qlossary
Aameen - '0 Allah grant it'. A supplication which is often said after
supplicating for something else Aayah (pL Aayaat) -A sign of Allah or a section of the Qur'anic text
often referred to as a verse Abuul-Muttalib - The grandfather of the Prophet MuhammaJ (~) -

Ahlus-Sunnah - A term used for those adhere to what the Prophet
(;i) and his companions were upon with respect to matters of belief,
methodology and all other matters of the religion Aqeedah - The Islamic beliefAsh'arees - A sect which distorts the meanings of the attributes of
Allah. They attribute themselves back to the great scholar of the
Salaf, Abu-Hasan Al-Ash'aree (may Allah have mercy on him) whom
they claim was the upholder of their deviant beliefs. However, the
final works of Abul-Hasan Al-Ash'aree show chat he is free from such

beliefsAsr - The mid-afternoon prayer, which 1s the third of the daily
prescribed prayers Da'wah - Calling people to Islam Dhikr - Remembering Allah Eeman - The correct Islamic faith comprising belief of the heart,
testitfication upon the tongue and the actions of the limbs. It
increases (with obedience to Allah) and decreases (with disobedience)

61
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

'C[asflya & 'Tarb~ta · (Purification & Cu!livalion - tmd !he need which the Cfllu.•lirn.l baO!! jor them

+Fiqh - Islamic jurisprudence or the understanding and application of
the Islamic law from its sources Hadeeth (pl. Ahaadeeth) - A term used for the narration of words,
actions or tacit approvals of the Prophet Muhammad (~) Hijra - The emigration of the Prophet (i15) from Makkah to Medina;
the migration of Muslims from the lands of the non-Muslims to the
lands of the Muslims Ijtihaad - The effort or deduction which a Jurtst makes from the
sources of Islam to extract law which is not self-evident Imaam - A religious scholar; one who leads the prayer; the leader of
a statelnshallah - 'If Allah wills' Jihaad - Striving to make the word of Allah uppermost. It has
various forms including striving physically against an enemy, striving
against ones own soul and striving financially in the cause of Allah Khamr - Alcohol Khilaafah - The Islamic state Laa ilaha ilal Allah - None has the right tO be worshipped except
AllahMaatureedees - A sect which is from the sub-divisions of the
Hanafee school of thought and believes that eeman neither increases
or decreases. It takes its name from Abu Mansoor Al-Maatureedee
who said: 'My eeman is like the eeman of ]ibraeel' (The angel of
revelat ion) i.e. because he didn't believe that eeman increased or

decreased, he considered that everyone is of the same level of eeman -

62
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· Cfasfiga & Cfarbiga · - cpurificalion & Cul!ioalion - and !be need which lha <J'IluslifTIJ have for !hem

+-Madhhab - A school of thought Mufti - Someone who is able to issue religious edicts Muhaddith - A scholar who specialises in the science of hadeethMu'tazilla - The rationalist school of thought which appeared in the
second century after Hijra. This sect believes in the creation of the
Qur' an, rebelling against the Muslim rulers and the negation of
Allah's attributes Mujtahid - A jurist who makes ijtihaad Quraish - A great tribe in pre-Islamic Arabia and that to which the
Prophet Muhammad (~) belonged to Riba- Usury/InterestSaheeh Al-Bukhari - The most authentic compilation of hadeeth
collected by Muhammad Ibn Ismaeel Ibn Ibraheem Ibn Mughira Ibn
Al-Bardizba Al-Bukhari (may Allah have mercy on him). It is
unanimously accepted by all the Muslims as being the most authentic
book after the Qur' an Salaf - Predecessors; the early Muslims; the companions, their
students and then their students (collectively referred to as the first
three generations) Salafee - One who takes his understanding of Islam from the Salaf_
This includes matters of belief, methodology and all other matters of
the religionSharee'ah- The divine Islamic law -

Shaytaan - Satan, the devil -

63
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

· 'Tasf<ya & 'Tarbzqa · . 9urijicalion & Cullioalion · and the need which !he 91/us/ims have for !hem

+-

Sunnah - Literally meaning 'way', it refers to everything that the
Prophet (;I) came with. It includes those matters which the Prophet
(~) established through his sayings, actions and tacit approvals. Like
the Qur'an, it is also divine revelation from AllahSurah - A chapter of the Qur' an Tajweed- The science of reciting the Qur'an Tawheed - Islamic monotheism; the belief in the oneness of Allah in
His lordship, in His names and attributes and in His worship Ummah- The Islamic community/nation
Usool - The fundamental principles of the religion-

64
Www.IslamicBooks.Website

Www.IslamicBooks.Website

