THE
MAJOR SINS

Dar Al-Taqwa

Imam Shams ad-Din adh-Dhahabi
© Dar Al Taqwa Ltd. 2012

ISBN 978-1-870582-65-0

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, elec-
tronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the
prior permission of the publishers.

Translation: Aisha Bewley

Editors: Abdalhaqq Bewley and Muhammad Isa Waley
Cover desing by Mukhtar Sanders

Published by:
Dar Al Taqwa Ltd.
7A Melcombe Street
Baker Street
London NWI 6AE

Printed by:
IMAK OFFSET Printing Centre
T: 0090 212 656 49 97
F: 0099 212 656 29 29
www.imakofset.com.tr
isa@imakofset.com.tr
19

22
23
28
29
30
37
40
45
47

48
50

53
63
59

60
63
65
66
70
70

Contents

The author and Kitab al-kaba’ir
The Deadly Sins
1. Associating others with Allah
2. Murder
3. Sorcery
4, Neglect of the prayer
Section: When a child should be ordered to pray
Section: The punishment of the person who does
the prayer like a pecking bird
Section: Greater concern for attending the ‘Isha’
and Fajr prayers
5. Refusing to pay zakat
6. Not fasting a day of Ramadan without a valid excuse
7. Not performing /ajj when able to do so
8. Disrespect to parents
9. Shunning relatives
10. Fornication
11. Sodomy
Section: The punishment of sodomites
Section: anal intercourse with a woman is part
of sodomy
12. Usury
13. Consuming the property of orphans and
wronging them
14. Lying about Allah and His Messenger #
15. Fleeing from battle
16. A leader duping his followers and treating
them unjustly
17. Pride
18. Perjury
19. Drinking alcohol
Traditions from the Salaf about wine
Section on hashish
Proofs of Propbethood

20. Gambling 74
21, Slandering chaste women 7
22. Stealing from booty 79
23. Theft 82
24. Highway robbery 84
25. Deliberate false oaths 86
Section: On swearing by other than Allah 87
26. Injustice 89
Section: Being cautious about visiting the
perpetrators of injustice 96
27. Tax Collecting 100
28. Consuming and receiving unlawful property 102
29. Suicide 106
30. Inveterate lying 108
31. Being corrupt in rendering judgement 111
32. Taking bribes for judgement 113
33. Women looking like men and men looking
like women 114
34. Being a wittol 117
35. Marrying a woman to enable her to remarry
her former husband 118
36. Not avoiding urine, something which the
Christians are prone to 121
37, Showing-off 122
38. Teaching for the sake of this world and
concealing knowledge 125
39. Treachery 128
40. Reminding people of one’s charity 130
41. Denial of the Divine Decree 131
42. Eavesdropping on people and seeking out
their secrets 136
43. Carrying tales 137
44, Cursing 140
Section: On the permissibility of cursing those who
disobey Allah 140
45. Perfidy and not fulfilling a promise 144
46. Believing soothsayers and astrologers 146
47. A wife disobeying her husband 148

48. Making images 154

il
Contents

49, Slapping, wailing, tearing garments, shaving the
head, pulling out hair and lamenting loudly in

a time of affliction 156
Section on consoling 159
50. Transgression 166
51. Being overbearing towards the weak, slaves, girls,
wives, and animals 168
52. Harming one’s neighbours 174
53. Abusing and insulting other Muslims 176
Section: Cautioning against inciting fights between
believers and between animals of any kind 177

Section: Encouraging reconciliation between people 177
54. Hlarming people and being overbearing

towards them 180
55, Wearing waist-wrapper, robe, clothing and trousers
long out of arrogance, pride and boastfulness 183
56. Men wearing silk and gold 185
57. Absconding by slaves 186
58. Slandering to other than Allah Almighty 187
59. Knowingly ascribing oneself falsely someone
to other than one’s real father 189
60. Argument, quarrelling and disputation 190
61. Denying spare water to others 193
62. Giving short weight and measure 194
63. Feeling secure from Allah’s devising 196

64. Despairing of the mercy of Allah and losing hope —- 199
65. Abandoning the Group Prayer and praying alone

without a valid excuse 200
66. Persisting in abandoning the Jumu‘a and Group

prayer without a valid excuse 201
67. Causing harm in bequests 205
68. Deceit and treachery 206
69. Spying on Muslims and pointing out their

weak points 207
70. Insulting one of the Companions 208
Glossary 212
Index 217

iil
The author and Kitab al-Kaba’ir

‘The author’s name is Shams ad-Din Muhammad ibn ‘Uthman
ibn Qaymaz at-Turmani al-Farigi ad-Dimishqi ash-Shafi‘l; he is
commonly known as adh-Dhahabi.

His family originally came from Myafariqinayy, but he was
born in Damascus in 673/1274. He studied with the shaykhs of
Syria, Egypt and the Hijaz. He visited many cities for this purpose
and was a recognised source in many fields of knowledge, especial-
ly with respect to the different recensions of the Qur’an and
hadith, His memory was legendary. He is described as the imam of
all others in respect of memory and also as the shaykh of analysis
of narrators’ character (arh wa ta‘dil). He was outstanding in every
way and fainous in all regions. Seekers of knowledge sought him
out from every direction.

In an autobiographical note, adh-Dhahabi mentions thirteen
hundred shaykhs from whom he took knowledge. He himself
taught a large number of scholars, including a group of truly great
scholars and famous writers. He held a number of teaching posts
in Damascus and, when he went blind in 741 AH, he stopped
writing altogether and, for the rest of his life he confined himself
to teaching. He died on 3 Dhu al-Qa‘da 748/1348. and was buried
in the cemetery of al-Bab as-Saghir in Damascus.

Adh-Dhahabi left an ample legacy of knowledge which he
recorded in the useful books he wrote, numbering about ninety in
all and including works on hadith, history, biographies and other
subjects. The largest of them is his great history Ta’rikh al-Islam.
Other books include Siyar an-nubula’, Mizan al-i‘tidal, al-
Mutashabib fi asma@ ar-rijal, and Tajrid al-usul fi hadith ar-Rasul.
Many of these works are published and still in circulation.

Many writers, both old and modern, have discussed the books
of adh-Dhahabi and have written a number of essays about him,
both in Arabic other languages. All of them emphasise his knowl-
edge and excellence and praise his scholarly legacy, which benefit-
ed the people of his time and those after them and succeeding
generations down to our own time.

1
Seventy Major Sins

The present work a/-Kaba’ir is one of the most important ones
he wrote for ordinary readers. In it he deals with themes which are
of great interest and benefit to them in both their deen and matters
of this world, explaining matters which are less easy to understand
in other books of knowledge written for specialist scholars and
researchers.

In al-Kaba’ir adh-Dhahabi adopts the approach of a warning
guide who seeks to correct people as regards their beliefs and lives
and presents his material in easily understood language and in a
clear attractive style. He avoids complexity, obscurity and artifices
and his book is a useful source for speakers and preachers alike. By
his words he awakens the heedless and bewildered, chides rebels
and deviants, and guides those who desire to travel the path of
Allah to the truth and to what is correct.
The Major Sins

In the Name of Allah the All-Merciful, Most Merciful

Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds. There should be no
aggression except against wrongdoers. Peace and blessings be on
our master Muhammad, the Lord of the Messengers and Imam of
the godfearing and on his family and all his Companions.

This is a book which contains a general discussion of the major
wrong actions and forbidden things. Major wrong actions are
those actions which Allah and His Messenger have forbidden in
the Book, Suna and through reports from the righteous Salaf.
Allah has promised in His Mighty Book that avoiding major
wrong actions and forbidden things will expiate minor bad actions,
declaring:

“If you avoid the serious wrong actions you have been forbidden,
We will erase your bad actions from you and admit you by a Gate
of Honour.” (4:31)

By this text Allah Almighty guarantees that anyone who avoids
major wrong actions will enter the Garden.

Allah Almighty also says:

“Those who avoid major wrong actions and indecencies and
who, when they are angered, then forgive.” (42:37)

“To whoever avoids the major wrong actions and indecencies
except for minor lapses, truly your Lord is immensely foreivine.”
7 5 by 01 ‏0م‎ c

(53:32)

‘The Messenger of Allah ‏يذ‎ said, “The five prayers, and Fuazu‘a
to Jumu‘a, and Ramadan to Ramadan, are expiation for everything
between them if major wrong actions are avoided.” (Muslim, at-
‘Tirmidhi and Ibn Khuzayma)

It is therefore incumbent on us to investigate major wrong
actions and learn what they are, so that we as Muslims may avoid
them. We find that scholars disagree about how many of them

3
Seventy Major Sins

there are. It is said that there are seven; so cite those who say as
evidence the words of the Prophet ‏:ف‎ “Avoid the seven deadly
ones...” and he went on to mention associating others with Allah,
sorcery, killing a soul which Allah has made sacrosanct except by
legal right, consuming the property of orphans, practising usury,
fleeing from the battlefield and slandering unaware chaste believ-
ing women. The Aadith is agreed upon.

Ibn ‘Abbas # said, “There are more likely to be seventy than
seven.” By Allah, Ibn ‘Abbas ‏عن‎ spoke the truth. The hadith does
not include all major wrong actions. The fact is that if someone
commits any wrong action for which there is a hadd punishment in
this world - such as murder, fornication or theft — or any which
have incurred a threat of Divine punishment, anger, or curse, indi-
cated by a statement from our Prophet Muhammad %, it is consid-
ered a major wrong action.

It must be accepted that some major wrong actions are worse
than others. Do you not see that the Prophet # counted shirk
among the major wrong actions? - and we know that anyone who
commnits shirk will be in the Fire forever and will never be forgiv-

en. Allah Almighty says:

“Allah does not forgive anything being associated with Him, but
He forgives whomever He wills for anything else.” (4:48)
1. Associating others with Allah

The worst of the major wrong actions is associating others with
Allah Almighty, of which there are several categories. One of them
is when a person treats something else as equal to Allah and wor-
ships something other than Him, be it a stone, a tree, the sun, the
moon, a Prophet, shaykh, star, angel, or anything else. ‘This is the
greater shirk which Allah Almighty is alluding to when He says:

“Allah does not forgive anything being associated with Him,
but He forgives whomever He wills for anything else.” (4:48)

“Associating others with Him is a terrible wrong” (31:13)

“If anyone associates anything with Allah, Allah has forbidden
him the Garden and his refuge will be the Fire.” (5:72)

There are also many other ayats which speak of it.

Anyone who associates others with Allah, and then dies while
doing so, is absolutely one of the people of the Fire, just as anyone
who believes in Allah and dies a believer is one of the people of
the Garden, even if he is punished for a time in the Fire. It is
reported in the Sahih that the Messenger of Allah * said three
times, “Shall 1 inform you of the worst of the major wrong
actions?” Those present answered, “Yes, Messenger of Allah.” He
said “Associating others with Allah and disobeying your parents.”
He was reclining and he sat up and then said, “False testimony,
false testimony,” and continued to repeat it until they said,
“Would that he had been silent!” (al-Bukhari, Muslim and at-
Tirmidhi) The Prophet % said, “Avoid the seven deadly ones,” and
among them he mentioned associating others with Allah. He #
said, “If anyone changes his deen, kill him.” (al-Bukhari, Ahmad,
Ibn Hibban, an-Nasa’i and Abu Ya‘la)

The second type of shirk is showing off one’s good actions. As
Allah Almighty says:

“Let him who hopes to meet his Lord act rightly and not associate
anyone in the worship of bis Lord.” (18:110)
Seventy Major Sins

It means in this context that one should not act to show off to
other people. The Prophet #2 said, “Beware of the lesser shirk!”
The people asked, “Messenger of Allah, what is the lesser shirk?”
He answered, “Showing off. Allah Almighty will say on the Day
when He repays His slaves for their actions, ‘Go to those to whom
you used to show off your actions in this world, and see whether
they have any reward for you.” (Ahmad, al-Bayhaqi)

The Prophet # said that Allah says, “Whoever does an action
in which he associates someone else with Me, it is for the one
whom he associates and has nothing to do with Me.” (Muslim) He
‏وق‎ also said, “If anyone wants people to hear about him, Allah will
let people know [the truth about] him. If anyone wants people to
see him, Allah will show him up.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim) Abu
Hurayra 2 said that the Prophet 38 said, “Many a fasting person
only gains hunger and thirst from his fast, and many a person who
prays at night is only deprived of sleep by his standing.” (Ibn
Majah) In other words, when prayer and fasting are not for the
sake of Allah, they bring no reward.

It is also related that the Prophet # said, “The likeness of a
person who acts merely to show off and for the sake of reputation
is that of someone who fills his bag with pebbles and then enters
the market to buy something. When he opens it in front of the
buyer, there is nothing in the bag but pebbles and he strikes his
face with it. The only benefit he gains from his bag is that people
say, ‘How full his bag is!’ He is not given anything for it.” That is
how it is with someone who acts in order to be seen and for the
sake of reputation. The only thing he gets from his actions is what
other people say about him; he receives no reward in the Next
World.

Allah Almighty says: “We will advance on the actions they have
done and make them scattered specks of dust.” (25:23) He means: We
will nullify the reward for any actions they did other than for the
sake of Allah Almighty and make them scattered dust. This is a
reference to the specks of dust that can be seen in rays of sunlight.

‘Adi ibn Hatim at-Ta’i # related that the Messenger of Allah #
said, “On the Day of Rising Allah will command groups of people
to go to the Garden, and when they are close to it, smell its fra-
grance and look at its palaces and what Allah has prepared for

6
Associating others with Allah

those dwelling in it, they will be told to go away from it. They
have no portion of it. So they will go back full of such regret and
sorrow as none of the early or later ones have experienced. ‘They
will say, ‘Our Lord, if You had admitted us to the Fire before
showing us what You showed us of the reward You have prepared
for Your friends, it would have been easier for us.’ Allah Almighty
will say, “Chat is what I had intended for you. When you were
alone you showed Me dreadful deeds, but when you were with
other people you met them with humility, showing them actions
which were the opposite of what You gave Me in your hearts. You
feared people but did not fear Me. You respected people but did
not respect Me. You refrained fromm things for people but did not
refrain from them for Me. Today I will make you taste the pain of
My punishment along with what I have denied you of My ample
reward.” (Ibn Abi Dunya. Its ismad is weak.)

A man asked the Messenger of Allah %, “Wherein lies salva-
tion?” He % answered, “In not cheating Allah.” The man asked,
“How can someone cheat Allah?” He replied, “By doing an action
which Allah and His Messenger have commanded while intending
somrthing other than the pleasure of Allah by it. Beware of show-
ing off. It is the lesser shirk. On the Day of Rising anyone who
showed off will be summoned in front of nankind by four names:
‘Show-off! Treacherous one! Impious one! Loser! Your actions are
lost and your reward is annulled. You will have no reward from
Us. Go and collect your reward from those for whom you acted,
deceitful one!”

A wise man was asked, “Who is a sincere person?” He
answered, “A sincere person is the one who conceals his good
actions in the same way he conceals his evil actions.” One man was
asked, “What is the goal of sincerity?” He replied, “Not to care
for people’s praise.”

Al-Fuday] ibn ‘Iyad said, “To abandon an action for the sake of
people is showing off and acting for the sake of people is shirk.
Sincerity is that Allah protect you from both of these.”

O Allah, protect us from both these things and pardon us!
2. Murder
Allah Almighty says:

“As for anyone who kills a believer deliberately, his repayment
is Hellfire, to remain in it for ever. Allah is angry with him and
has cursed him and has prepared for him an terrible punish-
ment.” (4:93)

“Those who do not call upon another god with Allah and do
not kill anyone Allah has made inviolate, unless with the right to
do so, and do not fornicate; anyone who does that will recerve an
evil punishment, and on the Day of Rising bis punishment will be
doubled, and he will be humiliated in it timelessly, forever, except
for those who repent and believe and act rightly.” (25:68-70)

“On account of that We decreed for the tribe of Israel that if
anyone kills another person, unless it is in retaliation for someone
else, or for causing corruption in the earth, it is as if they bad
murdered all mankind. And if someone saves another person’s life,
it is as if they had given life to all mankind.” (5:32-35)

“When the baby girl buried alive is asked for what crime she
was killed.” (81:8-9)

The Prophet % said, Avoid the seven deadly ones,” and he
mentioned taking a life which Allah has made inviolate without
having the legal right do so. A man asked the Prophet ss, “What is
the worst sin in the sight of Allah Almighty?” He answered, “That
you assign an equal to Allah when He created you.” The man con-
tinued, “Then what?” He % replied, “That you kill your child out
of the fear that he will eat with you.” He asked, “Then what?” He
se answered, “That you commit adultery with your neighbour’s
wife.” (al-Bukhari, Muslim, at-Tirmidhi and an-Nasa’i) Allah
revealed in confirmation of this: “Those who do not call upon another
god with Allah and do not kill anyone Allah has made inviolate, unless
with the right to do so, and do not fornicate.” (25:68)

The Prophet # said, “When two Muslims meet with their
swords, then the killer and the killed will both be in the Fire.”

8
Murder

Someone asked, “Messenger of Allah, we understand that this is
the case for the killer, but what about the one killed?” He
answered, “It is because he wanted to kill his companion.” (al-
Bukhari, Muslim, Abu Dawud, an-Nasa’i, Ibn Majah and Ibn
Hibban)

Imam Abu Sulayman al-Khattabi commented: “This applies
when they do not have a legitimate reason for fighting and are
only fighting out of enmity between them, or partisanship, or
seeking enrichment, leadership or high position. If one is fighting
rebels for a legitimate reason which demands that they be killed,
or is defending himself or his family, this does not apply because
he is commanded to fight to defend himself and has no desire to
kill his companion. The Aadith is not referring to people like this,
but to other people who fight without a valid reason. Allah knows
best.”

‘The Messenger of Allah # said, “Do not revert to being unbe-
lievers after my death, striking off one another’s heads.” (al-
Bukhari and Muslim) The Messenger of Allah 28 said, “People will
continue to find scope in their deen as long as they do not shed
unlawful blood.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim, at-Tirmidhi, an-Nasa’i
and Ibn Majah) The Prophet # said, “The first thing to be judged
between people on the Day of Rising will be the shedding of
blood.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim) In a hadith the Messenger of
Allah 3 said, “Killing a believer is worse in the sight of Allah than
the disappearance of this world.” (an-Nasa’i and al-Bayhaqi) The
Prophet # said, “The major wrong actions are: associating others
with Allah, murder, and deliberate perjury.” (al-Bukhari, Muslim
and an-Nasa’i) The Prophet # said, “No person is unjustly killed
without the responsibility for it falling on the elder son of Adam,
for he was the first to make a sunna of murder.” This is transmit-
ted in both major Sahih collections.

The Prophet % said, “Anyone who kills someone covered by a
treaty will not experience the fragrance of the Garden, even
though its fragrance can be experienced at a distance of forty
years.” Al-Bukhari transmitted this. ‘That is the case with someone
who kills someone covered by a treaty, such as a Jew or Christian
within the Land of Islam, what do you think will be the case if he
kills a Muslim? The Prophet # said, “Whoever kills a person cov-

9
Seventy Major Sins

ered by treaty, who is under the protection of Allah and His
Messenger, has broken the covenant of Allah and will not experi-
ence the fragrance of the Garden, even though its fragrance is
sensed at a distance of fifty years.” According to at-Tirmidhi this is
a sound hadith.

The Prophet # said, “If anyone aids and abets the killing of a
Muslim with even half a word he will meet Allah with the words
‘Despairing of the mercy of Allah Almighty’ written between his
eyes.” Imam Ahmad transmitted it. Mu‘awiya # related that the
Messenger of Allah # said, “Allah may forgive every sin except
when a man dies an unbeliever or a man kills a believer deliberate-
ly.” (an-Nasa’i and al-Hakim)

We ask Allah for protection.

10
3. Sorcery

We mention sorcery here because it necessarily involves unbe-
lief. Allah Almighty says:

“But the shaytans disbelieved, teaching people sorcery.” (2:102)

The sole aim of the accursed Shaytan in teaching people sor-
cery is to make them associate others with Allah. Allah Almighty
says, referring to Harut and Marut:

“They taught no one without first saying to him, ‘We are merely
a trial, so do not disbelieve.’ People learned from them how to
separate a man and his wife, but they cannot harm anyone by it
except with Allah’s permission. They have learned what will
harm them and will not benefit them. They know that any who
deal in it will have no share in the Next World.” (2:102)

Many people get involved in sorcery out of misguidance, think-
ing it only to be forbidden and not realising that it actually consti-
tutes disbelief. They embark on studying natural magic (simya’)
and practising it, which is pure sorcery; they learn how to separate
a man from his wife, which is sorcery; and how to cause a man to
love or hate his wife and similar things through the use of unheard
of words, most of which constitute shirk and misguidance.

The Aadd punishment for a sorcerer is execution, because sor-
cery constitutes disbelief in Allah or something tantamount to dis-
belief. The Prophet % mentioned sorcery among the seven deadly
wrong actions. ‘Deadly’ means that they can ruin people. So one
should fear his Lord and not involve himself in something which
will lose him this world and the Next. It is reported that the
Prophet ‏يه‎ said, “The punishment for sorcerers is to be executed
by the sword.” (at-Tirmidhi) We know, according to Jundub, that
Bajala ibn ‘Abda said, “A letter from ‘Umar reached us a year
before he died ordering us to kill every sorcerer and sorceress.”
(Abu Dawud) Wahb ibn Munabbth said, “I read in a book that
Allah Almighty says: “There is no god but Me. Anyone who prac-
tises sorcery or makes use of it, who is a soothsayer or has recourse

1]
Seventy Major Sins

to soothsaying, or who reads omens or asks for them to be read, is
nothing to do with Me.”

‘Ali ibn Abi Talib # said that the Messenger of Allah 3¢ said,
“Three people will never enter the Garden: someone addicted to
drink, someone who cuts off relatives, and someone who believes
in sorcery.” Imam Ahmad related this in his Musnad.

Ibn Mas‘ud # said, “Incantations, amulets and witchcraft are
shirk.” Amulets are beads and things which the ignorant attach to
themselves, their children and their animals claiming that they
ward off the evil eye. This is an act belonging to the time.of
Jahiliyya. Anyone who believes in that has committed shirk.
Witchcraft is what a woman uses to make her husband love her.
That is an aspect of shirk since ignorant people believe it has an
effect which goes against the decree of Allah Almighty.

Al-Khattabi said, “An incantation using the Qur’an or the
Names of Allah is permitted because the Prophet # used one for
al-Hasan and al-Husayn. He said, ‘I seek refuge for you both with
the perfect Words of Allah from every shaytan, avenging spirit, and
critical eye.”

Allah is the One who is asked for help and we rely on Him
alone.
4. Neglect of the prayer
Allah Almighty says:

“An evil generation succeeded them, who neglected the prayer and
followed their appetites. They will plunge into the Valley of Evil —
except for those who repent and believe and act rightly.” (19:59)

Ibn ‘Abbas # said, “The meaning of ‘neglected’ here does not
imply complete abandonment of the prayer but delaying it beyond
its time.” Sa‘id ibn al-Musayyab, the Imam of the Tabi‘un, said, “It
means not praying Zubr until the time of ‘sr, not praying ‘Asr
until the time of Maghrib, not praying Maghrib until the time of
‘Isha’, not praying ‘Isha’ until the time of Fajr, and not praying
Fajr until the sun has risen. If someone dies persisting in this state
without repenting, Allah has promised him ‘Ghayy’, which is a
deep valley in Hell whose food is disgusting.”

Allah Almighty says in another ayat: “Woe to those who pray and
are forgetful of their prayer” (107:4-5): in other words, who are neg-
ligent and careless about it. Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas # said, “1 asked
the Messenger of Allah % about ‘those who are forgetful of their
prayer, and he said, ‘It means delaying it” - in other words, delay-
ing it beyond its time. (al-Bazzar) They are said to be ‘praying’
and yet they are negligent about the prayer and delay it beyond its
time. Allah has promised such people ‘Wayl’, which means severe
punishment. It is also said to be a valley in Hell. If the mountains
of this world were placed in it, they would melt from the intensity
of its heat. That will be the destination of those who are negligent
about the prayer and delay it beyond its time - unless they repent
to Allah Almighty and regret their negligence.

Allah Almighty says in another ayat:

“O you who believe, do not let your wealth or children divert you
from the remembrance of Allah. Whoever does that is lost.”
(63:9)

13
Seventy Major Sins

Commentators say that what is meant by “remembrance of
Allah” in this ayat is the five prayers. Anyone who is preoccupied
by his wealth through buying and selling, or concern for his liveli-
hood, or the welfare of his children, from the prayer at its time is
one of the lost. That is corroborated by the words of the Prophet
#8: “The first action for which a person will be called to account
on the Day of Rising will be the prayer. If it is in order, then he
has been successful and won. If it is lacking, then he is ruined and
lost.” (al-Mundhiri)

Allah Almighty says reporting about the inhabitants of Hell:

“What caused you to enter Sagar?’ They will say, ‘We were not
among those who prayed and we did not feed the poor. We
plunged with those who plunged and denied the Day of
Judgement until the Certain came to us. The intercession of the
interceders did not help them.” (74:42-48)

The Prophet # said, “The contract is determined by that
which is between us and the prayer: whoever abandons it has dis-
believed.” (Ahmad, Abu Dawud, an-Nasa’i and at-Tirmidhi) And
in another hadith the Prophet % said, “All that stands between a
person and disbelief is abandoning the prayer.” (Ahmad, Muslim,
Abu Dawud, an-Nasa’i, at-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah)

It is reported in Sahih Bukhari that the Messenger of Allah ‏ع‎
‎said, “If anyone misses the ‘4sr prayer their actions fall away.” In
the Sunan we find that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, “If someone
abandons the prayer deliberately he has stepped outside the
covenant of Allah.” (Ibn Majah and al-Bayhaqi)

The Prophet % said, “I have been commanded to fight people
until they say, “There is no god but Allah,’ establish the prayer and
pay the zzkat. When they do that, their lives and property are pro-
tected from me, except when there is a legal right, and their reck-
oning is up to Allah.” This is reported by the major 524117 sources.
The Prophet # says (about the prayers), “Whoever perseveres in
them will have light, a proof and salvation on the Day of Rising.
Whoever fails to persevere in them will have no light, proof or sal-
vation on the Day of Rising. On the Day of Rising, he will be with
Qarun, Haman and Ubayy ibn Khalaf.” (Ahmad)

14
Neglect of the prayer

‘Umar ibn al-Khattab 2 said, “Anyone who neglects the
prayer has no portion of Islam.” Al-Bayhaqi related that ‘Umar
also said: “A man went to the Messenger of Allah % and asked,
‘Messenger of Allah, which actions does Allah Almighty love the
most in Islam?’ He answered, “The prayer at its time. Anyone who
abandons the prayer has no deen. Prayer is the mainstay of the
deen.” When ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab #2 was stabbed, someone said
to him, “The prayer, Amir al-Mu’minin.” He said, “Yes, there is no
portion for anyone in Islam who abandons the prayer,” and he
prayed with his wound gushing blood.

‘Abdullah ibn Shagiq at-Tabi‘i said, “Che Companions of the
Messenger of Allah % did not think that abandoning any action
was tantamount to disbelief except in the case of the prayer.” ‘Ali
# was asked about a woman who did not pray and said, “Anyone
who does not pray is an unbeliever.” (at-Tirmidhi and al-Hakim)
Ibn Mas‘ud 2 said, “A person who does not pray has no deen.” Ibn
‘Abbas 2 said, “Anyone who abandons the prayer deliberately will
find Allah angry with him when he meets Him.”

The Messenger of Allah % said, “If someone meets Allah hav-
ing squandered the prayer, Allah will pay no attention to any good
action he did after abandoning the prayer.” Ibn Hazm said, “After
shirk, there are no wrong actions greater than delaying the prayer
beyond its time and killing a believer without right.” Ibrahim an-
Nakha‘i said, “Anyone who abandons the prayer has disbelieved.”
Ayyub as-Sakhtiyani said the same. ‘Awn ibn ‘Abdullah said:
“When a person is lowered into his grave, the first thing he will be
asked about is the prayer. If his answer is satisfactory, then his
other actions will be looked at, if not, then none of his other
actions will be looked at.”

The Prophet ‏يه‎ said, “When someone prays the prayer at the
beginning of the time, it rises to heaven accompanied by light
until it reaches the Throne and asks forgiveness for the person
who did it until the Day of Rising. It says, ‘May Allah safeguard
you as you safeguarded me.’ When someone prays it outside its
time, it rises to heaven accompanied by darkness. When it reaches
heaven, it is rolled up like a tattered garment and thrown back in
the face of the one who did it. It says, ‘May Allah make you lost as
you lost me.”” (at-Tabarani)

15
Seventy Major Sins

Abu Dawud related in his Swnan that ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Amr ibn
al-‘As « said that the Messenger of Allah % said, “Three will not
have their prayer accepted: someone who leads a people by force,
someone who enslaves a free person, and someone who comes to
the prayer after its time has passed.” It has come that the Prophet
se said, “Anyone who combines two prayers without an excuse has
come to a great door of wrong action.” (al-Hakim)

We ask Allah for success and help. He is Generous, Magnani-
mous and the Most Merciful of the Merciful.

Section: when a child should be ordered to pray

Abu Dawud related that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Order
your children to pray when they are seven, beat them to enforce it
it when they are ten, and put them in separate beds.” Imam Abu
Sulayman al-Khattabi said, “This Aadith indicates that the punish-
ment should be extremely harsh if an adult abandons the prayer.”
One of the followers of Imam ash-Shafi‘i uses it as proof of the
obligation to put to death anyone who abandons the prayer after
becoming adult. He says, “The fact that he deserves beating when
he is not adult indicates that after puberty he deserves a more
severe punishment than beating; and there is nothing more severe,
after beating, than putting to death.”

Scholars disagree concerning the ruling about people who
abandon the prayer. According to Malik, ash-Shafi‘i and Ahmad, a
person who abandons the prayer should be put to death by
beheading. There is disagreement about whether a person who
abandons the prayer beyond its time without any excuse is an
unbeliever or not. Ibrahim an-Nakha‘i, Ayyub as-Sakhtiyani,
‘Abdullah ibn al-Mubarak, Ahmad ibn Hanbal and Ishaq ibn
Rahawayh say that he is an unbeliever. They find evidence in the
words of the Prophet ‏رية‎ “The contract between us and them is the
prayer. Whoever abandons it has disbelieved,” and the words,

“Abandoning the prayer is all that lies between a man and unbe-
lief.”

16
Neglect of the prayer

Section

We find in a hadith: “Whoever perseveres in the prescribed
prayers, Allah Almighty will grant him five honours: He will
release him from straitened circumstances, rescue him from the
punishment of the grave, give him his book in his right hand, let
him pass over the S7rat like lightning, and admit him to the
Garden without reckoning. But whoever makes light of them,
Allah will afflict him with fourteen punishments: five in this world,
three at death, three in the grave, and three when he emerges
from the grave. As for those in this world, the first is the removal
of blessing from his life, the second is that the mark of the righ-
teous is removed from his face, the third is that no action he does
will have any reward from Allah, the fourth is that his supplica-
tions will not rise to heaven, and the fifth is that no supplications
of the righteous will count for him. Those that will afflict him at
death are firstly that he will die disgraced, secondly that he will die
hungry, and thirdly that he will die thirsty. Even if he were to be
given the all seas of this world to drink, that would not quench his
thirst. As for those which will befall him in his grave, the first is
that the grave will be made so narrow for him that his ribs are
crushed, the second is that a fire will be kindled for him in the
grave over whose embers he will be turned night and day, and the
third is that a bald-headed poisonous snake with eyes of fire and
fangs of iron will be given power over him. The length of each
fang is the length of a day’s journey. It will speak to his corpse and
say, ‘I am the bald-headed poisonous snake,’ and its voice is like
shattering thunder. It will say, ‘My Lord commanded me to strike
you for wasting the Subs prayer by delaying it until sunrise, to
strike you for wasting the Zubr prayer by delaying it until ‘4s7, to
strike you for wasting the ‘4sr prayer by delaying it until Maghrib,
to strike you for wasting the Maghrib prayer by delaying it until
‘Isha,’ and to strike you for wasting the ‘Isha’ prayer by delaying it
until Sub.’ Whenever he strikes him a blow, he sinks seventy
cubits into the earth, and he will continue to be punished in this
way until the Day of Rising. As for that which will afflict him

17
Seventy Major Sins

when he leaves his grave for the standing of the Resurrection, they
are a harsh reckoning, an angry Lord and entrance into the Fire.”
One variant has: “He will come on the day of Rising with three
phrases inscribed on his face. The first is: ‘Neglecter of the right
of Allah’; the second is: ’Singled out for the wrath of Allah’; and
the third is: ‘As you wasted the right of Allah in this world, despair
today of the mercy of Allah.”

‘The Messenger of Allah % said one day to his Companions #,
“O Allah, do not leave among us any deprived wretch!” Then he
asked, “Do you know who the deprived wretch is?” They asked,
“Who is it, Messenger of Allah?” He said, “Someone who aban-
dons the prayer.” Ibn ‘Abbas # related, “On the Day of Rising, a
man will be brought and made to stand before Allah Almighty and
He will command him to go to the Fire. He will ask, ‘O Lord,
why?’ Allah Almighty will say, ‘For delaying the prayer until after
its time and making a false oath by Me.”

It is related that the first faces to be blackened on the Day of
Rising will be the faces of those who abandoned the prayer. There
is a valley in Hell called a/-Mulbam which contains snakes. Every
snake is like a camel’s neck in thickness and a month’s journey in
length. They bite all those who abandoned the prayer and their
venom will boil in their bodies for seventy years and then their
flesh will rot.

A story is related about a woman of the tribe of Israel who
went to Musa and said, “Messenger of Allah, [ have committed a
terrible sin and I have repented of it to Allah Almighty, so pray to
Allah to forgive me my sin and relent towards me.” Musa asked
her, “What was your sin?” She answered, “Prophet of Allah, I
committed adultery and bore a child and killed it.” Musa 8 said to
her, “Leave, strumpet, lest a fire from heaven descend and burn us
for your misdeed!” She left with a broken heart. Jibril x descend-
ed and said, “Musa, the Almighty Lord says to you, ‘Why did you
reject the repentant woman, Musa? Have you not found worse
than her?’” Musa asked, “Jibril, who could be worse than her?” He
replied, “Someone who deliberately abandons the prayer.”

There is another story from one of the Salaf, about a sister of
his who died. He accidentally dropped a bag of money into her
grave and did not become aware of it until he had left her grave.

18
Neglect of the prayer

Then he realised what had happened and returned to her grave
and dug it up after the people had left. He found a fire burning
her in her grave, put the earth back on top of her and returned to
his mother weeping in sorrow. He said, “Mother, tell me about my
sister and what she did.” She said, “Why are you asking about
her?” He said, “Mother, I saw a fire burning her in her grave.” She
wept and said, “My son, your sister neglected the prayer and
delayed it beyond its time.”

If that is the state of someone who just delays the prayer, what
will it be like for someone who does not pray at all? We ask Allah
Almighty to help us to keep to it at its prescribed times. He is
Generous, Magnanimous.

Section: On the punishment of a person who per-
forms the prayer like a pecking bird and does not
properly complete the ruku‘ and prostration

It is related in the commentaries on the words of Allah
Almighty: “Woe to those who pray and are forgetful of their prayer,”
(107:4-5) that they refer to people who pray like a pecking bird
and do not complete its kz‘ and prostration.

The following is confirmed in the two Sahih collections from
Abu Hurayra 2: “A man entered the mosque while the Messenger
of Allah % was seated in it. The man prayed and then came and
greeted the Prophet 3, who returned his greeting and then said to
him, ‘Go back and pray. You have not prayed.’ He went back and
prayed as he had done the first time. Then he came and greeted
the Prophet #, who returned his greeting and again said, ‘Go back
and pray. You have not prayed.’ He went back and prayed as he
had prayed. Then he went and greeted the Prophet #, and he
returned his greeting and said, ‘Go back and pray. You have not
prayed.’ The third time the man said, ‘By the One who sent you
with the Truth, Messenger of Allah, I cannot do any better than
that, so teach me.’ He 4 said, ‘When you stand for the prayer, say
the takbir and then recite what is easy for you of the Qur’an. Then
do ruku‘ until you are at rest in your ‏كبتار‎ Then stand back up
until you are completely upright. Then go into prostration until

19
Seventy Major Sins

you are at rest in your prostration. Then sit back until you are at
rest in the sitting position. Then go into prostration until you are
at rest in your prostration. Do that throughout all of your
prayer.”

Imam Ahmad related from al-Badri that the Messenger of
Allah s¢ said, “A prayer in which a man does not make his spine
straight in ruku‘ and sujud is not accepted.” Abu Dawud and at-
Tirmidhi related it. This is a text from the Prophet % invalidating
the prayer of anyone whose back is not straight in rukw‘ and sujud
in the obligatory prayer. It is also necessary to be at rest in each
position which is when every limb has settled in its place.

It is confirmed that the Prophet % said, “The worst thief is
someone who steals from his prayer.” He was asked, “How can
anyone steal from his prayer?” He said x, “By not properly com-
pleting his rukuS sujud or recitation.” Imam Ahmad related the
hadith of Abu Hurayra ‏عق‎ in which the Messenger of Allah 3s said,
“Allah does not look at a man whose spine is not straight between
ruku‘ and prostration.” The Prophet # said, “That is the prayer of
the hypocrite who sits looking at the sun until it is between the
horns of shaytan, and then stands up and pecks four times and only
remembers Allah a little.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim) Abu Musa ‏ع‎
‎said, “One day the Messenger of Allah # prayed with his
Companions and then sat down. A man entered and rose to pray,
and he began to bow and prostrate like a pecking bird. The
Messenger of Allah 3g said, ‘Do you realise that if this one died, he
would die following something other than the religion of
Muhammad %: pecking in his prayer as a crow pecks at blood?”
Abu Bakr ibn Khuzayma transmitted it in a sound hadith.

‘Umar ibn al-Khattab ¢ related that the Messenger of Allah 3
said: “Everyone who prays has an angel to his right and an angel
to his left. If he does the prayer properly, they take it up to Allah
Almighty. If he does not, they strike his face.” (ad-Daraqutni) Al-
Bayhaqi related with an ésvad from ‘Ubada ibn as-Samit ‏يت‎ that
the Messenger of Allah ‏ع‎ said: “If someone performs wudu’ prop-
erly and then stands for the prayer and properly completes the
ruku‘, prostration and recitation in it, the prayer says, ‘May Allah
preserve you as you preserved me!’ Then it is taken up to heaven
accompanied by an illumination and a light. The gates of heaven

20
Neglect of the prayer

are opened for it, and it is taken to Allah Almighty and intercedes
for its performer. If someone does not complete bowing, prostra-
tion or recitation in it, the prayer says, “May Allah neglect you as
you neglected me!’ Then it is taken up to heaven covered by dark-
ness. The gates of heaven are closed to it and then it is rolled up
like a tattered garment and is used to strike its performer in the
face.”

Salman al-Farisi # related that the Messenger of Allah # said,
“The prayer is weighed and measured. Whoever gives it full mea-
sure is given full measure for it. Whoever stints — you know what
Allah says about the stinters. Allah Almighty says: ‘Woe to the stin-
ters.’ (83:1) The stinters are those who give short measure or
weight in goods or the prayer. Allah has promised them Way/. It is
a valley in Hell. Hell itself seeks refuge from its heat.” We seek
refuge from that.

Ibn ‘Abbas 8 reported that the Messenger of Allah % said,
‘When one of you prostrates he should put his forehead, nose and
hands on the ground. Allah Almighty revealed that you should
prostrate on seven limbs: the brow, the nose, both hands, the
knees, and the tips of the toes. You should not prostrate on your
hair or clothes. When someone prays and does not give every limb
its due, that limb curses him until he finishes his prayer.”

Al-Bukhari transmitted from Hudhayfa ibn al-Yaman # that
he saw a man praying and not properly completing the bowing or
prostration in the prayer. Hudhayfa told him, “You did not pray,
and if you were to die praying this prayer you would die not con-
forming to the natural form of Muhammad #.” One variant from
Abu Dawud has that he asked, “For how long have you prayed the
prayer like this?” He answered, “For forty years.” He said, “You
have not prayed at all for forty years. If you were to die you would
die not conforming to the natural form of Muhammad ‏”أي‎

Al-Hasan al-Basri used to say, "Son of Adam, what part of your
deen can be said to be dear to you if your prayer is of no impor-
tance to you? It is the first thing which will be asked about on the
Day of Rising, as is clear from the words of the Prophet 38: “The
first of his actions which a slave of Allah will be called to account
for on the Day of Rising is his prayer. If it is in order, he has been
successful and has won. If it is not, then he has lost and is ruined.

21
Seventy Major Sins
If some of his obligatory prayers are lacking, then Allah Almighty
will say, ‘Look and see whether My slave has any voluntary prayers
to make up for what is lacking of the obligatory;’ and then all his
other actions will be examined in the same way.”

For this reason people should perform a lot of supererogatory
prayers, so that they can make up for any shortfall in their obliga-
tory ones.!

Section: Greater concern for attending the ‘Isha’
and Fajr prayers

The Prophet # said, “There is no prayer heavier on the hyp-
ocrites than Fajr and ‘Isha’. If they only knew what is in them, they
would come to them even if they had to crawl.” (al-Bukhari and
Muslim) Ibn ‘Umar ‏عن‎ said, “When a man failed to join us in the
‘Isha’ and Subh prayers in the group, we used to consider him a
hypocrite.”

A narrative is recounted in which ‘Ubaydullah ibn ‘Umar al-
Qawariri said: “I used to never miss the ‘Isha’ prayer in a group.
One night a guest arrived and I was busy with him and missed the
‘Isha’ prayer in the group. I went out seeking to pray in the Basra
mosque and found that all the people had already prayed and the
mosques were shut. I returned to my house and said, “There is a
hadith which says that the prayer in a group is twenty-seven
degrees better than the prayer alone.’ So I prayed ‘Isha’ twenty-
seven times and then slept and dreamt that I was with some people
on horses and I was also on a horse. We raced and I made my
horse gallop but could not catch them up. I turned to one of them
and he said to me, ‘Do not exhaust your horse. You will never
catch us up.’ ‘Why?’ I asked. He said, ‘Because we prayed ‘Isha’ in
a group and you prayed alone.’ I awoke in sorrow because of that.”

We ask Allah for help and success. He is Generous,
Magnanimous.

1. To avoid repetition, the section on the punishment of the one who neglects the
prayer (in a group) when able to perform it has been moved to No. 65, near the end of
the book, which deals with it as a specific wrong action.

22
5. Refusing to pay zakat

Allah Almighty says:

“Those who are tight-fisted with the bounty Allah has given them
should not suppose that that is better for them. No indeed, it is
worse for them! What they were tight-fisted with will be hung
around their necks on the Day of Rising.” (3:180)

Allah Almighty also says:

“Woe to those who associate others with Him, those who do not
pay zakat.” (41:26)

He calls them idolators. Allah Almighty further says:

“As for those who hoard gold and silver and do not spend it in the
Way of Allah, give them the news of a painful punishment on the
Day it is heated up in the fire of Hell and their foreheads, sides
and backs are branded with it: ‘This is for what you hoarded for
yourselves, so taste what you were hoarding.’” (9:34)

It is confirmed that the Messenger of Allah % said, “There is
no one who has gold or silver and does not pay what is due on
them without them being turned, on the Day of Rising, into slabs
of fire and being heated in the Fire of Hell and their sides, fore-
heads and backs being branded with them. Every time they cool
they will be heated again throughout a day whose length is fifty
thousand years, until people’s fates have been decided and they see
their way open either to the Garden or to the Fire.” He was asked,
“Messenger of Allah, what about camels?” He % said, “There is no
owner of camels who fails to fulfil what is due to them — and one
of their rights is to be milked on the day they are watered - with-
out, on the Day of Rising, being thrown on his face on account of
them onto a very wide level plain. Not even one young camel will
be missing and they will trample him with their hooves and bite
him with their teeth. When the last of them have passed over him,
then the first of them will return again to him throughout a day
whose length is fifty thousand years until people’s fates have been

23
Seventy Major Sins

decided and he sees his way open either to the Garden or to the
Fire.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim) The Prophet % said, “The first
three to enter the Fire will be a harsh ruler, someone with wealth
who did not pay the right of Allah on his property, and a poor man
who is boastful.” (al-Mundhiri)

Ibn ‘Abbas #2 said, “If someone has the wealth to allow him to
complete Aaj of the House of Allah Almighty and he does not
make hajj, or the wealth on which zakat is obligatory and he does
not pay zakat, he will ask to return when he dies.” A man said to
him, “Fear Allah, Ibn ‘Abbas. It is only the unbelievers who ask to
return.” Ibn ‘Abbas # said, “I will recite to you evidence for that
in the Qur’an. Allah Almighty says: ‘Give from what We have pro-
vided for you, before death comes to one of you and he says, “My Lord, if
only You would give me a little more time so that I can give sadaqa [1.e.
pay zakat] and be one of the righteous [i.e. perform hajj].”’ (63:10) He
was asked, “When does zakat become obligatory?” He answered,
“When a person’s wealth reaches two hundred dirhams, then it is
obligatory to pay zakat on it.” He was asked, “What makes hajj
obligatory?” He answered, “Provision and a mount.”

Abu Hurayra ‏م‎ said that the Messenger of Allah % said, “If
Allah gives someone wealth and he does not pay the zakat due on
it, on the Day of Rising it will take on the likeness of a bald-head-
ed poisonous snake with two black dots over its eyes which will
encircle his neck, biting his jaws, and say, ‘I am your wealth. I am
your treasure.” Then he recited this ayat: “Those who are miserly
with the bounty Allab has given them should not suppose that that is
better for them. No indeed, it is worse for them! What they were miserly
with will be bung around their necks on the Day of Rising” (3:180). Al-
Bukhari transmitted it.

Ibn Mas‘ud ‏عن‎ spoke about the words of Allah Almighty refer-
ring to those who refuse to pay zakat: “On the Day it is heated up in
the fire of Hell and their foreheads, sides and backs are branded with it,”
(9:34) and said, “A dinar will not be put on top of a dinar or a
dirham on top of a dirham. His skin will be expanded so that every
dinar and dirham has its place.” If it is asked why people’s faces,
sides and backs are singled out for branding, it is said that it is
because when a miserly wealthy person sees a pauper, he scowls,
averts his eyes and turns away. When he comes close to him, he

24
Refusing to pay zakat

turns his back. He is punished by being branded on these limbs so
that the retaliation is made on the parts involved in the original
action.

The Prophet 3 said, “Five for five.” They asked, “Messenger
of Allah, what is ‘five for five’?” He answered, “A people do not
break a contract without Allah giving their enemy power over
them. They do not judge by other than what Allah has revealed
without poverty spreading among them. Fornication does not
appear among them without death spreading among them. They
do not skimp in the weight and measure without being denied
crops and experiencing famine. They do not deny zakat without
rain being withheld from them.”

Warning: ‘Tell those who are distracted by this world that their
delusions will vanish tomorrow and what they amassed will be of
no use to them. What they were warned about will come about on
the Day when their wealth will be heated up in Hellfire and their
foreheads, sides and backs branded, so how can it be absent from
their hearts and minds now? On the Day it is heated up in Hellfire
and their foreheads, sides and backs are branded, their wealth will
be taken to the place where the punishment is imposed and put
into a crucible to be heated in order to increase its severity. It will
be heated in the Fire of Hell and their foreheads, sides and backs
will be branded with it.

When a poor person encounters them, he encounters harm.
When he asks them for something, flames of anger fly from them
like firebrands. They forgot the wisdom of their Creator regard-
ing the wealth of this one and the poverty of that one. It is
extraordinary how much grief they will encounter when they are
in their graves. The Fire of Hell will be heated over them and
their foreheads, sides and backs branded with it. Their heirs will
inherit from them without difficulty. He will have thorns whereas
his heirs will have fresh dates. If you could only see them in the
depths of the Fire, being turned on a spit over the burning coals of
their dinars and dirhams, trussed up because they were miserly
with their wealth! If you could see them in Hellfire drinking boil-
ing water and even those who are stoical crying out when their

25
Seventy Major Sins

foreheads, sides and backs are branded. How often they were
warned in this world and did not listen! How often they were told
to fear the punishment of Allah and none of them were alarmed!
How often they were told about refusing to pay zakat and were
not moved!

Story: It is related that Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Faryabi said: “I
went out with a group of my companions to visit Abu Sinan.
When we went into where he was and sat with him, he said, ‘Let’s
go and visit a neighbour of ours whose brother has died and con-
sole him for his loss.’ We rose with him and visited that man and
found him weeping and grieving for his brother. We sat down to
console him but he did not accept our comfort and consolation.
We said, ‘Do you not know that death is inevitable?’ He said, “Yes,
but I weep for the morning and evening in which my brother is
suffering punishment.’ We asked him, ‘Has Allah informed you of
the Unseen?’ He answered, ‘No, but when I buried him and lev-
elled the earth over him and the people left, I sat at his grave and
there was a sound from his grave saying, “Oh! They have made
me sit alone to undergo the punishment! I used to pray. I used to
fast!”

‘His words made me weep, and I removed the earth from him
to see what was happening to him. His grave was filled with fire
and there was a collar of fire around his neck. The compassion of
brotherhood moved me to stretch my hands to remove the collar
from his neck and my fingers and hand were burned.’ He showed
his hand to them and it was black and burned. He said, ‘I put the
earth back and left. How can I not weep for his state and grieve
over him?’ We asked, ‘What did your brother use to do in this
world?’ He answered, ‘He used to not pay zakat on his wealth.’
We said, “This is the confirmation of the words of Allah Almighty:
“Those who are miserly with the bounty Allah has given them should not
suppose that that is better for them. No indeed, it is worse for them!
What they were miserly with will be hung around their necks on the
Day of Rising.” (3:180) Your brother has had his punishment has-
tened in his grave until the Day of Rising.’

“Then we left him and went to Abu Dharr 2, the Companion
of the Messenger of Allah 3. We told him the story of the man

26
Refusing to pay zakat

and said to him, ‘Jews and Christians die and we do not see that in
their case.’ He said, ‘There is no doubt that they are in the Fire.
Allah shows you the people of faith so that you may reflect. Allah
Almighty says: “Whoever sees clearly, does so to his own benefit.
Whoever is blind, it is to his own detriment.” (6:104) Lord does not
wrong His slaves.”

We ask Allah for pardon and protection. He is Generous,
Magnanimous.

27
6. Not fasting a day of Ramadan without a valid
excuse

Allah Almighty says:

“You who believe, fasting is prescribed for you, as it was prescribed

for those before you — so that perhaps you may be godfearing — for
a specified number of days. But any of you who are ill or on a
journey should fast a number of other days.” (2:183-184)

It is confirmed in the two major Sahih collections that the
Prophet % said, "Islam is based on five things: the testimony that
there is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah, establishing the prayer, paying zakat, making hajj to the
House [of Allah], and fasting Ramadan.”

The Prophet % said, “If anyone breaks the fast one day of
Ramadan without an excuse, even fasting all the time will not
make up for it.” (at-Tirmidhi, an-Nasa’i and Ibn Majah)

Ibn ‘Abbas ‏ع‎ said, “The supports of Islam and the pillars of
the deen are three: testimony that there is no god but Allah; the
prayer; and fasting Ramadan. Anyone who abandons any of them
is an unbeliever.”

We seek refuge with Allah from that.

28
7. Not performing hajj when able to do so

“Hajj to the House is a duty owed to Allah by all mankind -
those who can do find a way to do it.” (3:97)

‘The Prophet % said, “If someone possesses the provision and a
mount which will convey him to the Sacred House of Allah but
does not perform hajj, it does not matter if he dies a Jew or
Christian. For Allah Almighty says, ‘Hajj to the House is a duty owed
to Allah by all mankind — those who can do find a way to do it? (3:97).”
(at-Tirmidhi and al-Bayhagi) ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab # said, “I
wanted to send men to these cities and examine everyone who has
wealth but has not performed Aaj, and impose the jizya on them.
‘They are not Muslims.”

Ibn ‘Abbas # said, “Anyone who has not performed haj and
has not paid zakat on his property will ask to return when he dies.”
Someone said to him, “It is only the unbelievers who ask to
return.” He said, “That is proven in the Book of Allah Almighty:
‘Give from what We have provided for you before death comes to one of
you and he says, “Lord, if only You would give me a little more time so
that I might give sadaqa (i.e. pay zakat) and be one of the righteous
(i.e. perform hajj.)” Allah will not give anyone more time, once their
time has come. Allah is aware of what you do.’ (63:10-11).” It was
asked, “What makes zakat obligatory?” He answered, “Two hun-
dred dirhams, or and their value in gold.” It was asked, “What
makes hajj obligatory?” He replied, “Provision and a mount.”
Sa‘id ibn Jubayr said, “A wealthy neighbour of mine who did not
perform hajj died and I did not pray over him.”

29
8. Disrespect to parents

Allah Almighty says:

“Your Lord has decreed that you should worship none but Him,
and that you should show kindness to parents, whether one or both
of them reach old age with you. Do not say ‘Ugh! to them out of
irritation and do not be harsh to them. (Meaning, ‘Do not
speak to them with annoyance when they are old. You must
serve them as they served you since the one who acted first
has superiority — how could there be equality? They bore
that hoping for your life, so how could you harm them,
hoping they will die?’) Speak to them with gentleness and gen-
erosity. Take them under your wing, out of mercy, with due
humility, and say, ‘Lord, show mercy to them as they did in look-
ing after me when I was small.” (17:23-24)

Allah Almighty also says,

“Give thanks to Me and to your parents. To Me is your final
return.” (31:14)

Look, may Allah have mercy on you, at how He has combined
thanks to them with thanks to Himself! Ibn ‘Abbas # said, “Three
ayats are revealed connected to three things, none of which is
accepted without the other. One is the words of Allah Almighty:
“Obey Allah and obey the Messenger.” (4:59) If someone obeys Allah
but does not obey the Messenger, it is not accepted from him. The
second is the words of the Almighty: “Perform the prayer and pay
the zakat.” (2:43) If someone prays but does not pay zakat, it is not
accepted from him. The third is the words of Allah Almighty:
“Give thanks to Me and to your parents.” If someone thanks Allah,
but does not thank his parents, it is not accepted from him. That is
why the Prophet 3 said, “The pleasure of Allah lies in pleasing
one’s parents and the anger of Allah lies in angering one’s par-
ents.’”” (at-Tirmidhi)

Ibn ‘Umar # said: “A man came to ask permission of the
Prophet # to go on jihad with him. The Prophet # asked, ‘Do you
have parents?’ ‘Yes,’ he answered. The Messenger of Allah said ‏,كه‎

30
Disrespect to parents

‘Then expend your effort on them.” This is transmitted in the
two Sabih collections. Look at how he * preferred the merit of
being dutiful to one’s parents and serving them to jihad.

We find in the two Sahih collections that the Messenger of
Allah ss said, “Shall T intorm you of the greatest of wrong actions?
Associating others with Allah, and disrespect to one’s parents.”
Notice how he connected acting badly towards them and failure to
be dutiful and kind to them with shirk. Also in the two Sahih col-
lections the Messenger of Allah % said, “Someone who disrespects
his parents, someone who reminds people of his charity to them,
and a habitual drinker of wine will not enter the Garden.”

The Prophet # also said, “If Allah knew of anything less than
‘Ugh!’, He would have forbidden it. No matter what someone
who shows disrespect to his parents does, he will not enter the
Garden. No matter what someone who is dutiful to them does, he
will enter the Garden.” (ad-Daylami) The Prophet % also said,
“Allah curses anyone who disrespects his parents.” The Prophet
further said, “Allah curses anyone who curses his father and Allah
curses anyone who curses his mother.” ([bn Hibban) And the
Prophet % said, “Allah defers all wrong actions for as long as He
wishes until the Day of Rising except for disrespect to parents.
Punishment is hastened for the one who does that.” In other
words, they receive punishment in this world before the Day of
Rising. (al-Hakim)

Ka‘b al-Ahbar 2 said, “Allah hastens the death of a person
when he shows disrespect to his parents in order to hasten the
punishment for him. Allah increases the life of a person when he is
dutiful to his parents in order to enable them to show more duty
and kindness.” Being dutiful towards them means spending on
them when they need it. A man came to the Prophet # and said,
“Messenger of Allah, my father says that he is in need of my prop-
erty.” The Prophet % said, “You and your property belong to your
father.” Ka‘b al-Ahbar ‏عن‎ was asked about what disrespect to par-
ents involves and said, “When a person’s father or mother swears
by him and he does not fulfil their oath; when he is commanded
and he does not obey their command; when they ask him for
something and he does not give it to them; and when they trust
him and he betrays their trust.”

31
Seventy Major Sins

Ibn ‘Abbas # was asked about the people of the Ramparts (¢/-
A’raf) and who they are and what the Ramparts are. He said, “The
Ramparts is a mountain between the Garden and the Fire. It is
called the Ramparts because it overlooks the Garden and Fire, and
on it are trees, fruits, rivers and springs. As for the men who are
on it, they are men who went out to jihad without the permission
of their fathers and mothers and were killed in jiAad. Being killed
in the Way of Allah prevented them from entering the Fire and
disobedience to their parents prevented them from entering the
Garden, so they are on the Ramparts until Allah carries out His
command on them.”

The two Sahih Collections report that a man went to the
Messenger of Allah 3 and asked, “Messenger of Allah, who is the
person most entitled to my good company?” He answered, “Your
mother.” He asked, “Then who?” He said, “Your mother.” He
asked, “And then who?” He said, “Your mother.” He said, “Then
who?” He said, “Your father, and then the next closest kin and the
next closest.” He encouraged dutifulness to mothers three times
and to fathers once. That is only because her concern and compas-
sion is greater as well as what she endured in pregnancy, labour,
birth, nursing and sleepless nights.

Ibn ‘Umar # saw a man carrying his mother on his shoulders,
taking her around the Ka‘ba. He asked, “Ibn ‘Umar, do you think
that I have repaid her?” “No,” he answered, “not for a single one
of her labour pains, but you have done good. May Allah repay you
with much for a little.”

Abu Hurayra # said that the Messenger of Allah s said, “Allah
has bound Himself not to admit four people to the Garden or let
them taste its bliss: a habitual drinker, a consumer of usury, some-
one who consumes an orphan’s property wrongly and someone
who disrespects his parents, unless they repent.” (al-Hakim)

The Prophet % said, “The Garden is under the feet of the
mothers” (Ibn Majah and an-Nasa’i related the like.) A man went
to Abu ad-Darda’ ‏ع‎ and said, “Abu ad-Darda, I have married a
woman, but my mother is telling me to divorce her.” Abu ad-
Darda’ said, “I heard the Messenger of Allah say “The parent is
the middle gate to the Garden.’ As you wish, you may forfeit that
door or retain access to ‏”.غ1‎ (Ibn Majah and at-Tirmidhi)

32
Disrespect to parents

The Prophet # said, “Three supplications are answered with-
out a doubt: that of the wronged, that of the traveller, and that of a
parent against his child.” (al-Mundhiri) The Prophet #8 said, “A
maternal aunt is in the position of a mother,” meaning in respect
of dutifulness, generosity, ties and charity. (at-Tirmidhi)

Wahb ibn Munabbih said, “Allah Almighty revealed to Musa,
‘Musa, respect your parents. Whoever respects their parents will
have a long life and be given a child who respects him. Whoever
disrespects his parents will have a short life and be given a child
who disrespects him.” Abu Bakr ibn Abi Maryam said, “I read in
the Torah that whoever strikes his father should be killed.” Wahb
said, “I read in the Torah that stoning is prescribed for striking a
father.”

‘Amr ibn Murra al-Juhani # said, “A man came to the Messen-
ger of Allah # and said, ‘Messenger of Allah, if I pray the five
prayers, fast Ramadan, pay zakat and make hay to the House, what
do you think I will receive?” He answered, “Anyone who does that
is with the Prophets, the true, the martyrs and the righteous -
unless he disrespects his parents.” (Ahmad and at-Tabarani)

The Prophet 4 said, “Allah curses anyone who disrespects his
parents.” It is related that the Messenger of Allah 38 said, “I saw in
the Night Journey some people in the Fire suspended from
stumps of fire. I asked, ‘Jibril, who are these?’ He said, “Those
who vilified their fathers and mothers in this world.”

It is related that if someone insults his parents, an ember of fire
descends into his grave. It is related that when someone who dis-
respected his parents is buried, the grave constricts him until it
caves in his ribs. And the people with the most severe punishment
on the Day of Rising will of be three kinds: those who associate
others with Allah; those who fornicate; and those who disrespect-
ed their parents.

Warning. O you who withhold the most confirmed of rights,
which is to be dutiful to your parents, through disobedience, and
who forget what is obligatory for you and neglect what is in front
of you, you owe your parents a debt. You claim to seek the
Garden, yet it is under the feet of your mother. She bore you in
her womb for nine months, as if she performed nine 54775. She suf-

33
Seventy Major Sins

fered in childbirth what melts the heart and she suckled you from
her breasts with milk. She rushed from sleep for your sake and
washed dirt from you with her right hand. She preferred you to
herself with food and her lap became a cradle for you. She dealt
with you with kindness and help. If an illness or complaint afflict-
ed you, she was greatly upset, and her sadness and weeping lasted
long. She spent her money on doctors to treat you. If she had been
given a choice between your life and hers, she would have chosen
the former. She did all this and yet you treat her badly time and
time again.

She prayed for you to have success secretly and openly. But
then when she needs you in old age, you consider her the least
important of things. You are full and she is hungry. You are
quenched and she is thirsty. Your wife and children treat her well
but you treat her with neglect, her orders vex you even when they
are slight. Her life seems long to you although it is short. This is
despite the fact that your Lord has forbidden you to say “Ugh”
and warned you that you risk being punished in this world
through the disobedience of your own children and in the Next
World by distance from the Lord of the worlds. He calls to you
with rebuke and threat. “That is on account of what you did. Allab
does not wrong His slaves.” (3:182)

It is related that in the time of the Prophet 38 there was a young
man called ‘Alqama # who strove a lot to obey Allah in prayer,
fasting and sadaga. When he became very ill, his wife sent for the
Messenger of Allah % to say that her husband ‘Alqama was in his
death throes, saying, “I wanted to tell you of his condition,
Messenger of Allah.” The Prophet # sent ‘Ammar, Suhayb and
Bilal, saying, “Go to him and instruct him in the shahada.” They
went to see him and found him in the throes of death. They began
to instruct him to say, “There is no god but Allah” but his tongue
could not articulate it. They sent to the Messenger of Allah 22 to
inform him that his tongue could not articulate the shahada. The
Prophet # asked, “Are either of his parents alive?” It was said,
“Messenger of Allah, his mother is very old.” So the Messenger of
Allah % sent to her, telling the messenger, “Ask her if she is able to
travel to the Messenger of Allah 26. Otherwise she should stay in
her house until he comes to her.”

34
Disrespect to parents

The messenger went to her and told her what the Messenger
of Allah s had said. She said, “My soul be ransom for his! I am
duty bound to go to him.” So she leaned on a staff and went to the
Messenger of Allah 3 and greeted him, and he returned the greet-
ing and said to her, “Mother of ‘Algama, tell me the truth. If you
lie, revelation trom Allah will come.” What was the state of your
son ‘Algama?” She said, “Messenger of Allah, he did much prayer,
much fasting and gave much sadaqa.” The Messenger of Allah %

30

asked, “What is your state?” She answered, “Messenger of Allah, I
am angry with him.” “Why?” he asked. She said, “Messenger of
Allah, he prefers his wife to me and disobeys me.” The Messenger
of Allah said, “The anger of the mother of ‘Alqama has veiled
the tongue of ‘Algama from the shabada.”

Then he said, “Bilal, go and bring me a lot of firewood.” She
said, “Messenger of Allah, what are you going to do?” He
answered, “Burn him with fire in front of you.” She said,
“Messenger of Allah, my child! My heart cannot bear to see him
burned with fire in front of me!” He said, “Mother of ‘Alqama!
The punishment of Allah is harsher and more enduring. If you
were pleased with him Allah would forgive him, so be pleased with
him. By the One who has my soul in His hand, ‘Algama will not
be helped by his prayer, fasting or sadaga as long as you are angry
with him.” She said, “Messenger of Allah, I testify to Allah
Almighty and His angels and those Muslims who are present that I
am pleased with my son ‘Algama.” The Messenger of Allah ¢ said,
“Go to him, Bilal, and see if he is able to say, “There is no god but
Allah’ or not. Perhaps the mother of ‘Algama has said something
that is not in her heart, out of modesty before me.”

He went and heard ‘Alqama from inside the house saying,
“There is no god but Allah.” Bilal entered and said, “People! The
anger of ‘Alqama’s mother veiled his tongue from the shahada, and
her pleasure has released his tongue.” Then ‘Algama died on that
day and the Messenger of Allah % came and ordered that he be
washed and shrouded, and then prayed over him and attended his
burial. Then he stood on the edge of his grave and said,
“Company of the Mujahirun and Ansar! Anyone who prefers his
wife to his mother, on hin is the curse of Allah, the angels and all

35
Seventy Major Sins

mankind. AJlah will not accept from him any compensation unless
he repents to Allah Almighty and is good to her and seeks to
please her. Allah is angry when she is angry. We ask Allah to give
us success in His pleasure and to make us avoid His wrath. He is
Generous, Magnanimous, Compassionate, Merciful.”

36
9. Shunning relatives

Allah Almighty says:

“Have taqwa of Allah in whose name you make demands on
one another and also in respect of your kin,” (4:1) meanin
J g
“Beware of cutting off ties with relatives.”

“Ls it not likely that if you did turn away you would cause cor-
ruption in the earth and sever your ties of kinship? Such are the
people Allah bas cursed, making them deaf and blinding their
eyes.” (47:22-23)

“Those who fulfil Allah’s contract and do not break their
agreement; those who join what Allah has commanded to be
joined and are afraid of their Lord and fear an Evil Reckoning.”
(13:20-21)

He misguides many by it (the Qur’an) and guides many by it.
But He only misguides the deviators — those who break Allah’s
contract after it bas been agreed, and sever what Allah has com-

manded to be joined, and cause corruption in the earth. It is they
who are the lost.” (2:26-27)

The two Sahib collections report that the Messenger of Allah #
said, “Anyone who severs ties of kinship will not enter the
Garden.” Anyone who severs his ties with weak relatives, shuns
them, is arrogant towards them, and does not give to them out of
goodness and charity if he is rich and they are poor, is included in
this threat and will be forbidden to enter the Garden until he
repents before Allah Almighty and is good to them. The
Messenger of Allah 8 said, “Whoever has weak relatives and is not
good to them but spends his sadaga on others, Allah will not
accept his sadaga from him or look at him on the Day of Rising.”
(at-Tabarani) If he is poor, he should maintain ties with them by
visiting them and asking how they are, going by the words of the
Prophet %, “Maintain ties with your kin, even if only with a greet-
ing.

‘The Prophet 3 said, “Whoever believes in Allah and the Last
Day should maintain ties with his relatives.” (al-Bukhari) The

37
Seventy Major Sins
Messenger of Allah % said, “He who maintains ties is not the one
who treats his relatives the same as they treat him; he who main-
tains ties is the one who, when his kin cut him off, still maintains
ties with them.” The Prophet 38 said, “Allah Almighty says: ‘I am
the All-Merciful, and it is kinship (rahm from the same root as
“Merciful”). Whoever maintains ties with kin, I maintain ties with
him. Whoever cuts them off, I cut him off.” (Abu Dawud and at-
Tirmidhi) ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn said to his son, “My son, do not keep
the company of anyone who cuts off kin. I find him cursed in the
Book of Allah in three places.”

Abu Hurayra #¢ related that he sat down to relate from the
Messenger of Allah 38 and said: “I order anyone who severs ties
with relatives to leave us.” No one rose except a young man from
the edge of the circle. He went to his paternal aunt, because he
had been in conflict with her for some years, and made peace with
her. His aunt asked him, “What has brought you, nephew?” He
replied, “I was sitting with Abu Hurayra, the Companion of the
Messenger of Allah 38, and he said, ‘I order anyone who severs ties
with kin to leave us.’” His aunt said to him, “Go back to Abu
Hurayra and ask him why.” He went back to him and told him
what had happened to him with my aunt and then asked, “Why
should someone who severs ties not sit with you?” Abu Hurayra
answered, “I heard the Messenger of Allah # say, ‘Mercy does not
descend on a group of people among whom are those who sever
ties with their kin.”

It is related that a wealthy man went on hay to the Sacred
House of Allah. When he reached Makka, he entrusted a thousand
dinars to a man who was known for his trustworthiness and recti-
tude. He went to stand on ‘Arafat and then returned to Makka, to
find that the man had died in his absence. He asked the man’s fam-
ily about his property and learned that they had no knowledge of
it. He went to the scholars of Makka and told them about his situ-
ation and his money. They told him, “In the middle of the night
go to Zamzam and look into it and call, ‘O So-and-so’, using his
name. If he was one of the people of the Garden, he will answer
you the first time.” So the man went and called into Zamzam; but
no one answered.

38
Shunning relatives

He went back to the scholars and told them and they said, “We
belong to Allah and to Him we return. We fear that your compan-
ion is one of the people of the Fire. Go to the land of Yemen
where there is a well called Rahut. It is said that it is on the edge
of Hell. Look into it at night and call out, “So-and-so! If he is one
of the people of the Fire, he will answer you from it.” So he went
to Yemen and asked about the well. He was directed to it and went
to it at night, looked into it and called out, “Where is my gold>”
The answer came, “I buried it in such-and-such a place in my
house, for I did not trust my son with it.” He returned to the
man’s family and dug there and found it. He asked him, “What put
you in the Fire when we thought good of you?” He answered, “T
had a poor sister whom I shunned and was not compassionate to,
so Allah punished me because of her and put me in this position.”

That is confirmed by a sound hadith in which the Prophet #
said, “Anyone who severs ties of kinship will not enter the
Garden.” This includes sisters, maternal or paternal aunts, nieces
and other relatives. We ask Allah for success in obeying Him. He
is Generous, Magnanimous.

39
10. Fornication

The Almighty says:

“Do not go near fornication. It is an indecent act, an evil

way.” (17:32)

“Those who do not call upon another god together with Allah,
and do not take the life of anyone Allah has made inviolate,
except with the right to do so, and do not fornicate; anyone who
does that will receive an evil punishment and on the Day of
Rising his punishment will be doubled and he will be humiliated
in it timelessly, forever, except for those who repent.” (25:67-70)

“A man and woman who commit fornication: flog both of
them with a bundred lashes and do not let compassion for either
of thent possess you, where Allah’s deen is concerned, if you believe
in Allah and the Last Day. A number of the believers should wit-
ness their punishment.” (24:2)

Scholars say that this is the punishment in this world for male
and female fornicators if they are single and have not married. If
they are married or have been married before, even once in their
lives, they should be stoned to death. That is confirmed in the
Sunna from the Prophet %. If they are not punished in this world
and they die without repenting, they will be punished in the Fire
with whips of fire.

It is confirmed that the Messenger of Allah % said, “A fornica-
tor does not fornicate while he is a believer. A thief does not steal
while he is a believer. A drinker does not drink wine while he is a
believer. No plunderer plunders something of value which attracts
people’s eyes while he is a believer.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim) The
Prophet # said, “When someone commits fornication, faith leaves
him and becomes like a shadow over his head. When he extricates
himself, faith returns to him.” (Abu Dawud, at-Tirmidhi and al-
Bayhaqi) ‘The Prophet # said, “If someone fornicates or drinks
wine, Allah removes faith from him as a man removes a shirt over
his head.” (al-Hakim) We find in a badith that the Messenger of
Allah # said, “Allah will not speak to three kinds of people on the

40
Fornication

Day of Rising, nor will be look at them or attest to their integrity
and they will have a painful punishment: an old man who forni-
cates, a lying king, and a proud pauper.” (Muslim and at-Tirmidhi)

Tbn Mas‘ud 2 said, “I asked, ‘Messenger of Allah, which sin is
greatest in the sight of Allah Almighty?’ He 3 replied, “That you
assign an equal to Allah although He created you.’ I said, “That is
terrible. Then what?’ He said, “That you kill your child out of fear
that he will eat with you.’ I asked, “Then what?’ He said, “That
you commit fornication with your neighbour’s wife.’” Allah
Almighty revealed the confirmation of that: “Those who do not call
upon another god together with Allah and do not take the life of anyone
Allah has made inviolate, except with the right to do so, and do not for-
nicate; anyone who does that will receive an evil punishment and on the
Day of Rising his punishment will be doubled and he will be humiliated
in it timelessly, forever, except for those who repent.” (25:67-69)
(Muslim and an-Nasa’i) Notice how Allah links fornication with a
neighbour’s wife to associating something else with Him and
killing a soul which He has made inviolate except by a legal right.
This is a hadith which is transmitted in the two Sahih collections.

In Sahib Bukhari there is a hadith about a dream of the Prophet
% in which Samura ibn Jundub a related that Jibril and Mika’il
came to the Prophet # and said, “Come with us.” He said, “We
came to something like an oven, the upper part of which was nar-
row and the bottom wide. There was shouting and voices coming
from it. We looked into it and there were naked men and women
inside. Flames were flaring up at them from underneath them and
when they reached them they shouted because of the intensity of
the heat. I asked, ‘Who are they, Jibril?’ He answered, “Those are
male and female fornicators. This is their punishment until the
Day of Rising.’” We ask Allah for safety and protection!

‘Ata’ said regarding the tafsir of the words of Allah Almighty
about Hellfire, “It bas seven gates” (15:44) that the worst of those
gates with respect to regret, heat, grief and stench is for fornica-
tors who committed fornication in full knowledge of what they
were doing.” Makhul ad-Dimishqi said, “The people of the Fire
smell a foul smell and say, ‘What is this most horrible stench we
smell?’ They are told, “That is the smell of the genitals of fornica-

41
Seventy Major Sins

tors.” Ibn Zayd, one of the imams of tafsir, said that the people of
the Fire will be harmed by the stink of the genitals of fornicators.
One of the commandments which Allah wrote for Musa ¥% 1s:
“Thou shalt not steal or commit adultery, lest My Countenance
become veiled to you.”

It has come from the Prophet # that Iblis sent his armies to the
earth and told them, “I will put a crown on the head of whichever
of you misleads a Muslim, and the one who is most successful in
tempting them will have the closest position to me.” So one of
them came to him and said, “I kept at so-and-so until he divorced
his wife.” He said, “You have not done anything. He will marry
someone else.” Then another came and said, “I kept at so-and-so
until I put enmity between him and his brother.” He said, “You
have not done anything. He will reconcile with him.” Then anoth-
er came and said, “I kept at so-and-so until he committed fornica-
tion.” Iblis said, “Yes, you have done well,” and so he brought him
close to him and put the crown on his head. We seek refuge with
Allah from the evils of Shaytan and his armies.

Anas # related that the Messenger of Allah % said, “Faith is a
garment with which Allah clothes whomever He wishes. When
someone commits fornication, Allah removes the garment of faith
from him. If he repents, He returns it to him.” (al-Bayhaqi) It is
reported that the Prophet % said, “Company of Muslims, fear for-
nication. It incorporates six features: three in this world and three
in the Next World. The three in this world are removal of light
from the face, an early death and enduring poverty. As for those in
the Next World, they are the anger of Allah Almighty, a bad reck-
oning and being punished in the Fire.” (Ibn al-Jawzi)

The Prophet ‏يه‎ said, “If someone dies persisting in drinking
wine, Allah will make him drink from the river of Ghawta, which
is a river which flows in the Fire coming from the genitals of
whores. Pus and suppuration flows from their vaginas in the Fire
and then those who died persisting in drinking wine drink that.”
(Ahmad, Abu Ya‘la and Ibn Hibban)

The Messenger of Allah % said, “There is no sin after shirk
which is more terrible in the sight of Allah than a sperm which a
man places in a vagina not lawful for him.” He #8 also said, “There
is a wadi in Hell with snakes in it and every snake is as thick as a

42
Fornication

camel’s neck which bites the one who abandons the prayer. Its poi-
son boils in his body for seventy years and then his flesh falls off.
There is a wadi in Hell called the well of al-Hazan in which are
snakes and scorpions. Each scorpion is like a camel with seventy
stings and each sting has a poisonous barb. It stings the fornicator
and its poison spreads in his body and he experiences bitter pain
for a thousand years and then his flesh falls off and his genitals run
with pus and suppuration.” (Ahmad and at-Tabarani)

It is also related that if someone commits fornication with a
married woman, half the punishment of this community will afflict
him and her in the grave. On the Day of Rising, Allah will judge
this to be among her husband’s good deeds if he had no knowl-
edge of it. If he knew and was silent, Allah will forbid the Garden
to him because Allah Almighty has written over the gate of the
Garden: “You are forbidden to the wittol.” A wittol is a man who
knows about the infidelity of his wife and is silent and not jealous.

It is also related that someone who puts a lustful hand on a
woman who is not lawful for him will come on the Day of Rising
with his hand chained to his neck. If he kisses her, his lips will be
clipped in the Fire. If he commits fornication with her, his thigh
will be made to speak and will speak against him on the Day of
Rising, saying. “I conmmitted the Aaram.” Allah Almighty will look
at him with the eye of wrath and the flesh of his face will fall off. If
he is proud and says, “I did not do it,” his tongue will testify
against him and say, “I am that with which he said what was not
lawful.” His hands will say, “I am that with which he touched the
unlawful.” His eyes will say, “I am that with which he looked at
the unlawful.” His feet will say, “I am that with which he walked to
the unlawful.” His genitals will say, “I did it.” The recording
angels will say, “I heard.” Another will say, “I wrote it.” Allah
Almighty will say, “I looked and veiled it.” Then Allah Almighty
will say, “My angels, take him and make him taste My punishment.
My anger is severe on those who have little shame before Me.”
That is confirmed by the Book of Allah Almighty: “On the Day
when their tongues and hands and feet will testify against him about
what they were doing.” (24:24)

The worst fornication is that done with one’s mother, sister,

43
Seventy Major Sins

father’s wife or female mahbram relatives. Al-Hakim says that the
report is sound: “Whoever has sex with a mahram, kill him.” Al-
Bara’ said that the Messenger of Allah # sent his uncle to a man
who had married his father’s wife, in order to put him to death and
take one-fifth of his property.

We ask Allah, the Generous by His bounty to forgive us our
sins. He is Generous, Magnanimous.

44
11. Sodomy

In His Noble Book Allah Almighty recounts to us the story of
the people of Lut in a number of places. One instance is the words

of the Almighty:

“When Our command came, We turned their cities upside down
and rained down on them stones of hard baked clay, piled on top
of one another in layers, each one earmarked by your Lord. They
are never far from the unbelievers.” (11:82-83)

If other people act in the same way, then the same punishment will
befall them.

The Prophet # said, “What I most fear for you is the action of
the people of Lot. Whoever does their action is cursed. Allah has
cursed anyone who commits the action of the people of Lut. Allah
has cursed anyone who commits the action of the people of Lut.
Allah has cursed anyone who commits the action of the people of
Lut.” (Ibn Majah and at-Tirmidhi) The Prophet 38 said, “If you
find anyone committing the action of the people of Lut, put to
death both the active and passive partner.” (Abu Dawud, at-
Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah) Ibn ‘Abbas # said, “Look for the high-
est building in the town and throw them from it and then follow
that with stones, as was done to the people of Lut.”

The Muslims agree that sodomy is one of the major wrong
actions which Allah has forbidden. Allah says:

“Of all beings, do you lie with males, leaving the wives Allah has
created for you? You are a people who have overstepped the lim-
its.”

In other words, “you have gone beyond what is lawful to the
unlawful” (26:165-166). Allah Almighty says in another ayat
reporting about his Prophet Lut #:

“We rescued him from the city which committed disgusting
acts. They are evil people who were deviators.” (21:74)

45
The name of the city was Sodom. Its people used to commit
the vile actions which Allah Almighty mentioned in his Book.
They used to commit sodomy with men, break wind in their gath-
erings and do other disliked things.

It is related that the Prophet % said, “Sex between women is
fornication.” (at-Tabarani) Abu Hurayra #: said that the Messen-
ger of Allah 38 said, “Four are subject to the anger of Allah morn-
ing and evening.” He was asked, “Who are they, Messenger of
Allah?” He # replied, “Men who resemble women and women
who resemble men, those who have sex with animals and men who
go to men (i.e. commit sodomy).” (at-Tabarani)

It is related that when one man mounts another, the Throne of
the All-Merciful trembles out of fear of the wrath of Allah
Almighty and the heavens almost fall on the earth. The angels
hold them back and recite Surat al-Ikblas until the anger of Allah
subsides. (as-Suyuti) The Prophet # also said, “Seven will be
cursed by Allah Almighty and He will not look at them on the Day
of Rising. He will say, ‘Enter the Fire with those who enter it’: one
who does it and one to whom it is done (i.e. sodomy), one who
commits bestiality, and the one who marries a woman and her
daughter at the same time, one who masturbates - unless they
repent.”

It is related that the actions of the people of Sodom included
backgammon, racing pigeons, dog fighting, ram fighting, cock
fighting, entering baths without waist-wrappers; and giving short
weight and measure. Woe to those who do that! It is reported that
whoever plays with pigeons will not die until he tastes the pain of
poverty. Ibn ‘Abbas #2 said, “If a sodomite dies without repenting,
he will be turned into a pig in his grave.” The Prophet # said,
“Allah will not look at a man who comes to a man or woman by
the anus.” Abu Sa‘id as-Sa‘luki said, “There will be people in this
community called sodomites. They are of three kinds: those who
look, those who shake hands, and those who commit foul actions.”
(at-Tirmidhi, an~Nasa’i and Ibn Hibban)

Looking with lust at a woman or a beardless youth is a kind of
fornication, for it is confirmed that the Prophet 3 said, “The for-
nication of the eye is by looking. The fornication of the tongue is
by words. The fornication of the hand is by touching. The forni-

46
Sodomy

cation of the foot is by walking. The fornication of the ear is by
listening. The lower self desires and wants. The genitals confirm
or deny that.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim)” Because of that, the righ-
teous have always strongly advised keeping away from beardless
young men and have warned against looking at them, speaking to
them and sitting with them. Al-Hasan ibn Dhakwan said, “Do not
sit with the children of the wealthy. They have forms like those of
virgins and they are a greater temptation than women.”

One of the Tabi‘un said, “I am less afraid of a beast of prey
attacking a devout young man than I am of a beardless youth sit-
ting with him.” It used to be said: “A man should not spend the
night in the same place as a beardless youth.” One of the scholars
forbade being alone with beardless youths in a house, shop or
bath-house, drawing an analogy between them and women,
because the Prophet % said, “A man is not alone with a woman
without Shaytan being the third of them.” (at-Tirmidhi)

There are beardless youths who are more beautiful than
women and so the temptation is greater. Evil is possible in respect
of them which is not possible in respect of women, and doubt ts
easy in respect of them which is not possible in respect of a
woman. So it is more likely to be unlawful. The statements of the
Salaf about avoiding them and being cautious about seeing them
are too many to count, and they call them “foul” because they are
impure legally.

Sufyan ath-Thawri entered the bath-house and a lad with a
beautiful face also entered where he was. He said, “Get him away
from me! Get him away! I see a shaytan with every woman and 1
see about ten shaytans with a lad with a handsome face.” A man
went to visit Imam Ahmad with a handsome lad and the Imam
asked, “What is this one in relation to you?” He answered, “My
nephew.” He said, “Do not bring him to us again. Do not walk
with him in the street, lest those who do not know you are related
to him might think something bad about you.” It is related that
when the delegation of ‘Abd al-Qays went to the Prophet 4g, a
handsome beardless man was among them. The Prophet ‏عه‎ made
him sit behind him. He said, “The temptation of Dawud 4 was
through the eye.” It used to be said that the glance is the postman
of fornication. We find in a hadith: “The glance is one of the ‏حلمم‎

47
Seventy Major Sins

soned arrows of Iblis. If someone abandons it for Allah, Allah will
bequeath the sweetness of worship in his heart which he will expe-
rience until the Day of Rising.”

Section: The punishment of sodomites

It is reported that Khalid ibn al-Walid wrote to Abu Bakr
as-Siddiq a that he found in a place a man who used to commit
sodomy. Abu Bakr consulted the Companions x about his case.
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib # said, “This is a sin which only one nation
committed: the nation of Lut. Allah Almighty has informed us
about what He did to them. I think that he should be burned.” So
Abu Bakr #2 wrote to him to burn him and Khalid ‏عه‎ burnt him.

The Community agree that anyone who commits this act with
his slave is considered a sodomite. It is related that in his travels
‘Isa ibn Maryam ¥ passed by a fire which was burning a man and
took some water to put it out, upon which the fire turned into a
boy and the man turned into fire. ‘Isa % was amazed at that and
said, “O Lord, return them to their former state so that I may ask
them what happened to them.” So Allah Almighty brought them
to life and they appeared as a man and a boy. ‘Isa ¥ asked them,
“What happened?” The man said, “Spirit of Allah, I was tempted
by love for this boy and lust moved me to commit indecency with
him. We both died and since then sometimes he becomes fire
which burns me and sometimes I become fire which burns him.
This is our punishment until the Day of Rising.”

We seek refuge with Allah from the punishment of Allah and
we ask for pardon, well-being and success in what He loves and is
pleased with.

Section: anal intercourse with a woman is part of sodomy,

which Allah and His Messenger have forbidden

Allah Almighty says: “Your women are fertile fields for you, so come

“

to your fertile fields however you like” (2:223), in other words: “in

48
Sodomy

whatever position you like, from the front or back, but in the same
place.” The reason for the revelation of the ayat was that the Jews
in the time of the Prophet # used to say, “If a man has sexual
intercourse with his wife from behind, any child will be born
cross-eyed.” ‘The Companions of the Messenger of Allah 3 asked
about that and Allah revealed this ayat to refute them. Muslim
transmitted it. One variant has, “Avoid the anus and menstrua-
tion.” The word used for the “same place” means the vagina,
because it is the place of tillage, meaning the place of procreation
‘The anus is the place of excretion. That is foul and dirty. Abu
Hurayra # related that the Prophet # said, “Accursed is he who
has sex with a menstruating woman or in a woman’s anus.”
(Ahmad and Abu Dawud)

At-Tirmidhi related from Abu Hurayra # that the Prophet #
said, “Anyone who has sex with a menstruating woman or a
woman in the anus, or goes to a soothsayer, has disbelieved in
what Allah revealed to Muhammad.” Included in this strong threat
is someone who goes to a soothsayer. meaning an astrologer or
someone who claims to know about something which has been
stolen and speaks about unseen matters. Many of the ignorant fall
into these acts of disobedience owing to their lack of knowledge
and failure to gain it. That is why Abu ad-Darda’ 2 said, “Be a
scholar, a teacher, a listener or a lover; be anything else and you
will be destroyed” — that is, someone who does not know or teach
or listen, and does not like people who do so is obliged to repent
to Allah of all sins and errors.

We ask Allah for pardon from what was done in ignorance and
for protection during the rest of our lives. O Allah, we ask You for
pardon and protection in the deen and this world and the Next.
You are the Most Merciful of the merciful.

49
12. Usury

Allah Almighty says:

“O you who believe, do not consume usury multiplied and then
remultiplied. Fear Allah so that perbaps you may be successful.”
(3:130)

The Almighty says: “Those who practise usury will not rise except
as someone driven mad by Shaytan’s touch” — in other words, they will
rise from their graves on the Day of Rising as someone who has
been struck by Shaytan and thrown down by him — “That is because
they say, “Trade is the same as usury.” (2:275) They say that usury is
lawful, and so they make lawful what Allah has made unlawful.

When Allah resurrects people on the Day of Rising, they will
emerge quickly except for those who have consumed usury. They
will rise and fall down as someone thrown down tries to get up.
Whenever they stand up, they fall down again. That is because
they consumed usury in this world and so Allah made it grow in
their bellies until it makes them top heavy on the Day of Rising.
So whenever they want to get up, they fall over. They want to go
quickly with the other people but are not able to do so. Qatada #
said, “Those who consumed usury will be raised on the Day of
Rising insane. That is how usurers will be known by people at the
Standing.”

Abu Sa‘id al-Khudri # said that the Messenger of Allah & said,
“When I was taken on the Night Journey, I passed by some people
whose bellies were sticking out in front of them. The belly of each
of them was like a huge house. Their bellies extended, lining the
path of the people of Pharaoh, who are presented to the Fire
morning and evening. They are brought like defeated camels
without hearing or understanding. When the people with those
bellies become aware of them they try to stand up, but their bellies
drag them down and they cannot get away so that the people of
Pharaoh trample them; and this happens to them on the way there
and the way back. That is their punishment in the barzakh (inter-
space) between this world and the Next.” The Prophet ‏يه‎ contin-
ued, “I asked Jibril who they were and he said, “Those are the peo-

50
Usury

ple who consuned usury. They only rise as someone rises whoin
Shaytan has driven mad by his touch.”

In one transmission we find: “When I was taken up, I heard
thunder and lightning in the seventh heaven above my head. I saw
men whose bellies stuck out in front of them like houses and there
were snakes and scorpions in them which could be seen from the
outside. I asked, “Who are they, Jibril?? He answered, “Those who
consumed usury.’”” (Ahmad)

It is related from ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Abdullah ibn Mas‘ud
from his father ‏بع‎ “When fornication and usury appear in a town,
Allah gives permission for its destruction.” (Abu Ya‘la) ‘Umar #
reported, “When people are stingy with dinars and dirhams and
sell on credit and follow the tails of cattle and abandon jihad in the
way of Allah, Allah will send down an affliction which will not be
removed from them until they restore their deen.” (Abu Dawud)
The Prophet % said, “Usury does not appear in a people without
madness inaking its appearance among them. Fornication does not
appear in a people without death appearing among them. A people
do not skimp with regard to weight and measure without Allah
denying them rain.” (Ibn Majah, al-Bazzar, al-Bayhaqi and al-
Hakim)

It is related in a long hadith that those who consume usury will
be punished from the time they die until the Day of Rising by
being made to swim in the Red River, whose water is like blood,
and being fed with stones, representing the forbidden property
which they amassed in this world, which are extremely hard to
swallow — stones of fire which they will be made to swallow just as
they swallowed the unlawful wealth they amassed in this world.
This punishment will take place in the barzakh before the Day of
Rising in addition to the curse of Allah upon them.

In a sound hadith the Messenger of Allah % said, “It is incum-
bent on Allah not to admit to the Garden, nor to let taste its bliss,
a habitual drinker, a consumer of usury, someone who consumes
the wealth of orphans without a right, and someone who disre-
spects his parents — unless he repents.”

It is related that those who consume usury will be resurrected
as dogs and pigs because of the devices they employed to consume
usury, in the same way that the people who violated the Sabbath

51
Seventy Major Sins

were transformed for the way they trapped the fish which Allah
had forbidden to be caught on the Sabbath. They dug holes into
which the fish swam on the Sabbath and they would take them out
the next day. When they did that, they were transformed by Allah
into monkeys and pigs. That is how it will be with those who
employ different types of devices to consume usury. Those devices
are not hidden from Allah. Ayyub as-Sakhtiyani said, “They try to
deceive Allah as they would a child. If they had been absolutely
straightforward, it would have been better for them.”

The Prophet % said, “Usury has seventy doors, the least of
which is comparable to a man having sex with his mother. The
worst kind of usury is a man attacking the honour of his Muslim
brother.” (at-Tabarani) Anas # said, “The Messenger of Allah
addressed us and mentioned usury, making it clear how terrible it
is. He said, “A dirham which a man gets from usury is worse than
committing fornication thirty-six times in Islam.” (fbn Abi ad-
Dunya and al-Bayhaqi) He & also said that the Messenger of
Allah # said, “Usury comprises seventy sins, the least of which is
like a man having sex with his mother.” (Ibn Majah) Abu Bakr as-
Siddiq # said, “Che one who takes usury and the one who pays it
will both be in the Fire:” i.e., “the one who takes it and the one
who gives it are the same.” We ask Allah for protection!

Ibn Mas‘ud 2 said, “If a man owes you a debt, and then gives
you something, do not take it. It is usury.” Al-Hasan said, “When
you are owed a debt by a man, anything you eat from his house is
ill-gotten.” This is inferred from the words of the Prophet %:
“Every loan which brings benefit is usury.” Ibn Mas‘ud 2 also
said, “If someone intercedes for a man and 1s then offered a gift, it
is ill-gotten.” That is confirmed by the words of the Prophet ‏ع‎
‎“If someone intercedes for a man who then gives him a gift and he
accepts it, he has come to one of the great doors of usury.” Abu
Dawud transmitted it.

We ask Allah for pardon and protection in the deen, and in this
world and the Next.

52
13. Consuming the property of orphans and
wronging them

Allah Almighty says:

“People who consume the property of orphans wrongfully con-
sume nothing in their bellies but fire. They will roast in a
Searing Blaze.” (4:10)

“And that you not go near the property of orphans before they
reach maturity — except in a good way.” (6:152)

Abu Sa‘id al-Khudri # related that the Messenger of Allah #
said, “In the Ascent during the Night Journey, I saw some men
whose jaws were forced open; other men brought stones of fire
which they threw into their mouths and which then emerged from
their anuses. [ asked, ‘JJibril, who are those?’ He said, “Those who
consume the property of orphans wrongly consume fire in their
bellies.” Muslim transmitted it. Abu Hurayra #2 related that the
Messenger of Allah & said, “Allah Almighty will raise some people
from their graves and fire will emerge from their bellies, burning
their mouths with fire.” Someone asked, “Who are those,
Messenger of Allah?” He answered, “Do you not see that Allah
says: ‘People who consume the property of orphans wrongfully consume
nothing in their bellies but fire?”

As-Suddi said, “Anyone who consumes the property of an
orphan wrongly will be raised on the Day of Rising with flames of
fire coming out of his mouth, ears, nose and eyes. Everyone who
sees him will know that he consumed the wealth of an orphan.”
Scholars have said that if the guardian of an orphan is poor he may
use his property correctly in order to maintain him in his best
interests and to make his wealth grow. There is nothing wrong
with that. But anything other than that is unlawful and forbidden.
The Almighty says:

“Those who are wealthy should abstain from it altogether. Those
who are poor should use it sensibly and correctly.” (4:6)

53
Seventy Major Sins

‘There are four positions about using an orphan’s wealth cor-
rectly. The first is that the guardian may take it as a loan, the sec-
ond is that he may consume it according to need without extrava-
gance, the third is that he may take what is appropriate for the
work he does for the orphan, and the fourth is that he should only
take it in real need. If he becomes wealthy, he should repay it, and
if he does not become wealthy, what he has done is lawful. These
positions were mentioned by Ibn al-Jawzi in his tafsir.

It is reported in al-Bukhari that the Messenger of Allah 3 said,
“1 and the guardian of an orphan will be in the Garden like this,”
and he indicated his index and middle fingers and the gap between
them. Guardianship of an orphan entails managing his affairs and
striving for his best interests in respect of food and clothing, and
making his property increase if he has property. If he has no prop-
erty, one should spend on him and clothe him seeking to please
Allah Almighty.

The Messenger of Allah % said, “If someone lets a Muslim
orphan eat and drink with him until Allah enriches him, Allah will
make the Garden mandatory for him unless he commits a wrong
action which is not forgiven.” (at-Tirmidhi) The Prophet * said,
“If someone strokes an orphan’s head, and strokes it for the sake of
Allah alone, he receives a good action for every hair over which his
hand passes. If someone is good to a orphan boy or girl with him,
he and I will be like these in the Garden.” (Ahmad)

A man said to Abu ad-Darda’ #, “Give me some advice.” He
said, “Show mercy to an orphan, bring him close to you and feed
him from your own food. When a man came to the Messenger of
Allah % to complain about the hardness of his heart, I heard the
Messenger of Allah 3 say, ‘If you want to soften your heart, then
bring an orphan close to you, stroke his head and feed him from
your own food. That will soften your heart and you will be able to
do what you need.” (at-Tabarani)

One thing related from one of the Sa/afis that he said, “At the
beginning I was addicted to things by which I disobeyed Allah and
drinking wine. One day I got an orphan child and took him in, was
good to him, fed him and clothed him and took him to the baths
to remove his unkemptness. I honoured him as a man honours his
child, and more. I went to sleep the night after that and dreamt

54
Consuming the property of orphans

that the Resurrection had taken place and I was summoned for the
reckoning and was sent to the Fire for the acts of disobedience [
had done. The Zabaniyya (angels of Hell) dragged me towards the
Fire and | was humble and lowly before them. Suddenly there was
that orphan, standing in front of me in the road. He said, ‘Let him
go, angels of my Lord! It is my right to intercede for him with my
Lord. He was good to me and honoured me.’ The angels said, ‘We
have not been commanded to do that.’ Then a call came from
Allah Almighty: ‘Let hin go. I have forgiven hiin for what he did,
because of the intercession of the orphan and his kindness to him.’
1 awoke and turned to Allah Almighty. I exerted myself in showing
mercy to orphans.”

This is why Anas ibn Malik #, the servant of the Messenger of
Allah &, said, “The best of houses is a house in which there is an
orphan who is treated well, and the worst of houses is a house in
which there is an orphan who is treated badly. The most beloved
of people to Allah is the one who does something for an orphan or
a widow.” It is related that Allah Almighty revealed to Dawud ‏ب‎
‎“Dawud, be like a merciful father to orphans and a kind husband
to widows. Know that as you sow so shall you reap.” It means that
as you do, so shall it be done to you. So that must be the case if
you die and leave an orphan child or widow. Dawud © said in his
intimate conversation with his Lord, “My God, what is the recom-
pense of someone who supports orphans and widows seeking to
please You?” He answered, “His reward is that I will shade him in
My shade on the Day when there is no shade but My shade.”

Regarding the merit of being good to widows and orphans is a
story about an ‘Alawite (descendant of ‘Ali), who was staying at
Balkh in the land of the Persians. His wife was also an ‘Alawite and
they had some daughters. They lived in luxury and prosperity.
‘Then the husband died and the woman and her daughters fell into
poverty and need. She moved with her daughters to another town
out of fear of abuse from her enemies. It happened that they left in
a time of intense cold and, when they came to the new town, the
woman left her daughters in a deserted mosque and went to try
and find them some food. She passed by two groups: one group
gathered around a Muslim who was the town’s shaykh, and anoth-
er around a Magian who was the town’s tax collector.

55
Seventy Major Sins

She went first to the Muslim and explained her situation to him
saying, “I am an ‘Alawite woman and I have orphaned daughters
whom I have left in a deserted mosque, and I want food for the
night.” He said to her, “Show me proof that you are a noble
‘Alawite.” She said, “I am a foreign woman in a land which does
not know me.” He turned away from her. So, brokenhearted, she
left him and went to that Magian and explained her situation to
him, telling hin that she had orphaned daughters with her and
was a foreign noble woman. She told him what had happened to
her with the Muslim shaykh. He got up and sent for one of his
wives, and they took her and her daughters to his house and gave
them the best food and clothed them in the most splendid gar-
ments. They spent the night with him in luxury and honour.

In the middle of the night, that Muslim shaykh dreamt that it
was the Day of Resurrection and the banner was set up at the head
of the Prophet %. There were castles of emerald whose windows
were pearls and rubies and which had domes of pearl and coral.
He asked, “Messenger of Allah, who is this castle for?” He
answered, “For a Muslim man who declares the unity of Allah.”
He said, “Messenger of Allah. I am a Muslim man who declares
the unity of Allah.” The Messenger of Allah % said, “Produce
clear proof with you that you are a Muslim who declares the unity
of Allah.” He was bewildered.

The Prophet % said to him, “When the ‘Alawite woman told
her story to you, you said, ‘Produce clear proof for me that you
are an ‘Alawite.’ So produce for me clear proof that you are a
Muslim.” The man woke up in sorrow for having turned away the
disappointed woman. Then he began to search in the town and
ask about her until he was told that she was with the Magian. He
went to him and said, “I would like to take the noble ‘Alawite
woman and her daughters off your hands.” The man said,
“Certainly not! I have the blessing of looking after them.” He said,
“1 will give you a thousand dinars to hand them over to me.” He
said, “I will not do it.” He said, “I must have them.” He said, “I
am more entitled to the thing you desire, and the castle you saw in
your dream was created for me. Do you think your Islam makes
you better than me? By Allah, I and my household did not sleep
last night until we had become Muslim at the hand of the ‘Alawite

56
Consuming the property of orphans

woman. I had the same dream as you. The Messenger of Allah #
said to me, ‘Are the ‘Alawite woman and her daughters with you?’
I answered, ‘Yes, ‘ He said, “The castle is for you and the people of
your house. You and your household are among the people of the
Garden. Allah created you a believer before time began.” So the
Muslim left in such a state of sorrow and grief as only Allah
knows.

So look, may Allah have mercy on you, at the blessing which
comes from being good to widows and orphans, and the honour it
brings to a person in this world! This is why it is confirmed in the
two Sahih collections that the Messenger of Allah % said, “The
one who strives on behalf of widows and the poor is like someone
who does jihad in the Way of Allah.” The transmitter said, “I think
he said, ‘like someone who prays without flagging and fasts with-
out breaking the fast.’”” The one who strives on their behalf is the
one who looks after their affairs and seeks their best interests seek-
ing to please Allah Almighty.

May Allah benefit us by that by His favour and honour. He is

Generous, Magnanimous, Compassionate, Forgiving, Merciful.

57
14. Lying about Allah Almighty and His Messenger 3%

Allah Almighty says:

“On the Day of Rising you will see those who lied against Allah
with their faces blackened.” (39:60)

Al-Hasan said, “They are those who say, ‘If we want to do some-
thing we will do it and if we do not want to we will not do it.” [bn
al-Jawzi said in his tafsir: “A group of scholars believe that lying
about Allah and his Messenger is disbelief which takes one out of
Islam. There is no doubt whatsoever that lying about Allah and
His Messenger by making what is lawful unlawful and the unlaw-
ful lawful is pure disbelief. The concern here is about lying in
some way other than that.”

The Prophet % said, “Whoever lies about me, a house will be
built for him in Hellfire.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim) The Prophet
% also said, “Whoever deliberately lies about me, he will take his
seat in the fire.” The Prophet # further said, “Whoever relates a
report allegedly from me thinking that it is a lie, he is one of the
liars.” (Muslim) The Prophet # said, “Lying about me is not like
lying about someone else. Whoever lies about me deliberately, he
will take a seat in the Fire.” (Muslim) The Prophet ® said,
“Whoever says that I said anything that I did not say will take his
seat in the Fire.” The Prophet 38 said, “A believer may by nature
be capable of anything except treachery and lying.” (al-Bazzar and
Abu Ya‘la)

We ask Allah for success and protection. He is Generous,
Magnanimous.

58
15. Fleeing from battle

This is when the enemy is not more than twice as many as the
Muslims. An exception is made for withdrawing to rejoin the fight
elsewhere or to support another group, even if far away. Allah
Almighty says:

“Anyone who turns his back on them that day, except withdraw-
ing to rejoin the fight or withdrawing to support another group,
brings Allah’s anger down on himself. His refuge is Hell. What
an evil destination!” (8:16)

Abu Hurayra said that the Messenger of Allah % said,
“Avoid the seven deadly sins.” They asked, “What are they,
Messenger of Allah?” He replied, “Associating others with Allah,
sorcery, killing a soul which Allah has made unlawful except by a
legal right, consuming usury, consuming the wealth of orphans,
fleecing from battle, and slandering chaste, heedless, believing
women.” (Al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Ibn ‘Abbas # said, “When Allah revealed, ‘Uf there are twenty of
you who are steadfast, they will overcome two hundred’ (8:65), Allah
prescribed for them that twenty should not flee from two hun-
dred. Then it was revealed that ‘Now Allah has made it lighter on
you, knowing that there is weakness in you. If there are a hundred of you
who are steadfast, they will overcome two hundred; and if there are a
thousand of you, they will overcome two thousand with Allah’s perntis-
sion. Allah is with the steadfast.’ (8:66) So Allah prescribed that one
hundred should not flee from two hundred. Al-Bukhari related it.

59
16. A leader duping his followers and treating
them unjustly

Allah Almighty says:

“There are only grounds against those who wrong people and
act as tyrants in this world without any right to do so. Such people
will have a painful punishment.” (42:42)

“Do not consider Allah to be unaware of what the wrongdoers
perpetrate. He is merely deferring them to a Day on which their
sight will be transfixed, rushing headlong - heads back, eyes
vacant, hearts hollow.” (14:42-43)

“Those who do wrong will soon know the kind of reversal they
will receive!” (26:227)

“They would not restrain one another from the wrong things
they did. How evil were the things they used to do!” (5:79)

‘The Messenger of Allah # said, “Whoever deceives us is not of
us,” (Muslim) And he 3 said, “Injustice will be darkness on the
Day of Rising.” (Al-Bukhari, Muslim and at-Tirmidhi) The
Prophet # also said, “All of you are shepherds and each of you is
responsible for his flock.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim) The
Messenger of Allah 38 further said, “Any shepherd who dupes his
flock will be in the Fire.” (at-Tabarani) The Prophet % said, “If
someone is put in authority over people by Allah and does not deal
with it faithfully, Allah will forbid him the Garden.” (Al-Bukhar1)
And in another transmission: “If on the day he dies, he dies duping
his flock, Allah will deny him the Garden.”

The Prophet ‏عه‎ said, “There is no governor who judges
between people who will not be held on the Day of Rising, an
angel taking hold of him by the back of the neck. If Allah says,
“Throw him down,’ he will be thrown into Hell for forty years.”
Imam Ahmad related it. The Messenger of Allah % said, “Woe to
amirs! Woe to captains! Woe to trustees! On the Day of Rising,
some people will wish they had been hung by their hair from the
Pleiades as a punishment and that they had not been given author-

60
A leader duping his followers

ity over anything.” The Prophet # said, “A just judge will come on
the Day of Rising and will wish that he had not judged between
two people, even about a single date.” (al-Bazzar) The Prophet #
said, “There is no commander of ten who will not be brought on
the Day of Rising with his hand chained to his neck. Either his
justice will release him or his injustice will ruin him.” (Ahmad and
Ibn Hibban)

One of the supplications of the Messenger of Allah #8 was: “O
Allah, if someone is put in authority over some part of this com-
munity and is kind to those under him, be kind to him. If he is
harsh to them, be harsh to him.” The Prophet # said, “Whoever
undertakes some of the affairs of the Muslims and is veiled from
their needs, want, and poverty, Allah will be veiled from his needs
and want and poverty.” (Muslim and an-Nasa’i) The Messenger of
Allah # said, “There will be impious unjust rulers. Whoever
believes their lies and assists them in their injustice is not from me
and I am not from him. He will not come to my Basin [on the Last
Day}.” (Ahmad and at-Tirmidhi) The Messenger of Allah % said,
“Two classes of my community will not obtain my intercession:
unjust, corrupt rulers and people who are excessive in the deen.
Witness will be borne against them and they will be excluded.”
(at- Tabarani)

We find in a hadith that the Prophet 2 said: “O people, com-
mand the right and forbid the wrong lest you call upon Allah and
He does not answer you and ask forgiveness of Allah and He does
not forgive you. When the rabbis of the Jews and the monks of the
Christians stopped commanding the right and forbidding the
wrong, Allah cursed them at the hands of the Prophets and then
enveloped them in affliction.” (al-Isfahani)

‘The Messenger of Allah 3 said, “If someone innovates some-
thing in this affair of ours which is not part of it, it is rejected” (al-
Bukhari and Muslim) and: “Whoever innovates a matter or intro-
duces an innovation, the curse of Allah, the angels and all people is
on him, and Allah will not accept from him any recompense.”

We also find in a badith: “Whoever does not show mercy will
not be shown mercy. Allah will not show mercy to someone who
does not show mercy to other people.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim)

61
Seventy Major Sins
The Prophet # said, “A just ruler will be shaded by Allah in His
shade on the Day when there is no shade but His shade.” (al-
Bukhari and Muslim) He also said #, “The just will be on minbars
of light: those who were fair in their rulings and to their family
and in all their undertakings.” (Muslim and an-Nasa’i)

When the Messenger of Allah 38 sent Mu‘adh to Yemen, he
said, “Beware of the best property, for there is no veil between the
supplication of the wronged and Allah.” Al-Bukhari related it. He
% said, “There are three to whom Allah will not speak on the Day
of Rising.” He mentioned among them a lying king. (Muslim) He
also said #, “You are eager for authority, but it will be a matter of
regret on the Day of Rising.” Al-Bukhari related it and also this:
“By Allah, I will not appoint to this office anyone who asks for it
or who is eager for it.”

The Messenger of Allah #8 said, “Ka‘b ibn ‘Ujra, seek refuge
with Allah from the command of fools: leaders who will come
after me who do not follow my guidance and do not follow my
sunna.” (Ahmad) Abu Hurayra # reported that the Prophet #
said, “If someone seeks to judge the Muslims and is placed in that
position and then his justice overcomes his injustice, he will be in
the Garden. If his injustice overcomes his justice, he will be in the
Fire.” (Abu Dawud)

‘Umar # said to Abu Dharr #, “Relate to me a hadith which
you heard from the Messenger of Allah.” Abu Dharr #: said, “I
heard the Messenger of Allah % say: ‘A ruler will brought to the
Day of Rising and will be thrown onto the bridge over Hell. The
bridge will shake so violently that all his joints will be dislocated.
If he obeyed Allah in his work, he will pass over it. If he disobeyed
Allah in his work, the Bridge will break under him and make him
fall into Hell for fifty years.’” ‘Amr ibn al-Muhajir that ‘Umar ibn
‘Abd al-‘Aziz reported: “If you see me deviating from the truth,
put your hand on mine and say, ‘‘Umar, what are you doing?”

62
17. Pride

This includes pride, boasting, conceitedness, haughtiness and

vanity. Allah Almighty says:

“Musa said, ‘I seek refuge in my Lord from every proud man
who does not believe in the Day of Reckoning.’” (40:27)

“He does not love people puffed up with pride.” (16:23)
The Messenger of Allah # said, “Once Allah made the earth

swallow a man who was walking with an arrogant gait. He will
sink in it until the Day of Rising” (al-Bukhari and an-Nasa’i). He
#8 also said, “The tyrants and the arrogant will be gathered on the
Day of Rising like grain on which people walk. Abasement will
envelop them in every place.” (an-Nasa’i and at-Tirmidhi)

One of the Salaf said, “The first sin by which Allah was dis-
obeyed was pride.” Allah Almighty says: ‘We said to the angels,
“Prostrate to Adam!” and they prostrated, with the exception of Iblis. He
refused and was arrogant and was one of the unbelievers.’ (2:34) If
someone arrogant towards God, his faith will not help him, as
happened with Iblis.”

The Prophet ‏يه‎ said, “No one will enter the garden while there
is atom of pride in his heart.” Muslim related it. Allah Almighty
says: “Allah does not love anyone who is vain or boastful.” (31:18) The
Messenger of Allah % said, “Allah Almighty says: ‘Majesty is My
waist-wrapper and pride is My cloak. If someone vies with Me for
them, I will cast him into the Fire.’”” Muslim related it.

The Prophet # said, “The Garden and the Fire argued. The
Garden said, ‘Why is it that only the weak and lowly will enter
me? The Fire said, ‘I was preferred for the tyrants and arrogant.”
Allah Almighty says: “Do not avert your face from people out of
haughtiness and do not strut about arrogantly in the earth. Allah does
not love anyone who is vain or boastful.” 31:18)

Salama ibn al-Akwa‘ ‏ع‎ said, “A man ate with the Messenger of
Allah # using his left hand. The Prophet # said, ‘Eat with your
right hand.’ The man replied, ‘I cannot.’ Then he said, “You can-
not? Only pride has stopped you.’ After that he was never able to

63
Seventy Major Sins

lift it to his mouth.” Muslim related it. He # said, “Shall I inform
you of who is in the Fire? It is every rough, strutting, arrogant
person.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim) Ibn ‘Umar # said, “I heard the
Messenger of Allah # say, “There is no man who is arrogant in his
gait and arrogant in himself who will not meet Allah and find Him
angry with him.” (at-Tabarani) It is sound, corroborated by this
hadith of Abu Hurayra #:: “The first three to enter the Fire will be
an unjust ruler, a rich person who does not pay zakat, and a proud,
poor person.” (Ibn Khuzayma and Ibn Hibban) We find in Sahib
al-Bukbari that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Allah will not look
at three on the Day of Rising, will not declare them upright, and
they will have a painful punishment: the one who wears his gar-
ment long (out of pride), the one who reminds people of his chari-
ty to them, and the one sells his goods by a false oath.”

The worst kind of pride is that of someone who is arrogant to
wards people because of his knowledge and gloats over his own
superiority. Such a person does not benefit at all from his knowl-
edge. Someone who seeks knowledge of the Next World is ren-
dered contrite by his knowledge; his heart is made humble and his
lower self is abased. He lies in wait for his lower self and does not
let up on it but calls it to account all the time and examines it. If
he were to let it loose, it would refuse to follow the Straight Path
and destroy him. If someone seeks knowledge out of pride and
desire for leadership and exalts himself over other Muslims, think-
ing them to be foolish and belittling them, this is the worse kind
of pride — and anyone who has an atom’s weight of pride in his
heart will not enter the Garden. There is no strength or power
except by Allah, the High, the Immense.

64
18. Perjury

Allah Almighty says:
“Those who do not bear false witness.” (25:72)

We find in a Tradition, “Perjury is equivalent to double shirk
with Allah.” Allah Almighty says: “Have done with telling lies.”
(22:30) Anther Aadith states: “The feet of a false witness will not
move on the Day of Rising until the Fire is made mandatory for
him.” (Ibn Majah and al-Hakim)

According to a/-Musannaf: “Whoever commits perjury has
committed several terrible sins. One of them is lying. The
Almighty says: ‘Allah does not guide any unbridled inveterate liar.’
(40:28)” We find in another hadith: “A believer can be naturally
disposed to anything except treachery and lying.” (Ibn Majah and
al-Hakim) Another of his sins is that he wrongs the person against
whom he testifies in order to take his wealth, honour and life. A
third is that he wrongs the person against whom he testifies in
order to acquire unlawful wealth. He takes it on oath, so the Fire
becomes mandatory for Him. The Messenger of Allah 38 said, “IfT
judge that someone should have his brother’s property, to which
he in fact has no right, he should not take it. I have cut for him a
piece of the Fire.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim) A fourth sin is that he
makes lawful what Allah Almighty has made unlawful and protect-
ed with respect to wealth, life and honour.

The Messenger of Allah 38 said, “Shall I tell you of the worst of
serious wrong actions? Associating others with Allah, disrespect to
parents, and perjury. And perjury.’ He continued to repeat it until
we almost said that we wished that he had been silent.” Al-Bukhari
related this.

We ask Allah almighty for safety and protection from every
affliction.

65
19. Drinking alcohol

Allah Almighty says:

“You who believe, wine and gambling, stone altars and divining
arrows are filth from the handiwork of Shaytan. Avoid them
completely so that perbaps you will be successful. Shaytan wants to
stir up enmity and hatred between you by means of wine and
gambling, and to debar you from remembrance of Allah and from
the prayer. Will you not give them up?” (5:90-91)

Allah Almighty forbids wine in this zyat and cautions against it.

The Prophet # said, “Avoid wine. It is the mother of foul
things.” (al-Hakim) Anyone who does not avoid it has disobeyed
Allah and His Messenger and deserves punishment for disobeying
Allah and His Messenger. Allah Almighty says:

“As for bim who disobeys Allah and His Messenger and oversteps
Hits limits, We will admit him into a Fire, to remain in it time-
lessly, for ever. He will have a humiliating punishment.” (4:14)

Ibn ‘Abbas # said, “When the prohibition of wine was
revealed, some of the Companions went to one another and said,
‘Wine has been forbidden and made equal to shirk.’” (at-Tabarani)
‘Abdullah ibn ‘Amr ‏ل‎ believed that drinking wine was the greatest
of the major wrong actions and it is, without a doubt, the mother
of foul things. Those who drink are cursed in more than one
hadith.

Ibn ‘Umar ‏2ل‎ said that the Messenger of Allah # said, “Every
intoxicant is wine and every sort of wine is forbidden. If someone
drinks wine in this world and dies without having repented of it
and is addicted to it, he will not drink it in the Next World.”
Muslim related it. Kbamr (wine) means anything that overpowers
the intellect whether it is moist or dry, eaten or drunk.

Imam Ahmad related in his Musnad in a hadith from Abu
Hurayra ‏ف‎ that the Messenger of Allah # said, “An habitual
drinker of wine is like an idolator.” He stated that when an habitu-
al drinker dies without repenting, he will not enter the Garden.

66
Drinking alcobol

An-Nasa’i related in a hadith from Ibn ‘Umar 2# that the
Messenger of Allah 48 said, “Anyone who disrespects his parents
and habitually drinks wine will not enter the Garden.” In one vari-
ant: “Allah has forbidden the Garden to three: an habitual drinker,
someone who disrespects his parents, and a wittol, meaning some-
one who condones evil in his wife.”

He also stated that Allah does not accept the good actions of a
drunkard. Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah # related that the Messenger of
Allah # said, “Three who do not have their prayer accepted from
them, and none of whose good actions rises to heaven: a runaway
slave, until he returns to his owners and surrenders to them; a
woman whose husband is angry with her, until he is pleased with
her; and a drunkard until he becomes sober.” (Ibn Khuzayma, Ibn
Hibban, al-Bayhaqi and at-Tabarani)

Abu Sa‘id al-Khudri ‏عن‎ related that the Messenger of Allah %
said, “Allah does not accept the prayer of anyone who drinks wine
as long as any of it remains in his body.” One transmission has: “If
someone drinks wine, Allah does not accept anything from hitn. If
someone becomes drunk on it, his prayer is not accepted for forty
days. If he repents and then reverts, it is right for Allah to let him
drink of the molten brass of Hellfire.” The Messenger of Allah #
said, “If someone drinks wine and does not get drunk, Allah turns
away from him for forty nights. If someone drinks wine and gets
drunk, Allah will not accept any compensation from him for forty
nights. If he dies during this time, he dies as an idolator. It is right
for Allah to let him drink from the ooze of poison.” Someone
asked, “Messenger of Allah, what is the ooze of poison?” He said.
“The fluid, blood and pus of the people of the Fire.”

The Prophet # said that anyone who drinks wine is not a
believer when he drinks it. It is reported from Abu Hurayra #
from the Prophet # that “A thief is not a believer when he steals.
A fornicator is not a believer when he fornicates. Someone who
drinks is not a believer when he drinks wine. Repentance can
occur afterwards.” Al-Bukhari transmitted it. We find in another
hadith: “Whoever commits fornication or drinks wine, Allah
removes Islam from him as a man removes a shirt from over his
head.” (al-Hakim) It is reported that “Anyone who drinks wine in

67
Seventy Major Sins

the evening becomes an idolator in the morning. Anyone who
drinks it in the morning becomes an idolator in the evening.”

The Prophet # said: “The scent of the Garden can be smelt
from five hundred miles, but its fragrance will not be smelt by
anyone who disrespects his parents, reminds people of his charity,
habitually drinks wine or worships an idol.” It is related by Imam
Ahmad in the sadith from Abu Musa al-Ash‘ari # that the
Messenger of Allah # said, “A habitual wine drinker will not enter
the Garden, nor will anyone who believes in sorcery or who cuts
off kin. Whoever dies while drinking wine, Allah will let him drink
from the river of Ghuta, which is fluid flowing from the genitals of
whores, and the stink of their private parts nauseates the people of
the Fire.”

The Messenger of Allah % said, “Allah sent me as a mercy and
guidance to the worlds. He sent me to do away with stringed
instruments and wind instruments and the business of the
fahiliyya. My Lord Almighty has sworn by His might: ‘None of
My slaves takes a mouthful of wine without being given its like
from the boiling water of Hell. None of My slaves leaves it out of
fear of Me without My letting him drink in the fields of sanctity
with the best companions.” (Ahmad)

Abu Dawud related that the Messenger of Allah % said, “Wine
itself is cursed, as are the one who drinks it, the one who serves it,
the one who sells it and the one who buys it, the one who presses
it or for whom it is pressed, the one who carries or accepts its
delivery, and the one who consumes the money paid for it.” Imam
Ahmad related it from a 5205 of Ibn ‘Abbas #, who said: “I
heard the Messenger of Allah % say, ‘Jibril came to me and said,
“Muhammad, Allah has cursed wine, whoever presses it or has it
pressed, its seller and buyer, the one who drinks it, the one who
consumes what is paid for it, its carrier and the one who asks for it
to be carried, and the one who serves it or asks for it to be
served.”””

There is a prohibition against visiting wine-drinkers when they
are ill or greeting them. ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Amr ibn al-‘As ‏2ت‎ said,
“Do not visit wine drinkers when they are ill.” Al-Bukhari relates
that “Ibn ‘Umar 22 said, ‘Do not greet a wine drinker.’” The
Prophet #8 said, “Do not sit with wine drinkers; do not visit those

68
Drinking alcohol

of them who are ill; and do not attend their funerals. A wine
drinker will come on the Day of Rising with a black face, his
tongue dangling down onto on his chest, and his spittle running
down. Anyone who sees that will recognise that he was a wine
drinker.” (Ibn al-Jawzi)

One of the scholars said: “It is forbidden to visit them and
greet them, because a wine drinker is deviant and cursed by Allah
and His Messenger, as in the words of the Prophet #: ‘Allah has
cursed wine and the one who drinks it. If someone buys it and
presses it, he is cursed twice. If he gives it to someone, he is cursed
three times.’ That is why it is forbidden to visit them and greet
them unless they repent. If someone repents, Allah turns to him.”

He stated % that it is not lawful to use wine for medicine.
Umm Salama ® said, “A daughter of mine was ill and I made
nabidh (a fermented drink) for her in a jug. The Messenger of
Allah 3 came to me while it was boiling and asked, ‘What is this,
Umm Salama?’ J mentioned that I was using it to treat a daughter
of mine. The Messenger of Allah # said, ‘Allah Almighty has not
put the healing of my community in what He has made prohibited
for it.’” (al-Bayhaqi) It is mentioned by Abu Nu‘aym in a/-Hilya
from Abu Musa 22 that he said, “The Prophet # was brought
some nabidh in a jar which was bubbling and he said, ‘Smash it
against the wall. This is the drink of someone who does not
believe in Allah and the Last Day.’”

The Messenger of Allah # said, “Anyone who has one ayat of
the Book of Allah in his heart and pours wine on it will be brought
on the Day of Rising and every letter of that ayat will take him by
the forelock until he is made to stand before Allah — blessed is He
and exalted — and argue with it. Whoever has the Qur’an argue
with him is an opponent. Woe to anybody who has the Qur’an
argue against him on the Day of Rising.”

It is related that the Prophet said, ”There are no people who
gather together to drink an intoxicant in this world without Allah
gathering them together in the Fire. They will turn to one anoth-
er blaming each other. One of them will say to the other, ‘So-and-
so, may Allah not repay you well. You are the one who brought me
to this!’ The other will say the same thing back.”

69
Seventy Major Sins

‘Traditions from the Salaf about wine

Al-Fudayl ibn ‘Iyad visited one of his students who was dying,
and began to instruct him to say the shahada; but his tongue would
not articulate it. So he repeated it to him but he said, “I do not say
it. Iam free of it.” So al-Fuday] left him, weeping. Then after that
he saw him in a dream being dragged to the Fire. He said to him,
“Wretch! What stripped recognition from you?” He answered,
“Master, I had an illness and I went to a doctor and he told me to
drink a glass of wine every year. He told me that if I did not do it,
my illness would continue. I used to drink it every year for medi-
cation.” If that is the state of someone who drinks it for medica-
tion, what will be the state of someone who drinks it for any other
reason? We ask Allah for pardon and protection from every afflic-
tion.

One of those who repented was asked about what brought it
about and he said, “I used to disinter graves and I saw dead people
in them turned away from the 15/2. I asked their families about
them and they said, “They used to drink wine in this world, and
they died without repenting.’” One of the righteous said, “A
young son of mine died, and after I had buried him, I saw him in a
dream and his hair was white. I said, ‘My son, I buried you when
you were young. What has made you white-haired?’ He answered,
‘Father, a man was buried beside me who used to drink wine in
this world. Hell sighed when he came and there was no child who
did not become white-haired from the intensity of its sigh.”” We
seek refuge with Allah. We ask Allah for pardon and protection
from anything which obliges punishment in the Next World.

Section. Hashish, which is made from the leaves of cannabis,
is unlawful like wine, and anyone who consumes it should receive
the same 52204 punishment as someone who drinks wine. It is
worse than wine since it destroys the intellect and constitution,
making a man effeminate, a wittol or some other corrupt thing.
Wine is more corrupting in another way because it leads to argu-
ing and fighting. Both of them prevent remembrance of Allah and
the prayer.

70
Drinking alcohol

Some later scholars hesitate about the badd punishment for
hashish and believe that someone who uses it should receive a dis-
cretionary punishment which is less than the badd. This 1s because
they consider it to be something which alters the mind without
giving pleasure, and because early scholars did not say anything
about it. That is not the case. Rather people are intoxicated by
consuming it and desire it like wine or even more, so that they
cannot bear to be without it, and it stops them from remembering
Allah and from the prayer when they use it often.

But when hashish is in a solid form and eaten and not drunk or
smoked, scholars disagree about its impurity. There are three posi-
tions in the school of Imam Ahmad and others. It is said that it is
impure like wine which is drunk; and that is the sound position. It
is said that it is not impure because it is solid. It is said that there is
a difference according to whether it is in a solid or liquid form. In
any case, it is included in the category of intoxicants, which Allah
and His Messenger have forbidden, both in word and meaning.

Abu Musa 2 said, “Messenger of Allah, give us a ruling about
two drinks which we make in Yemen: b7t, which is made from fer-
mented honey which becomes strong; and mizr, which is made
from barley which is fermented until it becomes strong.” The
Messenger of Allah % said, “I have been given the final general
statements;” and the Prophet #8 said, “Every intoxicant is forbid-
den.” Muslim related it.

The Prophet ‏يل‎ said, “When much of something intoxicates, a
little of it is unlawful.” The Prophet # did not distinguish between
one type of intoxicant and another, as to whether it is eaten or
drunk, since wine can be made into bread and hashish can be
melted in water and drunk. Wine is eaten and drunk. Hashish is
eaten and drunk. The scholars did not mention it because it was
not a custom among the early generations. It came about when the
Mongols came to the lands of Islam. By Allah, Iblis does not
rejoice at anything as he does at hashish, because it is attractive to
base souls and people consider it lawful and indulge in it.

Story. It is related from ‘Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan that a young
man came to him weeping in sorrow and said, “Amr al-Mu’minin,

7)
Seventy Major Sins

I have committed a terrible sin. Can I repent?” The caliph asked,
“What was your sin?” He replied, “My sin is terrible.” He said,
“What is it? Repent to Allah Almighty. He accepts the repentance
of His slaves and pardons evil deeds.” He said, “Azir al-Mu’minin,
I used to rob graves and I saw extraordinary things in them.” He
asked, “What did you see?” He said, “Amir al-Mu’minin, one
night I dug up a grave and I saw that its inhabitant had turned his
face away from the gib/a. I was afraid of him and wanted to leave.
Then someone said in the grave, ‘Why don’t you ask why the
corpse has turned his face away from the gibla?’ So I asked, ‘Why
has he turned away?’ I was answered, ‘Because he made light of
the prayer. This is the repayment of someone like him.’

“Then I dug up another grave and saw that the corpse had
been turned into a pig and was bound with chains and fetters on
his neck. I was afraid of him and wanted to leave, and a voice said,
‘Why don’t you ask what he did and why he is being punished?’ So
1 asked, ‘Why?’ He said, ‘He used to drink wine in this world and
died without repenting.’ The third time, Amir al-Mu’minin, I
opened the grave and found the corpse driven into earth with pegs
of fire and his tongue pinned to the back of his mouth. I was afraid
and wanted to leave but there was a call, ‘Why do you not ask
about his state and why he is being punished?’ I asked, ‘What did
he do?’ He said, ‘He did not avoid urine and he used to carry tales
among people.’ I opened a fourth grave, Amir al-Mu’minin, and
found its inhabitant burning with fire and I was afraid of him and
wanted to leave. Someone said, ‘Why do you not ask about him
and his state?’ I asked, ‘What is his state?’ He said, ‘He abandoned
the prayer.’

I dug up a fifth, Amir al-Mu’minin, and found that it extended
as far as the eye could see with a luminous light. The corpse was
lying on a bed. His light shone and he was wearing beautiful gar-
ments. [ was in awe of him and wanted to leave. It was said to me,
‘Will you not ask about his state and why he is honoured in this
way?’ I said, ‘Why is he honoured?’ I was told, ‘Because he was a
devout young man who was brought up obeying and worshipping
Allah Almighty.” ‘Abd al-Malik said at that, “This contains a les-

son for the disobedient and good news for the obedient. It is

72
Drinking alcohol

mandatory for anyone with these defects to quickly repent and
obey Allah.”

May Allah make us and you among the obedient and make us
avoid the actions of the deviants. He is Generous, Magnanimous.

73
20. Gambling

Allah Almighty says:

“O you who believe, wine, gambling, stone altars and divining
arrows are filth from the handiwork of Shaytan. Avoid them
completely so that perbaps you may be successful. Shaytan wants to
stir up enmity and hatred between you by means of wine and
gambling and to debar you from remembrance of Allah and from
the prayer. Will you not then give them up?” (5:90-91)

Gambling (maysir) is gambling of any type: backgammon,
chess, dice, or something else. It is consuming the property of
people under false pretences, which Allah forbids when He says:
“Do not devour one another’s property by false means.” (2:188) It is
encompassed by the words of the Prophet 38, “Men who spend the
property of Allah without due right will go to the Fire on the Day
of Rising” (al-Bukhari). In Sahib al-Bukhari we also find that the
Messenger # said, “If anyone says to his companion, ‘Come on, I
will make a bet with you,’ he should give sadaga.” If merely saying
the words obliges expiation or sadaga, what do you think about
actually doing it?

Section. Scholars disagree about backgammon and chess when
there is no betting involved. They agree that it is forbidden to play
backgammon since it is established sound proofs that the
Messenger of Allah # said, “Whoever plays backgammon, it is as
if he had dyed his hand with the flesh and blood of pigs.” Muslim
transmitted it. The Prophet % also said, “Anyone who plays
backgammon has disobeyed Allah and His Messenger.” (Malik,
Abu Dawud, Ibn Majah) Ibn ‘Umar a said, “Playing backgam-
mon is gambling and is like greasing oneself with pig fat.”

As for chess, most scholars believe that it is forbidden to play it,
whether there is a bet or not. If betting is involved, it is gambling
without a doubt. As for the statement that even if there is no bet-
ting, it is still a form of forbidden gambling according to most of
the scholars, it is related in one transmission from ash-Shafi‘i that
it is permitted if it is done in privacy and does not distract anyone

74
Gambling

from an obligation or the prayer at its time. An-Nawawi was asked
about playing chess and whether it was forbidden or permitted,
and he answered, “It is forbidden according to most scholars.” He
was also asked whether it was permitted to play chess and whether
anyone who played it sinned or not, and he answered, “If he delays
a prayer beyond its time or he plays it to win money, it is forbid-
den. Otherwise it is disliked according to ash-Shafi‘i and forbid-
den according to others.” That is the position of an-Nawawi in his
Fatwas.

The proof that it is forbidden in the view of the majority is
found in the words of Allah Almighty: “Forbidden for you are car-
rion, blood and pig meat ... by means of divining arrows.” (5:3) Sufyan
and Waki‘ ibn al-Jarrah said, “Divining arrows includes chess.”
‘Ali ibn Abi Talib # said, “Chess is the gambling of the Persians.”
He passed by some people playing it and said, “What are these
images to which you devoting yourselves? It is better for one of
you to hold a burning ember until it is extinguished than to touch
them.” Then he added, “By Allah, this is not what you were creat-
ed for.” He also said, “The one who plays chess is the most men-
dacious of people. One of them says, ‘Checkmate’ [“Shab mat: the
King is dead”] when he is not.”

Abu Musa al-Ash‘ari # said, “No one plays chess except some-
one in error.” Ishaq ibn Rahawayh was asked, “Do you think that
there is anything wrong with playing chess?” He answered, “It is
totally bad.” It was said to him, “The people of the frontiers play it
for military training.” He said, “It is impiety.” Muhammad ibn
Ka‘b al-Qurazi was asked about playing chess and said, “The least
that can be said about it is that those who play it will be presented
[or gathered] on the Day of Rising with people of falsehood.” Ibn
‘Umar # was asked about chess and said, “It is worse than
backgammon.” Imam Malik ibn Anas was asked about chess and
said, “Chess is part of backgammon.”

It has reached us that Ibn ‘Abbas # was made the guardian of
an orphan’s property and found a chess game among the things
the orphan inherited from his father and burned it. If playing it
had been lawful, it would not have been permitted to burn it since
it was the property of an orphan. But since playing it is unlawful,
he burned it and so it falls into the same category as wine. If wine

715
Seventy Major Sins

is found in the property of an orphan, it has to be poured away.
The same is true of chess. Ibrahim an-Nakha‘i was asked, “What
do you say about chess?” He answered, “It is cursed.”

Abu Bakr al-Athram related in his collection from Wathila ibn
al-Asqa‘ that the Messenger of Allah # said, “Allah looks at His
creation three hundred and sixty times every day. A chess player
does not benefit from that because he says, “The king is dead.”
Abu Bakr al-Ajurri related with an ismad from Abu Hurayra # that
the Messenger of Allah 38 said: “When you pass by people playing
with these arrows, backgammon and chess and other such distrac-
tions, do not greet them. When they gather and devote themselves
to them, Shaytan comes to them with his armies and surrounds
them. Whenever one of them averts his eye from it, Shaytan and
his armies impel him to look back. They continue to play until
they separate, like dogs which gather around a corpse, eat from it
until their bellies are filled, and then separate. That is also because
they lie and say, ‘The king is dead (“shah mat” which becomes in
English “checkmate”).’”” The Prophet % said, “The person with
the worst punishment on the Day of Rising is someone who plays
chess. Do you not see him say, ‘I killed him’ and ‘By Allah, he is
dead!’? By Allah, he lies against Allah.”

Mujahid said, “When someone is dying, his companions with
whom he used to sit present themselves to him. A man who used
to play chess was dying and was told, ‘Say: “There is no god but
Allah,” but he said, ‘Mate!’ and then died. So what he used to do
in his playing when he was alive overpowered his tongue and
instead of saying the shahada, he said, “Checkmate.”

There is no strength or power except by Allah the High, the
Immense. This is like what is reported in another hadith: “Every
man dies according to what he lives and is resurrected according
to what he died.” (Muslim)

We ask Allah the Gracious by His bounty to make us die as
Muslims, not changing or altering or becoming misguided or
swerving. He is Generous, Magnanimous.

76
21. Slandering chaste women

Allah Almighty says:

“Those who accuse women who are chaste, but whe are believ-
ers and not aware, are cursed in this world and the Next World,
and they will have a great punishment on the Day when their
tongues and hands and feet will testify against them about what
they were doing.” (24:23-24)

“Those who make accusations against chaste women and then
do not produce four witnesses: flog them with eighty lashes and
never again accept them as witnesses. Such people are deviators.”

(24:4)

Allah Almighty tells us in the ayat that whoever accuses a
chaste free woman who has been married of fornication and lewd-
ness is cursed in this world and the Next and will have a painful
punishment. In this world he receives the badd punishment of
eighty lashes and his testimony is not accepted, even if he has
good character.

In the Sahih collection it is reported that the Messenger of
Allah 8 said, “Avoid the seven deadly ones,” and he mentioned
among them slandering believing chaste women. Slander is to call
a free chaste Muslim woman, to whom you are not related, an
adulteress, whore or harlot, or call her husband, “husband of a
whore,” or her child, “child of a whore” or “child of an adulter-
ess”. When a man or a woman says that about a man or a woman,
it is like someone calling a man an adulterer or accusing a free boy
of engaging in pederasty. Such a person receives the badd punish-
ment of eighty lashes unless he brings a clear proof of that allega-
tion.

The clear proof is as Allah says: four witnesses must attest to
the truthfulness of a person’s allegations about that woman or
man. If there is no proof, then he is to be flogged if the man or
woman he slandered so requests. That is also the case when some-
one slanders a slave or slave-girl by calling his slave an adulterer or
his slave-girl an adulteress, whore, or harlot, since it is confirmed

77
Seventy Major Sins

in the two Sahih collections that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, “If
anyone accuses his slave of adultery, the add punishment will be
carried out on him on the Day of Rising unless he is as he said.”

Many ignorant people intemperately use these indecent words
for which there is punishment in this world and the Next World.
This is why it is confirmed in the two Sabih collections that the
Messenger of Allah 3 said, “A man may say some words thought-
lessly because of which he will fall in the Fire deeper than the dis-
tance between the east and the west.” Mu‘adh ibn Jabal 8 asked,
“Messenger of Allah, will we be punished for what we say?” He
answered, “May your mother be bereft, Mu‘adh! Are people
thrown into the Fire on their faces for anything but the harvest of
their tongues?” We find in a hadith: “Whoever believes in Allah
and the Last Day should speak good words or be silent.”

Allah ~ blessed and exalted is He - says in His Mighty Book:
“He does not utter a single word without a watcher by him, pen in
hand!” (50:18) ‘Uqba ibn ‘Amir 2 said, “Messenger of Allah, what
brings salvation?” He # replied, “Control your tongue, keep to
your house and weep over your errors. The furthest of people
from Allah is someone who is hard-hearted.” (Abu Dawud and at-
Tirmidhi) The Prophet # also said, “The person Allah hates most
is an indecent, coarse person.”

May Allah protect us and you from the evil of our tongues by
His grace and honour. He is Generous, Magnanimous.

78
22. Stealing from the booty

This includes stealing from the treasury and the zakat. Allah
Almighty says:

“Allah does not love treacherous people.” (8:58)

“No Prophet would ever be guilty of misappropriation. Those
who misappropriate will arrive on the Day of Rising with what
they misappropriated.” (3:161)

According to Sahih Muslim Abu Hurayra ‏ع‎ said, “The
Messenger of Allah # stayed with us one day and he mentioned
misappropriation and what a terrible thing it was. He said, ‘Do
not misappropriate. I would not like to see any of you coming on
the Day of Rising with a camel groaning on his neck and saying,
‘Messenger of Allah, help me!’ I will say, ‘I cannot do anything for
you against Allah. I conveyed it to you.’ [ would not like to see any
of you coming on the Day of Rising with a horse neighing on his
neck and saying, ‘Messenger of Allah, help me!’ I will say, ‘I can-
not do anything for you against Allah. I conveyed it to you.’ I
would not like to see any of you coming on the Day of Rising with
a sheep bleating on his neck and saying, ‘Messenger of Allah, help
me!’ I will say, ‘I cannot do anything for you against Allah. I con-
veyed it to you.’ I would not like to see any of you coming on the
Day of Rising with a soul on his neck shouting and saying,
‘Messenger of Allah, help me!’ I will say, ‘I cannot do anything for
you against Allah. I conveyed it to you.’ I would not like to see any
of you coming on the Day of Rising with garments fluttering on
his neck and saying, ‘Messenger of Allah, help me!’ I will say, ‘I
cannot do anything for you against Allah. I conveyed it to you.’ I
would not like to see any of you coming on the Day of Rising with
gold and silver on his neck, saying, ‘Messenger of Allah, help me!’
I will say, ‘I cannot do anything for you against Allah. I conveyed
it to you.”

Anyone who takes any of these categories of booty before they
are divided up among the fighters, or from the treasury without
the permission of the ruler, or from the zakat which is collected

79
Seventy Major Sins

for the poor, will come on the Day of Rising carrying it on his
neck, as Allah Almighty said in the Qur’an: “Those who misappro-
priate will arrive on the Day of Rising with what they have misappro-
priated.” (3:161) The Prophet # said, “Return even a needle and
thread. Beware of misappropriation. It will be a disgrace for a per-
son on the Day of Rising.” The Prophet % stood on the minbar
and praised Allah and said, “By Allah, none of you will take any-
thing [without right] but that he will carry it on his back on the
Day of Rising. I may recognise a man among you who will meet
Allah carrying a camel grumbling, a cow mooing or a sheep bleat-
ing.” Then he # raised his hand and said, “O Allah, have I con-
veyed it?”

Abu Hurayra @ said, “We went out with the Messenger of
Allah % to Khaybar. When we conquered it we did not take any
gold or silver. We took goods, food and clothing. Then we went to
the wadi (Wadi al-Qura). The Messenger of Allah 3 had with him
a slave (called Rifa‘a ibn Yazid, from the Banu ad-Dubayb) whom a
man of the Banu Judham had given him. When we camped in the
wadi, the slave of the Messenger of Allah % got up to remove his
saddle and was killed by a random arrow. We said, ‘Congratula-
tions to him on martyrdom, Messenger of Allah.’ The Messenger
of Allah said, ‘No, by the One who has my soul in His hand. The
cloak which he took from the booty before it was divided up will
turn into fire burning him.’ The people were alarmed and a man
brought a strap or two and said, ‘I got this at Khaybar.’ The
Messenger of Allah % said, ‘A strap or two of Fire.” (al-Bukhari
and Muslim)

‘Abdullah ibn ‘Amr #z said, “There was a man called Karkara
who looked after the baggage of the Messenger of Allah % and he
died. The Prophet % said, ‘He is in the Fire.’ They went to inves-
tigate, and found a cloak which he had misappropriated.” (al-
Bukhari)

Zayd ibn Khalid al-Juhani # said that a man misappropriated
something from the booty in the Khaybar expedition and the
Prophet # refused to pray over him. He said, ‘Your companion
misappropriated something in the Way of Allah.’ We searched his
things and found in it some pearls worth two dirhams which had
belonged to a Jew.” (Malik, Ahmad and others) Imam Ahmad said,

80
Stealing from the booty

“We do not know that the Prophet ‏يه‎ refused to pray over anyone
except misappropriators and suicides.” It is related that the
Prophet % stated, “Gifts to governors are a form of misappropria-
tion.” (Ahmad)

There are many hadiths on this subject. Some of them are
found in the chapter on injustice. There are three types of injus-
tice. One is consuming wealth under false pretences. The second
is injustice to people by killing, beating, breaking and wounding
them. The third is wronging people by abuse, curses, insults and
slander. The Prophet 3 spoke at Mina and said, “Your lives, your
property and your honour are sacred, like the sanctity of this day
of yours in this month of yours in this land of yours.” (al-Bukhari
and Muslim) The Prophet # also said, “Allah does not accept a
prayer without purity; nor does He accept sadaga from misappro-
priated wealth.” (Muslim)

We ask Allah for success in what He loves and is pleased with.
He is Generous, Magnanimous.

81
23. Theft

Allah Almighty says:

“As for thieves, male or female, cut off their hands in reprisal for
what they have done: an object lesson from Allah. Allah is
Almighty, All-Wise.” (5:38)

Ibn Shihab said, “The punishment of Allah for those who steal
other people’s property is amputation. Allah is Almighty in His
retribution on theft, and All-Wise in imposing the obligation of
cutting off the thief’s hand.”

Ibn ‘Umar 2 said that the Prophet # cut off a hand for a shield
worth three dirhams. ‘Nisha 82 said, “Che Messenger of Allah #
cut off the hand of a thief for a quarter of a dinar or more.” (al-
Bukhari and Muslim) In one transmission, the Messenger of Allah
‏عه‎ said, “The hand of a thief is not to be cut off for less than the
price of a shield.” ‘Aisha # was asked “What is the price of a
shield?” She answered, “A quarter of a dinar.” (al-Bukhari and
Muslim) In another transmission he # said, “Cut off the hand for
a quarter of a dinar. Do not cut it off for less than that.” A quarter
of a dinar at that time was eqivalent to three dirhams, a dinar
being worth twelve dirhams.

Abu Hurayra# narrated that the Messenger of Allah % said,
“Allah cursed the thief who steals a helmet for which his hand is
cut off and who steals a rope for which his hand is cut off.” (al-
Bukhari and Muslim) Al-A‘mash said, “They considered that the
helmet meant here was an iron helmet and they considered that
the rope was one which was worth three dirhams.”

‘Nisha wz reported: “A Makhzumi woman borrowed some
goods and refused to return them, and the Prophet ‏يه‎ commanded
that her hand be cut off. Her family went to Usama ibn Zayd a
and spoke to him about her and he spoke to the Prophet #, who
said to him, ‘Usama, do I see you interceding where one of the
budud of Allah is concerned?’ The Prophet # rose to speak and
said, “Those before you were destroyed because when one of their
nobles stole they would leave him alone, but when someone weak

82
Theft

stole, thy would cut off his hand. By the One who has my soul in
his hand, if Fatima the daughter of Muhammad were to steal, her
hand would be cut off.’ The hand of the Makhzumi woman was
cut off.”

‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn Jarir said, “Fadala ibn ‘Ubayd asked
whether hanging the hand of a thief from his neck was part of the
Sunna. He replied, ‘A thief was brought to the Prophet # and he
had his hand cut off and then commanded that it be hung from his
neck.’” Scholars say that that a thief does not benefit from his
repentance unless he returns what he stole. If he is bankrupt, then
he must ask the owner of the property to absolve him. Allah
knows best.

83
24. Highway robbery

Allah Almighty says:

“The reprisal against those who wage war against Allah and
His Messenger, and go about the earth corrupting it, is that they
should be killed or crucified, or have their opposite hands and feet
cut off, or be banished from the land. That will be their degrada-
tion in this world and in the Next World they will have a terrible
punishment.” (5:33)

Al-Wahidi said, “Waging war against Allah and His Messenger
means disobeying them. Anyone who disobeys you fights you.
Corrupting the earth means by killing, theft and usurping wealth.
To take up weapons against the believers is to wage war against
Allah and His Messenger. That is the position of Malik, al-Awza‘i
and ash-Shaf1‘i.”

As for His words, “killed ... banished from the land,” al-Walibi
said that Ibn ‘Abbas # said that the word “or” used in this ayat
indicates a choice. The meaning is that the ruler has permission to
execute, crucify or banish. This is the position of al-Hasan, Sa‘id
ibn al-Musayyab and Mujahid. According to the transmission of
‘Atiyya, however, the “or” does not indicate permission to choose
but gives the order in the ruling for different crimes. If someone
kills and robs, he is put to death and crucified. If he robs but does
not kill, the punishment is amputation. If someone sheds blood
but refrains from theft, he is to be put to death. If someone causes
alarm on the road but does not kill, he is to be banished. This is
the position of ash-Shafi‘1.

Ash-Shafi‘i also said, “Each of them receives a badd punishment
according to his actions. If someone is to be put to death and cru-
cified, he is put to death before he is crucified because it is disliked
to torture him. He is crucified for three days and then taken down.
If someone is to be put to death but not crucified, he is put to
death and returned to his family for burial. If anyone is sentenced
to amputation without death, he has his right hand cut off and
then cauterised. If he reverts and steals again, his left foot is cut
off. If he reverts and steals again, his left hand is cut off, in accor-

84
Highway robbery

dance with what is related from the Prophet # about a thief: ‘If he
steals, cut off his hand. Then if he steals again, cut off his foot.
Then if he steals again, cut off his other hand. If he steals again,
cut off his other foot.’ (Abu Dawud and an-Nasa’i) That is what
Abu Bakr and ‘Umar # did, and none of the Companions 3% dis-
agreed with it. The reason why it is the left is that it is agreed that
it should be the left foot after the hand. That is the meaning of
His word ‘opposite’.”

Ibn ‘Abbas # says about the words of the Almighty, “or banish-
ment from the land”: “It means that the ruler declares that he may
be killed with impunity and says, ‘If anyone meets him, he should
kill him.’ This concerns what he is able to do. If anyone is arrest-
ed, his banishment from the land is imprisonment or detention,
because when he is imprisoned and cannot move in the land, he is
banished from it.”

We ask Allah for protection from every affliction and trial. He
is Magnanimous, Generous.

85
25. Deliberate false oaths

Allah Almighty says:

“Those who sell Allah’s covenant and their own oaths for a paltry
price, such people have no portion in the Next World; and on the
Day of Rising Allah will not speak to them or look at them or
purify them. They will have a painful punishment.” (3:77)

According to al-Wahidi this was revealed about two men who
argued with the Prophet # about some property: the one against
whom the claim was made wanted to swear an oath and so Allah
revealed this ayat. The one against whom the claim was made
withdrew and affirmed the right of the claimant.

‘Abdullah [ibn Mas‘ud] # reported that the Messenger of Allah
‏به‎ said, “Whoever swears an oath depriving someone of his prop-
erty, and lies in his oath, will meet Allah and find Him angry with
him.” Al-Ash‘ath a: said, “By Allah, it was revealed about me.
There was some land between me and a Jewish man, and he
denied my claim to it, so I took him to the Prophet 4 who said,
‘Do you have a clear proof?’ I said, ‘No.’ He said to the Jew,
‘Swear.’ I said, ‘Messenger of Allah, then he will swear and take
away my property.’ So Allah Almighty revealed, ‘Those who sell
Allab’s covenant and their own oaths for a paltry price, such people have
no portion in the Next World; and on the Day of Rising Allah will not
speak to them, or look at them or purify them.” (al-Bukhari)

‘Abdullah ibn Mas‘ud ‏عن‎ reported that he heard the Messenger
of Allah % say, “Anyone who swears in order to take the property
of a Muslim man without any right to it, will meet Allah while He
is angry with him.”

‘Abdullah [ibn Mas‘ud] #2 also said, “Then the Messenger of
Allah % recited to us its confirmation in the Book of Allah: ‘Those
who sell Allah’s covenant and their own oaths...’ (3:77) to the end of
the ayat. This is transmitted in both Sahih collections. Abu
Umama # said, “We were with the Messenger of Allah # when he
said, ‘Whoever usurps the right of a Muslim by means of his oath,
Allah has made the Fire mandatory for him and forbidden him the

86
Deliberate false oaths

Garden.” A man said, “Even if it be little, Messenger of Allah?”
He answered, “Even if it be a stalk of ‘araq.” Muslim transmitted
this in his Sahib. Hafs ibn Maysara said, “How severe this hadith
is!” He said, “Is it not in the Book of Allah: ‘Those who sell Allah’s
covenant and their own oaths for a paltry price...2”

Abu Dharr # reported that the Prophet ‏ع‎ said, “There are
three people whom Allah will not speak to or purify on the Day of
Rising, and who will have a painful punishment” The Messenger
of Allah ¥ said this three times. Abu Dharr @ said, “They are
ruined and have lost, Messenger of Allah. Who are they?” He said,
“Someone who wears his garment long (out of pride), someone
who reminds people of his charity to them, and someone who sells
his goods with a false oath.” The Messenger of Allah 38 said, “The
major wrong actions are: associating others with Allah, disrespect-
ing parents, murder and a deliberate false oath.” Al-Bukhari trans-
mitted this in his Sahzb.

Section on someone swearing by something other than Allah,
such as the Prophet 4, the Ka‘ba, the angels, heaven, water,
life, the spirit, the head, the life of the sultan, the blessing of
the ruler and such like

Ibn ‘Umar ‏عه‎ narrated that the Prophet # said, “Allah has for-
bidden you to swear by your fathers! If someone swears, he should
swear by Allah or remain silent.” According to another transmis-
sion in the Sahib: “Someone who swears should only swear by
Allah or be silent.” ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn Samura 2 reported that
the Messenger of Allah # said, “Do not swear by idols nor by your
fathers.” Muslim related it. Burayda # said that the Messenger of
Allah 3¢ said, “Whoever swears by the trust is not one of us.” Abu
Dawud and others related it. Burayda also reported that the
Messenger of Allah 3 said, “If someone swears using the words,
‘Or I am free of Islam,’ and is lying, that is how he is. If he is
telling the truth, he will not return to Islam safe and sound.”

Ibn ‘Umar # related that he heard a man say, “By the Ka‘ba!”
He said, “Do not swear by anything other than Allah. I heard the
Messenger of Allah #2 say, ‘Anyone who swears other than by Allah

87
Seventy Major Sins

has disbelieved and associated others with Him.’” At-Tirmidhi
related it as did Ibn Hibban, who declared in his Sahih that it is
sound, and al-Hakim.

The Prophet % said, “If someone makes an oath and says in his
oath, ‘By al-Lat and al-‘Uzza,’ he should say, “There is no god but
Allah.’” Some of the Companions 4 were accustomed to say this
before Islam, and sometimes the tongue of one of them would get
the better of him and he would swear by them, and therefore the
Prophet 3 commanded that he say immediately, “There is no god
but Allah” to expiate what his tongue had said. All success is by
Allah.

88

26. Injustice

Injustice includes consuming other people’s property, taking it
without right, wronging people by striking them or insulting
them, transgressing against them, and being overbearing to the
weak.

Allah Almighty says:

“Do not consider Allah to be unaware of what the wrongdoers
perpetrate. He is merely deferring them to a Day on which their
sight will be transfixed, rushing headlong - heads back, eyes
vacant, hearts hollow. Warn mankind of the Day when the pun-
ishment will reach them. Those who did wrong will say, ‘Our
Lord, reprieve us for a short time. We will respond to Your call
and follow the Messengers.’ But did you not swear to Me before
that you would never meet your downfall, even though you inbab-
ited the houses of those who had wronged themselves and it was
made clear to you how We had dealt with them and We gave you
many examples?” (14:42-45)

“There are only grounds against those who do wrong.”

(42:42)

“Those who do wrong will soon know the kind of reversal they
will receive.” (26:227)

The Prophet ‏يه‎ said, “Allah prolongs the life of the unjust but
when He takes them, He will not let them escape. Then he recit-
ed, ‘Such is the iron grip of your Lord when He seizes cities which do
wrong. His grip is painful, violent’ (11:102).” (al-Bukhari and
Muslim)

The Prophet 3 said, “Anyone who has done an injustice to his
brother with respect to his honour or something else should seek
to be absolved by him before the time when there will be neither
dinar nor dirham, before some of his right actions will be taken
from him by his brother, and if he does not have any good actions,
some of the bad actions of his brother will be taken and cast on
him.” (al-Bukhari and at-Tirmidhi)

89
Seventy Major Sins

The Prophet # stated that his Lord — Blessed and Exalted is
He - said, “My slaves, I have forbidden injustice to Myself and
made it unlawful between you, so do not do wrong one another.”
(Muslim and at-Tirmidhi)

The Messenger of Allah # said, “Do you know who the true
bankrupt is? They replied, “he bankrupt is someone who has
neither money nor goods.” He said, “The truly bankrupt person
of my community is the one who performs the prayer, fasts and
pays zakat but then insults this person, slanders that one, con-
sumes the property of this person, sheds the blood of that one, and
strikes this one. Some of them will be given some of his good
deeds, and others will also be given some of his good deeds. If his
good deeds are exhausted before this has finished, some of their
sins will be taken and cast on him and then he will be thrown into
the Fire.” (Muslim and at-Tirmidhi)

All of these badiths are in the Sahih collections. We have
already quoted his advice to Mu‘adh # when he sent him to
Yemen: “Fear the supplication of the wronged. There is no veil
between it and Allah.” In some books Allah Almighty says, “My
anger is severe against anyone who wrongs someone else who has
no helper other than Me.”

As someone recited:

Do not wrong others, for you have no real power.
The end of injustice is regret.
Your eyes sleep but the wronged one is awake,
praying against you,
and the Eye of Allah never sleeps.

One of the Salaf said, “Do not wrong the weak lest you
become one of the evil ones among the strong.” Abu Hurayra #
said, “The bustard dies in its nest fearing the injustice of the
unjust.” It is said that it is written in the Torah: “A caller shall calls
from beyond the Bridge (Sirat): ‘Company of transgressing
tyrants! Company of affluent wretches! God swears by His might
and majesty that no wrongdoer will cross this bridge today.’”

90
Injustice

Jabir # said, “When the emigrants to Abyssinia returned to
the Messenger of Allah # in the year of the Conquest, he asked,
‘Will you tell me about the most extraordinary thing that you saw
in the land of Abyssinia?’ The youngest of them said, ‘Messenger
of Allah, one day while we were sitting, one of their old women
passed by us carrying a jug of water on her head. One of their boys
passed and put one of his hands between her shoulders and pushed
her. The woman fell to her knees and the jug broke. When she got
up, she turned to him and said, “You will know, treacherous one!
When Allah sets up the Throne and gathers the first and the last,
and hands and feet speak of what they earned, you will know the
consequences of my business and your business with Him tomor-
row.” The Messenger of Allah ‏يه‎ said, ‘She spoke the truth. How
can Allah purify a people when the strong among them are not
punished for what they do to the weak?”

It is related that the Prophet % said, “There are five people
with whom Allah is angry. If He wishes, He expresses His anger
on them in this world, or He may order them to the Fire in the
Next World: the ruler of a people who takes his right from his
subjects but does not give them their rights from himself and does
not avert injustice from them; a leader of a people who obey him
but who does not treat the weak and strong equally and speaks
from whim; a man who does not command his wife and children
to obey Allah, and does not teach them their deen; a man who hires
someone who does his work in full and who does not then give
him his full wage; and a man who wrongs his wife in respect of her
dowry.”

‘Abdullah ibn Salam # said, “When Allah Almighty created
His creatures, they stood on their feet and raised their heads to
the sky and said, ‘Lord, who are You with?’ He answered, ‘With
the wronged, until they are given their due.’”” Wahb ibn Munabbih
said, “A tyrant built a castle and fortified it. Then a poor old
woman came and built a hut beside it where she could take refuge.
The tyrant rode out one day and went around the castle, saw the
hut and asked, ‘Whose is this?’ He was told, ‘It belongs to a poor
woman who lives in it.’ He ordered that it be demolished. The old
woman came and saw it destroyed and asked, ‘Who destroyed it?’
She was told, ‘The king. He saw it and destroyed it.’ So the old

91
Seventy Major Sins

woman lifted her head to heaven and said, ‘O Lord, since I was
not present, where were You?’ So Allah commanded Jibril to over-
turn the castle on top of those inside it, and he overturned it.”

When Khalid ibn Yarmak and his son were imprisoned, he
said, “Father, after all the power we had, we are now in chains in
prison.” He said, “My son, the supplication of the wronged was
made at night and we neglected it, but Allah did not neglect it.”
Yazid ibn Hakim used to say, “I have never feared anyone at all
except for a man I wronged. I know that he has no helper except
Allah. He told me, ‘Allah is enough for me. Allah is between you
and ‏”.عم‎ Abu Umama # said, “The wrongdoer will be brought
on the Day of Rising until he is on the bridge over Hell and he
will meet the one he wronged, who will acquaint him with how he
wronged him. Those who were wronged will keep at those who
wronged them until they take the good deeds they have. If they do
not find that they have any good deeds, the wrongdoers will take
on their evil deeds in return for the wrongs they did until they go
to the lowest rank in the Fire.” (at-Tabarani)

‘Abdullah ibn Unays ‏عن‎ related that he heard the Messenger of
Allah # say, “Allah’s servants will be gathered on the Day of Rising
barefoot, naked and uncircumcised. A caller will call to them with
a voice which will be heard from afar, as it is heard close at hand: ‘I
am the King, the Judge. None of the people of the Garden shall
enter the Garden nor any of the people of the Fire enter the Fire
while he is guilty of an injustice, until I take retaliation from him,
be it a slap or more. “Your Lord will not wrong anyone.” (14:49) We
asked, ‘Messenger of Allah, how will that be when we come bare-
foot and naked?’ He replied, ‘Repayment is brought about
through good actions and evil actions. Your Lord will not wrong
anyone.’” (Ahmad) It is reported that the Prophet % said,
“Whoever strikes with a whip unjustly, retaliation will be taken
from him on the Day of Rising.” (al-Bazzar)

It is also mentioned is that Khusrau (the Persian emperor)
adopted a teacher for his son to teach him and discipline him.
When the child had reached the highest level of excellence and
manners, the teacher summoned him one day and dealt him a
severe blow without any reason. So the child harboured rancour
towards the teacher until he became an adult. His father died, and

92
Injustice

he succeeded to the throne after him. He summoned the teacher
and said to him, “What made you hit me on such-and-such a day
with a painful blow without any reason?” The teacher answered,
“Know, o King, that when you reached the highest level of excel-
lence and manners, I knew that you would become king after your
father. I wanted you to taste the pain of a blow and the pain of
injustice so that you would never wrong anyone.” He said, “May
Allah repay you well.” Then he had a reward brought for him and
let him go.

One form of injustice is misappropriating the property of an
orphan. The Aadith of Mu‘adh ibn Jabal # has already mentioned
in which the Messenger of Allah % said to him, “Fear the supplica-
tion of the wronged. There is no veil between it and Allah.” One
variant states that the supplication of the wronged rises above the
clouds, and the Lord Almighty says, “By My might and majesty, I

will help you, even if it be after some time.”

Section: One of the worst sins is to delay paying what one
owes when one is able to pay it, because it is confirmed in the two
Sabib collections that the Messenger of Allah % said, “The pro-
crastination of the wealthy is injustice.” One variant has: “The one
who can pay commits an injustice which makes his honour and his
punishment lawful.” This means his creditor may complain about
him publicly and he can be imprisoned.

Section. Another form of injustice is when a man wrongs a
woman by failing to pay her due by way of dowry, maintenance
and clothing. It is encompassed by the words of the Messenger of
Allah # about the injustice which makes a man’s honour and pun-
ishment lawful. Ibn Mas‘ud 2 said: “The hand of a man or
woman will be taken on the Day of Rising and there will be a call
made in front of people: “This is so-and-so son of so-and-so.
Those who are owed anything by them should come and take
what is due to them.’” He said, “A woman will be happy to receive
her due from her father, brother or husband.” Then he recited:
“That Day there will be no family ties between them and they will not be
able to question one another.” (23:101) He added, “Allah will forgive
whatever He wishes regarding what is due to Himself, but He will

93
Seventy Major Sins

not forgive any of the rights due to other people. The person will
be made to stand for people and then Allah Almighty will say to
the people owed rights, ‘Come and get your rights.”

The Prophet % continued, “Allah Almighty will say to the
angels, “Iake some of his righteous actions and give everyone who
is seeking something what he is due.’ If he is a friend of Allah and
there is an atom’s weight of his good deeds left, Allah will multiply
it for him so that he enters the Garden through them. If he is a
wretched slave, and nothing remains for him, the angels will say,
‘Lord, his good actions have run out and there are still people with
demands.’ Allah will say “Iake some of their evil deeds and add
them to his evil deeds.’ Then he will be thrown into the Fire.”

That is confirmed by the words of the Prophet # quoted
above: “Do you know who the true bankrupt is?” He stated that
the bankrupt person in his community is the one who comes on
the Day of Rising having performed prayer, zakat and fasting, but
has abused this one, struck that one, and taken the property of that
one. Because of this some of his good actions will taken for this
person and that person. If his good actions run out before he has
settled what he owes, some of their sins will be taken and cast on
him and then he will be thrown into the Fire.

Section. Another form of injustice is when someone hires a
person to do some work but then does not give him his wages. It is
confirmed in the Sahih al-Bukbari that the Messenger of Allah ‏عه‎
‎said, “Allah Almighty says, ‘I will be an adversary against three on
the Day of Rising: a man who makes an agreement in My name
and then breaks it; a man who sells a free man and consumes the
proceeds; and a man who hires an employee and gets full work
from him but fails to pay him his wages.’” The same applies when
a person wrongs a Jew or Christian, short-changes someone,
imposes work on someone beyond his capacity, or takes something
from someone against their will. He is included in the words of
Allah Almighty: “I will be an adversary against him on the Day of
Rising.” Another form of injustice is when someone swears about
a debt he owes and lies. According to both Sahih collections the
Messenger of Allah 3 said, “If anyone appropriates the right of a

94
Injustice
Muslim by an oath, Allah has made the Fire mandatory for him
and forbidden him the Garden.” They said, “Even if it is some-
thing insignificant, Messenger of Allah?” He replied, “Even if it is
only a stick of arak.”

It is related that nothing will be more hateful to anyone on the
Day of Rising than to see someone he recognises, fearing that he
will seek him out because of an injustice he inflicted on him in this
world; as the Prophet % said, “You will hand over to people their
rights on the Day of Rising, so that even a hornless sheep will take
revenge on a horned one.” (Muslim) The Prophet 3 said,
“Whoever has done an injustice to his brother in respect of his
honour or anything else should seek to be absolved by him before
the Day when there will be neither dinar nor dirham. If he has
right actions, they will be taken from him to counterbalance the
injustice he did; and if he does not have any good actions, some of
the bad actions of his friend will be taken and he will be made to
carry them. Then he will be cast into the Fire.” (al-Bukhari and
at-Tirmidhi)

‘Abdullah ibn Abi ad-Dunya related from Abu Ayyub al-Ansari
‏عم‎ that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, “The first to argue on the
Day of Rising will be a man and his wife. By Allah, her tongue will
not speak but her hand and foot will testify against her about the
trouble she caused her husband in this world. A man’s hand and
foot will also testify against him as to whether he treated his wife
well or badly. Then a man will be summoned with his servant for
the same purpose. No ransom will be accepted from him, but the
good actions of this wrongdoer will be given to the one he
wronged. Then the tyrants will be brought in iron funnels and the
order will come: ‘Drive them to the Fire.”

Qadi Shurayh used to say, “The wrongdoers will know who
will fall short when they are awaiting their punishment and those
they wronged are awaiting help and reward.” It is related that if
Allah desires good for His slave, Allah gives power over him to
someone who will wrong him.” Tawus al-Yamani visited [the
Caliph] Hisham ibn ‘Abd al-Malik and said to him, “Fear Allah on
the Day of the Announcement!” Hisham asked, “What is the Day
of the Announcement?” He replied that Allah Almighty says:
“Between them a herald will proclaim, ‘The curse of Allah be on the

95
Seventy Major Sins

wrongdoers.’” (7:44) Hisham fainted. Tawus said, “If this is the
effect of merely hearing a description, how will be when it is seen
directly?”

O you who are content with the name of wrongdoer, how
many wrongs do you have to your account? The prison is Hellfire

and the judge is the Truth.

Section. Being cautious about visiting perpetrators of
injustice, socialising with them and helping them

Allah Almighty says: “Do not rely on those who do wrong, thus
causing the Fire to afflict you.” (11:113) ‘Rely’ here means to be at
ease with something and to incline to it with affection. Ibn ‘Abbas

# said, “Do not completely incline to them with love, gentle
words and affection.” As-Suddi and Ibn Zayd explained as mean-
ing “Do not flatter wrongdoers.” ‘Ikrima said, “It means to obey
them and love them.” Abu al-‘Aliyya stated that it means “Do not
be pleased with what they do.”

Allah Almighty says: “Assemble those who did wrong together with
their associates and what they worshipped.” (37:22) Ibn Mas‘ud #
reported that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, “There will be rulers
who are attended by servants or courtiers who are perpetrators of
injustice and lie. Anyone who goes to them to support them in
their falsehoods and helps them in their injustice is not from me
and I am not from him. Anyone who does not go to them, and
does not help them in their wrongdoing, is from ine and I am
from him.”

Ibn Mas‘ud ‏عه‎ also reported that the Prophet # said, “Anyone
who helps a wrongdoer gives him power over himself.” Sa‘id ibn
al-Musayyab said, “Do not fill your eyes with the helpers of injus-
tice except with disapproval in your hearts, so that your righteous
actions may not fall away.” Makhul ad-Dimishqi said, “A caller
will call on the day of Rising, ‘Where are the perpetrators of injus-
tice and their helpers?’ Everyone who brought them ink, filled
_their inkwells, sharpened their pens, or did anything more than
that will be present with them and they will be gathered together
in a box of fire and thrown into Hellfire.” A tailor went to Sufyan
ath-Thawri and said, “I am a man who makes the Sultan’s clothes.

96
Injustice
Am I one of the helpers of the perpetrators of injustice?” Sufyan
answered, “You yourself are one of the perpetrators of injustice.
The helpers of the perpetrators of injustice are those who buy
needles and thread from you.”

It is related that the Prophet % said, “The first to enter the Fire
on the Day of Rising will be the whippers who had whips with
which they beat people on behalf of the perpetrators of injustice.”
Ibn ‘Umar 2 said, “The helpers of the perpetrators of injustice
and police are the dogs of the Fire on the Day of Rising.”

It is related that Allah Almighty revealed to Musa: “The tribe
of Israel should not recite any kind of remembrance of Me. I
remember anyone who remembers Me and My remembrance of
them is to place a curse upon them.” In one version, “I remember
any of them who remember Me with a curse.” It is reported that
the Prophet % said, “None of you should stand in a place where a
wronged man is beaten. A curse will descend on those who attend
that place unless they defend him.”

It is related that the Messenger of Allah # said, “A man will go
to his grave and be told, ‘We are going to beat you with a hundred
blows.’ He will continue to plead with them until it becomes one
blow which they will strike him with. Then his grave will be filled
with fire. He will ask, ‘Why did you hit me with this blow?’ They
answer, ‘You prayed a prayer without being in a state of purity, and
passed by a man being wronged and did not help him.” If this is
the state of someone who does not help one wronged person when
he is able to, what will be the state of the wronger himself?

It is confirmed in the two Sahih collections that the Messenger
of Allah # said, “Help your brother, whether he is inflicting wrong
or is wronged.” They said, “Messenger of Allah, we can help him
if he is wronged but how we can help him if he is inflicting
wrong?” He answered, “You can take hold of his hands to restrain
him from doing wrong. ‘That is helping him.”

One the gnostics said, “I dreamt of a man who used to serve
the perpetrators of injustice and tax collectors some time after his
death, and he was in a bad state. I said to him, ‘What is your situa-
tion?’ He said, ‘An evil one.’ I asked, ‘Where did you end up?’ He
replied, ‘In the punishment of Allah.’ 1 asked, ‘What is the state of

the perpetrators of injustice with Him?’ He answered, “Che worst

97
Seventy Major Sins

state. Have you not heard the words of Allah Almighty, “Those who
do wrong will soon know the kind of reversal they will receive.’
(26:227)?”

Someone reported: “I saw a man whose arm had been severed
at the shoulder and who was crying out, ‘Whoever sees me should
not wrong anyone!’ I went to him and asked him, ‘My brother,
what is your story?’ He answered, ‘My brother, my story is
extraordinary. I was one of the helpers of the perpetrators of injus-
tice and one day I saw a fisherman who had caught a large fish,
which I wanted. I went to him and said, “Give me this fish.” He
said, “I will not give it to you. I will sell it and get food for my
family.” So I struck him and took it from him by force and went
off with it. While I was walking carrying it, it bit my thumb and
when I reached my house and put it down, it bit my thumb again.
I felt such great pain that I could not sleep because of its severity
and the distress it caused me. My hand swelled up. In the morn-
ing, I went to the doctor and I complained to him of the pain. He
said, “This is the beginning of gangrene. I will cut your thumb off
lest it spread and you lose your hand.” So he cut off my thumb.
Then it afflicted my hand and I could not sleep or be still owing to
the intensity of the pain. I was told that my hand must be ampu-
tated, so it was amputated; but the pain then spread to my fore-
arm. It was terrible and I could not be still. The only way to gain
relief from the intensity of the pain was, I was told, to have my
arm amputated at the elbow; so I did that. But the terrible pain
spread to the upper arm and so I had to have my whole arm ampu-
tated at the shoulder.’

““Someone asked me what had caused the pain and I men-
tioned the story of the fish to him. He told me, “If you had
returned at the beginning of the affliction to the owner of the fish
and given it back to him and placated him, you would not have
lost a limb. Go now to him and ask his forgiveness before the pain
reaches the rest of your body.” I continued to seek him in the land
until I found him and fell at his feet, greeting him and weeping. I
said to him, “Sir, I ask you by Allah to pardon me!” He asked who
I was and I said, “I am the one who took the fish from you by
force,” and I described to him what had happened and showed
him my arm. He wept when he saw it and then said, “My brother,

98
Injustice

I absolve you from what you did, since I see this affliction you
have suffered.” I said, “Sir, by Allah, did you pray against me when
I took it?” “Yes,” he replied. “I said, ‘O Allah, this man has over-
powered me by his strength to take unjustly what You provided
me with, so show me Your power over him!” I said, “Sir, Allah has
shown you His power over me and I repent to Allah Almighty for
my service to the perpetrators of injustice and I will never again
stand at their door or be seen among their helpers as long as I live,

Allah willing.””” All success is from Allah.

99
27. Tax Collecting

This is encompassed by the words of the Almighty:

“There are only grounds against those who wrong people and act
as tyrants in the earth without right to do so. Such people will
have a painful punishment.” (42:42)

A tax-collector is one of the greatest helpers of the perpetrators
of injustice. Indeed, he is one of them. He takes something he is
not entitled to and gives it to someone who is not entitled to it.
This is why the Prophet % said, “A tax-collector will not enter the
Garden.” Abu Dawud related it. That is because he has to take on
himself the injustice people have suffered at his hands. Where will
the tax collector be on the Day of Rising with respect to paying
back to people what he took from them? It will be taken from his
good actions if he has good actions. This is alluded to in the hadith
of the Prophet #: “Do you know who the true bankrupt is?”,
which has already been mentioned.

We find in the hadith of the woman who purified herself
through being stoned: “She repented in such a way that if even a
tax-collector had repented in the same way, he would have been
forgiven or it would have been accepted from him.”

A tax-collector resembles a highway robber and is a thief. A
tax-collector, his scribe, witness, and the one who takes from a sol-
dier and an old man all share in the sin. They consume what is
unlawful. It is sound that the Messenger of Allah % said, “No flesh
nourished by the unlawful will enter the Garden, and the Fire is
more entitled to it.” The unlawful means anything which is ugly
to mention and causes shame.

Al-Wahidi mentioned this subject in his explanation of the
words of Allah Almighty: “Bad and good are not the same.” (5:100)
Jabir 42 reported that a man said, “Messenger of Allah, wine is my
trade. I gathered wealth from its sale. Will that property benefit
me if I use it to obey Allah Almighty?” The Messenger of Allah #
said, “Even if you were to spend it on hajj, jihad or 520204, it would
not turn into even the wing of a gnat in the sight of Allah. Allah

100
Tax-collecting

only accepts the good. Allah Almighty has revealed the confirma-
tion of that in His words: ‘Bad things and good things are not the
same even though the abundance of the bad things may seem attractive
to you.’ (5:100)”

We ask Allah for pardon and protection.

101
28. Consuming and receiving unlawful property
in any way

Allah Almighty says:
“Do not devour one another’s property by false means.” (2:188)

This means: “None of you may consume the property of
another under any kind of false pretences.” Ibn ‘Abbas ‏2ت‎ said that
this means a man using a false oath to misappropriate the property
of his brother. Consuming property under false pretences can take
two forms. One is by way of injustice, such as through usurpation,
treachery, or theft. The second is is by way of amusement and
sport, such gambling, games and the like.

We find in Sahih al-Bukbhari that the Messenger of Allah 3¢ said,
“Men who spend the property of Allah without a legal right will
go to the Fire on the Day of Rising,” and in Sahih Muslim: “Then
the Prophet # spoke about a man who goes on a long journey, is
dishevelled and dusty, and stretches his hands to heaven saying, ‘O
Lord! O Lord!’ when his food is unlawful, his drink is unlawful,
his clothes are unlawful, and his sustenance is unlawful. How
could such a man have his prayer answered?” Anas # reported, “I
said, ‘Messenger of Allah, pray to Allah to grant me a supplication
which is answered.’ ‘The Prophet # said, ‘Anas, make your earning
goodly and your supplication will be answered. A man may raise a
morsel of the unlawful to his mouth and his supplication not be
answered for forty years.”

Al-Bayhaqi related with an isnad that the Messenger of Allah #
said, “Allah has allotted your character traits to you, just as He has
allotted provision to you. Allah gives this world to both those He
loves and those He does not love; but He only gives the deen to
those He loves, so if Allah gives someone the deen, He loves him.
Whoever gains property unlawfully, whether they spend some of it
from themselves, give part of it as sadaqa, or leave it behind when
they die, it will not bring him any blessing, nor will it be accepted
from him, it will only be fuel for the Fire. Allah does not erase evil
by evil, but only erases evil by good.”

102
Consuming unlawful property

Ibn ‘Umar # reported that the Messenger of Allah 2: said,
“This world is sweet and green. Whoever obtains lawful property
and spends it properly, Allah will reward him and let him inherit
the Garden. Whoever earns wealth in this world which is not law-
ful and spends it improperly, Allah will admit him to the Abode of
Abasement. Many a person who spends what his lower self desires
of the unlawful will go to the Fire on the Day of Rising.” (al-
Bayhagi) It is reported that the Prophet # said, "If someone is not
concerned about where he earns his wealth, Allah will not be con-
cerned about whichever gate he enters the Fire by.”

Abu Hurayra #: said, “It is better for one of you to put dust
into his mouth than to put something unlawful into his mouth.”
(Ahmad) It is related that Yusuf ibn Asbat said, “When a young
man worships, Shaytan says to his helpers, ‘Look at the source of
his food.’ If his food is from a bad source, he says, ‘Let him
become tired and strive. He has spared you himself. His efforts
will not help him if he consumes the unlawful.” That is supported
by what is affirmed in the Sahib when the Prophet * said about a
man whose food and drink are unlawful that an angel over
Jerusalem calls every day and night, “Whoever consumes the
unlawful, no recompense will be accepted from him.” ‘Abdullah
ibn al-Mubarak said, “I prefer returning one dirham from a doubt-
ful source to giving a hundred thousand in sadaqa.” It is related
that the Prophet % said, “If someone performs 5477 using unlawful
wealth and says ‘At Your service,’ the angel says, “There is no “At
Your service” for you. Your hajj is rejected.” (at-Tabarani)

Imam Ahmad said, “If someone buys a garment for ten dirhams
and even one of those dirhams is unlawful, Allah will not accept a
prayer from him as long as wears it.” Wahb ibn al-Ward said, “If
you were to stand in a prayer like this column, it would not be of
any benefit to you unless you checked to see whether what enters
your stomach was lawful or unlawful.” Ibn ‘Abbas 2 said, “Allah
does not accept the prayer of a man who has anything unlawful in
his belly until he repents to Allah Almighty of eating it.” Sufyan
ath-Thawri said, “Someone who spends unlawful wealth in obey-
ing Allah is like someone who purifies a garment with urine. A

103
Seventy Major Sins
garment can only be purified with water. A wrong action can only
be expiated with what is lawful.”

‘Umar # said, “We used to leave nine-tenths of what is lawful,
for fear of falling into the unlawful.” Ka‘b ibn ‘Ujra #e reported
that the Messenger of Allah ‏يه‎ said, “A body nourished by the
unlawful will not enter the Garden.” Zayd ibn Arqam # said,
“Abu Bakr had a slave who used to pay him a levy to buy his free-
dom. He used to come every day with his levy and Abu Bakr
would ask him where he got it from. If he was pleased he would
eat from it, otherwise he would leave it. He came to him one night
with some food while Abu Bakr was fasting. He ate a morsel from
it, forgetting to ask him about it. Then he said to him. ‘Where did
you get this from?’ He answered, ‘I used to act as a soothsayer for
some people in the Jabiliyya although I was not good at soothsay-
ing. I deceived them.’ Abu Bakr said, ‘Confound you! You have
almost destroyed me!’ Then he put his hand in his mouth and
began to vomit but it did not come out.’ He was told, ‘It will only
come up with water.’ So he called for water and began to drink
and vomit until he had got rid of everything in his stomach.’
Someone said to him, ‘May Allah have mercy to you! All of this
for the sake of this morsel?’ He said, ‘If I had to die to remove it, I
would do so. I heard the Messenger of Allah # say, “The Fire is
entitled to any body which is nourished by the unlawful.” I feared
that some of my body would be nourished by this morsel.”

The scholars hold that included under this heading are tax-col-
lecting, treachery, counterfeiting, theft, falsity, usury, taking the
property of an orphan, bearing false witness, borrowing something
and then denying having done so, bribery, giving short measure
and weight, selling something with a concealed fault, gambling,
sorcery, astrology, making images, fornication, professional
mourning, taking a wage without permission from the seller, and
selling a free person as a slave and consuming the price.

Section: It is related that the Messenger of Allah 8 said, “On
the Day of Rising some people will be brought who have a pile of
good actions as huge as the mountain of Tihama — but when they
bring them, Allah will make them scattered dust and then throw

104
Consuming unlawful property

those people into the Fire.” It was said, “Messenger of Allah, how
can that be?” He answered, “They used to pray, fast, pay zakat,
and perform bay, but when something unlawful was offered to
them, they took it and so Allah made their actions come to noth-

ing.”

It is reported that one of the righteous was seen after his death
in a dream and was asked, “What did Allah do with you?” He said,
“Good, but I was held back from the Garden because of a needle
which I borrowed and did not return.”

We ask Allah Almighty for pardon and protection and success
in doing what He loves and is pleased with. He is Generous,
Magnanimous, Compassionate, Merciful.

105
29. Suicide

Allah Almighty says:
“Do not kill yourselves. Allah is Most Merciful to you. If any-

one who does so out of enmity and wrongdoing, We will roast him

in a Fire. That is an easy matter for Allah.” (4:29-30)

Al-Wahidi said in his commentary on this ayat that “Do not kill
yourselves” means “Do not kill one another, for you are the people
of one deen and so you are like one soul.” That is the position of
Ibn ‘Abbas 2 and most others. Some people, however, believe
that it prohibits suicide. The soundness of this is indicated by what
Abu Mansur Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Mansuri reported to
us from ‘Amr ibn al-‘As #. He said, “I had a wet dream during the
expedition of Dhat as-Salasil, and was afraid that if I had a ghus/ I
would die, so I did tayammum and prayed Subh with my compan-
ions. I mentioned that to the Prophet # and he said, ‘‘Amr, did
you pray with your companions when you were in janaba?’ So I
told him what had kept me from having a ghus/. I said that I had
heard Allah’s words: ‘Do not kill yourselves. Allah is Most Merciful to
you.’ The Messenger of Allah # laughed and did not say any-
thing.” (Abu Dawud) This 4adith mdicates that ‘Amr  interpret-
ed this ayat as being about killing oneself, not something else, and
the Prophet 38 did not contradict it.

Jundub ibn ‘Abdullah # reported that the Prophet 3 said:
“Among those before you was a man who had a wound and could
not endure it. He took a knife and cut his arm with it and the
blood flowed until he died. Allah Almighty said, ‘My slave has has-
tened to Me by his own action and so J have denied him the
Garden.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Abu Hurayra 2 reported that the Messenger of Allah % said,
“If someone kills himself with a sharp implement, he will have it in
his hand and be stabbing himself with it in the belly in the Fire of
Hell forever. If someone kills himself with poison, he will have his
poison in his hand and be swallowing it in the Fire of Hell forever.
If someone throws himself from a mountain and kills himself he

106
Suicide

will be falling in the Fire of Hell forever.” It is transmitted in the
two Sahib collections.

Thabit ibn ad-Dahhak # related that the Messenger of Allah
# said, “Cursing a believer is like killing him. Falsely accusing a
believer of disbelief is like killing him. Anyone who kills himself
with anything will be punished with it on the Day of Rising.” A
sound hadith reports about a man who was suffering from a wound
and hastened his death by killing himself with the point of his
sword. The Messenger of Allah #8 said, “He is one of the inhabi-
tants of the Fire.”

We ask Allah to inspire us with right guidance and to give us
refuge from the evils of ourselves and the evils of our actions. He
is Generous, Magnanimous, Forg9iving, Merciful.

107
30. Inveterate lying

Allah Almighty says:
“Call down the curse of Allah upon the liars.” (3:61)

“Death to conjecturers” (51:10): in other words, liars.

Allah does not guide any unbridled inveterate liar.” (40:28)

It is reported in the two Sahih collections from Ibn Mas‘ud
that the Messenger of Allah # said, “Truthfulness leads to piety
and piety leads to the Garden. A man may continue to tell the
truth and attend to the truth until he is written with Allah as
truthful. Lying leads to impiety and piety leads to the Fire. A man
may continue to lie and attend to lying until he is written with
Allah as a liar.”

Also in the two Sahih collections is a report that the Prophet #
said, “There are three signs of a hypocrite, even if he prays, fasts
and claims that he is a Muslim: when he speaks, he lies; when he
promises, he breaks his promise; and when he is trusted, he
betrays his trust.” The Prophet 3 said, “If anyone has four charac-
teristics, he is a pure hypocrite, and if anyone has one of them, he
has an aspect of hypocrisy until he gives it up: when he is trusted,
he betrays his trust; when he speaks, he lies; when he makes an
agreement, he breaks it; and when he quarrels, he speaks falsely.”
(al-Bukhari and Muslim)

Sahih al-Bukbari contains the hadith describing the vision of the
Prophet 36 in the Night Journey, in which he said: “We came to a
man who was lying on his back, and there was another man stand-
ing over him with an iron hook. He went to one side of his face
and ripped open the side of his mouth until it reached the back of
his neck and then his nostril to the back of his neck and his eye to
the back of his neck. Then he moved to the other side and did the
same thing as he had done to first side. When he finished that
side, the first side had become whole again. Then he did the same
thing all over again. He will continue to do that until the Day of
Rising. I asked, ‘Who is this?’ They said, ‘He would leave from his
house and tell lies which spread everywhere.”

108
Inveterate lying

The Prophet # said, “A believer may be naturally disposed to any-
thing except treachery and lying.” (Ahmad) One hadith has
“Beware of conjecture. Conjecture is the most lying kind of
speech.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim) The Prophet # said, “Woe to
the one who tells lies to make people laugh! Woe to him. Woe to
him. Woe to him.” (Ahmad)

Even worse are false oaths, as Allah Almighty reports about the
hypocrites when He says: “They swear to falsehood and do so know-
ingly.” (58:14) In the Sahih it is reported that the Messenger of
Allah % said: “There are three whom Allah will not speak to on
the Day of Rising nor attest to their integrity and they will have a
painful punishment: a man with water to spare which he denies to
a traveller; a man who sells goods to a man and swears by Allah
that he paid a certain amount for it and the buyer believes him and
takes it when that is not true; and a man who gives a pledge to a
ruler only for worldly gain, and if he gives him something he is
loyal, but if he does not give him any of it he is not loyal.”

The Prophet % said, “It is great treachery to say something to
your brother which he believes when you are lying.” In another
hadith we find: “Whoever recounts a dream which he did not have
will have to tie a knot between two grains of barley, and will not
be able to do so.” (al-Bukhari)

The Messenger of Allah # said, “The worst of lies is when a
man says his eyes have seen something which they have not seen.”
It means that he says, “I dreamt such-and-such” when he did not
see anything. Ibn Mas‘ud # said, “When someone continues to
lie, a black spot grows in his heart until all his heart becomes
black. Then he is written in the sight of Allah among the liars.”
(Malik)

A Muslim should guard his tongue so that he speaks only bene-
ficial words. There is safety in silence and nothing is equal to safe-
ty. We find in Sahih al-Bukhari from Abu Hurayra # that the
Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Whoever believes in Allah and the
Last Day should speak good or be silent.” It is agreed that this
hadith is sound and is a text proving clearly that a human being
should only speak good words. Good words are those whose bene-
fit is clear to the speaker.

109
Seventy Major Sins

Abu Musa #2 reported, “I asked, ‘Messenger of Allah, which of
the Muslims is the best?’ He said, “The one from whose tongue
and hand the Muslims are safe.’” We find in the Muwatta’ of
Imam Malik from the transmission of Bilal ibn al-Harith al-
Muzani # that the Messenger of Allah 8 said: “A may man say
what is pleasing to Allah and he does not suspect that it will have
the result that it does, and Allah writes for him His good pleasure
for it until the day when he meets Him. And a man may say what
incurs the wrath of Allah and he does not suspect that it will have
the result that it does, and Allah writes His wrath for him for it
until the day when he meets Him.”

There are many sound badiths like those we have mentioned
but what we have cited is sufficient. One man was asked, “How
many faults exist in the son of Adam?” He said, “They are too
many to count. I have counted eight thousand but I found that
there is one good quality which, if you avail yourself of it, will
conceal all of them. It is guarding the tongue.”

May Allah make us avoid disobedience to Him and occupy us
with that which pleases Him. He is Generous, Magnanimous.

Warning. O slave of Allah, there is nothing more precious for
you than your life and yet you waste it. There is no enemy for you
like shaytan and yet you obey him. There is nothing more harmful
than consenting to what your lower self wants and yet you treat it
like a friend. The best part of your life has passed and there
remains only the white hair of dissolution. White hair is enough
of a warning against dissolution. O heedless one! It is the best of
qualities! Where is weeping out of fear of the Immense? Where is
the time which was lost in playing games? How many silent tears
there will be at the Rising for the wrong actions which the books
of the scribe contain! Who will support me when I stand at the
station of reckoning and I am asked, “What have you done with
respect to every obligation?”

110
31. Being corrupt in rendering judgment

Allah Almighty says:

“Those who do not judge by what Allah has sent down, such
people are unbelievers.” (5:44)

“Those who do not judge by what Allah has sent down, such
people are wrongdoers.” (5:45)

“Those who do not judge by what Allah has sent down, such
people are deviators.” (5:47)

Al-Hakam related from Talha ibn ‘Ubaydullah #2 that the
Prophet # said, “Allah does not accept the prayer of a ruler who
judges by other than what Allah has sent down.” The Sahih of al-
Hakim also records from Burayda # that the Messenger of Allah
ss said: “There are three types of judges. One type will go to the
Garden, and two types will be in the Fire. One type of judge
recognises the truth and judges by it and so he will be in the
Garden. One type of judge recognises the truth but is deliberately
unjust and so he will be in the Fire. One type of judge judges
without knowledge. He will also be in the Fire.” They asked,
“What is the wrong action of the one who is ignorant?” He
replied, “His wrong action is that he should not have been a judge
without having knowledge.”

Abu Hurayra # reported that the Messenger of Allah 3 said,
“Anyone who is appointed as a gadi has been slaughtered without a
knife.” (Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi) Al-Fudayl ibn ‘Tyad said, “A
gadi should spend one day in judgement and one day weeping for
himself.” Muhammad ibn Wasi‘ said, “The first to be summoned
for reckoning on the Day of Rising will be judges.” ‘Aisha ‏ع8‎ said
that she heard the Messenger of Allah # said, “A just gadi will be
brought on the Day of Rising and experience such a harsh reckon-
ing that he will wish that he had not judged between two people
about a single date.” (Ahmad and Ibn Hibban) Mu‘adh ibn Jabal
‏عن‎ said that the Messenger of Allah % said, “A gadi will slide down
a slope in Hellfire further than Aden.” ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib # narrat-
ed that he heard the Messenger of Allah # say: “There is no ruler

111
Seventy Major Sins

or gadi who will not be brought on the Day of Rising before he is
made to stand before Allah Almighty on the Sirat and then his
secrets will be unfurled and read out in front of people. If he is
just, Allah will deliver him by his justice. If he was otherwise, that
bridge will break completely and he will go between two of its
supports (or stretch his limbs) for a certain distance and then the
bridge will break, sending him into Hell.”

Makhul said, “If I were given a choice being being a gadi and
having my head chopped off, I would choose to have my head
chopped off.” Ayyub as-Sakhtiyani said, “I find that the people
with the most knowledge are those who flee from it (becoming a
qadi) the most.” Ath-Thawri was told, “Shurayh has been asked to
be gadi.” He said, “What a man they have corrupted!” Malik ibn
al-Mundhir summoned Muhammad ibn Wasi‘ to appoint him gadi
of Basra and he refused. He repeated it and said, “You will sit as
gadi or | will whip you!” He said, “If you do that, you are the ruler.
It is better to be abased in this world than in the Next World!”

Wahb ibn Munabbih said, “When a judge intends injustice or
acts unjustly, Allah will make decrease affect the people of his
country, even in the markets, provisions, crops, milk and every-
thing. When he intends good and justice, Allah will bring blessing
to the people of his kingdom.” One of the governors of Hims
wrote to ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-Aziz, “The city of Hims is ruined and
needs rebuilding.” ‘Umar wrote to him, “Fortify it with justice and
clear its roads of injustice. Peace.” He also said, “It is unlawful for
a 7447 to judge while he is angry. If a gadi lacks knowledge and has
bad intention, bad character and lack of scrupulousness, his loss is
complete and he must immediately resign and hasten to sincerity.”

We ask Allah for pardon and protection and success in what He
loves and what pleases Him. He is Generous, Magnanimous.

112
32. Taking bribes for judgement

Allah Almighty says: “Do not devour one another's property by false
means or offer it to the judges as a bribe, trying through crime to know-
ingly usurp a portion of other people’s property.” (2:188) This means:
“do not bribe or entice judges with your wealth in order to take a
right belonging to someone else when you know that it is not law-
ful for you.” Abu Hurayra # reported that the Messenger of Allah
3 said, “Allah curses both the briber and the one bribed for judge-
ment.” At-Tirmidhi transmitted it and considered it a hasan hadith.
‘Abdullah ibn ‘Amr 2 said, “The Messenger of Allah 4g cursed the
briber and the one bribed.”

Scholars have said that the curse attaches to the briber when he
intends by it to harm a Muslim or to obtain by it something he is
not entitled to. When he pays it in order to obtain his right or to
defend himself from injustice, he is not subject to the curse. In the
case of a judge, a bribe taken to avert injustice is unlawful for him.
We find in another hadith: “The curse is on the go-between in any
bribe.” This follows the same rule as applies to a briber whose aim
is good: the curse does not fall on him if that is the case, but oth-
erwise it does.

Section. Abu Dawud related in his Sunan from Abu Umama
al-Bahili # that the Messenger of Allah % said, “Whoever inter-
cedes for a man who then gives him a gift for doing it, he has
opened a great door among the doors of usury.” Ibn Mas‘ud #
said, “It is unlawful for you to accept a gift given to you by some-
one for helping him to fulfil a need.” Masrug related that he spoke
to Ibn Ziyad about an injustice and he settled it. Then the one
who had suffered the injustice gave him a servant, but he refused
to accept the gift and returned it. He said, “I heard Ibn Mas‘ud #
say, ‘If someone averts an injustice from a Muslim and then is
given anything for doing so, be it little or much, it is unlawful.”
The man said, “Abu ‘Abd ar-Rahman, we thought that what was
unlawful was bribes in exchange for judgement.” He said, “That
constitutes disbelief.”

113
Seventy Major Sins

We seek refuge with Allah from this enormity. We ask Allah for
pardon and protection from every affliction and disliked thing.

Imam Abu ‘Umar al-Awza‘i, who lived in Beirut, said that a
Christian came and told him, “A governor in Baalbek did me an
injustice and I want you to write to him. Then he gave him a jar of
honey.” Al-Awza‘i said, “If you wish, take back the jar and I will
write to him. Or, if you wish, I will take the jar.” So he wrote to
the governor for him asking him to reduce some of the khara tax
for the Christians. The Christian took the jar and letter and went
to the governor and gave him the letter, and he reduced it by thir-
ty dirhams through the intercession of the Imam. May Allah have
mercy on him and gather us in his company.

114
33. Women looking like men and men looking
like women

We find in the Sahih that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Allah
has cursed women who imitate men and men who imitate
women”: in other words, those who resemble men in their dress
and speech. Abu Hurayra # reported that the Messenger of Allah
ag said, “Allah curses a woman who wears men’s clothes and a man
who wears women’s clothes.”

When a woman dresses like a man, the curse of Allah and His
Messenger attaches to her, and also to her husband if he allows her
to do so and does not forbid it. For he is commanded to make her
go straight in obedience to Allah and to forbid her to disobey
Him. This is according to the words of Allah Almighty: “Safe-
guard yourselves and your families from a Fire whose fuel is people and
stones,” (66:6), meaning: “Discipline them, teach them, command
them to obey Allah and forbid them to disobey Allah, just as that is
obligatory for you in respect of yourselves.” The same is implied
by the words of the Prophet 38: “All of you are shepherds and each
of you is responsible for his flock. A man is the shepherd of his
family and will be responsible for them on the Day of Rising.” (al-
Bukhari and Muslim)

It is related that the Prophet % said, “Men are destroyed when
they obey women.” (Muslim) Al-Hasan said, “Today, if a man
obeys his wife in what she desires, Allah Almighty will throw him
into the fire.” The Prophet ‏يه‎ said, “Iwo types are people of the
Fire: people with whips like the tails of cattle with which they beat
people, and women who are naked despite being clothed, straying
and tempting, their heads like the tilted humps of camels. They
will not enter the Garden or experience its fragrance, although its
fragrance can be experienced at such-and-such a distance.” This
was transmitted by Muslim.

Nafi‘ narrated that Ibn ‘Umar # and ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Amr
were with az-Zubayr ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib # when a woman came
driving some sheep and shouldering a bow. ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar
sé asked, “Are you a man or a woman?” She answered, “A

115
Seventy Major Sins

woman.” He turned to [bn ‘Amr # and said, “Allah Almighty has
cursed on the tongue of His Prophet 38 women who resemble men
and men who resemble women.”

Among the actions for which a woman is also cursed are dis-
playing adornments, gold and pearls from under the veil, wearing
perfume when she goes out, and wearing attractive garments when
she goes out. All of that is part of adornment which Allah hates
and He hates those who do it in this world and the Next. Such
actions have become predominant in most women. The Prophet
#2 said about them, “I looked at Hell and saw that most of its
inhabitants were women.” He # also said, “I have not left behind
me any trial more harmful to men than women.”

We ask Allah to protect us from the trial they represent and to
put them right by His favour and generosity.

116
34. Being a wittol (a man who condones his wife’s

infidelity)

Allah Almighty says:

“A man who has fornicated may only marry a woman who
has fornicated or a woman of the idolators. A woman who has
forntated the may only marry a man who bas fornicated or a
man of the idolators. Doing such a thing is unlawful for believ-
ers.” (24:3)

‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar #: related that the Messenger of Allah #
said, “Three people will not enter the Garden: a person who dis-
obeys his parents, a wittol, and a manly woman.” An-Nasa’i relates
that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Three will be forbidden the
Garden by Allah: a habitual wine drinker, someone who disobeys
his parents, and a wittol who accepts the licentious behaviour of
his wife” — or in other words, condones it in his wife. We seek
refuge with Allah from that.

One who thinks that his wife is involved in illicit behaviour but
overlooks it because of his love for her or because he owes her a
debt, or a heavy bride-price which he cannot pay, or because he
has young children, is not as bad as one who simply ignores it, and
there is no good in a man who has no jealousy.

We ask Allah for protection from every affliction and trial. He
is Generous, Magnanimous.

117
35. Marrying a woman to enable her to remarry
her former husband

There is a sound report from Ibn Mas‘ud # that the
Messenger of Allah 25 cursed men who married women to enable
them to remarry their former husbands and husbands for whom it
was done. At-Tirmidhi said, “(The unlawfulness of) that practice
was agreed on by the people of knowledge, including ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattab, ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan, and ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar &.
That was also the position of the fugaha’ among the Tabi‘un.
Imam Ahmad related it in his Musnad, and an-Nasa’i in his Sunan
with a sound isnad. Ibn ‘Abbas # related: “The Messenger of
Allah # was asked about a marriage made for the purpose of
allowing remarriage and said, ‘No! Marriage is based on true
desire for it. Marriage is not based on deception or mocking the
Book of Allah Almighty. There must be consummation.” Abu
Ishaq al-Juzjani related it. ‘Uqba ibn ‘Amir # related that the
Messenger of Allah #8 said, “Shall I tell you about the borrowed
billy-goat?” They said, ‘Yes, Messenger of Allah.” He said, “It is a
man who marries a woman in order to permit her first husband to
remarry her. Allah curses this one and the one for whom it is
done.” Ibn Majah related this with a sound isnad.

Ibn ‘Umar 2 related that a man asked him, “What do you say
about a woman whom I married to make her lawful for her former
husband if he has not commanded me to do so and does not know
about it?” Ibn ‘Umar # told him, “Marriage must be based on
desire. If you like her, keep her. If you dislike her, separate from
her. We considered this to be tantamount to fornication in the
time of the Messenger of Allah #8.”

As for the traditions from the Companions and the Tabi‘un, al-
Athram and Ibn al-Mundhir related that ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab &
said, “I would stone any man who married a woman so that she
could remarry her former husband, and I would stone the one for
whom it was done.” ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab # was asked about
making a woman lawful for her husband and said, “That is forni-
cation.”

118
Marrying a woman to enable her to remarry

‘Abdullah ibn Sharik al-‘Amiri said that he heard that when Ibn
‘Umar 2 was asked about a man who divorced his cousin and then
regretted it and wanted to take her back and a man wanted to
marry her to make her lawful for him, he said, “Both of them are
fornicators, even if they remain for twenty years or the like of that,
if he knows that he intended to make her lawful.” Ibn ‘Abbas #
said that a man told him, “My cousin divorced his wife three times
and then regretted it.” He said, “Your cousin has disobeyed his
Lord and regretted it. He has obeyed Shaytan, who will not give
him a way out.” He said, “What do you think about a man who
makes her lawful for him?” He said, “If someone tries to trick
Allah, He will trick him.”

Ibrahim an-Nakha‘i stated, “If the intention of one of the
three, the first husband, the second husband or the woman, is to
make remarriage lawful, then the second marriage is invalid and
she is not lawful for her first husband.” Al-Hasan al-Basri said, “If
any of the three intends to make remarriage lawful, it is invalid.”
Sa‘id ibn al-Musayyab, the imam of the Tabi‘un, said about a man
who married a woman in order to make her lawful for her first
husband, “She is not lawful.” Among those who also said that are
Malik ibn Anas, al-Layth ibn Sa‘d, Sufyan ath-Thawri and Imam
Ahmad.

Isma‘il ibn Sa‘id said, “I asked Imam Ahmad about a man who
married a woman thinking to make her lawful for her first hus-
band while the woman did not know that.” He replied, “He is
someone trying to make a woman lawful for a husband who
divorced her. If that is his intention, he is cursed.” The position of
the school of ash-Shafi‘l is that if making remarriage lawful is stip-
ulated in the contract, the contract is invalid, like a contract for
temporary marriage. If the contract is made and it is not stipulated
in the contract nor before it, then the contract is not invalid. If he
marries her on the basis that when he has made her lawful, he will
divorce her, there are two views about it, the sounder of which is
that it is invalid. The argument for its invalidity is that it is a pre-
condition whose validity prevents the continuance of marriage,
and so it is like setting a time limit on the marriage. That is the
soundest view according to ar-Rafi‘i. The second argument is that
it is an invalid precondition connected to the contract and so the

119
Seventy Major Sins

marriage itself is not invalid, as is the case when someone marries
with the stipulation that he will not marry another wife and will
not travel with her. Allah knows best.

We ask Allah to grant us success in what pleasing to Him and
to help us avoid acts of disobedience to Him. He is Generous,
Magnanimous, Forgiving, Merciful.

Warning. By Allah, how excellent are people who leave this
world before leaving it! They remove their hearts from it by aver-
sion to the darkness of its form, and they choose the days of peace
and obtain its fruits. They enjoy the words of their Master and
submit to His command and surrender to Him. They accept His
gifts with thankfulness and submit. They emigrate to obey Him
with pleasure and contentment, and they hasten to Him from all
people and prefer to obey Him with knowledge and perception.
They are pleased and do not object, whatever may happen. They
spend of themselves in what is an excellent business transaction.
How excellent is their purchase! They serve Him and their hearts
are open to His service. They knock on His door and the door is
opened. They weep continually, and their eyelids are reddened by
their tears. They stand before dawn like those who weep and
mourn. You can recognise them by their mark. They show the
effects of sincerity. They are redolent with the spread of His fra-
grant intimacy from the scent of their praise.

120
36. Not avoiding urine, something which the
Christians are prone to

Allah Almighty said:
“Purify your clothes.” (74:4)

Ibn ‘Abbas #2 said, “The Prophet 3 passed by two graves and
said, “They are being punished, yet they are not being punished
for anything great. One of them carried tales and the other did not
keep himself free of urine:” in other words, he was not careful
about it. It is transmitted in the two Sahib collections. The
Messenger of Allah # said, “Keep yourself free from urine. Much
of the punishment in the grave is due to it.” Ad-Daraqutni related
this.

If someone does not guard against urine on his body and cloth-
ing, his prayer is not accepted. Abu Nu‘aym related in a/-Hilya
from Shaqi ibn Mati‘ al-Asbahi # that the Messenger of Allah 2
said, “There are things that increase the painful punishment of the
people of the Fire in addition to what they are already suffering.
They run between boiling water and the Blaze. They call out for
destruction. ‘They ask one another, ‘Why do these things inflict
pain upon us in addition what we are already suffering?’ One man
is put in a box of embers, another man drags his intestines, anoth-
er man has pus and blood flowing out of his mouth, and yet anoth-
er eats his own flesh. The person in the box is asked, ‘Why are you
making our suffering worse than it is already?’ He says that he
died with the wealth of people still on his neck. Then the one who
is dragging his intestines will be asked, ‘Why are you making our
suffering worse than it is already?’ He says that he was not con-
cerned where urine splashed, and did not wash it off. Then the
one whose mouth is running with pus and blood will be asked,
‘Why are you making our suffering worse than it is already?’ He
says that he used to look at every ugly word and enjoy it.” In one
version, “He used to eat the flesh of people and carry tales.”

We ask Allah for pardon and protection by His favour and gen-
erosity. He is the most Merciful of the merciful.

121
37. Showing off

Allah Almighty says about the hypocrites:

“They show off to people, only remembering Allah a little.”
(4:142)

“Woe to those who pray and are forgetful of their prayer, those
who show off and deny help to others.” (107:4-7)

“O you who believe, do not nullify your sadaqa by demands of
gratitude or insulting words, like him who spends his wealth,

showing off to people.” (2:264)

“So let him who hopes to meet bis Lord act rightly and not
associate anyone in the worship of his Lord.” (18:110)

This means that he should not show off his good actions.

Abu Hurayra # reported that the Messenger of Allah % said,
“The first of mankind to be judged on the Day of Rising will be a
man who was martyred. He will be brought and will be informed
of the blessings he had and will acknowledge them. Allah will ask,
‘What did you do with them?’ He will say, ‘I fought for You until I
was martyred.’ Allah will say, “You lie. Rather you fought so it
would be said, “A bold man!” and so it was said.’ Then the com-
mand will be given and he will be dragged on his face until he is
thrown into the Fire. There will also be a man to whom Allah
gave much wealth and all sorts of property. He will be brought
and informed of his blessings which he will acknowledge. Allah
will ask, ‘What did you do with them?’ He will answer, “There was
no path in which You like spending to be done but that I spent in
it for You.’ He will say, ‘You lie. Rather you did it so that it would
be said, “He is generous,” and so it was said.’ Then the command
will be given and he will be dragged on his face until he is thrown
into the Fire. There will also be a man who studied knowledge
and taught it and recited the Qur’an. He will be brought and
informed of his blessings which he will acknowledge. Allah will
ask, ‘What did you do with them?’ He will say, ‘I studied knowl-
edge and taught it and I recited the Qur’an for You.’ He will say,
‘You lie. Rather you studied so that it would be said, “A scholar!”

122
Showing off

and you recited so that it would be said, “He is a reciter!” And so
it was said.’ Then the command will be given and he will be
dragged on his face until he is thrown into the Fire.” Muslim
related it.

‘The Prophet 3 said, “Whoever wants to be heard, Allah makes
him heard. Whoever wants to be seen, Allah makes him seen.” (al-
Bukhari and Muslim) According to al-Khattabi it means:
“Whoever does an action without sincerity, wanting people to see
him and listen to him will be repaid for that so that he will be
known for it and disgraced, and so what was inside him will appear
on him. Allah knows best.” The Prophet # said, “Even a little of
showing-off is shirk.” (al-Hakim) The Prophet # also said, “What
I fear most for you is the lesser shirk.” Someone asked, “What is it,
Messenger of Allah?” He said, “Showing-off.” (Ahmad)

Allah Almighty says about the Day when His slaves are repaid
for their actions: “Go to those to whom you used to show off your
actions and see if you find any reward with them.” This is also said
to be the subject of the words of the Almighty: “What confronts
them from Allah will be something they did not reckon with.” (39:47)
They did actions which were seen as good actions in this world,
but which will appear to them on the Day of Rising as evil deeds.
One of the early righteous Muslims said when he read this ayat,
“Woe to the people who show off! A show-off will be summoned
on the Day of Rising with four names: ‘O show-off, O treacher-
ous, O impious, O loser. Go and take your reward from those for
whom you acted. You shall have no reward from Us.”

Al-Hasan said, “Anyone who shows off wants to override
Allah’s decree for him, and he is an evil man. He wants people to
say that he is righteous, but then what will they say when he is in
the position of those abased in the presence of his Lord? The
hearts of believers must know that.” Qatada said, “When someone
shows off, Allah says, ‘Look at My slave and how he mocks Me.’”
It is related that ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab # looked at a man who was
bowing his head {in the prayer and said], “O you who are bowing
your neck, raise your head! Humility is not in the neck. Humility
is in the heart.” It is said that Abu Umama al-Bahili went to a man
in the mosque who was prostrating and weeping and making sup-

123
Seventy Major Sins

plication in his prostration. Abu Umama said to him, “You! You!
This should be done your room!”

Muhammad ibn al-Mubarak as-Suri said, “Show your true
demeanour in the night. That is better than showing it in the day,
because one’s demeanour in the day is towards creatures and one’s
demeanour at night is towards the Lord of the worlds.” ‘Ali ibn
Abi Talib # said, “There are three signs of a show-off: he is lazy
when he is alone; he is active when he is among people; and he
does more when he is praised for it and less when he is criticised
for it.” Al-Fudayl ibn ‘Iyad said, “Leaving action for the sake of
people is showing off. Acting for the sake of people is shirk.
Sincerity is that Allah protect you from both of these.”

We ask Allah for help and sincerity in actions, words, move-
ment and stillness. He is Generous, Magnanimous.

Warning. Slaves of Allah! Your days are few and the threats
facing you are dire. Let the last report to the first and let the heed-
less awaken before the caravans depart. O you who have no doubt
that you will travel but have no provision or mount! O you who
dive into the gulf of passion, when will you reach the shore? Will
you not awaken from total sleep, and attend with a heart which is
not heedless and rise to pray at night, as does someone who is
intelligent? Alas for the deceived, ignorant heedless one! Despite
his mature age he is weighed down with wrong actions. He has
squandered bravery and relied on the mount of passion. He is dis-
tracted from remembering his grave and yet still claims to be
intelligent! By Allah, the heroes have preceded him to the highest
station. He hopes for success despite his idleness. What a hope!
What a hope! A hero does not win by idleness!

124
38. Teaching for worldly gain and concealing
knowledge

Allah Almighty says:

“Only those of His slaves with knowledge have fear of Allah.”
(35:28)

This means “those with knowledge of Allah Almighty.” Ibn
‘Abbas # said, “He means those among His creation who fear
Him since they possess knowledge of His power, might and
force.” Mujahid and ash-Sha‘bi said, “The learned man is the one
who fears Allah Almighty.” Ar-Rabi‘ ibn Anas said, “Whoever does
not fear Allah is not a man of knowledge.”

Allah Almighty says:

“Those who hide the Clear Signs and Guidance We have sent
down, after We have made it clear to people in the Book. Allah

curses them, and the cursers curse them.” (2:159)

This ayat was revealed about the scholars of the Jews. By
“Clear Signs” He means stoning, hudud and other legal judgments,
and by “Guidance” He means the coming of Muhammad 3 and
his description. “After We have made it clear to people (meaning the
tribe of Israel) iz the Book (which is the Torah).” Those who con-
cealed it are cursed. Ibn ‘Abbas 2 said, “Everything except jinn
and men curses them.” Ibn Mas‘ud ‏عن‎ said, “Iwo Muslims do not
curse one another without that curse reverting to the Jews and
Christians who concealed the coming of Muhammad % and his
description.”

Allah Almighty says:

“When Allah made a covenant with those given the Book: ‘You
must make it clear to people and not conceal it.’ But they toss it in
disdain behind their backs and sell it for a paltry price. What an
evil sale they make!” (3:187)

According to al-Wahidi: “This ayat was revealed about the Jews
of Madina. Allah made a covenant with them in the Torah to

125
Seventy Major Sins

explain about the coming of Muhammad 38 and his description
and mission and not to conceal it. It is in the words of Allah
Almighty: “You must make it clear to people and not conceal it.’” Al-
Hasan said, “This is the covenant of Allah Almighty with the
scholars of the Jews to make clear to people what is in their Book:
in which the Prophet 3 is mentioned.”

The Messenger of Allah # said, “Whoever learns knowledge
whose purpose is to please Allah in order to obtain goods of this
world will not experience the scent of the Garden.” Abu Dawud
related this. The Prophet % said, “Anyone who seeks knowledge
in order to vie with scholars or argue with fools or to win people’s
hearts will go to the Fire.” At-Tirmidhi transmitted this. The
Prophet 38 said, “Anyone who is asked about a point of knowledge
but conceals it will be bridled on the Day of Rising with a bridle of
Fire.” One supplication of the Messenger of Allah # was: “TI seek
refuge with You from knowledge which is not beneficial.” The
Prophet # said, “If someone learns knowledge and does not act by
it, his knowledge only increases him in pride.”

Abu Umama # related that the Messenger of Allah % said, “An
evil scholar will come on the Day of Rising and will be thrown
into the Fire and will go round and round tethered by his
intestines as a donkey goes round and round a mill. He will be
asked, ‘What has brought you to this? We were guided by you.’
He says, ‘I used to act differently from the way I instructed you to
act.” Hilal ibn al-‘Ala’ said, “Seeking knowledge is hard; preserv-
ing it is harder than seeking it; acting by it is harder than preserv-
ing it; and being safe from it is harder than acting by it.”

We ask Allah for safety from every affliction and success in
what He loves and is pleased with. He is Generous, Magnanimous.

Warning. Son of Adam, when will you remember the ends of
matters? How long until you depart from these palaces? How long
will you remain in what you built? Where are those before you in
their houses and camps? Where is there anyone who will not die?
All, by Allah, will depart, and will gather in their graves. They will
rest in that roughest bed until the Trumpet is blown. When they
rise for the Judgement and heaven is rolled up, the veil will be lift-
ed, the curtains will be torn aside, and the true reality of actions

126
Teaching for the sake of this world

will appear and be known to people’s hearts. The Sirat will be set
up — and how many feet will slip? Hooks will be set up on it to
catch every deluded one. The faces of the godfearing will shine
like full moons. The iniquitous will call woe and destruction. The
Fire will be brought forth, led by reins, and it will be bubbling and
seething. When people are thrown into it, they will hear it groan-
ing as it boils. There is no happiness in this world for anyone who
truly believes in the Resurrection. Happiness in this world is due
only to ignorance or ingratitude.

127
39. Treachery

Allah Almighty says:

“O you who believe, do not betray Allah and the Messenger and
do not knowingly betray your trusts.” (8:27)

Al-Wahidi said, “This ayat was revealed about Abu Lubaba ‏أت‎
‎when the Messenger of Allah % sent him to the Banu Qurayza
while he was besieging them, and his family and children were
among them. They said, ‘Abu Lubaba, what do you think will hap-
pen to us if we submit to the judgement of Sa‘d?’ Abu Lubaba
pointed to his throat, meaning ‘Slaughter. Do not do it.’ That was
treachery on his part towards Allah and the Messenger. Abu
Lubaba # said, ‘My feet did not move from where I had been
standing before I realised that I had betrayed Allah and His
Messenger.”

Ibn ‘Abbas #2 said, “The “trusts” are the actions which Allah
has imposed on His slaves,” meaning the acts He has made obliga-
tory for them. Al-Kalbi said, “As for treachery towards Allah and
His Messenger, it means disobeying them. As for betraying the
trust, everyone is entrusted with what Allah has made obligatory
on him. If he wishes, he can betray it. If he wishes, he can carry it
out. No one can see it except Allah Almighty.”

Allah Almighty says: “A//ah does not guide the deviousness of
traitors.” (12:52) In other words, He does not guide anyone who
betrays His trust. Such people will be disgraced in the end by
being deprived of guidance. The Prophet # said, “There are three
signs of the hypocrite: when he speaks, he lies; when he promises,
he breaks it; and when he is trusted, he betrays that trust.” The
Messenger of Allah % said, “Someone untrustworthy has no faith
and someone who cannot keep a covenant has no deen.”

Treason is always ugly, but some kinds of treachery are worse
than others. Someone who betrays you by cheating you of a penny
is not the same as someone who betrays you in respect of your
family and your property and commits terrible things. The
Messenger of Allah # said, “Return every trust to the one who
entrusted you with it, and do not betray anyone who has betrayed

128
Treachery

you.” We also find in hadith: “A believer may be naturally disposed
to everything except treachery and lying.” The Messenger of Allah
% said, “Allah Almighty says, ‘I am the third of two partners as
long as neither of them betrays his friend.””

Regarding this matter we are also told: “The first thing to be
removed from people will be trustworthiness and the last to
remain will be the prayer. Many a person who prays will gain no
good from it.” The Messenger of Allah # said, “Beware of treach-
ery. It is an evil companion.”

Ibn Mas‘ud @ said: “On the Day of Rising someone with a
trust he betrayed will be brought and told, ‘Deliver your trust.’ He
will say, “Lord, how, when the world has gone?’ The form of it on
the day he accepted it will appear to him in the bottom of Hell,
and he will be told, ‘Go in and take it out.’ He will descend into it
and carry it on his shoulder, and it will be heavier than the moun-
tains of this world, until he thinks that he is saved, and then it will
fall and he will fall after it forever.” Then he # said, “The prayer
is a trust. Wudu’ is a trust. Ghusl is a trust. The weight is a trust.
The measure is a trust. The greatest trust is anything left for safe-
keeping.”

O Allah, deal kindly with us and grant us Your pardon!

129
40. Reminding people of one’s charity

Allah Almighty says: “O you who believe, do not nullify your
sadaqa by demands for gratitude or insulting words.” (2:264)
According to al-Wahidi this refers to those who make people feel
indebted for gifts they give. Al-Kalbi said that it is someone who
considers his sadaga a favour for Allah and injures its recipients. In
the Sabb it is recorded that the Messenger of Allah # said: “There
are three kinds of people whom Allah will not speak to or attest to
their integrity on the Day of Rising and they will have a painful
punishment: those who wear their garment long (out of pride);
those who remind people of their charity towards them; and those
who sell their goods with a false oath.”

Another hadith says: “Three will not enter the Garden: some-
one who disrespects his parents, a habitual drinker and someone
who makes people obligated through charity.” An-Nasa’i related
this. It is reported that the Prophet # said, “Beware of reminding
people of your charity, which nullifies gratitude and erases the
reward.” Then the Messenger of Allah # recited the words of
Allah Almighty: “O you who believe, do not nullify your sadaga by
demands for gratitude or insulting words.” (2:264)

Ibn Sirin heard one man say to another, “I have been good to
you and done such-and-such and such-and-such.” [bn Sirin told
him, “Be silent. There is no good in charity when it is recounted.”

130
41. Denial of the Divine Decree

Allah Almighty says:
“We have created all things in due measure.” (54:49)

Ibn al-Jawzi said in his tafsir that there are two views about the
reason for the revelation of this ayat. One of them is that the idol-
ators of Makka went to the Messenger of Allah % to argue with
him about the Decree and this ayat was revealed. Muslim alone
transmitted this. The second view is that the bishops of Najran
went to the Messenger of Allah # and said, “Muhammad, you
claim that acts of disobedience happen by a decree but that is not
how things are.” The Prophet # said, “You are the opponents of
Allah.” So this ayat was revealed: “The evildoers are indeed misguided
and insane on the Day when they are dragged face-first into the Fire:
“Taste the scorching touch of Sagar? We have created all things in due
measure.” (54:47-49)

‘Umar ibn al-Khattab # related that the Messenger of Allah #
said: “When Allah gathers the first and last on the Day of Rising,
He will command a caller to give a call, which the first and the last
will hear, saying: ‘Where are the opponents of Allah?’ The
Qadariyya will stand and be ordered to go to the Fire. Allah will
say, “laste the scorching touch of Sagar. We have created all things in
due measure.” They are called the opponents of Allah because they
argued that it is not possible for Him to decree disobedience for
His slave and then to punish him for it.

Hisham ibn Hassan related that al-Hasan said, “By Allah, even
if a Qadari fasts until he is like a thread and then prays until he is
like a string, Allah will still drag him on his face into Sagar. Then
he will be told: ‘Taste the scorching touch of Sagar. We have created all
things in due measure.” Muslim related in his Sahib from a hadith
of Ibn ‘Umar 2 that the Messenger of Allah said, “Every thing
comes about by a decree, even powerlessness and cleverness.”
According to Ibn ‘Abbas # this means: “We created all things
with a decree and measure written in the Preserved Tablet before
they occur.”

131
Seventy Major Sins

Allah Almighty says: “diab created both you and what you do.”
(37:96) This can be understood in two ways. One is that ‘what you
do’ is a verbal noun and so the meaning is: “Allah created both you
and your actions.” The second is that it means: “Allah created you
and created the idols you make.” This ayat shows that the actions
of Allah’s slaves are created, and Allah knows best. Allah Almighty
says, “He inspired it with depravity or taqwa.” (91:8) “Inspiring” is
causing something to occur in the soul. Sa‘id ibn Jubayr said, “He
made it have its depravity or tagwa.” Ibn Zayd said, “He put that
into it by giving it success through its tagwa or ruin it through its
depravity.” Allah knows best.

The Messenger of Allah # said, “Allah is the one who is kind to
some people and inspires them to good and admits them into His
mercy. He tempts other people, ruins them, and rebukes them for
their actions although they could not have done otherwise than
fail in their test, He punishes them - and He is just. ‘He will not be
questioned about what He does, but they will be questioned.’ (21:23)”

Mu‘adh ibn Jabal # reported that the Messenger of Allah %
said, “Allah has not sent any Prophet without there being
Qadariyya and Murji‘iyya in his nation. Allah has cursed the
Qadariyya and Murji‘iyya on the tongues of seventy Prophets.”
‘Aisha # said that the Messenger of Allah 3 said, “he Qadariyya
are the Magians of this Community.” Ibn ‘Umar # narrated that
the Messenger of Allah % said, “Every nation has Magians, and the
Magians of this community are those who claim that there is no
such thing as destiny and that actions are not predetermined.” He
continued, “When I meet them, I will tell them that I am quit of
them and they are quit of me.” Then he said, “By the One who
has my soul in His hand, if one of them had had the equivalent of
Uhud in gold and spent it in the way of Allah, it would not be
accepted until he believes that both good and evil are decreed.”
Then he mentioned Jibril and his asking the Prophet #, “What is
faith?” He answered, “It is that you believe in Allah and His angels
and His Books and Messengers (and the Last Day), and that you
believe in the decree, both good and bad.”

His words, “that you believe in Allah” is affirmation that He —
glory be to Him and exalted is He — exists and is characteristed by
the attributes of Majesty and Perfection, free of the attributes of

132
Denial of the Decree

imperfection; and that he is Single, Eternal, Creator of all crea-
tures and disposes of them as He wishes, and He does as He wish-
es in His kingdom.

Faith in the angels means affirming that they are slaves of
Allah.

“They are honoured slaves. They do not precede Him in speech,
and they act on His command. He knows what is in front of them
and what is behind them. They only intercede on behalf of those
with whom He is pleased, and even they are apprehensive for fear
of Him.” (21:26-28)

Faith in the Messengers means affirming that they speak the
truth in what they report from Allah; that Allah supported them
with miracles which indicate their truthfulness; that they conveyed
the Message from Allah Almighty and made clear to those respon-
sible what Allah has commanded them to do; that they must be
revered; and that no one should differentiate between any of them.

Faith in the Last Day is affirmation of the Day of Rising and
what it involves: being brought back after death, the Resurrection,
Gathering, the Reckoning, the Balance, the Sirat; the Garden and
the Fire, which are the abode of the reward and punishment of
those who do good and those who do evil; and other things trans-
mitted on sound authority.

Faith in the Divine Decree is affirmation of what has already
been mentioned. It is what is indicated by the words of the
Almighty, “Allah created both you and what you do” (37:96) and “We
have created all things in due measure.” (54:49) An aspect of it is
expressed in the words of the Prophet # in a hadith from Ibn
‘Abbas #: “Know that if a nation united to help you, it could only
succeed in something which Allah has written for you. If they
united to harm you they could only harm you with something
which Allah has written for you. The pens (of the Divine Decree)
have been lifted and the pages are dry.”

The position of the Sa/af and later imams is that anyone who
definitely believes in these things without doubt or hesitation is

truly a believer, whether that be through definitive proofs or out
of simple faith. Allah knows best.

133
Seventy Major Sins

Section. Seventy of the Tabi‘un and the imams of the Muslims,
the Salaf and fugaha’ of the cities, agree that the swnna which the
Messenger of Allah # died following is contentment with the
Divine Decree and foreordination of Allah, submission to His
command, steadfastness under His judgement, accepting what
Allah has commanded and forbidden, sincere action for Allah,
belief in the Divine Decree, both good and evil, abandoning doubt
and debate and arguments in the deen, wiping over leather socks,
accompanying any caliph, pious or impious, in jihad, and praying
over those of the gibla (i.e. the Muslims) who have died.

Faith involves word, action and intention. It increases by obe-
dience and decreases by disobedience. The Qur’an is the uncreat-
ed Words of Allah brought down by Jibril to His Prophet
Muhammad 4%. One should be steadfast under the banner of the
ruler whether he be just or unjust. We do not rebel against our
commanders with the sword, even if they are unjust, and we do
not declare any of the people of the gib/a to be unbelievers, even if
they commit major wrong actions, unless they declare them to be
lawful. We do not attest that any of the people of the Garden will
have the Garden for any good which they have done unless the
Prophet 38 testifies to that. We refrain from commenting on any
conflict which occurred between the Companions of the
Messenger of Allah #. The best of creation after the Messenger of
Allah 3 was Abu Bakr, then ‘Umar, then ‘Uthman, and then ‘Ali,
may Allah be pleased with all of them; and we ask for mercy for all
the wives of the Prophet #8 and his children and Companions.

Point. There are certain statements which scholars say are tan-
tamount to disbelief. One is mocking any of the Names of Allah,
His command or Hs promise and threat. That constitutes disbe-
lief. If someone were to say, “If Allah were to command me to do
such-and-such, I would not do it,” it constitutes disbelief. Or if
they were to say, “If the gib/a were in this direction, I would not
pray towards it” that also constitutes disbelief. If someone is told,
“You should not abandon the prayer or Allah will punish you,” and
he replies, “If He punishes me for it in view of my illness and
hardship, He will wrong me,” that also constitutes disbelief. If
someone says, “Even if the Prophets and angels were to testify to
that, I would not believe it,” that constitutes disbelief.

134
Denial of the Decree

Certain phrases are disliked and considered objectionable, such
as: “You have no deen,” “You have no faith,” “You have no certain-
ty,” “You are impious,” You are a hypocrite,” “You are a zindiq.,”
or “You are a deviant.” ‘Those and their like are all forbidden. It is
feared for anyone who uses them that his faith will be stripped
away and he will be forever in the Fire.

We ask Allah the Gracious by His kindness to make us die as
Muslims following the Book and the Sunna. He is the Most
Merciful of the merciful.

135
42. Eavesdropping on people and seeking out
their secrets

Allah Almighty says:
“Do not spy.” (49:12)

Yahya ibn Abi Kathir said, “Spying means prying into people’s
private affairs and listening secretly to what they say. According to
some commentators spying means investigating the faults of the
Muslims and their private affairs. The ayat means: “None of you
should seek out the faults of your brother when Allah has veiled
him.” Ibn Mas‘ud 2 was told by someone, “Al-Walid ibn ‘Uqba‘s
beard was dripping with wine.” He said, “We are forbidden to spy.
If anything visible appears to us, we will punish him for it.”

The Messenger of Allah 38 said, “Whoever listens to what peo-
ple are saying when they do not want him to will have molten iron
poured into his ears on the Day of Rising.” Al-Bukhari transmit-
ted this. We seek refuge with Allah from it and ask Allah for suc-
cess in what He likes and pleases Him. He is Generous,
Magnanimous.

Warning. Slaves of Allah, death is close and exacting. Souls
which have exhausted themselves in amassing goods are in hock. It
is as if you were divested in the clutches of destruction. Slaves of
Allah, all acts of disobedience are recorded and written and the
selves are in hock for what they harvested and earned. They have
what they earned and counted against them is what they earned. O
you who are deluded by wishful thinking and false hopes and are
engaged in ugly actions, not knowing who you are fighting! You
who are like a body without a heart, are you content to miss what
is truly good? O you whose life is rapidly disappearing, travelling
at racehorse speed, you are white-haired! Have you not yet recog-
nised the true marvels!

136
43. Carrying tales

This means carrying tales from one person to another in order
to cause disharmony between them. It is unlawful by the consen-
sus of the Muslims. There are legal proofs in the Book and the
Sunna which demonstrate its unlawfulness. Allah Almighty says:

“Do not obey any vile swearer of oaths, any backbiting slander-
monger.” (68:10-11)

It is reported in both Sahih collections that the Messenger of Allah
# said, “A tale-bearer will not enter the Garden.” According to
one hadith the Messenger of Allah # passed by two graves and
said, “They are being punished; and they are not being punished
for anything that seems much, although it is in fact a great deal.
One of them used not to free himself of his urine, and the other
used to carry tales.” Then he took a fresh branch, split it into two
pieces, and stuck one half in each grave. He said, “Perhaps it will
lighten the punishment for them as long as they have not dried

”

up.

His words “they are not being punished for anything that
seems much” mean that they did not think it much. Hence in one
variant he said, “but it is in fact a great deal.” Abu Hurayra #
reported that the Messenger of Allah % said, “You will find that
the worst people are the two-faced, who show one face to these
and another face to those. Whoever has two tongues in this world,
Allah will give him two tongues of fire on the Day of Rising.” The
meaning of “someone with two tongues” is that they say one thing
to one person and another thing to a different person.

Imam Abu Hamid al-Ghazali said, “It is mostly applied to
someone who carries the words someone has said about someone
else to the person he talked about and says, ‘So and so says such
and such about you.’ But tale-bearing is not confined to that. It is
defined as disclosing anything that a person would dislike to be
disclosed, whether through words, writing, gestures, allusion or
any other way, and whether it involves a fault or something else.
The real meaning of tale-bearing is to broadcast a secret and
reveal anything that another person would not want to be dis-

137
Seventy Major Sins

closed. People should be silent about anything that they see of the
states of people except when there is a benefit for the Muslims in
reporting it or when it is done to avert a bad action.”

He also said: “When someone tells another that a certain per-
son has said anything about him, six things are incumbent upon
the person addressed. Firstly, he should not believe him, because
tale-bearers are by definition impious. Secondly, he should tell
him not to do that and advise him that his action is wrong.
Thirdly, he should dislike him for the sake of Allah Almighty. It is
mandatory to dislike for the sake of Allah. Fourthly, he should not
think anything evil about the person who was quoted, in accor-
dance with the words of the Almighty: “4void too much suspicion:
some suspicion is a crime.” (49:12) Fifthly, he must not carry out any
kind of investigation to see if what he was told is true. The
Almighty says: “Do not spy.” (49:12) Sixthly, he should be unhappy
about the tale-bearing, which is forbidden, and so certainly must
not pass it on to anyone else.”

It is reported that a man mentioned to ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz
something about a man and ‘Umar said, “If you wish, we will look
into what you say. If you are speaking the truth, you are one of the
people of this ayat, ‘If a deviator brings you a report, scrutinize it.’
(49:6) If you are lying, then you are one of the people of this ayat,
‘any backbiting slandermonger.’ (68:10) If you wish, we will pardon
you.” He said, ‘Pardon me, Amir al-Mu’minin! I will not do it
again!”

Al-Hasan al-Basri said, “If anyone tells you a story about some-
one else, know that he will also tell a story about you to someone
else. There is a saying about this: ‘Whoever transmits to you
transmits from you, so beware.”” It is related that one of the righ-
teous early Muslims visited a brother of his and mentioned to him
something about one of his brothers which he disliked. He told
him, “My brother, you have committed slander and made me
commit three crimes: you have made me dislike my brother, you
have distracted my heart by it, and you have made me suspect
you.” One of the righteous early Muslims used to say, “Whoever
tells that your brother is abusing you is himself abusing you.” A
man went to ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn and said, “So-and-so abused you
and said such-and-such about you.” He said, “Take me to him.”

138
Carrying tales

‘Ali went with the man, who was thinking that he was going to
defend himself. But when he reached him, ‘Ali said, “My brother,
if what you said about me is true, may Allah forgive me. If what
you said about me is false, may Allah forgive you.”

It is said about the words of Allah Almighty, “The bearer of fire-
wood” (111:4), alluding to the wife of Abu Lahab, that she used to
carry tales. Tales are called firewood because they are the cause of
enmity, as firewood is used to kindle fire. It is said that the action
of tale-bearers is worse than the action of Shaytan, because the
action of Shaytan is by hidden whispering while the action of tale-
bearing is face to face.

It is related that a man saw a boy being sold and was told that
he had no fault other than tale-bearing. He thought that unimpor-
tant and bought him. After being with him some days, the boy said
to the wife of his master, “My master wants to marry another wife
as well as you or divorce you. He does not love you. If you want
him to be kind to you and abandon what he has resolved to do,
when he sleeps, you should take a razor, cut some hairs from his
beard and give them to me.” The woman’s heart was filled with
anxiety and she said to herself, “Yes, I will do that,” and decided to
do that the next time her husband was asleep.

Then the boy went to the husband and said, “My master, my
mistress, your wife, has taken a lover other than you and has fallen
in love with him and wants to be free of you. She has resolved to
murder you toriight. If you do not believe me, then pretend to be
asleep in the night and see if she comes to you with something in
her hand, intending to cut your throat with it.” His master believed
him. In the night, the woman came with the razor to shave the
hairs from under his beard. The man was pretending to sleep and
said to himself, “By Allah, the slave was telling the truth.”

When the woman lowered the razor towards his throat, he
seized it from her and killed her with it. Her family came and saw
that she had been murdered and so they killed him. In this way a
destructive blood feud was brought about between the two fami-
lies because of the malevolent mischief of that ill-fated lad. That is
why Allah called tale-bearer a deviator in His words: “If a deviator
brings you a report, scrutinize it carefully, lest you attack people in igno-
rance and so come to greatly regret what you have done.” (49:6)

139
44. Cursing

The Prophet 3 said, “Cursing a believer is like killing him.”
Al-Bukhari transmitted it. In Sahih Muslim we find that the
Messenger of Allah 25 said, “Cursers will have no intercessors or
witnesses on the Day of Rising.” The Prophet 3 said, “A true per-
son should not be a curser.” The Messenger of Allah & said,
“When anyone curses anything, the curse rises to heaven and the
doors of heaven are locked against it. Then it descends to the
earth and its doors are locked against it. Then it goes right and left
and does not find any place to go and it returns to what was cursed
if it deserved it. If not, it returns to the one who uttered it.”

‘Imran ibn Husayn # said, “While the Messenger of Allah #
was on one of his journeys, a woman of the Ansar was riding a she-
camel and she was annoyed and cursed it. The Messenger of Allah
# heard that and said, “Take what is on it and leave it. It is
accursed.” ‘Umar #: said, “I used to see it walking among people,
and no one would stop it.” Muslim transmitted this.

Section on the permissibility of cursing those who disobey
Allah in a general way without naming specific individuals

Allah Almighty says:
“The curse of Allah is on the wrongdoers.” (11:18)

“Then let us make earnest supplication and call down the
curse of Allah upon those who lie.” (3:61)

It is reliably reported that the Messenger of Allah # said, “Allah
has cursed those who consume usury and those who pay it, those
who witness it and those who record it.” He said, “Allah has
cursed the one who makes a woman lawful for remarriage and the
one for whom it is done.” He said, “Allah has cursed the woman
who attaches false hair and the one who has it attached, the tattoo-
er and the one tattoed, and the one who plucks hair between the
eyebrows and the one who has it plucked.”

140
Cursing

The Messenger of Allah 38 cursed women who scream in afflic-
tion, women who shave off their hair in affliction, and women who
tear their clothes in affliction. The Prophet # cursed those who
make images. He cursed those who change property-line markers.
And he said ‏يه‎ “Allah curses anyone who curses his parents and
He curses anyone who insults own his mother.” We find in the
Sunan that he also said 3%, “Allah has cursed people who misguide
a blind person from the right direction. Allah has cursed anyone
who has sex with an animal. Allah has cursed anyone who commits
the action of the people of Lut.”

He cursed people who go to soothsayers. He cursed women
who wail and those around them. He cursed anyone who leads a
group of people when they dislike him. He cursed women who
spend the night with their husband angry at them. He cursed a
man who hears “Come to prayer, Come to success,” and then does
not respond. He cursed the one who slaughters in the name of
other than Allah. He cursed thieves. He cursed anyone who reviles
the Companions. He cursed effeminate men and masculine
women. He cursed men who resemble women and women who
resemble men. He cursed women who wears men’s clothes and
men who wears women’s clothes. He cursed anyone who sows evil
between a woman and her husband or a slave and his master. He
cursed anyone who has sex with a menstruating woman or in a
woman’s anus.

He cursed anyone who points anything made from steel at his
brother. He cursed anyone who refuses to pay zakat. He cursed
anyone who lies about who his father is. He cursed anyone who
brands an animal on its face. He cursed anyone who intercedes or
is interceded for when one of the udud of Allah is concerned after
the case has reached the judge. He cursed any woman who leaves
her house without her husband’s permission. He cursed anyone
who abandons commanding right and forbidding wrong when he
is able to do so. He cursed the passive and active participants in
sodomy. He cursed wine, those who drink, pour, ask for, sell, buy
or carry it, and the one for whom it is carried, and those who use
the proceeds of selling wine and those who direct people to it.

141
The Prophet # said, “Six are cursed by Allah and by every
Prophet whose supplication is answered: anyone who denies the
Decree of Allah, anyone who adds to the Book of Allah, anyone
given power who exalts those Allah has abased and abases those
Allah has exalted, anyone who makes lawful what Allah has made
unlawful, anyone who makes it lawful to treat my family in a way
Allah has forbidden, and anyone who abandons my Sunna.”

He cursed anyone who commits adultery with his neighbour’s
wife. He cursed masturbators. He cursed anyone who marries
both a mother and her daughter. He cursed anyone who gives
bribes to gain a favourable judgement, the one bribed, and their
go-between. He cursed anyone who conceals knowledge. He
cursed people who hoard. He cursed anyone who disappoints a
Muslim, as in other words does not help him. He cursed a ruler
whpodoes not have mercy. He cursed men and women who refrain
from marriage. He cursed anyone who travels in the wilderness
alone.

We seek refuge with Allah from His curse and that of His
Messenger!

Section. Know that cursing a protected Muslim is forbidden
by consensus of the Muslims. It is permitted to curse people who
possess bad qualities in general, for instance by saying: “Allah
curses wrongdoers,” “Allah curses unbelievers,” “Allah curses the
Jews and Christians,” “Allah curses the impious,” “Allah curses
umage-makers,” and other such things. As for cursing a particular
individual among those who are guilty of specific acts of disobedi-
ence, like a particular Jew or Christian, or someone unjust, or a
fornicator, thief or usurer, the literal text of the badiths above sug-
gest that it is not forbidden. Al-Ghazali indicates that it is permit-
ted in respect of people whom we know to have died as unbeliev-
ers, such as Abu Lahab, Abu Jahl, Pharoah, Haman and their like.
He said, “The object of a curse is to distance someone from the
mercy of Allah; but we do not how this or that impious person or
unbeliever will end up.”

He said, “As for those whom the Messenger of Allah 3 cursed
himself, as when he said, ‘O Allah, curse Ra‘l, Dhakwan, ‘Asiyya:

142
Cursing

they disobeyed Allah and His Messenger,’ those are tribes of
desert Arabs and the Prophet #% knew that they would die unbe-
lievers.” He said, ”Praying for evil to befall a person is close to a
curse, even against a wrongdoer, such as when a person says, “May
Allah not mend his body,” “May Allah not heal him,” and other
such things. Doing that is wrong. The same applies to cursing any
animal or inanimate object. All that is wrong.” Some scholars say
that if one curses anyone who does not deserve to be cursed he
should hasten to add, “if he deserves it”.

Section. It is permitted for those who enjoin what is right and
forbid what is wrong, and for every teacher, to say to someone he
is addressing during the course of his work, “Woe to you!” or
“How weak you are in understanding!” or “How lacking in self-
reflection!” “O self-wronger!” or other such things if it is true; but
there must be no expression in it which could be conveyed as clear
slander, or injurious allusion, even if it is true. It is permitted pro-
vided its aim is simply discipline, or rebuke, or words to benefi-
cially affect the hearer’s self. Allah knows best.

O Allah, divest our hearts of connection to any but You! Make
us to be among those You love and who love You. Forgive us, our
parents and all Muslims!

143
45. Perfidy and breaking promises
Allah Almighty says:

“Fulfil your contracts. Contracts will be questioned about.”
(17:34)

Az-Zajjaj said, “All that Allah has commanded or forbidden is a
contract. Allah Almighty also says: “You who believe, fulfil your con-
tracts.” (5:1) According to al-Wahidi Ibn ‘Abbas # said about this,
“The word ‘contracts’ here refers to what Allah has made lawful
and unlawful, what He has imposed and explained in the Qur’an.”
Ad-Dahhak said, “The word ‘contracts’ refers to anything whose
fulfilment Allah has imposed on this community as regards what is
lawful and unlawful, obligatory prayers, shares of inheritance and
contracts.” According to Mugatal ibn Hayyan it means, “Fulfil the
contracts which Allah has made with you in the Qur’an in respect
of what He has ordered you to do and forbidden you to do, and
the contracts which are between you and the idolators and
between Muslims.” Allah knows best.

The Prophet % said, “Whoever has four characteristics is a
pure hypocrite, and whoever has one of them has an aspect of
hypocrisy until he gives it up: whenever he is trusted, he betrays
his trust; whenever he speaks, he lies; when he makes an agree-
ment, he breaks it; when he quarrels, he speaks falsely.” This is
transmitted in both Sahih collections.

The Messenger of Allah # said, “Every traitor will have a ban-
ner on the Day of Rising which reads “This one betrayed So-and-
so.” The Messenger of Allah # said, “Allah Almighty says, ‘TI will
be the antagonist of three people on the Day of Rising: a man who
makes a covenant in My name and then betrays it; a man who sells
a free man and then consumes the money he gets for him; and a
man who hires an employee and gets full work from him and then
does not pay him his wages.” Al-Bukhari transmitted this.

The Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Anyone who reneges on his
duty of obedience will meet Allah on the Day of Rising with no
evidence to defend him. Anyone who dies without having given

144
Perfidy

the oath of allegiance will die the death of the Jahiliyya.” Muslim
transmitted this. The Messenger of Allah # said, “Whoever wants
to be far from the Fire and enter the Garden should die believing
in Allah and the Last Day and should treat people as he would like
to be treated by them. Whoever gives allegiance to a leader should
give him both his hand and his heart and should obey him if he
can. If anyone contends with (that leader), he should be behead-
ed.”

145
46. Believing soothsayers and astrologers

Allah Almighty says:

“Do not pursue what you have no knowledge of. Hearing, sight
and hearts will all be questioned.” (17:36)

According al-Wahidi’s commentaary on these words of the
Almighty, al-Kalbi said, “Do not speak about something you have
no knowledge of.” Qatada said, “Do not say, ‘I heard’ if you did
not hear, or ‘I saw’ if you did not see, or ‘I know’ if you do not
know.” According to al-Walibi, Ibn ‘Abbas #: said, “Allah will ask
people about what they were charged to do. This impugns looking
at what is not lawful, listening to what is forbidden and desiring
what is not permitted. Allah knows best.”

Allah Almighty says:

“He is the Knower of the Unseen and does not divulge His
Unseen to anyone except a Messenger with whom He is well

pleased.” (72:26-27)

According to Ibn al-Jawzi: “The Knower of the Unseen is
Allah Almighty alone with no partner in His kingdom, and He
only informs any Messenger with whom He is pleased about
unknown aspects of His Unseen because a proof of the truthful-
ness of the Messengers lies in their reporting about the Unseen.”
This is an indication that anyone who claims that the stars give
knowledge of the Unseen is an unbeliever, and Allah knows best.

The Messenger of Allah 3 said, “Anyone who goes to a diviner
or soothsayer and believes what he says has disbelieved in what
was sent down to Muhammad.” We find in the two Sahih collec-
tions that Zayd ibn Khalid a said: “The Messenger of Allah % led
us in the Subh prayer after a rainy night. When he finished, he
faced the people and said, ‘Do you know what your Lord has
said?’ They said, ‘Allah and His Messenger know best.’ He said:
“This morning My slaves have become divided into believers and
unbelievers. Those who say, “We had rain by the favour and
mercy of Allah” believe in Me and not in the stars. Those who say

146
Believing in soothsayers and astrologers

that it was because of a certain star, disbelieve in Me and believe in
the star.”””

Scholars say that if a Muslim says, “We had rain through the
rising of such-and-such a star,” meaning that its rising was what
brought the rain into existence, then he is an unbeliever or an
apostate without doubt. If he means that it is a sign of the descent
of rain and that rain descends at this sign but it descends by the
action of Allah in His creation, he is not an unbeliever. Scholars
disagree about whether it is disliked. The best view is that it is dis-
liked because it is one of the expressions of disbelief.

The Messenger of Allah # said, “If someone goes to a diviner
and believes what he says, his prayer will not be accepted for forty
days.” Muslim related it. ‘Aisha said, “Some people asked the
Messenger of Allah ‏يه‎ about soothsayers, and he said, ‘It is noth-
ing.’ They asked, ‘Messenger of Allah, did he not say such-and-
such?’ The Messenger of Allah 3 said, “That true word was heard
by a jinn who repeated it in the ear of his friend and mixed a hun-
dred lies with it.’” This is transmitted in both Sahih collections.

‘Nisha ¥ reported: “I heard the Messenger of Allah % say,
“The angels descend in the mists, which are the clouds, and men-
tion that something has been decreed in heaven. A shaytan eaves-
drops, hears it and then reveals it to the soothsayers, and they add
a hundred lies of their own making to it.”” Al-Bukhari related this.

Qabisa ibn Abi al-Makhariq # related that he heard the
Messenger of Allah % say, “Divining, birds and reading paths of
flight are part of idol worship.” Abu Dawud related it; and
explained that reading paths involves holding birds to ascertain
good or bad omens by their flight. If they fly to the right, it
denotes good luck. If they fly to the left, it denotes bad luck.” Ibn
‘Abbas # related that the Messenger of Allah % said, “Anyone
who plucks a branch of astrology has plucked a branch of sorcery.
Whatever else of it he learns adds to it.” ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib 2 said,
”A soothsayer is a sorcerer, and a sorcerer is an unbeliever.” We
ask Allah for protection in this world and the Next.

147
47. A wife disobeying her husband

Allah Almighty says:

“If there are women whose disobedience you fear, you may admon-
ish them, refuse to sleep with them, and then beat them. But if
they obey you, do not look for a way to punish them. Allah is All-
High, Most Great.” (4:34)

According to al-Wahidi: “The word ‘disobedience’ (nushuz)
here refers to a wife’s disobedience to her husband. It means
putting herself above him in a disagreement.” ‘Ata’ said, “It means
trying to harm him, deny herself to him and to cease to obey
him.” The words ‘admonish them’ mean by the Book of Allah, and
mean reminding them of what Allah has commanded them to do.
Ibn ‘Abbas ‏عه‎ said that “refuse to sleep with them” means turning
one’s back on one’s wife in bed and not speaking to her. Ash-Sha‘bi
and Mujahid said, “It means to shun her bed and not sleep with
her.” “Beat them” means with a blow that is not hard. Ibn ‘Abbas
sz said that it means discipline such as a blow. A husband can deal
with his wife’s disobedience in the way Allah has allowed him
which is mentioned in this ayat. Ibn ‘Abbas 2 also said, “Do not
look for reasons to punish them.”

In the two Sahih collections we find that the Messenger of
Allah # said, “If a man calls his wife to his bed and she does not
come, the angels curse her until morning.” One version has: “If he
spends the night angry with her, the angels curse her until morn-
ing.” The two Sahih collections also contain this hadith: “When a
woman spends the night shunning the bed of her husband the
One who is in heaven is angry with ber until her husband is
pleased with her.” Jabir 2 related that the Prophet # said, “Three
will not have their prayer accepted by Allah and no good action of
theirs will rise to heaven: a runaway slave until he returns to his
masters and surrenders himself to them, a woman whose husband
is angry with her until he is pleased with her, and a drunkard until
he is sober.”

148
A wife disobeying her husband

Al-Hasan said that it is related that someone heard the Prophet
% say, “The first things a woman will be asked about on the Day
of Rising are her prayer and her husband.” Another hadith states:
The Messenger of Allah 38 said, “It is not lawful for a woman who
believes in Allah and the Last Day to fast when her husband is
present without his permission, or to give permission for anyone
to enter his house except with his permission.” Al-Bukhari trans-
mitted it. That applies only to voluntary fasting. She may not fast
without his permission because of his right over her.

The Prophet # said, “If I had commanded anyone to prostrate
to anyone, I would have commanded a woman to prostrate to her
husband.” At-Tirmidhi relates it. The aunt of Husayn ibn Mihsan
wz said that when she mentioned her husband to the Prophet # he
said, “See are where you are in relation to him. He is your Garden
and your Fire.” An-Nasa’i transmitted this. ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Amr a
reported that the Prophet 3 said, “Allah will not look at a woman
who is not grateful to her husband in a situation when she could
not manage without him.” It is also reported that he % said,
“When a woman leaves the house of her husband, the angels curse
her until she returns or repents.” The Prophet # also said, “If a
woman dies while her husband is pleased with her, she will enter
the Garden.”

It is mandatory for a woman to seek to please her husband and
avoid his anger, and not to refuse him when he wants her, accord-
ing to the words of the Prophet 3: “When a man calls his wife to
his bed she should go to him, even if she is at the oven.” Scholars
have said, “Unless she has the excuse of menstruation or past-par-
tum bleeding, for then it is not lawful for her to go to him, or for
the man to ask that of her. He may not have sex with her until she
has had a ghus/, in accordance with the words of Allah Almighty:
“Keep apart from women in menstruation and do not approach them
until they have purified themselves” (2:222): in other words, “do not
have sex with them until they have purified themselves.”

A woman should not dispose of her husband’s property except
with his permission, nor should she criticise his appearance. Al-
Asma‘i said, “A bedouin woman visited a beautiful woman who
had an ugly husband and asked her, ‘How could you be happy to

be married to someone like this?’ She said, ‘Listen, you! Perhaps

149
Seventy Major Sins

he was good with respect to what is between him and Allah His
Creator and Allah made me his reward. Perhaps I was bad and He
made him my punishment.”

‘Misha ‏فك‎ said, “Company of women, if you knew the right
your husbands have over you, you would wipe the dust off your
husband’s feet with your cheeks.” The Prophet % said, “Those of
your women who are the people of the Garden are those who are
loving and who, when their husbands are hurt or in pain, go to
them and put their hands in theirs and say, ‘I will not go to sleep
until you feel better.”

Section on the excellence of a woman who obeys her hus-
band and the severity of the punishment of a disobedient
wife

A woman who fears Allah Almighty should strive to obey Allah
and obey her husband and seek to please him, as he is her Garden
or her Fire according to the words of the Prophet #: “Any woman
who dies while her husband pleased with her will enter the
Garden.” In another hadith we find: “If a woman prays her five
prayers, fasts the month (of Ramadan), and obeys her husband, she
will enter the Garden by whichever gate of the Garden she wish-
es.”

The Prophet % said, “I looked in the Fire and I saw that most
of its inhabitants were women. That was because of their lack of
obedience to Allah and His Messenger and their husbands and
their great concern with self-adornment.” Self-adornment means
that, when she wants to go out, she puts on her most splendid gar-
ments, beautifies herself and goes out to attract people. Even if she
is safe in herself, people are not safe from her. That is why the
Prophet 3 said, “A woman is a private part. When she leaves her
house, Shaytan looks at her.” In another badith we find: “A woman
is a private part, so keep her in the house. When a woman goes
out and her family ask her, ‘Where are you going?’ and she says,
“To visit an invalid or attend a funeral,’ Shaytan keeps on at her
until she leaves the house. A woman cannot seek the pleasure of
Allah in any better way than by staying in her house, worshipping
her Lord and obeying her husband.”

150
A wife disobeying her husband

‘Ali 2 asked his wife Fatima w, “Fatima, what is best for a
woman?” She answered, “That she not see men and they not see
her.” ‘Ali #2 used to say, “Are you not ashamed? Are you not jeal-
ous? Some of you let their wives go out among men so that they
look at the men and the men look at them.” One day while ‘Aisha
w and Hafsa & were sitting with the Prophet 2 Ibn Umm
Maktum x entered. He was blind. The Prophet % said, “Veil
yourselves from him.” They said, “Messenger of Allah, is he not
blind so that he cannot see us or recognise us?” The Prophet #
replied, “Are you blind so that you do not see him?” Mu‘adh ibn
Jabal # reported that the Messenger of Allah % said, “No woman
harms her husband in this world without his wife among the
houris saying, ‘Do not harm him. May Allah fight you! Woe to the
woman who disobeys her husband.”

Section: While a woman is commanded to obey her husband
and seek to please him, her husband is also commanded to treat
her well and be kind to her, to put up with any bad character or
other defect she may display, and to give her her due with respect
to maintenance, clothing and good companionship, conforming to
the words of Allah Almighty: “Live together with them correctly and
courteously” (4:19), and by the words of the Prophet %#: “You are
instructed to be good to women. You have a right over your
women and your women have a right over you. The right they are
due is that you be good to them with respect to clothing and feed-
ing them; and the right you are due from them is that they not
allow anyone you dislike into their private quarters and not allow
anyone you dislike into your homes at all.”

The Prophet # said, “The best of you is the one who is best to
his family;” and in one variant: “The best of you is the one who is
kindest to his family.” The Messenger of Allah 3 was very kind to
women. The Prophet % said, “If a man is patient with the bad
character of his wife, Allah will give him a reward like the one He
gave to Ayyub # for bearing his affliction. If a woman is patient
with the bad character of her husband, Allah will give the reward
of the like the one He gave to Asiya, the daughter of Muzaham,
the wife of Pharaoh.”

151
Seventy Major Sins

It is related that a man went to ‘Umar # to complain about his
wife’s character and stood at his door waiting for him to come out.
He heard ‘Umar’s wife nagging him with her tongue, arguing with
him, while Umar remained silent and did not answer her. So the
man left saying, “If this is the state of ‘Umar with all his severity
and firmness, and he is the Avzir al-Mu’minin, what about me?”
‘Umar came out and saw him turning away from his door and
called out to him saying, “What do you need, my man?” He
answered, “Amir al-Mu’minin, | came to you to complain about
my wife’s bad character and her nagging me, and then I heard your
wife doing the same, so I turned back and said, ‘If this is the situa-
tion of the Amir al-Mu’minin with his wife, what can I say about
mine?” ‘Umar said, “My brother, I put up with it for the rights I
owe her: she cooks my food, bakes my bread, washes my clothes
and nurses my children. She is not in fact required to do any of
that. Through her my heart is stilled and protected from the
hbaram. So 1 put up with that from her.” The man said, “Air al-
Mu’minin, my wife is also like that.” ‘Umar said, “Put up with it,
brother. It is but a short period of time.”

It is related that a righteous man had a brother in Allah who
was also a righteous man, and whom he used to visit once a year.
He came to visit him and knocked at his door. The man’s wife
asked, “Who is it?” He answered, “Your husband’s brother in
Allah. I have come to visit him.” She said, “He has gone to get
firewood. May Allah not bring him back or keep him safe!” and
she began to criticise him. While he was standing at the door, his
brother came from the direction of the mountains with a bundle
of firewood on the back of a lion which he was driving before him.
He came and greeted his brother and welcomed him. He entered
the house and put the firewood inside. He told the lion, “Go, may
Allah bless you.” ‘Chen he brought his brother in; and all the time
his wife was criticising him but he did not reply to her. Then he
ate something with his brother and then bade him farewell. The
man left amazed at the patience of his brother with that woman.

The following year he went to visit his brother again, as was his
custom, and knocked at the door. His wife asked, “Who is at the
door?” He answered, “The brother in Allah of your husband, so-
and-so.” She said, “Welcome to you. Make yourself comfortable.

152
A wife disobeying her husband

He will soon come, Allah willing, safe and sound.” He was amazed
at the softness of her words and manners. When his brother came
carrying firewood on his own back, he was also amazed. He came
and greeted him, entered the house and admitted him. The wife
brought some food for them and began to pray for them in a gen-
tle voice. When he was about to leave him, he said, “My brother,
will you tell me about something if I ask you?” He said, “What is
it, my brother?” He said. “Last year I came to you and heard the
words of a woman with a coarse tongue and no manners, criticis-
ing you continually, and I saw you come from the mountains with
firewood on the back of a lion which was subservient to you. This
year I found a woman who spoke with kind words and without
criticism; but I saw you come carrying the firewood on your back.
Why is that?” He replied, “My brother, that ill-tempered wife of
mine died. I was patient with her character and what she dis-
played, and endured the hardship, and so Allah subjected to me
the lion you saw to carry the firewood for me because of my
patience with her. When she died, I married this righteous woman
and I have found tranquillity with her — and so I am cut off from
the lion and have to carry firewood on my own back, because of
the peace of mine I enjoy with this blessed obedient woman.”

We ask Allah to provide us with patience in what He loves and
pleases Him. He is Generous, Magnanimous.

153
48. Making images on clothes, walls, stones,
coins and all things, whether it be in wax, paste,
iron, copper, wool, or anything else

Allah Almighty says:

“As for those who abuse Allah and His Messenger, Allab’s curse is
on them in this world and the Next World. He has prepared a
humiliating punishment for them.” (33:57)

‘Ikrima said, “This means those who make images.” Ibn ‘Umar
# reported that the Messenger of Allah ‏يه‎ said, “Those who make
images will be punished on the Day of Rising. They will be told,
‘Bring what you created to life.” This is transmitted in both Sahih
collections.

‘Nisha w said, “The Messenger of Allah % came back from a
journey and I had put up a curtain with images on it over an alcove
of mine. When the Messenger of Allah % saw it his face changed
colour and he said ‘‘Aisha, the people with the worst punishment
from Allah on the Day of Rising will be those who make things
like Allah’s creation.” ‘Aisha ve said, “So I cut it up and made two
cushions from it.” This is transmitted in both Sahib Collections.

Ibn ‘Abbas # reported, “I heard the Messenger of Allah 3% say,
‘Every image maker shall be in the Fire. Every image he made will
be given a soul and he will be punished by it in the fire of Hell.”
This is transmitted in both Sahih collections. Ibn ‘Abbas also
reported that he heard the Messenger of Allah 3% say, “Anyone
who makes an image in this world will be obliged to blow a spirit
into it on the Day of Rising, and he will never be able to do that.”
The Prophet #% said, “Allah Almighty says, ‘Who does more
wrong that someone who tries to create as I create? Let them cre-
ate a grain or create an ant.’” This is transmitted in both Sahih
Collections.

The Prophet 3 said, “A shape from the Fire will shoot up from
it on the Day of Rising and say, ‘I have been entrusted with three:
all who called on another god with Allah, every stubborn tyrant
and every image-maker.” (at-Tirmidhi) The Messenger of Allah %

154
Making images

also said, “The angels do not enter a house in which there is a dog
or an image.” This is transmitted in the two Sahih collections. We
find in the Suman of Abu Dawud that ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib narrated
that the Messenger of Allah % said, “The angels do not enter a
house in which there is a dog, an image or anyone in janaba.”

According to al-Khattabi, these words refer to angels who
descend with mercy and blessing, rather than guardian angels,
who do not leave whether someone is in janaba or not. He said
that he does not mean someone who is janaba and delays ghus/ to
the time of the prayer, but rather someone who does not have a
ghusl and with whom neglect of it becomes a habit.

‘Aisha ‏ع‎ said, “The Messenger of Allah ‏يه‎ used to sleep while
in janaba without having touched water.” What he said about dogs
applies when a dog is acquired other than for the purposes of
farming, guarding or hunting. If someone needs a dog, there is no
harm in them, Allah willing, in some cases, such as for guarding
the house when necessary. As for images which are images of liv-
ing things, whether they be in the form of statues or just drawn on
a wall or ceiling, placed on a carpet, or woven into a cloth, the
general position is that they should be avoided. All success is from
Allah.

Destroying images is mandatory for anyone who is able to
destroy them or remove them. Muslim related in his Sahih that
Hayyan ibn Husayn said, “‘Ali ibn Abi Talib # said to me, ‘Shall I
pass on to you something which the Messenger of Allah # passed
on to me? Do not leave any image without destroying it, or any
elevated grave without levelling it.”

We ask Allah for success in doing what He has made obligatory
and is pleased with. He is Generous, Magnanimous.

155
49. Slapping, wailing, tearing garments, shaving
the head, pulling out hair and lamenting loudly in
a time of affliction

We find in Sahih al-Bukhari that Abdullah ibn Mas‘ud #
reported that the Messenger of Allah % said, “Anyone who slaps
his cheeks, rips his pockets and cries out in the way that people
cried out in the time of the Jahiliyya is not one of us.” And we find
in the Sahih collections a hadith from Abu Musa al-Ash‘ari #¢ that
the Messenger of Allah # “disowns a woman who wails, who
shaves her hair or pulls it out [in grief], and a woman who tears
her clothes in affliction.” All of that is forbidden by the agreement
of scholars. It is also forbidden to dishevel one’s hair, slap one’s
cheeks, scratch one’s face or wail loudly.

Umm ‘Atiyya # said, “When we gave our oath of allegiance,
the Messenger of Allah 3 imposed on us that we should not wail.”
Al-Bukhari related it. Abu Hurayra 2 reported that the
Messenger of Allah % said, “There are two qualities which turn
people into unbelievers: impugning people’s lineage, and wailing
over the dead.” Muslim related it. Abu Sa‘id al-Khudri said that
the Messenger of Allah 3g cursed a woman who wails and anyone
who listens to her, as Abu Dawud relates. Abu Burda said, “Abu
Musa al-Ash‘ari 2: was ill and he fainted with his head in the lap
of his wife. She started wailing and he could not stop her. When
he recovered, he said, ‘I disown whatever the Messenger of Allah
% disowns. The Messenger of Allah ‏غ2‎ disowns women who wail,
who shave their hair or pull it out [in grief], and woinen who tear
their clothes in affliction.”

According to both Sahih collections, the Messenger of Allah ‏ع‎
‎said, “A dead person is punished in his grave for the wailing done
over him.” Abu Musa #: said, “There is no one who dies and then
those who are weeping over him stand and say, ‘O master! O
mountain!’ and other such things, without two angels poking him
and asking, ‘Were you like that?’” At-Tirmidhi transmitted this.

The Prophet % said, “If a wailer does not repent before she
dies, she will stand on the Day of Rising wearing trousers of tar

156
Slapping and wailing in affliction

and a shirt of scabies.” Al-Hasan said, “Two sounds are cursed:
flutes in blessing and wailing in affliction.” The Messenger of
Allah # said, “Those mourners will form two rows in the Fire and
will bark at the people of the Fire as dogs bark.” Al-Awza‘i related
that ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab 2 heard the sound of wailing and went
in with some others and started hitting those present until he
reached the professional wailer and hit her so hard that her veil
fell off. He said, “Hit her! She is a professional mourner with no
inviolability! She is not weeping in sorrow for you but is shedding
tears to take your dirhams. She harms the dead in their graves and
the living in their houses because she debars patience when Allah
commands it and commands despair when Allah debars it.”

Know that this forbidden type of mourning involves raising the
voice to a wail while recounting the good qualities of the dead per-
son. In the opinion of scholars it is forbidden to raise the voice in
excessive weeping. Weeping for the dead without lamenting or
wailing is not forbidden. We find in Sahih al-Bukbari and Sahih
Muslim from Ibn ‘Umar a that the Messenger of Allah # visited
Sa‘d ibn ‘Ubada accompanied by ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Awf, Sa‘d
ibn Abi Waqgas, and ‘Abdullah ibn Mas‘ud #2 and the Messenger
of Allah # wept. When the people saw the Messenger of Allah #
weeping, they too wept. He said, “Listen! Allah does not punish
for the tears of the eye or the sorrow of the heart; He punishes or
shows mercy on account of this.” He pointed to his tongue. We
are informed by Usama ibn Zayd #2 that the Messenger of Allah 38
said that Sa‘d # asked, “What is this, Messenger of Allah?” He
answered, “This is mercy which Allah puts in the hearts of His
slaves. Allah shows mercy to His slaves who are merciful.”

It is related in Sahih al-Bukhari from Anas # that the
Messenger of Allah #8 visited his son Ibrahim who was breathing
his last, and the eyes of the Messenger of Allah 3 filled with tears.
‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Awf @ said to him, “You, Messenger of
Allah?” He said, “Ibn ‘Awf, it is mercy.” Then he said, “The eye
weeps and the heart is sad. We only say what is pleasing to our
Lord and I am sad at your leaving, Ibrahim.”

As for the sound Aadiths that a dead person is punished for the
weeping of his family over him, they should not be taken literally
in general, but interpreted. Scholars disagree about their interpre-

157
Seventy Major Sins

tation. The most obvious position is, and Allah knows best, that it
applies only when the dead person left instructions for that type of
mourning. The followers of ash-Shafi‘i said that it is permitted
before and after death, but before it is more fitting because of the
sound hadith. When death is inevitable, no one should weep. Ash-
Shafi‘i and his followers have a text that the dislike of weeping
after death is precationary, not prohibitive; and they interpreted
the hadith “Do not weep” as expressing disapproval, and Allah
knows best.

Section. Those who wail incur this punishment and curse
because they encourage despair and discourage patience, while
Allah and His Messenger instruct people to have patience and
expectation of a reward and forbid despair and anger. Allah

Almighty says:

“O you who believe, seek help in steadfastness and the prayer.
Allah is with the steadfast. ...We will test you with something of
fear, hunger, and loss of wealth and life and fruits. But give good
news to the steadfast: those who, when disaster strikes them, say,

‘We belong to Allah and to Him we return.”” (2:153-156)

‘Aisha ‏2ف‎ related that the Messenger of Allah % said, “There is
no affliction which afflicts a believer but that by it Allah expiates
something he has done - even a thorn which pricks him.” Muslim
related this. ‘Alqaina ibn Mirthadd ibn Sabit related from his
father that the Messenger of Allah % said, “If someone suffers an
affliction, he should remember in his affliction the loss of me, for
it is the greatest of afflictions.” The Messenger of Allah % said,
“When anyone’s child dies, Allah asks His angels, ‘Have you taken
the child of My slave?’ They say, ‘He praised You and said, “To
Him we return.”’ Allah Almighty says, ‘Build a house in the
Garden for My slave, and call it the House of Praise.’” (at-
Tirmidhi) The Messenger of Allah 28 said, “Allah Almighty says,
‘When I take anyone from this world who is dear to a slave of
Mine and he expects a reward, his recompense is the Garden.” Al-
Bukhari related this.

‘The Prophet # said, “One sign that a son of Adam is destined
to be one one of the blessed in the Hereafter is contentment with

158
Slapping and wailing in affliction

what Allah has decreed. A sign that a son of Adam is destined to be
one of the wretched in the Hereafter is his anger at what Allah has
decreed.” ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab & said, “When the Angel of
Death takes the soul of a believer, he stands at the door and there
is an uproar among the people of the house. Some of them slap
their faces, some tear their hair and cry out in lamentation. The
Angel of Death says, ‘What is the point of all this anguish and dis-
may? By Allah, I do not shorten the life of any of you or take any
of your provision or wrong any of you at all. If you complain and
are angry with me, by Allah, I am following orders. If it is for your
dead, he has no choice. If it is against your Lord, then you are dis-
believers in Him. I will return again and again until none of you
are left.” The Messenger of Allah # said, “By the One Who has
my soul in His hand, if they were to see his situation and hear his
words, they would ignore their dead and weep for themselves.”

Section on consolation and condolence

‘Abdullah ibn Mas‘ud 2 said that the Prophet # said,
“Whoever consoles anyone in affliction will have a similar
reward.” At-Tirmidhi related this. Abu Burda & related that the
Prophet % told Fatima ez, “Whoever consoles a bereaved person
will be clothed in a robe of the Garden.” At-Tirmidhi related this.
‘Abdullah ibn ‘Amr ibn al-‘As ‏ع‎ said that the Messenger of Allah
% asked Fatima ‏رتك‎ “What has brought you out of your house,
Fatima?” She said, “I have come to the people of this house to
wish mercy on their dead and to console them.” ‘Amr ibn Hazm
#2 related from the Prophet 38, “If any believer consoles his broth-
er in an affliction, Allah will clothe him in robes of honour on the
Day of Rising.”

Know, may Allah have mercy on you, that offering condolences
means encouraging people to have patience and saying things to
console the friend of the deceased, alleviate his sorrow and lighten
his affliction. It is recommended because it contains commanding
what is right and forbidding what is wrong. It is part of what is
alluded to by the words of Allah Almighty: “Help each other to good-
ness and taqwa.” (5:2) This is the best evidence for expressing con-
dolences.

159
Seventy Major Sins

Know that expressing condolences involves telling people to be
steadfast, and it is recommended before and after burial.
According to the followers of of ash-Shafi‘i, it can be done from
when someone dies until three days after his burial. According to
our colleagues, it is disliked to offer condolences after more than
three days, since consolation stills the heart of the afflicted; norn-
mally the heart is stilled after three days, and one should not
renew their sorrow over the dead. That is what most of our col-
leagues say. Abu al-‘Abbas, one of our colleagues, said, “There is
no harm in consoling after three days. However you should go on
doing it, even if the time is long.” An-Nawawi said, “It is prefer-
able not to do it after three days except in two situations: when
either the consoler or the afflicted person is absent during the
burial and then returns after three days. Condolence after burial is
better than before it, because the family of the dead are usually
preoccupied with preparing the dead before that time and also
because loneliness occurs after burial, since the separation is felt
more strongly.”

The formulae of consolation are well-known. The best of them
is what is related in the two Sahih collections, where Usama ibn
Zayd #2 reported: “One of the daughters of the Prophet # sent to
the Prophet to call him and inform him that her son was dying.
The Prophet # told the messenger, ‘Return to her and tell that to
Allah belongs whatever He takes and whatever He gives.
Everything thing has a term set by Him. Tell her to be steadfast in
expectation of a reward.’” An-Nawawi said, “This hadith is one of
the greatest of the rules of Islam and contains important things
about the fundamentals, details and etiquettes of the deen, patience
in all afflictions, cares and illnesses and other things.”

The words of the Prophet %, “to Allah belongs whatever He
takes” mean that the whole world is under the ownership of Allah
and He does not take what is yours; He only takes back what He
has lent you. His words, “and what He gives” mean that whatever
He gives you is still under His ownership. It is His to do with as
He pleases. Everything has a term set by Him, so do not be dis-
tressed. If He takes it, it means that the fixed term has ended and
so it would not have been possible to delay it or advance it.

160
Slapping and wailing in affliction

Knowing this, you should be patient and expect a reward for what-
ever befalls you. Allah knows best.

Mu‘awiya ibn Ayas related from his father from the Prophet #
that he missed one of the Companions and asked about him. They
said, “Messenger of Allah, his son whom you have seen has died.”
When the Prophet # met him, he asked about his son, and the
man told him that he had died. He offered him condolences for
his loss and then asked, “Which would you prefer: to enjoy your
life with him or to come tomorrow to one of the doors of the
Garden and find that he has beaten you to it and will open it for
you?” He answered, “Prophet of Allah, I would prefer him to have
beaten me to the Garden and to open it for me.” He said, “You
have that.” Someone asked, “Prophet of Allah, is this just for him
or for all Muslims?” He answered, “For all Muslims.” (Ahmad)

Abu Musa 2 related that the Prophet % went to al-Baqi* and
went up to a woman who was weeping at a grave and said to her,
“Slave of Allah, fear Allah and be patient.” She retorted, “Slave of
Allah, Iam bereaved.” He repeated, “Slave of Allah, fear Allah and
be patient.” She said, “Slave of Allah, if you had suffered such a
loss, you would excuse me.” He repeated, “Slave of Allah, fear
Allah and be patient.” She said, “Slave of Allah, you heard me, so
now leave.” So the Messenger of Allah # left her. One of the
Muslims saw her and went and asked her, “What did the man say
to you?” She told him what he had said and how she had replied to
him. He asked her, “Did you not recognise him?” “No, by Allah,”
she replied. He said, “You stupid woman! That was the Messenger
of Allah!” She ran quickly to catch him up and said, “Messenger of
Allah, I will be patient!” He replied, “Patience is at the first blow.”
This means that patience is best shown when the affliction first
occurs. After that, solace occurs naturally.

We find this in Sahih Muslim: “The son of Abu Talha and
Umm Sulaym died. She said to her family, ‘Do not tell Abu Talha
until I have told him myself.’ When Abu Talha came she brought
him his meal, and he ate and drank. She then prepared for him
more than she used to prepare before, and he had sex with her.
When she saw that he was satisfied, she said, ‘Abu Talha, what
would you think if some people lent something to the people of a
household and then asked for what they had lent to be returned?

161
Seventy Major Sins

Can they be refused?’ He answered, ‘No.’ Umm Sulaym said,
‘Then expect a reward for your son.’ Abu Talha became angry and
said, ‘You left it until I had sullied myself to tell me about my son.
By Allah, you shall not compel me be to be patient.’ He went to
the Messenger of Allah # and told him what had happened, and
the Messenger of Allah # said, ‘Allah will bless you in your
night.”

In a hadith we find: “No one is given a better and more all-
embracing gift than patience.” (al-Bukhari) A wise man wrote to a
man who had suffered an affliction: “You have lost what you have
been afflicted with, so do not lose the compensation: the reward
for it.” Another said, “An intelligent person does on the first day
of affliction what an ignorant one does after five days.” It is well-
known that the passage of time assuages afflictions. ‘That is why
the Lawgiver commanded that the time for patience is at the first
blow.

The news reached ash-Shafi‘i that ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Mahdi
had lost a son and was very distressed about it. Ash-Shafi‘l sent to
him the following message: “My brother, console yourself in the
way you would console others, and consider ugly in your actions
what you would consider ugly in the actions of others. Know that
the sharpest afflictions are loss of happiness and deprival of a
reward. What about when they are combined and added to them
is committing a sin? Jake your portion, my brother, when it is
close by before you need to seek it when it is far away. May Allah
inspire you with patience in afflictions, and reward us and you
with the reward for it.”

A man wrote to one of his brothers to console him for his son:
“As long as he lives, a son is a source of sorrow and trial to his par-
ents. If he dies before them, he is a blessing and a mercy. Do not
grieve over the sorrow and trial you have lost, and do not waste
the blessing and mercy Allah has given you in compensation.”

Ibn ‘Abbas # said, “I heard the Messenger of Allah 3 say, ‘If
anyone of my community has two sons die before him, he will
enter the Garden.’” Look, may Allah have mercy on you, at the
blessing of offspring when they die young, male or female. Their
parents benefit from them in the Next World if they are steadfast
and expect a reward and say, “Praise be to Allah. We belong to

162
Slapping and wailing in affliction

Allah and to Him we return.” They will have what Allah Almighty
promised in His words: “Those who, when disaster strikes them, say,
‘We belong to Allah and to Him we return.” (2:156) In other words,
we are His property and He can do whatever He likes with us.

‘Thawban related that the Messenger of Allah % said, “No afflic-
tion befalls a person that is not due to one of two things: either a
wrong action which Allah only forgives through that affliction, or a
degree which Allah only made him attain by that affliction.” Umm
Salama ‏ع8‎ related that she heard the Messenger of Allah % say,
“Whoever says in affliction, ‘We belong to Allah and to Him we
return! O Allah, reward me for my affliction and give in exchange
something better than it,’ Allah will reward him and give him bet-
ter than it instead.” She said, “When Abu Salama died, I said,
‘Who could be better than Abu Salama?’ and then Allah gave me
the Messenger of Allah instead.” Muslim related it.

Ash-Sha‘bi reported that Shurayh said, “Whenever I suffer an
affliction, I praise Allah for it four times. I praise Him for it not
being worse. I praise Him for providing me with steadfastness in
it. I praise Him for giving me success in saying, ‘We return to
Hin’ for which I hope tor a reward. I praise Him for not making
the affliction in my deen.”

As for someone who becomes angry in an affliction and loudly
laments and slaps his cheeks, tears his shirt, dishevels his hair, or
shaves, cuts or tears out his hair, Allah is angry with them and
there is a curse upon them, whether it be a man or a woman. It is
also related that they are like someone armed with a spear wanting
to fight his Lord. It is related that Allah Almighty does not punish
for the tears of the eyes or the sorrow of the heart, but for what
the person suffering an affliction says with his tongue, 1.e. lamen-
tation and wailing. As has already been stated, a dead person is
punished in his grave for the wailing done for him. When the
wailer says, “O my support! O helper! O clothier!’, the dead per-
son will be tortured and will be asked, “Were you her support?
Were you her helper? Were you her clothier?” So wailing is
unlawful because it provokes sorrow and repels patience. It also
entails not submitting to the Divine Decree or obeying the com-

mand of Allah Almighty.
Seventy Major Sins

Story. Salih al-Murri said, “One night before Fumu‘a I was sit-
ting in a graveyard and fell asleep. I dreamt that the graves opened
up and the dead came out of them and sat in circles. Covered plat-
ters descended to them. Among them, however, there was a young
man who was being punished with various torments. I went to him
and asked, ‘Lad, why are you being punished among these peo-
ple?’ He answered, ‘Salih, by Allah, you must convey what I tell
you and fulfil the trust and have mercy on my exclusion! Perhaps
Allah Almighty will give me a way out at your hands. When I died,
my mother gathered mourners and wailers to lament my loss every
day, and I was punished for that. There was fire on my right and
my left, behind me and in front of me, because of what my mother
did. May Allah not repay her well from me!’ Then he wept so
much that I wept because of his weeping. Then he said, ‘Salih, by
Allah, you must go to her. She is in such-and-such a place. Tell her
from me: “Mother, do not torment your son! You raised me and
protected me from evils. Then when I died, you cast me into pun-
ishment! Mother, if only you could see the shackles on my neck
and the fetters on my feet and the angels of punishment hitting
me and berating me! If you could see my evil state, you would
have mercy on me. If you do not stop your lamentation and wail-
ing, Allah will judge between you and me on the Day when the
heavens split from one another and creatures emerge for judge-
ment.””

Salih continued, “I woke up in alarm and remained where I was
in a state of anxiety until dawn. In the morning, I entered the
town with no thought other than that of reaching the house of the
mother of the young lad. I asked for directions and went straight
to it. The door was blackened and the sound of wailers and
mourners could be heard from outside the house. I knocked on
the door and an old woman came out to me and asked, ‘What you
want?’ I replied, ‘I want the mother of the lad who died.’ She said,
‘What do you want with her? She is busy with her grief.’ I said,
‘Send her to me. I have a message for her from her son.’ She went
and told her. The mother came out wearing black garments and
her face was black, so much had she wept and slapped her face.
She asked me, ‘Who are you?’ I replied, ‘I am Salih al-Murri.
Yesterday I was at the graveyard with your son. I saw him being

164

Slapping and wailing in affliction

punished and he said, “My mother! You raised me and protected
me from harm, but then when I died you cast me into punishment.
If you do not stop what you are doing, Allah will judge between
you and me on the Day when the heavens split asunder.””’ When
she heard that, she fainted and fell to the ground. When she
recovered, she wept copiously and said, ‘My son is dear to me. If I
had known that about his situation, I would not have done what I
did. I repent to Allah Almighty of that.’ Then she entered her
house, drove off the mourners and put on other garments. She
brought me a bag full of dirhams and said, ‘Salih, give this as
sadaga for my son.”

Salih continued, “I bade her farewell, prayed for her and went
and gave sadaqa on behalf of her son with those dirhams. On the
next Thursday night, I went to the graveyard, as was my custom,
and fell asleep. I saw the inhabitants of the graves emerge from
their graves and sit as was their custom, and platters came to them.
That young man was laughing and happy and a platter was also
brought to him and he took it. When he saw me he came to me
and said, ‘Salih, may Allah repay you well from me. Allah has
removed the punishment from me because my mother stopped
doing what she was doing, and what she gave as sadaqga on my
behalf has come to me.’ I said, ‘What are these platters?’ He
answered, “These are the gifts of the living to the dead resulting
from the sadaga, recitation and supplication they do on their
behalf, which descend to them every Thursday night. They are
told, “This is a gift from so-and-so to you.” Return to my mother
and greet her from me and tell her, “May Allah repay you well
from me. What you gave as sadaqa for me has reached me, and you
will soon join me, so get ready.”’ I woke up later, and after some
days, went to the house of the mother of the lad. There was a bier
set up at the door. I asked, ‘Who is this for?’ They said, ‘For the
mother of the lad.’ I attended her funeral prayer and she was
buried beside her son in that cemetery. I prayed for both of them
and left.”

We ask Allah to make us die as Muslims and join us to the righ-
teous, and to protect us from the Fire. He is Generous,
Magnanimous, Compassionate, and Merciful.

165
50. Transgression

Allah Almighty says:

“There are only grounds against those who wrong people and act
as tyrants in the earth without any right to do so. Such people
will have a painful punishment.” (42:42)

The Prophet 3 said, “Allah revealed to me that you should be
humble, so no one should treat anyone unjustly and no one should
boast over anyone else.” Muslim transmitted it.

We find in a tradition, “If one mountain were to transgress
against another, Allah would turn the transgressor into dust.”

The Prophet 8 said, “There is no sin for which Allah is more
likely to impose a punishment in this world as well as what awaits
him in the Next World than transgression and cutting off ties with
kin.” (Ibn Majah and at-Tirmidhi)

Allah made the earth swallow Qarun when he transgressed
against his people and Allah Almighty reported about him: “Qarun
was from the people of Musa, but he lorded it over them” to His words,
“We caused the earth to swallow up both him and his house.” (28:76-81)

According to Ibn al-Jawzi, there are various statements about
the transgression of Qarun. One is that he gave money to a prosti-
tute to falsely accuse Musa ¥ of having had sex with her. She did
that and so Musa asked her to swear to what she had said and she
told him what Qarun had made her do. That was his transgres-
sion. This is what Ibn ‘Abbas said. The second is that he trans-
gressed by disbelief in Allah Almighty. This is what ad-Dahhak
said. The third is that it is by disbelief as Qatada said. The fourth
is that he lowered his garment a span. That is what ‘Ata’ al-
Khurasani said. According to al-Mawardi he used to serve Pharaoh
and he wronged and transgressed against the tribe of Israel.

Concerning His words “We caused the earth to swallow up both
him and his house,” when Qarun told the prostitute to slander
Musa, Musa became angry and prayed against him and Allah
revealed to him, “I have commanded the earth to obey you, so tell
it. what to do.” Musa said “Earth, take him!” It swallowed him

166
Major Sins

until his bed disappeared. When Qarun saw that, he entreated
Musa for mercy but he said, “Earth, take him!” It took him until
his feet disappeared. He continue to say, “Earth, take him!” until
he disappeared. So Allah revealed to him, “Musa, by My might
and majesty, if he had asked Me for succour, I would have given it
to him!” Ibn ‘Abbas said, “The earth swallowed him down to the
lowest earth.”

Mugatil said, “When Qarun was destroyed, the tribe of Israel
said, ‘Musa destroyed him in order to take his wealth and house,’
and so Allah swallowed up his house and wealth after three days.”

“There was no group to come to his aid against Allah:” that is,
defend him from Allah. "He was not someone who is helped:” that is,
protected from what happened to him. Allah knows best.

O Allah, when You turn towards someone, You give safety,
When You turn aside, You give safety. When You give success, you
inspire; and when You disappoint, You suspect.

O Allah, remove the darkness of our sins by the light of knowl-
edge of You and Your guidance; and make us among those to
whom You turn, that we may turn from what is other than You.
Forgive us and our children and all the Muslims! Amen.

167
51. Being overbearing towards the weak, slaves,
girls, wives, and animals

Allah Almighty commands us to be good to them in His words:

“Worship Allah and do not associate anything with Him. Be
good to your parents and relatives and to orphans and the desti-
tute, and to neighbours who are related to you and neighbours
who are not related to you, and to companions and travellers and
your slaves. Allah does not love anyone vain or boastful.” (4:36)

Ibn Mas‘ud g said, “A bedouin came to the Prophet 32 and
said, ‘O Prophet of Allah, advise me.’ He answered, ‘Do not asso-
ciate anything with Allah, even if you are cut up and burned. Do
not fail to perform the prayer at its time. It is the protection of
Allah. Do not drink wine: it is the key to every evil.” (al-Mundhiri)

Being good to your parents means showing them kindness and
gentleness and not answering them harshly or glaring at them or
raising your voice to them. Your humility towards them should be
that of a slave before his master. Being good to relatives involves
maintaining ties with them and being kind to them. Where
orphans are concerned you should be gentle to them and stroke
their heads. With respect to the poor you should spend on them
and address them in a good manner. Neighbours who are related
to you are those with whom you have kinship. You owe them both
the rights of kinship and the rights of the neighbour as well as the
rights of Islam. Neighbours who are not related to you are those
with whom you have no kinship.

‘Aisha # reported that the Prophet % said, “Jibril continued to
advise me to treat neighbours well until I thought that he would
ask me to make them my heirs.” Anas ibn Malik # reported that
the Messenger of Allah 3 said, “A neighbour will hang on to his
neighbour on the Day of Rising and say, ‘Lord, You gave prosperi-
ty to this brother of mine and deprived me. I spent the night starv-
ing and this one spent the night satisfied. Ask him why he locked
his door against me and denied me the prosperity You gave to
him.”

168
Transgression

Regarding the companions referred to in the ayat, Ibn ‘Abbas
‏ف‎ and Mujahid said that it means companions on a journey who
are owed the rights of companionship and rights of a neighbour.
The travellers referred to are those who are needy and must be
given hospitality until they reach their destination. Ibn ‘Abbas 2
said, “It means a traveller to whom you give shelter and food until
he leaves you.” Slaves should be well provided for and their mis-
takes forgiven. “Allah does not love anyone vain or boastful.” Ibn
‘Abbas 2 said that someone vain is someone who considers him-
self innately superior and does not fulfil the rights of Allah, and
someone boastful is someone who vaunts himself over other peo-
ple by reason of the honour and blessings Allah has given him.

Abu Hurayra a? reported that the Messenger of Allah 4 said,
“While a young man from those before you was walking in a robe
in a state of arrogance and boastfulness the earth swallowed him
up. He will continue to sink into it until the Last Hour arrives.”
Usama reported that he heard Ibn ‘Umar # say, “I heard the
Messenger of Allah 3 say, ‘Whoever drags his garment out of
arrogance, Allah will not look at him on the Day of Rising.”

In his final illness when the Messenger of Allah # was on the
point of leaving this world, he commanded people to safeguard
the prayer and to be good to slaves. He said, “Allah! Allah! The
prayer and those you own!” In a hadith we find: “Good ownership
is good fortune and bad ownership is misfortune.” The Messenger
of Allah # said, “Bad owners will not enter the Garden.”

Abu Mas‘ud @ said, “I was hitting a slave with a whip when I
heard a voice behind me: ‘Know, Abu Mas‘ud, that Allah has more
power than you over this slave.’ J said, ‘Messenger of Allah, I will
never strike a slave again after this.’ (In one transmission, “The
whip fell from my hand out of awe of the Messenger of Allah #3.”
In another: “I said, ‘He is freed for the sake of Allah.’ He saia, ‘If
you had not done that, the Fire would have scorched you on the
Day of Rising.’” Muslim related it.from

Muslim also related in a hadith from Ibn ‘Umar # that the
Messenger of Allah % said, “If someone flogs a slave for a punish-
able crime he did not commit or slaps him, his expiation is to free
him.” Part of a badith narrated by Hakim ibn Hizain # is ‏غمص‎ the
Messenger of Allah % said, “Allah will punish those who torture

169
Major Sins

people in this world.” In another hadith: “Whoever strikes some-
one with a whip wrongfully, retaliation will be taken from him on
the Day of Rising.” (at-Tabarani) The Messenger of Allah 38 was
asked, “How many times should we pardon a servant?” He
answered, “Seventy times a day.” (Abu Dawud and at-Tirmidhi)

One day the Prophet # had a toothstick in his hand and he
summoned a servant of his who was slow in coming. He said,
“Were it not for retaliation, I would hit you with this toothstick!”
(Ahmad) Abu Hurayra # had a black slave-girl and he raised a
whip to her one day and said, “Were it not for retaliation, I would
render you unconscious. But as it is I will sell you to the One who
will give me your full price. Go. You are free for the sake of
Allah.”

A woman came to the Prophet 38 and said, “Messenger of
Allah, I called my slave girl a whore.” He asked, “Have you seen
her act in that way?” “No,” She answered. He said, “Then she will
seek retaliation from you on the Day of Rising.” So she went back
to her slavegirl and gave her a whip and told her, “Whip me.” The
slavegirl refused and so she set her free. Then she went back to the
Prophet ‏يه‎ and told him that she had freed her. He said,
“Perhaps.” (al-Hakim) In other words, “Perhaps your freeing her
will expiate your slander of her.”

It is reported in both Sahih collections that the Messenger of
Allah # said, “Whoever slanders a slave who is innocent of what
he said will be flogged on the Day of Rising with a badd punish-
ment of flogging unless he is as he says.”

We read in a hadith: “A slave is owed his food and clothing, and
should not be made to do what he is unable to do.” (Muslim) The
Prophet # instructed the Muslims when he left this world: “Allah!
Allah! The prayer and what you own. Feed them from what you
eat and clothe them from what you wear. Do not impose work on
them which they cannot do. If you burden them, then help them.
Do not torture Allah’s creatures. He let you own them. If He had
wished, they could have owned you.” (at-Tabarani)

A group visited Salman al-Farisi when he was the governor of
al-Mada’in. They found him kneading dough and asked him,
“Why do you not let your slave-girl do this?” He replied, “We
sent her on a task and did not want to add another task to it.”

170
Transgression

Section. One of the worst things that can be done to a slave or
slavegirl is to separate them from their children or from those they
love since it is reported that the Prophet : said, “If someone parts
a mother and her child, Allah will part him from those he loves on
the Day of Rising.” (at-Tirmidhi)

‘Ali # said, “The Messenger of Allah 4 gave me two boys who
were brothers and I sold one of them. The Messenger of Allah ‏يك‎
‎said, ‘Take him back! Take him back!” Another bad thing is to let
a slave or slave-girl or animal suffer from hunger. The Messenger
of Allah # said, “It is enough sin for a man to deny his food to
those he owns.” (Muslim)

It is wrong to hit an animal or to cause it pain or to tie it up in
such a way that it cannot stand up by itself or to make it carry a
load beyond its capacity. It is reported that animals will be brought
while people are standing on the Day of Rising and they will take
their retaliation. So if a man has struck an animal unnecessarily or
made it go hungry or thirsty or made it bear more than it was able
to, then it will take retaliation from him on the Day of Rising
according to how he wronged it or made it go hungry. The evi-
dence for that is what is confirmed in both Sahib collections from
Abu Hurayra ‏عد‎ who said, “The Messenger of Allah % said, ‘A
woman was punished on account of a cat which she tied it up until
it died of hunger. She did not feed it or water it when she impris-
oned it, nor did she let it eat from the vermin of the earth.’”” The
Prophet # saw a woman hanging in the Fire with a cat clawing her
in the face and breast and torturing her because she tortured it in
this world by imprisonment and hunger.

This applies to all sorts of animals. And the same applies if
someone tries to make an animal do more than it is able to: it will
take retaliation from him on the Day of Rising, according to what
is established in the two Sahih collections by the words of the
Messenger of Allah 3g: “While a man was driving a cow he mount-
ed it and hit it. It said, ‘I was not created for this. I was created for
tillage.” That was a cow which Allah made speak in this world to
defend itself so that it would not be harmed or used in a manner
other than that for which it was created. If someone imposes on an
animal what it is not capable of or hits it without right, it will take
appropriate retaliation from him on the Day of Rising.

171
Major Sins

Ibn ‘Umar 22 passed by some boys of Quraysh who were using
a bird as a target. They gave its owner every arrow that missed.
When they saw Ibn ‘Umar, they bolted. He said, “Who did this?
Allah has cursed the one who does this!” The Messenger of Allah
#8 cursed anyone who made a target of a living creature. If it is
something whose killing is authorised by the Shari‘a, such as
snakes, scorpions, mice and dogs, it should be killed immediately
and not tortured, as evidenced by the words of the Prophet #:
“When you kill, kill well. When you slaughter, slaughter well. Let
each of you sharpen his blade and put the animal to be slaughtered
at ease.” Similarly an animal should not be burned since it is con-
firmed in sound hadith that the Messenger of Allah said, “I com-
manded you in the past to burn so-and-so and so-and-so with fire.
Only Allah punishes with fire. If you find them, then kill them
both.”

Ibn Mas‘ud # said, “We were with the Messenger of Allah ‏و‎
‎on a journey and he went to respond to a call of nature. We saw a
sparrow with two chicks. We took her chicks and the sparrow
came and began to flutter. The Prophet # came back and said,
‘Who has distressed this one with her offspring? Leave her with
her children.’ The Messenger of Allah % also saw an anthill which
we had burned and said, ‘Who burned it?’ We replied, ‘We did.’
The Prophet # said, ‘No one should punish with fire except its
Lord.” (Abu Dawud) That is a prohibition of killing and torturing
by the use of fire, even lice, fleas and other such creatures.

Section. It is disliked to kill animals for sport, since it is related
that the Prophet % said, “If someone kills a sparrow for sport, on
the Day of Rising, it will cry out to Allah: ‘Lord, ask this one why
he killed me in vain and did not kill me for any purpose!” It is also
disliked to hunt birds (even for food) when they are nesting since
that is related in traditions. It is disliked to slaughter an animal in
front of its mother, in accordance with what Ibrahim ibn Adham
related: “A man slaughtered a calf in front of its mother and Allah
withered his hand.”

Section on the excellence of freeing slaves. Abu Hurayra #
reported that the Prophet # said, “If someone frees a believing

172
Being overbearing

slave, Allah will free forever one of his limbs by one of his limbs
from the Fire until he frees his genitals by his genitals.” Al-
Bukhari transmitted this. Abu Umama #2 reported that the
Prophet # said, “If a Muslim frees a Muslim man, he has ran-
somed himself from the Fire. Every limb of his expiates one of his
limbs. If Muslim man frees two Muslim women, they are his
redemption from the Fire: every two limbs of theirs expiates one
of his limbs. If a Muslim woman frees a Muslim woman, she will
be her redemption from the Fire and every limb or hers expiates
one her limbs.” At-Tirmidhi related this and described it as sound.

O Allah, make us among Your successful party and righteous
slaves.

173
52. Harming one’s neighbours

It is confirmed in both Sahih collections that the Messenger of
Allah 38 said, “By Allah, he does not believe. By Allah, he does nct
believe!” He was asked, “Who, Messenger of Allah?” He said, “He
whose neighbour is not safe from his treacherv.” In one variant,
“He whose neighbour is not safe from his evil will not enter the
Garden.”

The Messenger of Allah 38 was asked about the greatest sin in
the sight of Allah, and he mentioned three things: appointing an
equal to Allah when He created you, killing your child out of fear
that he will eat with you, and committing adultery with your
neighbour's wife.” A hadith states: “Anyone who believes in Allah
and the Last Day should not harm his neighbour.”

There are three kinds of neighbours: Muslim neighbours who
are kin, who are owed the rights of a neighbour, the rights of
Islam arid the rights of kinship; Muslim neighbours who are owed
the rights of a neighbour and the rights of Islam; and unbelieving
neighbours who are owed the rights of a neighbour. Ibn ‘Umar #
ha 1 a Jewish neighbour, and whenever he slaughtered a sheep he
said, “Take some of it to our Jewish neighbour.” It is related that a
poor neighbour will be hung on his rich neighbour on the Day of
Rising and will say, “Lord, ask him why he denied me charity and
closed his door to me.”

A neighbour should endure the annoyance caused by his neigh-
dour. It is part of being good to him. A man went to the Prophet
# and said, “Messenger of Allah, direct me to an action which, if I
do it, I will enter the Garden.” He said, “Do good.” He asked,
“Messenger of Allah, how will I know if I am doing good?” He
said, “Ask your neighbours. If they say that you are doing good,
then you are doing good. If they say that you are doing bad, then
you are doing bad.” Al-Bayhagi mentioned this. From Abu
Hurayra ‏ف‎ it is relted that the Prophet # said, “Anyone who clos-
es his door to his neighbour out of fear for his family and wealth is
not a believer. Anyone whose neighbour is not safe from his evil is
not a believer.”

174
Harming one’s neighbours

It is said: “It is less harmful for a man to fornicate with ten
women than to commit adultery with his neighbour’s wife. It is
less harmful for a man to steal from ten houses than to steal from
his neighbour’s house.” According to the Sunan of Abu Dawud,
Abu Hurayra # said: “A man went to the Prophet 3 to complain
about his neighbour, and he told him, ‘Go and be patient.’ He
came to him two or three times and then he said, ‘Go and put
your belongings into the street.’ The man did so. People began to
pass by him and ask him what was wrong and he told them about
his situation with his neighbour. They began to curse his neigh-
bour and say, ‘May Allah do such-and-such to him.’ His neighbour
went to him and said, ‘My brother, return to your house. You will
never again see anything you dislike from me.”

Put up with the harm of a neighbour, even if he is a dbimnnz. It
is related that Sahl ibn ‘Abdullah at-Tustari had a dhimmi neigh-
bour and there was a leak from his toilet into Sahl’s house. Every
day Sahl used to put a pot under that leak and collect the seepage
from the Magian’s toilet and then would throw it away at night so
that no one saw it. Sahl continued to do this for a long time until
he was dying. He summoned his Magian neighbour and said, “Go
into that room and see what is in it.” He entered and saw the hole
and filth leaking down from it into the pot. He said, “What is this
I see?” Sahl answered, “This has been flowing from your house
into this room for a long time. I collect it in the day and throw it
away at night. If I were not dying and did not fear that the charac-
ter of others could not bear that, I would not have told you. Do
what you think best.” The Magian said, “Sahl! Have you been
doing this for a long time while I remain in my disbelief? Stretch
out your hand. I testify that there is no god but Allah and
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.” Then Sahl died.

We ask Allah to guide us and you to the best character, actions
and words, and to make our end good. He is Generous,
Compassionate, Merciful.

175
53. Abusing and insulting other Muslims

Allah Almighty says:

“Those who abuse men and women who are believers, when
they have not merited it, bear the weight of slander and clear
wrongdoing.” (33:58)

“You who believe, people should not ridicule others who may be
better than themselves; nor should any women ridicule other
women who may be better than themselves. And do not find fault
with one another or insult one another with derogatory nick-
names. How evil it to have a name for evil conduct after coming
to faith! Those who do not turn from it are wrongdoers.” (49:11)

“Do not spy and do not backbite one another.” (49:12)

The Prophet # said, “One of the people in the worst position
with Allah on the Day of Rising will be the one whom people
avoid out of fear of his rudeness.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim)

We find another hadith saying: “The life, property and honour
of a Muslim is forbidden to another Muslim.” (Muslim and at-
‘Tirmidhi) The Prophet # also said, “The Muslim is the Muslim’s
brother. He must not wrong him, disappoint him, or demean him,
It is enough evil for a man to demean his brother Muslim.”
(Muslim) He also said # that insulting a Muslim is impiety and
killing him is disbelief.

Abu Hurayra 8 reported, “Someone said, ‘Messenger of Allah,
so-and-so prays in the night and fasts in the day but she harms her
neighbours with her tongue.’ He replied, “There is no good in her.
She will be in the Fire.’”” Al-Hakim said that this hadith is sound.

Another hadith also states: “Remember the good qualities of
your dead and expiate their evil deeds.” (al-Hakim) The Prophet
3 said, “During the Night Journey, I passed by people with copper
nails who were lacerating their faces and chests. I asked, ‘Who are
they, Jibril?’ He replied, ‘Those who ate people’s flesh and
attacked their reputation.” (al-Bukhari and Muslim)

176
Abusing other Muslims

Section cautioning against inciting fights between believ-
ers, and between any kind of animals

It is related on sound authority that the Prophet % said,
“Shaytan has despaired of those who pray worshipping him in the
Arabian peninsula but he still incites fights between you. So any-
one who provokes a dispute between two of the sons of Adam and
passes on to one of them anything that will anger the other is a
tale-bearer from the party of Shaytan, who are the worst of peo-
ple.” Likewise as the Prophet % said, “Shall I inform you of the
worst of you?” They answered, “Yes, Messenger of Allah. He said,
“The worst of you are those carry tales and ruin relations between
those who love one another, and who lead the innocent to wrong
action.” (Ahmad)

It is related on sound authority that the Messenger of Allah #
said, “A tale-bearer will not enter the Garden.” (al-Bukhari and
Muslim) A tale-bearer is someone who carries tales between peo-
ple, and particularly between two people in order to harm one of
them or alienate his heart from his companion or friend. He says,
“So-and-so said this about you and did such-and-such.” The only
time such a thing is permissible is if there is some real benefit in it,
such as warning him of some evil which is happening or to be
watchful.

As for instigating fights between animals, beasts, birds and
other things, it is unlawful. This applies to cock-fighting, ram
fighting, dog fighting and other such things. The Messenger of
Allah 48 forbade that. Anyone who does it disobeys Allah and His
Messenger.

Another aspect of this is alienating a woman’s heart from her
husband, or a slave from his master, or since it is related that the
Messenger of Allah # said, “Cursed is the one who alienates a
woman from her husband or a slave from his master.” (Abu

Dawud) We seek refuge with Allah from that.
Section encouraging reconciliation between people

Allah Almighty says:

177
Major Sins

“There is no good in much of their secret talk, except in the
case of those who enjoin sadaqa or what is right, or putting things
right between people. Whoever does that, seeking the pleasure of
Allah, We will give him an immense wage.” (4:114)

Mujahid said, “This is general for all people, and means that
there is no good in the conversations of people unless they are for
the good, as indicated by His words: “except in the case of those who
enjoin sadaga”. Ibn ‘Abbas # said that “what is right (sa ‘ruf)”
means maintaining ties of kinship and obeying Allah. It is said that
it is all good actions. “Putting things right between people” is some-
thing which the Messenger of Allah # encouraged. He said to Abu
Ayyub al-Ansari #2, “Shall I direct you to a sadaga which is better
for you than red camels?” He answered, “Yes, Messenger of
Allah.” He said, “Putting things right between people when they
have been set at odds and bringing them together when they are
far apart.”

Umm Habiba 82 related that the Prophet # said, “The words
of the son of Adam are all against him and not for him except
those which involve enjoining the right, prohibiting the wrong or
remembering Allah.” (Ibn Majah and at-Tirmidhi) It is related
that a man said to Sufyan, “How severe this hadith is!” Sufyan said,
“Have you not heard the words of Allah Almighty: ‘There is no
good in much of their secret talk, except in the case of those who enjoin
sadaqa or what is right’?’ Vhis is the same thing. Then the
Almighty informs us that such talk only benefits a person who
does it to seek what is with Allah. Allah Almighty says: ‘Whoever
does that, seeking the pleasure of Allah, We will give him an immense
wage.”

We find in a hadith: “He who puts things right between people
and hopes for good or speaks good is not considered a liar.” Al-
Bukhari related this. Umm Kulthum ¥ said, “I did not hear the
Messenger of Allah % make an allowance for anything that people
say except in three instances: in war, putting things right between
people, and the words between a man and his wife or a wife and
her husband.” Abu Hurayra ‏ل‎ related that the Messenger of Allah
38 said, “One cannot do anything better than walking to the

178
Abusing other Muslims

prayer, putting things right between people, or organising a per-
missible alliance between Muslims.” (al-Isbahani)

The Messenger of Allah 38 said, “If someone puts things right
between two people, Allah will put his business right and give him
the reward for freeing a slave for every word he speaks, and he will
return having been forgiven his past wrong actions.” (al-Isbahani)
All success is by Allah.

O Allah, treat us kindly and give us Your pardon, O Most
Merciful of the Merciful.

179
54. Harming people and being overbearing
towards them

Allah Almighty says:

“Those who abuse the believers, men and women, when they
have not merited it bear the weight of slander and clear wrong-
doing.” (33:58)

“Take the believers who follow you under your wing.”

(26:215)

Abu Hurayra # related that the Messenger of Allah # said,
“Allah Almighty says, ‘I have declared war on anyone who is hos-
tile to a friend of Mine.” (al-Bukhari) We find in another hadith
that Abu Sufyan went to Salman, Suhayb and Bilal ‏رع‎ who were in
a group, and they said, “The swords of Allah have not taken their
due from the enemy of Allah.” Abu Bakr # said, “Do you say this
to the elder and master of Quraysh?” He went to the Prophet #
and told him. He said, “Abu Bakr, perhaps if you made them
angry, you have also made your Lord angry.” Abu Bakr went to
them and asked, “My brothers, have I made you angry?” “No,”
they replied. “May Allah forgive you, my brother.”

Section on the words of the Almighty:

“Restrain yourself patiently with those who call on their Lord
morning and evening, desiring His face.” (18:28)

This ayat affirms the excellence of the poor. The reason for its
revelation was that it was the poor who were the first to believe in
the Prophet 3. The same was true for every Prophet: the poor
were the first to believe in them. So the Messenger of Allah #
used to sit with his poor Companions, such as Suhayb, Bilal and
‘Ammar ibn Yasir. The idolators wanted to induce him to drive the
poor away because they had heard that one of the signs of the
Messengers was that the first of their followers came from among
the poor.

180
Harming people

Some of the leaders of the idolators came and said,
“Muhammad, drive the poor away from you. Our souls are averse
to sitting with them. If you drive them away, the noble people and
leaders will believe in you.” So Allah Almighty revealed: “Do not
chase away those who call on their Lord morning and evening, seeking
His Face.” (6:52)

When the idolators despaired of them being driven away, they
said, “Muhammad, if you do not drive them away, then give us one
day and them another day.” So Allah Almighty revealed: “Restrain
yourself patiently with those who call on their Lord morning and
evening, desiring His face; and do not turn your eye from them, desiring
the attractions of this world.” (18:28)

Then Allah coined a likeness for them of the wealthy and the
poor in His words: “Cite an example for them of two men...” (18:32)
and “Make a simile for them of the life of this world...” (18:45) The
Messenger of Allah % used to esteem and honour the poor. When
the Messenger of Allah % emigrated to Madina, they emigrated
with him and stayed in the Suffa (veranda) of the mosque, praying
and supplicating, and they were called the People of the Suffa.
The poor who emigrated were put with them until they were
many in number. They witnessed the goodness Allah has prepared
for His friends, seeing it with the light of faith, and their hearts
were not attached to anything in existence. They said, “We only
worship You, and before You we are humble and prostrate. By You
we are guided and seek guidance. We rely on You and trust in You
and find delight in Your remembrance. We graze in the meadow
of Your love and work and toil for You, never leaving Your door.”

Then Allah addressed His Messenger about them, saying: “Do
not chase away those who call on their Lord in the morning.” (6:52) In
other words, “Do not drive away people who spend the night
remembering their Lord and in the morning remain at His door.
Do not drive away people from the mosque, which is their
refuge.” Allah is their goal and their Master. Hunger is their food
and wakefulness while other people sleep is their condiment.
Poverty and need are their badge, and humility and modesty their
blanket. They have tethered the horses of their resolve at the door
of their Master, and turned their faces to striving to enjoy intimate
conversation with their Lord.

181
Major Sins

Poverty is both universal and particular. Universal poverty con-
sists in our need for Allah Almighty, and this is the attribute of
every creature, believer or unbeliever. It is the meaning of the
words of the Almighty: “Mankind, you are the poor in need of Allah.”
(35:15) Particular poverty is the attribute of the awliya’ of Allah
and His lovers. Their hands are empty of this world and their
hearts are empty of connection to it, being occupied with Allah
and yearning for Him and intimacy with Him, along with devo-
tion and being alone with Allah.

O Allah, let us taste the sweetness of intimate conversation
with You and let us travel on the road of Your pleasure so that we
may be cut off from everything that will put us far from Your pres-
ence. We ask You to make easy for us what You make easy for the
people You love, and to forgive us and our parents and all the
Muslims!

182
55. Wearing one’s waist-wrapper, robe, clothing
and trousers long out of arrogance, pride and
boastfulness

Allah Almighty says:

“Do not strut about arrogantly on the earth. Allah does not love
anyone who is vain or boastful.” (31:18)

The Prophet # said, “Every part of the waist-wrapper below
the ankles is in the Fire.” (al-Bukhari) He # also said, “Allah will
not look at anyone who wears his waist-wrapper long out of arro-
gance.” (Malik, al-Bukhari, Muslim and others) And he # also
said, “There are three to whom Allah will not speak on the Day of
Rising, nor will He look at them nor purify them, and they will
have a painful punishment: one who wears his garment long, one
who reminds people of his charity, and one who sells his goods
with a false oath.” (Muslim) The Prophet % said, “Whoever wears
his garment long out of arrogance, Allah will not look at him on
the Day of Rising.” He % also said, “Dragging applies to the
‘waist-wrapper and turban. Whoever does any of that out of arro-
gance, Allah will not look at him on the Day of Rising.” (Abu
Dawud, an-Nasa’i and Ibn Majah)

The Prophet % said, “The waist-wrapper of the believer should
reach to the middle of the calves, and there is no harm in what is
between there and the ankles. What is lower than the ankles is in
the Fire.” (an-Nasa’i)

This applies to trousers, robes, gowns, and other garments. We
ask Allah for protection. Abu Hurayra # said, “A man was praying
wearing his waist-wrapper long, and the Messenger of Allah 38 said
to him, ‘Go and do wadu’.’ Then he came back and he again said,
‘Go and do wudu’. A man asked him, ‘Messenger of Allah, why
have you ordered him to do wadu’?’ He was silent and then he
said, ‘He was praying wearing his waist-wrapper long and Allah
does not accept the prayer of anyone who wears his waist-wrapper
long.’”” (Abu Dawud)

183
Major Sins

When the Prophet 38 said, “On the Day of Rising Allah will
not look at anyone who wears his garment long out of arrogance,”
Abu Bakr ‏ف‎ said, “Messenger of Allah, my waist-wrapper hangs
down unless I attend to it.” The Messenger of Allah # told him,
“You are not a person who does that out of arrogance.” (al-
Bukhari, Muslim, Abu Dawud and an-Nasa’i)

O Allah, treat us with Your good and excellent kindness by
Your mercy, O Most Merciful of the Merciful!

184
56. Men wearing silk and gold

It is reported in the two Sabih collections is that the Messenger
of Allah 4 said, “Anyone who wears silk in this world will not wear
it in the Next World.” This is general to soldiers and others by the
words of the Prophet %, “It is unlawful for men of my Community
to wear silk and gold.” Hudhayfa ibn al-Yaman 2 related: “The
Messenger of Allah #¢ forbade us to drink or eat from gold and sil-
ver vessels, and to wear or sit on silk and brocade.” Al-Bukhari
transmitted this.

Anyone who says that it is lawful for men to wear silk is an
unbeliever. The Lawgiver % made a concession for those with the
itch or scabies or some other such thing and for fighters when
they meet the enemy. As for wearing silk for adornment, it is
unlawful for men by the consensus of the Muslims. The same
applies when it is mostly silk: it is unlawful.

It is also unlawful for men to wear gold, whether it be a ring,
belt or scabbard. It is unlawful to wear it or use it. The Prophet #8
saw a gold ring on a man’s hand and he removed it and said, “One
of you goes to a ember of fire and puts it on his hand.” (Muslim)

It is the same with gold embroidery and silk brocade: it is
unlawful for men. Scholars disagree about permitting a young boy
to wear silk or gold: some people allow it and others forbid it by
the generality of the words of the Prophet # about silk and gold:
“These two are unlawful for the males of my Community, but law-
ful for their women.” Boys are included in the prohibition. This is
‘he school of Imam Ahmad.

We ask Allah for success in what He likes and is pleased with.
I {e is Generous, Magnanimous.

185
57. Absconding by slaves

Muslim related in his Sahih that the Messenger of Allah 3 said,
“When a slave runs away, his prayer is not accepted.” Ibn
Khuzayma related in his Sahib from the hadith of Jabir # that the
Messenger of Allah 38 said, “There are three whose prayer Allah
will not accept and from whom no good action will rise to heaven:
a runaway slave until he returns to his master; a woman whose
husband is angry with him, until he is pleased with her; and a
drunkard until he is sober.”

Fadala ibn ‘Ubayd says, according to a marfu‘ report: “Do not
ask about three: a man who leaves the community and disobeys his
ruler, a runaway slave who dies in disobedience, and a woman
whose husband is absent and provided her with adequate mainte-
nance but who displayed her beauties in his absence, as the people
of the Jahiliyya did.” (Ibn Hibban)

186
58. Slaughtering to other than Allah Almighty

This is like when people say, “In the name of Shaytan,” or an
idol or the name of a certain Shaykh. Allah Almighty says:

“Do not eat anything over which the name of Allah has not been
mentioned. Io do so is sheer deviance. The shaytans inspire their
friends to dispute with you. If you obeyed them you would then be
idolators.” (6:121)

According to Ibn ‘Abbas # this refers to carrion, animals that
have been strangled, and the other categories mentioned in the
third ayat of Sura al-Ma@’ida. Al-Kalbi said, “It means that over
which the Name of Allah has not been mentioned or what has
been slaughtered to other than Allah.” ‘Ata’ said that it declares
unlawful those animals which Quraysh and the Arabs slaughtered
in the name of idols.

If it be asked how an animal can be allowed by a Muslim when
the tasmiya (saying the name of Allah) has been omitted, and when
this zyat contains a clear prohibition against doing so, the answer
is that commentators explain that in this ‏كمه‎ “what does not have
the name of Allah mentioned over it” refers to carrion: no one
applies it to an animal slaughtered by a Muslim who simply omits
the tasmiya. Various points in the ‏تمك‎ indicate that the prohibition
refers to carrion. One of those points is the subsequent words: 0
do so is sheer deviance,” and eating an animal slaughtered by a
Muslim who has omitted the tasmiya is not considered deviance.
Another thing is His words, “The shaytans inspire their friends to dis-
pute with you;” and the dispute was about carrion, by the consensus
of the commentators, not about an animal slaughtered by a
Muslim without the tasmiya. Another thing is His words “If you
obeyed them, then you would be idolators,” when idolatry is deeming
carrion lawful, not deeming lawful a slaughtered animal over
which the name of Allah has not been mentioned.

Abu Mansur reported that Abu Hurayra ‏عه‎ said: “A man asked
the Messenger of Allah 3, ‘What do you think about a man who
slaughters and forgets to mention Allah Almighty?’ The Prophet

187
Major Sins

‎said, “The Name of Allah is on the mouth of every Muslim.”‏ عه
‎(at-Tabarani) Abu Mansur also reported from Ibn ‘Abbas 2 that‏
‎the Prophet % said, “His Name is enough; and even if someone‏
‎forgets to mention it when he slaughters, he should say the Name,‏
‎remember Allah, and then eat.” (ad-Daragutni)‏

‎‘Amr ibn Abi ‘Amr reported from ‘Aisha & that some people
said, “Messenger of Allah, some people bring us meat but we do
not know whether the name of Allah has been mentioned over it
or not.” The Messenger of Allah 38 said, “Say the Name over it
and eat.” (Malik and al-Bukhari)

‎It has already been mentioned that the Prophet ‏يه‎ said, “Allah
curses anyone who slaughters to something other than Allah.”

‎188
59. Knowingly ascribing oneself falsely to some-
one other than one’s actual father

Sa‘d # related that the Messenger of Allah % said, “Whoever
claims someone other than his true father to be his father, the
Garden is forbidden to him.” Al-Bukhari related this. Abu
Hurayra #? related that the Prophet ‏يك‎ said, “Do not disdain your
fathers. Whoever disdains his father is an unbeliever.” Al-Bukhari
related this. On the same subject we find: “Whoever claims any-
one other than his father to be his father, on him is the curse of
Allah.” Abu Dharr a said that he heard the Prophet # say, “Any
man who ascribes himself to someone other than his actual father
knowingly has committed unbelief; anyone who lays claim to what
is not his is not one of us and should take his seat in the Fire; and
if anyone charges a man with disbelief or says ‘Enemy of Allah’
when that is not the case, it comes back on him.” Muslim related
it.

We ask Allah for pardon and protection and success in what He
loves and pleases Him. He is Generous, Magnanimous.

189
60. Argument, quarrelling and disputation

Allah Almighty says:

“Among mankind there is someone whose words about the life
of this world excite your admiration, and he calls Allah to witness
what is in his heart, while he is in fact the most hostile of adver-
saries. When he leaves you, he goes about the earth corrupting it,
destroying crops and animals. Allah does not like corruption.”
(2:204-205)

Part of what is censured here is argument, disputation and
quarrelling. Al-Ghazali said, “Disputation means picking apart
words to show discrepancies in them with no other desire than to
denigrate the speaker and demonstrate your superiority over him.
Argument is concerned with explaining legal positions and affirm-
ing them. Quarrelling means insistence in words in order to
obtain an ample part of wealth or something else, sometimes initi-
ated and sometimes in response.”

An-Nawawi said, “Argument can be true or false. Allah
Almighty says: ‘Contend with the People of the Book only in the kindest
way.’ (29:46) The Almighty says: ‘Argue with them in the kindest
way.’ (16:125) Again, Allah Almighty says: ‘No one disputes Allah’s
signs except those who disbelieve.’ (40:4)” An-Nawawi further said, “If
one argues in order to inform others about the truth and to
uphold it, it is praiseworthy; if one does so to oppose the truth or
argue without knowledge, it is blameworthy.” Those are the crite-
ria according to which the texts permitting it or disapproving of it
were revealed. One scholar said, “I have not seen anything more
likely to remove the deen, decrease manliness, or distract one’s
heart than disputation.”

If it be objected that one must argue to get his rights, the
answer is as al-Ghazali said: “Know that the censure here is direct-
ed against someone who argues using falsehood and without
knowledge, like the deputy of a gadi, who engages in argument
before recognising which side the truth is on, debating without
knowledge.” Also censured is anyone who goes beyond what is
necessary to get what is due to him, and indulges in disputation,

190
Argument

lies, abuse, and verbal assault of his adversary. The same applies if
one is moved to argue by a simple obstinate desire to overpower
his opponent and break him. This is blameworthy.

As for someone who is wronged and supports his argument by
way of the Shari‘a without undue disputation, or excessive insis-
tence, and without sheer obstinacy or abuse, that is not unlawful,
but it is better to avoid it if there is any way of doing so, because
keeping one’s tongue in check when arguing is virtually impossi-
ble. Argument provokes rancour and anger in the breast, and
when anger erupts each opponent delights in harmng the other
and is sad to see him happy, and tends to unleash his tongue on
the other’s reputation. Anyone who argues is at risk from these
disasters. The least harm it brings about is distraction of the heart
so that while you are praying your thoughts are preoccupied with
proofs and argument, and your state is perturbed. Disputation is
the start of evil, and the same applies to argument and quarrelling.
So one should not open the door of dispute to himself except in
case of real need. In the book of at-Tirmidhi we find that Ibn
‘Abbas # related that the Messenger of Allah % said, “It is enough
of a sin for you to continue to be an arguer.” It is also reported
that ‘Ali 2 said, “Disputation is dangerous.”

Section. Abu Hurayra ‏عق‎ related that the Messenger of Allah ‏ع‎
‎said, “Anyone who indulges in disputation without knowledge
remains under the wrath of Allah until he stops.” (Ibn Abi ad-
Dunya) Abu Umama #: related that the Prophet & said, “A people
will not be misguided after receiving guidance unless they are
given to debate.” Then he recited, “They only say this to you for
argument’s sake.” (43:58) The Prophet 3 said, “What I most fear
for you is the slip of the scholar, the argument of the hypocrite
about the Qur’an, and this world severing your necks.” Ibn ‘Umar
‏هه‎ related this hadith. The Prophet # said, “Disputation about the
Qur’an is unbelief.” (Abu Dawud)

Section. It is disliked to use linguistic artifices in argument. A
person’s intention in his address should be to make the words clear

and understood. According to the book of at-Tirmidhi, ‘Abdullah
ibn ‘Amr ibn al-‘As # reported that the Messenger of Allah #

191
Seventy Major Sins

said, “Allah hates an eloquent man who moves his tongue like a
cow (in enunciation).” According to at-Tirmidhi this hadith is
hasan. ‏ع[‎ is also related from Jabir 2 that the Messenger of Allah
#2 said, “Those whom I love the most and who will sit closest to
me on the Day of Rising are the best in character. The most hate-
ful of you to me and those who will sit furthest from me on the
Day of Rising will be those of many words, those who overpower
people with words, and the verbose.” They said, “Messenger of
Allah, who are they?” He answered, “The arrogant.” According to
at-Tirmidhi it is a hasan hadith.

Know, however, that there is no blame in making the words of
kbutbas and admonitions eloquent. The goal in this is to stir peo-
ple’s hearts to the obedience of Allah Almighty, and eloquent lan-
guage has a clearly effective role in this; and Allah knows best.

192
61. Denying spare water to others

Allah Almighty says:

“Say: ‘What do you think? If one morning your water disappears
into the earth who would bring you running water?’” (67:30)

The Prophet # said, “Do not deny spare water in order there-
by to deny pasture by it.” (Agreed upon) He # also said, “If some-
one denies excess water and excess pasturage, Allah will deny him
His bounty on the Day of Rising.” (Ahmad)

The Messenger of Allah % said, “There are three whom Allah
will not speak to or look at or purify on the Day of Rising, and
who will have a painful punishment: a man in the desert with spare
water who denies it to a traveller, a man who gives his allegiance
to a leader but only does so to obtain worldly things — if he is
given them, he is faithful and if not, he is not — and a man who
sells goods to a man after ‘dsr and swears by Allah that he paid
such-and-such for them and is believed though that is not the
case.” This is transmitted in both Sahih collections.

193
62. Giving short measure and weight

Allah Almighty says:

“Woe to the stinters! (meaning those who give people
short measure and and weight) Those who, when they take a
measure from people, exact full measure, but when they give
them a measure or weight, hand over less than is due.” (83:1)

As-Suddi narrated that “When the Messenger of Allah 8 came
to Madina there was a man there called Abu Juhayna who had two
scales — one for giving and one for taking — and so Allah revealed
this ayat.

Ibn ‘Abbas # reported that the Messenger of Allah 26 said,
“Five for five.” They asked, “Messenger of Allah, what is ‘five for
five’?” He answered, “A people do not break a contract without
Allah giving their enemy power over them. They do not judge by
other than what Allah has revealed without poverty spreading
among them. Fornication does not appear among people without
Allah making the plague descend on them (meaning frequent
deaths). ‘They do not skimp in the weight and measure without
being denied crops and experiencing famine. They do not deny
zakat without rain being withheld from them.”

A stinter is someone who gives short measure and weight
because although he almost always only steals an insignificant
amount, to do so is theft, treachery and consumption of the
unlawful. Allah has promised “woe” to anyone who does it. Woe
(wayl) denotes intense punishment. It is also said that it is a valley
in Hell such that if all the mountains of this world were put into it,
they would melt from the intensity of its heat.

One of the early Muslims said, “I testify that everyone who
weighs or measures is in danger of the Fire — except someone who
is protected by Allah.” Another of them said, “I visited a sick per-
son who was close to death and began to instruct him to say the
shabada; but his tongue could not articulate it. When he recovered
1 asked him, ‘My brother, when I instructed you to say the shabada
why could your tongue not articulate it?? He answered, ‘My
brother, the tongue of the Scale is on my tongue stopping me,

194
Giving short measure

from articulating it.’ I asked him, ‘By Allah, did you use to give
short measure?’ He answered, ‘No, by Allah, but I did not use to
check the accuracy of my scales.’” If that is the situation of some-
one not sufficiently concerned with the accuracy of his scale, what
is going to be the state of someone who deliberately gives short
weight?

Nafi‘ related that Ibn ‘Umar # passed by a seller and said,
“Fear Allah and give full weight and measure. The stinters will be
made to stand until they are up to the middle of their ears in
sweat. The same is true of a merchant who pressed his hand on
the scale at the moment of selling and releases it when buying.”

We ask Allah for pardon and protection from every affliction
and trial. He is Magnanimous, Generous.

195
63. Feeling secure from Allah’s devising

Allah Almighty says: “Until while they were exulting in what they
had been given, We suddenly seized them” (6:44): in other words,
Allah’s punishment seized them from a direction they were not
expecting,

‘Ugqba ibn ‘Amir & related that the Messenger of Allah % said,
“When you see Allah giving His slave what he wants while he
remains disobedient, that means He is drawing him on.” Then he
recited, “When they forgot what they had been reminded of, We opened
up for them the doors to everything, until while they were exulting in
what they has been given, We suddenly seized them and at once they
were in despair.” (6:44) (at-Tabarani) Despair here means despair of
salvation when death arrives. Ibn ‘Abbas 2: said that it means
despairing of any good.

The Prophet # often used to say, “O Overturner of hearts,
make our hearts firm in Your deen!” He was asked, “Messenger of
Allah, do you fear for us?” The Messenger of Allah % said, “All
hearts are between two of the fingers of the All-Merciful, and He
turns them however He wishes.” (at-Tirmidhi)

We find in a sound hadith that a man may perform the actions
of the people of the Garden until there is only a span between him
and it, and then the Decree overtakes him and he does the actions
of the people of the Fire and enters it. And in Sabih al-Bukhari it is
reported from Sahl ibn Sa‘d as-Sa‘idi # that the Prophet % said,
“A man may perform the actions of the people of the Fire and yet
be one of the people of the Garden. And a man may do the actions
of the people of the Garden although he is one of the people of
the Fire. Actions have seals.”

Allah Almighty recounted in His Mighty Book the story of
Bal‘am who was stripped of faith after having great knowledge.
That was also the case with Barsisa the devout worshipper, who
died an unbeliever. He was a man of Egypt who was always in the
mosque for the adhan and the prayer. He had the radiance of wor-
ship and lights of obedience of Allah. One day he went up the
minaret, as was his custom, to call the adban. There was a house
belonging to a Christian below the minaret. He looked into it and

196
Feeling secure from Allah’s devising

saw the daughter of the owner of the house, who was very beauti-
ful, and he was tempted by her. He abandoned the adhan and went
down to her. “What do you want?” she asked him, and he
answered, “I want you.” She said, “I will agree to nothing ques-
tionable.” He told her, “Then I will marry you.” She said to him,
“You are a Muslim and my father will not marry me to you.” He
said, “I will become Christian.” She said to him, “If you do that, I
will.” So he became Christian to marry her, and stayed with them
in the house. During that day he went to the roof of the house, fell
off it and died. So he neither gained by strong practice of the deen
nor did he enjoy the girl. We seek refuge with Allah from His
devising and from a bad end and a bad conclusion!

Salim reported from ‘Abdullah #2 that the Messenger of Allah
# often used to swear, “No, by the Overturner of hearts!” Al-
Bukhari related this. It means that He moves them quicker than
the wind, in various directions: from acceptance to rejection, from
desire to antipathy, and between other opposites. In the Qur’an we
find: “Know that Allah intervenes between a man and his heart.” (8:24)
Mujahid said, “The meaning is that He comes between a man and
his intellect so that he does not even know what his finger is
doing.” Allah says: “There is a reminder in that for anyone who has a
heart.’” (50:37) According to at-Tabari this is a statement from
Allah Almighty that He has more control over the hearts of His
slaves than they do, and that He comes between them and their
hearts if He wishes so that man does not know anything except by
the will of Allah.

‘Nisha & reported: “The Messenger of Allah 38 used often to
say, ‘O Overturner of hearts, make my heart firm in obeying You !'
I said, ‘Messenger of Allah, you often make this prayer. Are you
afraid of not being so?’ He replied, ‘How could I feel secure,
‘Nisha? The hearts of the slaves are between the fingers of the All-
Merciful, who turns them however He wishes. Whenever He
wants to turn the heart of His slave, He turns it.’”

Given that guidance is known, going straight is dependent on
His will, the end is unknown and your will is not in your control,
do not admire your faith, actions, prayer, fasting, or any of your
acts of worship. Even if that is included in your earning, it is also
part of the creation of your Lord and His favour to you. If you

197
Major Sins

boast about any of that, you are boasting about a gift received
from someone else. If He strips you of it, your heart will be empti-
er of good than the inside of a donkey. How many a meadow full
of red flowers becomes dry stubble when the barren wind blows
on it! The same applies to someone whose heart is sound and
bright in the morning, obeying Allah, and then in the evening sick
and dark, disobeying Allah. That is the decree of the Almighty, the
Immense. Son of Adam, the pens are recording you, and yet you
are heedless and do not realise! Son of Adam, leave the songs and
lutes and houses and hearths, and arguing in this abode until you
see what is decreed as your destiny!

A caller shall call from before the Throne, “Where is so-and-
so? Where is so-and-so?” Anyone who hears that voice trembles.
Allah Almighty will tell that person, “You are invited to present
yourself before the Creator of the heavens and the earth.” So crea-
tures will direct their eyes towards the Throne and that person
will stand before Allah Almighty. Allah will give him some of His
light to veil him from other creatures and then will ask him, “My
slave, did you not know that I could see your actions in the Abode
of this world?” He will answer, “Yes, Lord.” Allah Almighty will
ask, “My slave, did you not hear of My vengeance and punishment
of anyone who disobeys Me?” “Yes, Lord,” he will say. Allah
Almighty will ask, “Did you not hear of My recompense and
reward for anyone who obeys Me?” He will reply, “Yes, Lord.”
Allah Almighty will ask, “My slave, did you disobey Me?” He will
reply, “Lord, that was the case.” Allah Almighty will ask, “My
slave, what do you expect from Me today?” He will say, “O Lord,
that You will pardon me.” Allah will ask, “My slave, are you cer-
tain that I will pardon you?” He will say, “Yes, Lord, because You
saw me disobeying and veiled it for me.” Allah Almighty will say,
“I have forgiven you and pardoned you, and your opinion is cor-
rect. Take your book in your right hand. I accept whatever good
actions are in it and | forgive you any evil deeds. I am the
Magnanimous, the Generous.”

198
64. Despairing of the mercy of Allah and losing
hope

Allah Almighty says:

“No one despairs of solace from Allah except people who are
unbelievers.” (12:87)

“It is He who sends down abundant rain, after they have lost
all hope.” (42:28)

“Say: ‘My slaves, you who have transgressed against your-

selves, do not despair of the mercy of Allah.” (39:53)

The Prophet % said, “None of you should die except with a
good opinion of Allah.” (Muslim)

Our God, were it not for Your love of forgiveness, You would
not grant any reprieve to him who disobeys You! Were it not for
Your forgiveness and generosity, none would reside in the Garden!
O Allah, You pardon and You love pardon, so pardon us! O Allah,
look at us with pleasure, confirm us in the register of the people of
piety, and preserve us from the register of the people of unrigh-
teousness. O Allah, realise our hopes and make our actions good
in all states. Make it easy for us to please You, and and impel us
towards good deeds. “Give us good in this world and good in the Next
World, and safeguard us from the punishment of the Fire.” (2:201)

199
65. Abandoning the Group Prayer and praying

alone without a valid excuse

Abdullah ibn Mas‘ud # related that the Prophet % said about
people who failed to attend the prayer, “I wanted to order a man
to lead the people in the prayer and then burn down the houses of
men who stayed away from the group around them.” Muslim
related this. He #8 also said, “People should stop abandoning the
group prayers or Allah will seal their hearts and they will be
among the heedless.” Muslim related this. The Prophet # also
said, “If someone misses three Fummu‘as out of lack of concern,
Allah will put a seal on his heart.” Abu Dawud and an-Nasa’i
transmitted it. He said, “Whoever misses the Fumu‘a without any
excuse or necessity will be recorded among the hypocrites in a
register which cannot be effaced or changed.” Hafsa @ related
that the Messenger of Allah # said, “Going to fumu‘a is mandato-
ry for every male past the age of puberty.”

We ask Allah for success in doing what pleases Him and what
He likes. He is Magnanimous, Generous.

200
66. Persistently missing the Jumu‘a and Group
prayers without a valid excuse

Allah Almighty says:

“On the Day when legs are bared and they are called on to
prostrate, they will not be able to do so. Their eyes will be down-
cast, darkened by debasement; for they were called upon to pros-
trate while they were in full possession of their faculties.” (68:42)

It is on the Day of Rising that the abasement of regret will
cover those referred to here. They were called upon to prostrate
in this world. Ibrahim at-Taymi said, “What is meant is the obli-
gatory prayer with the adban and igama.” Sa‘id ibn al-Musayyab
said, “They hear ‘Come to the prayer. Come to success’ but do
not respond although they are healthy and whole.” Ka‘b al-Ahbar
#2 said, “By Allah, this ayat was only revealed about those who
failed to attend the group prayer; and what threat could be
stronger or more far-reaching than this for someone who aban-
dons the group prayer although he is able to attend it?”

As for the Sunna, it is confirmed in both Sahih collections that
the Messenger of Allah 38 said, “I seriously considered command-
ing the prayer and the igama and ordering a man to lead the peo-
ple in prayer, then going around with some men with bundles of
firewood to some people who do not attend the group prayer and
burning down their houses on top of them.” And he only desisted
from burning down their houses for failing to perform an obliga-
tory act as a threat because their offspring and goods were in the
houses.

In Sahib Muslim it is stated that a blind man came ‏دغ‎ tne
Prophet 38 and said, “Messenger of Allah. I do not have a guide to
lead me to the mosque.” He asked the Prophet # to grent him an
allowance to pray in his house, and he gave him an allowance.
When he turned, he called him and said, “Can you hear the call
to the prayer?” He answered, “Yes.” He # said, “Then respond to

+499

it

201
Major Sins

Abu Dawud related that ‘Amr ibn Umm Maktum went to the
Prophet # and said, “Messenger of Allah, there are a lot of vermin
and beasts in Madina. I am blind and live in a house which is far
away. I have a guide who is not kind to me. Will you give me a dis-
pensation to pray in my house?” He asked, “Can you hear the
call?” He said, “Yes.” He said, “Then respond. I do not find any
dispensation for you.”

This was a blind man who complained of the difficulty is going
to the mosque without a guide to lead him, and in spite of that the
Prophet # did not allow him to pray in his house; so what can be
said about someone healthy who has good sight and no excuse at
all for not going? That is why when Ibn ‘Abbas # was asked about
a man who fasted in the day and prayed at night but did not pray
in a group or join others for the prayer, he said, “If he dies like
that, he will be in the Fire.” And Abu Hurayra #¢ said, “It would
be better for the ear of a son of Adam to be filled with molten lead
than for him to hear the adhan and not respond to it.”

It is related from Ibn ‘Abbas #2 that the Messenger of Allah 38
said, “If someone hears the call to prayer and no excuse prevents
him from responding to it...” Someone asked, “What constitutes
an excuse, Messenger of Allah?” He said, “Fear or illness,” and
continued, “The prayer which he has prayed in [his house] is not
accepted from him.” Al-Hakim transmitted in a/-Mustadrak from
Ibn ‘Abbas # that the Messenger of Allah % said, “Three people
will be cursed by Allah: someone who leads a people when they
dislike him; a woman who spends the night with her husband
angry with her; and a man who hears ‘Come to prayer. Come to
success’ but does not respond.”

‘Ali ibn Abi Talib 2 said, “There is no prayer for the neigh-
bour of a mosque except in the mosque.” Someone asked, “Who is
the neighbour of a mosque?” He answered, “Anyone who can hear
the adban.” Al-Bukhari related in the Sahih that ‘Abdullah ibn
Mas‘ud # said: “Anyone who wants to meet Allah tomorrow as a
Muslim (i.e. on the Day of Rising) should persevere in these five
prayers when they are called. Allah prescribed the sunnas of guid-
ance for your Prophet and they are sunnas of guidance to be fol-
lowed. If you pray in your houses, as this one who stays behind
prays in his house, you have abandoned the sunnas of your

202
Persisting in abandoning the Group Prayer

Prophet. If you abandon the sunnas of your Prophet, you are mis-
guided. I can remember when only a known hypocrite or someone
who was ill failed to join us. A man used to come supported by two
men until he stood in the row or until he reached the mosque for
the group prayer.”

Ar-Rabi‘ ibn Khuthaym was paralysed in his left side, and he
used to go to the prayer leaning on two men. He was told, “Abu
Muhammad, you may pray in your house. You have an excuse!”
He said, “It is as you say, but I hear the mw’adhdhin say, ‘Come to
the prayer. Come to success,’ and whoever is able to respond to it,
even creeping or crawling, should do so.” Hatim al-Asamm said,
“Once I missed the time of the group prayer and Abu Ishaq al-
Bukhari alone consoled me. If a child of mine had died, more than
ten thousand men would have consoled me because in the eyes of
people an affliction in the deen is less serious than an affliction in
this world!”

One of the Sa/af used to say, “No one misses the group prayer
except on account of a wrong action he has committed.” Ibn
‘Umar # said, “‘Umar went out one day to a walled garden and
returned after the people had prayed ‘Asr. ‘Umar said, ‘We belong
to Allah and to Him we return! We have missed the ‘Asr prayer in
the group. I testify to you that my garden is sadaqga for the poor in
expiation for what ‘Umar has done.’” It was a palm grove.

Allah Almighty says: “On the Day when legs are bared and they
are called on to prostrate, they will not be able to do so. Their eyes will be
downcast, darkened by debasement; for they were called on to prostrate
when they were in full possession of their faculties.” (68:42-43) Ka‘b al-
Ahbar ‏لل‎ said, “This ayat was only revealed about those who did
not go to the group prayers.” Sa‘id ibn al-Musayyab, the Imam of
the Tabi‘un, said, “They are people who used to hear, ‘Come to
prayer. Come to success,’ and did not respond although they were
healthy and sound.”

We find in both Sahib collections that the Messenger of Allah
2 said, “By Him Who has my soul in His hand, I wanted to order
some firewood to be brought, then order the prayer and give the
adhan for it and then order a man to lead the people, and then I
would go to some men who did not attend the prayer in the group
and burn their houses down on top of them.” We find in the vari-

203
Major Sins

ant of Muslim, also from Abu Hurayra #: “I wanted to order my
servants to gather firewood for me and then go to some people
who prayed in their houses without illness and burn them down
on top of them.” These Aadiths contain a strong threat against any-
one who misses the prayer in a group without excuse. At-Tirmidhi
related from Ibn ‘Abbas 2 that he was asked about a man who
fasted in the day and prayed at night but did not pray in the group
prayer or the Jumu‘a. He said, “If this one dies, he will be in the
Fire.”

Section. The group prayer is an immense matter, as is clear
from the tafsir of the words of the Almighty: “We wrote in the
Zabur after the Reminder came: ‘It is My slaves who are righteous who
will inherit the earth.’” (21:105) This is said to refer to those who
pray the five prayers in a group. The Almighty said, “We record
what they send ahead and what they leave behind.” (36:12)

In the Sahih it is reported that the Messenger of Allah % said:
“Whoever purifies himself in his house and then walks to the one
of the houses of Allah to fulfil one of the obligations of Allah, with
one step he takes one of his errors falls away and with the other he
is elevated by one degree. When he prays, the angels continue to
pray as long as he is in the prayer. They say, ‘O Allah, forgive him.
O Allah, show mercy to him!’ as long as he does not commit harm
in it or break wadu’.” The Prophet # also said, “Shall I direct you
to something by which Allah will efface your errors and raise you
in degree?” Those present said, ”Yes, Messenger of Allah.” He
said, “Doing wudu’ thoroughly when it is difficult, taking many of
steps to the mosque, and waiting for the next prayer after the
prayer. That is ribat (fighting to defend the frontiers of Islam).
That is rébat.” Muslim related this.

204
67. Causing harm in bequests

Allah Almighty says:

“After any bequest you make or any debt, making sure that no
one’s rights are prejudiced.” (4:12)

That means without causing any harm to your heirs, for
instance by leaving a debt by which harm is intended to someone’s
rightful heirs. Allah forbids that. Allah Almighty says: “4m mstruc-
tion from Allah; and Allah is All-Knowing, Ever-Forbearing. Those
who obey Allah and His Messenger” regarding inheritance, “He will
admit them into Gardens with rivers flowing under them, remaining in
them for ever. That is the Great Victory. As for him who disobeys Allah
and His Messenger...” Mujahid said that this means with regard to
the shares of inheritance Allah has allotted. ‘Ikrima related from
Ibn ‘Abbas #2 that it means anyone who is not pleased with the
division decreed by Allah and exceeds what Allah has said - “He
will admit him to a Fire, to remain in it forever. He will have a humili-
ating punishment.” (4:12-14)

Abu Hurayra @ reported that the Messenger of Allah 3 said,
“A man or woman may obey Allah for sixty years and then death
comes and they cause harm through bequests they make and so
the Fire becomes mandatory for them.” Then Abu Hurayra #
recited this ayat: “After any bequest you make or any debt, making
sure that no one’s rights are prejudiced.” (4:12) Abu Dawud related it.
The Prophet % said, “If someone makes off with the inheritance
of an heir, Allah will cut him out of his inheritance of the
Garden.” The Prophet # also said, “Allah has given everyone with
a right his right, and so there is no bequest to an heir.” At-
Tirmidhi described this as sound.

205
68. Deceit and treachery

Allah Almighty says:
“Evil plotting envelops only those who do it.” (35:43)

The Prophet 38 said, “Deceit and treachery will be in the Fire.”
(al-Bazzar) The Prophet # also said, “A swindler, a miser and
someone who reminds others of his char'ty will not enter the
Garden.”

Allah Almighty says about the hypocrites: “They think they
deceive Allah, but He is deceiving them.” (4:142) Al-Wahidi said,
“They will be treated in the ‏ع صدد‎ deceptive way they treated oth-
ers. That is to say they will be given light as the believers are given
it; but when they go onto the Sirat, their light will go out and they
will be left in darkness.” The Prophet #8 said in a hadith, “The
people of the Fire are five;” and among them he mentioned a man
who deceives you with regard to your wife and wealth, morning
and night. (Muslim)

206
69. Spying on the Muslims and pointing out their
weaknesses

According to the hadith about Hatib ibn Abi Balta‘a a ‘Umar
#2 wanted to kill him for what he had done, but the Messenger of
Allah 3 forbade him to kill him since he had been at Badr. If the
consequence of someone’s spying is weakness for Islam and its
people, and it results in killing or capture or looting or anything of
the kind, he is someone who “creates corruption in the earth and
destroys tillage and offspring” and so it is obligatory to kill him
and he deserves that punishment. We ask Allah for pardon and
protection. Of necessity it is known that tale-bearing is one of the
greatest forbidden things, and the tale-bearing of the spy is worse
still.

We seek refuge with Allah from that, and we ask Him for par-
don and protection. He is Subtle, Aware, Magnanimous,
Generous.

207
70. Insulting one of the Companions

It is recorded in both Sahib collections that the Messenger of
Allah # said that Allah Almighty says, “I have declared war on
anyone who is hostile towards a friend of Mine.” The Prophet 3
said, “Do not abuse my Companions. By the One who has my soul
in His hand, if one of you spent the like of Uhud in gold, it would
not reach the mudd or a half of it of one of them.” (al-Bukhari and
Muslim) The Prophet 28 said, “Allah, Allah! My Companions! Do
not make them a target after me. Whoever loves them, loves them
by love of me. Whoever hates them hates them by hatred of me.
Whoever harms them has harmed me. Whoever harms me has
harmed Allah. Whoever harms Allah is about to be seized.” At-
Tirmidhi transmitted it. This badith and those like it contain clari-
fication of the state of the one who makes the Companions a tar-
get after the Messenger of Allah 3% or curses them or forges lies
about them or censures them or rejects them or is disdainful of
them.

The words of the Prophet 28, “Allah, Allah” are an expression
of caution and warning, as when a warner says, “The Fire! The
Fire!”, meaning “beware of the Fire.” His words, “Do not make
them a target after me” mean ”Do not make them a target of
attack and abuse, as when one says, ‘So-and-so is a target of
abuse’.” He said, “Whoever loves them, loves them by love of me.
Whoever hates them hates them by hatred for me.” This is
because love for the Companions is on account of the fact that
they accompanied the Messenger of Allah % and helped him,
believed in him, boasted of him, and assisted him with their lives
and property. Whoever loves them loves the Prophet 3, and so
love for the Companions of the Prophet # is a mark of love for
him % and hating them is a inark of hatred of the Prophet 4, as
stated in a sound hadith: “Love of the Ansar is part of faith, and
hatred of them is part of hypocrisy.” That is only on account of
their precedence and striving against the enemies of Allah in the
company of the Messenger of Allah %.

The same applies to love of ‘Ali a being part of faith and
hatred for him being part of hypocrisy. The virtues of the

208
Insulting one of the Companions

Companions # are known to anyone who reflects on their states,
their lives and their record both during the life of the Messenger
of Allah # and after his death, on account of their precedence in
faith, striving against the unbelievers, propagating the deen, mak-
ing Islam victorious, making the word of Allah and His Messenger
uppermost, and teaching the obligations and sunnas he taught. If it
were not for them nothing of what has reached us of every aspect
of the deen would have done so; we would not have known a single
sunna or obligation; and we would not have known anything about
the hadith or sira.

Anyone who attacks them or abuses them has left the deen and
split from the religion of the Muslims, because attack only arises
from believing evil of them, concealing rancour towards them and
dislike of what Allah Almighty mentions in His book in praise of
them and of the praise of the Messenger of Allah 38 for them and
their virtues, excellence and love. Attacking the means is tanta-
mount to attacking the root cause, and disdain for the transmitter
is disdain for what he transmitted. That is clear to anyone who
reflects and is safe from hypocrisy, dualism and atheism in his
belief. Enough for you are the reports and traditions about that,
such as the words of the Prophet 38, “Allah chose me and chose
companions for me, and from them He gave me assistants, helpers
and in-laws. If anyone abuses them, on him is the curse of Allah,
the angels and all mankind. Allah will not accept any recompense
from him on the Day of Resurrection.”

Anas ibn Malik # reported, “Some of the Companions of the
Messenger of Allah 38 said, ‘We are insulted.’ The Messenger of
Allah # said, ‘If someone insults my Companions, the curse of
Allah, the angels and all mankind are on them.” Anas gg also
related that the Messenger of Allah # said, “Allah chose me and
chose companions for me, and from them He gave me assistants,
helpers and in-laws. People will come after me who criticise them
and deprecate them. Do not eat or drink with them or intermarry
with them, do not pray over them, and do not pray with them.”

Ibn Mas‘ud # reported that the Messenger of Allah 3 said,
“When my Companions are mentioned, hold back. When the
stars are mentioned, hold back. When fate is mentioned, hold
back.” Holding back is a sign of faith and submission to the com-

209
Major Sins

mand of Allah. The same is true of stars. If someone believes that
they have an effect outside of the will of Allah Almighty, he is an
idolator. The same applies to anyone who criticises the
Companions of the Messenger of Allah % at all or seeks out their
faults or mentions a fault and ascribes it to them: he is a hypocrite.
It is obligatory for a Muslim to love Allah and love His Messenger
and love what has he has brought, love those who carried out his
commands, and love those who took on his guidance and acted by
his swnna; to love his family and Companions, wives, servants and
slaves, and love those who love him and hate those who hate him -
because the strongest handhold of faith is love in Allah and hatred
in Allah.

Ayyub as-Sakhtiyani #2 said, “Whoever loves Abu Bakr, it is he
who erected the minaret of the deen. Whoever loves ‘Umar, it is he
who made the way clear. Whoever loves ‘Uthman, he was illumi-
nated by the light of Allah. Whoever loves ‘Ali, he took hold of
the firmest handhold. Whoever says good about the Companions
of the Messenger of Allah # is free of hypocrisy.”

Section. As for the virtues and excellent qualities of the
Companions, they are too many to mention. Scholars of the
Sunna agree on the excellence of the ten Companions for whom it
has been attested that they will be in the Garden. The best of the
ten are Abu Bakr, ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab, Uthman ibn ‘Affan, and
then ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib #. Only a foul, innovating hypocrite
doubts that. The Prophet % stated in a hadith reported by al-
‘Irbad ibn Sariya: “You must keep to my sunna and the sunna of the
rightly-guided caliphs after me. Hold onto it with your teeth.
Beware of innovated things.” The rightly-guided caliphs are Abu
Bakr, ‘Umar, Uthman, and ‘Ali #.

Allah revealed ayats in the Qur’an about the virtues of Abu
Bakr x: “Those of you possessing affluence and ample wealth should not
make oaths that they will not give to their relatives and the very poor.”
(24:22) There is no disagreement that this is about him, and so he
is described as having fad/ (affluence). Allah Almighty calls him
“The second of two in the Cave.” (9:40) There is no disagreement
about Abu Bakr being that companion and having been given the
good news of tranquillity and being the second of two. As ‘Umar

210
Insulting one of the Companions

said about him, “Who could be better than the second of two
when Allah is their third?” “He who brings the truth and those who
confirm it: those are the godfearing.” (39:33) Ja‘far 25-5201 said,
“There is no disagreement that the one who brought the truth was
the Prophet # and the one who confirmed it was Abu Bakr #.
What virtue could be greater than that? May Allah be pleased with
all of them.”

211
Glossary

Abu Jahl: One of the important men of Quraysh who was violently
opposed to Islam.

adhan: the call to prayer.

Amir al-Mu’minin: “the Commander of the Believers,” the title of
the Caliph.

Ansar: the “Helpers”, the people of Madina who welcomed and
aided the Prophet 3.

‘Arafa: a plain fifteen miles to the east of Makka which is visited as
part of baz.

‘araq: the arak tree, twigs of which are used to make siwak sticks for
cleaning the teeth.

‘Asr: the afternoon prayer.
awliya’: plural of wali.
ayat: a verse of the Qur’an.

Badr: a place near the coast, about 95 miles to the south of Madina,
where the Battle of Badr took place.

barzakh: the interspatial life in the grave between death in this world
and resurrection on the Day of Rising.

Baqi‘: the main cemetery in Madina.

Basin: a/-Hawd, the watering-place of the Prophet # in the Next
World, whose drink will refresh those who have crossed the
Bridge over the Fire before they enter the Garden.

Chosroes: the Greek form of Khusraw, the title of the Persian
Sassanid emperor.

deen: the life-transaction between the Creator and created.

Dhat as-Salasil: a military expedition which took place a month after

the Battle of Mu’ta in 8 AH led by ‘Amr ibn al-‘As.
dhimmi: a non-Muslim living under the protection of Muslim rule.
Dhu al-Qa‘da: the eleventh month of the Muslim calendar.
Fajr: the dawn prayer.

faqih, plural fugaba’: a man learned in knowledge of figh who by
virtue of his knowledge can give a legal judgement.

fuqaha’: see fagib.

212
Glossary

ghusl: major ablution of the whole body with water, required to
regain purity after menstruation, bleeding after childbirth and sex-
ual intercourse.

hadd: see budud.
hadith: reported speech of the Prophet #.

hajj: the annual pilgrimage to Makka and ots environs which is one of
the five Pillars of Islam.

Haman: the chief minister of the Pharaoh in the timne of Musa.

haram: unlawful in the Shari‘a.

Harut and Marut: two angels sent to test the people of Babylon by
teaching sorcery.

Hijra: emigration, especially that of the Prophet ‏يك‎ and his Compan-
ions from Makka to Madina.

hudud: plural of badd, Allah’s boundary limits for the lawful and
unlawful. The badd punishments are specific fixed penalties laid
down by Allah for specified crimes.

Iblis: the personal name of the Devil. He is also called Shaytan.
imam: Muslim religious or political leader.

iqama: the call which announces that the obligatory prayer is about
to begin.

‘Isha’: the night prayer.
isnad: the chain of transmission of a hadith from individual to individual.
Jahiliyya: the Time of Ignorance before the coming of Islam.

janaba: major ritual impurity incurred by sexual intercourse, sexual
discharge, menstruation, childbirth.

al-jarh wa at-ta‘dil: the science of critiquing a narrator’s position as a
narrator.

jihad: struggle, particularly fighting for the cause of Allah to establish
and defend Islam.

jinn: inhabitants of the created universe, made of smokeless fire, who
are normally invisible.

jizya: a protection tax payable by non-Muslims living under Muslim
rule as a tribute to the Muslim ruler.

Jumu‘a: the day of gathering, Friday, and particularly the fumu‘a
prayer, which is performed instead of Zubr by those who attend it.

213
Seventy Major Sins

Ka‘ba: the cube-shaped building at the centre of the Haram in
Makka, originally built by the Prophet Ibrahim.

Khaybar: a Jewish settlement to the north of Madina which was
besieged and captured by the Muslims in the seventh year after
the Hira because of the continual treachery of its inhabitants.

kharaj: taxes imposed on revenue from land or the work of slaves.

khutba: a speech, and in particular a sermon given by the Imam
before the Jumu‘a prayer and after the two ‘/d prayers.

Mada’in: the site of the cities of Seleucia and Ctesiphon for a time
the capital of the Sasanid rulers of Persia, also referred to as
Seleucia-Ctesiphon.

Maghrib: the sunset prayer.

mahram: a relative of the opposite gender with whom marriage is

forbidden.

6, 6%

marfu‘: “elevated”, a narration from the Prophet # related by a
Companion but without the last link in the chain of transmission,
as in “The Messenger of Allah said...”

Mina: a valley five miles from Makka on the road to ‘Arafa where the
three jamarat (pillars stoned by the pilgrims on 4aj/) stand and ani-
mals are sacrificed.

mu’adhdhin: someone who calls the adban or call to prayer.

Muhajirun: Companions of the Messenger of Allah who accepted
Islam in Makka and made Aijra to Madina.

Murji’iyya: A theological school of thought who adherents held that
it is faith and not actions which are ultimately important. They
also have a political position which suspends judgement on the
final destiny of a person guilty of major sins.

Musnad: a collection of badiths arranged according to the first
authority in their isnad.

nabidh: a drink made by soaking grapes, raisins, or other ingredients
in water without allowing them to the ferment to the point of
becoming intoxicating.

Najran: a province in the southern part of Arabia.

Qadariyya: a sect who believed that people have complete power
(gadar) over their actions and hence free will.

214
Glossary

qadi: a judge, qualified to judge all matters in accordance with the
Shari‘a and to dispense and enforce legal punishments.

Qarun: one of the tribe of Israel in Egypt at the time of Musa. He
SyP
possessed enormous wealth and was arrogant, and so Allah made
the earth swallow him up.

qibla: the direction faced in the prayer: towards the Ka‘ba in Makka.
Quraysh: one of the great tribes of Arabia. The Prophet Muhammad

# belonged to this tribe, which had great moral and financial
power both before and after Islam came. Someone from this tribe
is called a Qurayshi.

Qurayza: one of the Jewish tribes in Madina.

rak‘at: a unit of the prayer consisting of a sequence of standing, bow-
ing, prostration and sitting.

Ramadan: the month of fasting, the ninth in the Muslim lunar calen-
dar.

ribat: defence of the frontiers of territory held by Muslims.
ruku‘: bowing, particularly the bowing position in the prayer.
sadaqa: charitable giving for the Cause of Allah.

Salaf: the early generations of Muslims.

Saqar: “Scorching Heat,” part of Hell.

shahada: bearing witness, particularly witnessing that there is no god
but Allah and that Muhammad # is the Messenger of Allah.

Shari‘a: The legal modality of a people, based on the Revelation
given to or followed by their Prophet. The final Shari‘a is that of
Islam.

shaytan: a devil, particularly Iblis.

shirk: the unforgiveable wrong action of worshipping something or
someone other than Allah or associating something or someone as
a partner with Him.

sira: ‘conduct, behaviour, way of acting’, hence a biography, particu-
larly the biography of the Prophet &.

siwak: a stick of the arak tree used to clean the teeth.

Subh: the dawn prayer.

sujud: prostration.

215
Seventy Major Sins

Sunna: the customary practice of a person or group of people. It has
come to refer almost exclusively to the practice of the Messenger

of Allah .
Sunan: plural of sunna.
Tabi‘un: the second generation of the early Muslims, who did not

meet the Prophet Muhammad % but learned the Deen of Islam
from his Companions.

takbir: saying ‘Allabu Akbar’, “Allah is greater”.

taqwa: awe or fear of Allah, which inspires a person to be on guard
against wrong action and eager for actions which please Him.

Tasmiya: saying “Bismillab,” “In the Name of Allah”.

tayammum: purification for prayer with clean dust, earth, or stone,
when either water for ghus/ or wudu’ is unavailable or its use would
be detrimental to health.

Tihama: a narrow coastal region of Arabia on the Red Sea.

Ubayy ibn Khalaf: a contemporary enemy of Muhammad who was
killed in the Battle of Uhud.

Uhud: a mountain just outside Madina, where five years after the
Hijra the Muslims lost a battle against the Makkan idolaters.
Many great Companions, and in particular Hamza, the uncle of
the Prophet, were killed in this battle.

Wadi al-Qura: a place between Syria and Madina.

wali: someone who is a “friend” of Allah: that is, who possesses the
qualities that make someone especially beloved to Him.

wittol: a man who knows of and yet tolerates his wife’s infidelity.
wudu': the lesser ritual washing to be pure for the prayer.
Zabaniyya: the angels of Hellfire.

zakat: an annual tax on wealth and property, one of the five Pillars of
Islam.
Zamzam: the well in the Haram of Makka.
zindiq: a term used to describe a heretic whose teaching is a danger
to the state. Originally under the Persian Sasanids it meant a free-
thinker or atheist.
Zuhr: the midday prayer.

216
Index

Abyssinia 91

‘Adi ibn Hatim 6

Ahmad 16, 47, 71, 80, 103, 119
‘Nisha 82, 111, 147, 150, 151, 154,
155, 158, 188, 197

‘Ali ibn Abi Talib 12, 15, 48, 75,
111, 124, 134, 147, 150, 155, 171,
191, 202, 208, 210

‘Ali ibn al-Husayn 38, 138-139
‘Alqama ibn Mirthadd 158
al-A‘mash 82

‘Ammar 34, 180

‘Amr ibn Abi ‘Amra 188

‘Amr ibn al-‘As 106

‘Amr ibn Hazm 149

‘Amr ibn al-Muhajir 62

‘Amr ibn Murra 33

Anas ibn Malik 42, 52, 55, 102, 157,
168, 209

Ash‘ath, al- 86

Asiya 151

al-Asma‘i 149

‘Ata’ 41, 148, 187, 166

‘Atiyya 84

‘Awn ibn ‘Abdullah 15

al-Awza‘i 84, 114, 157

Ayyub 151

Ayyub as-Sakhtiyani 15, 16, 52, 112,
210

backgammon 74, 75, 76
al-Badri 20

Bajala ibn ‘Ada 11

Bal‘ain 196

Bara’, al- 44

Barsisa 196

Bilal 33-34, 180

Bilal ibn al-Harith 110

Burayda 87, 111

chess 74, 75, 76

ad-Dahhak 144, 166

Dawud 55

Dhat as-Salasil 106

217

‘Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan 71-72
‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn ‘Awf 157

‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn Jarir 83

“Abd ar-Rahman ibn Mahdi 162
‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn Samura 87
‘Abdullah ibn ‘Amr ibn al-‘As 16, 68,
80, 113, 115, 159, 191

‘Abdullah ibn Abi ad-Dunya 95
‘Abdullah ibn al-Mubarak 16, 103
‘Abdullah ibn Salam 91

‘Abdullah ibn Shagiq 15

‘Abdullah ibn Sharik 119

‘Abdullah ibn Unays 92

Abu al-‘Aliya 96

Abu Ayyub al-Ansari 95, 178

Abu Bakr 11, 48, 52, 85, 104, 134,
180, 184, 210

Abu Bakr al-Athram 76, 118

Abu Bakr ibn Abi Maryam 33

Abu Burda 156, 159

Abu Dharr 26, 52, 87, 189

Abu Hurayra 6, 19, 20, 24, 31, 38,
46, 49, 53, 59, 62, 64, 66, 67, 76, 79,
80, 90, 103, 106, 108, 111, 113, 115,
122, 137, 156, 169, 170, 171, 172,
174, 175, 176, 178, 180, 183, 187,
189, 191, 202, 203, 205

Abu Juhayna 194

Abu Lahab 139, 142

Abu Lubaba 128

Au Mansur 187

Av Mas‘ud 169

Al ‏د‎ Musa al-Ash‘ari 20, 68, 69, 71,
110, 156, 161

Ab 5350 al-Khudri 50, 53, 67, 156
Abt Sa‘id as-Sa‘luki 46

Abu Salama 163

Abu Sinan 26

Abu Sufyan 180

Abu Tatha 161-162

Abu Umama 86, 92, 113, 123, 126,
173, 1
Ibrahim an-Nakha’i 15, 16, 76, 119
Ibrahim at-Taymi 201

‘Tkrima 96, 154, 295

‘Imran ibn Husayn 140

‘Isa 48

Isma‘il ibn Sa‘id 119

Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah 67, 91, 100, 148,
186, 192

Ja‘far as-Sadiq 211

Jundub 11, 106

al-Juzjani 118

Ka‘b al-Ahbar 31, 201

Ka‘b ibn ‘Ujra 62, 104

al-Kalbi 128, 130, 187

Karkara 80

Khalid ibn al-Walid 48

Khalid ibn Yarmak 92

al-Khattabi 9, 12, 16, 123, 155
Khaybar 80

al-Layth ibn Sa‘d 119

Lut 45, 48, 141

Makhul 41, 96, 112

Malik 16, 84, 119

Malik ibn al-Mundhir 112

Masruq 113

al-Mawardi 166

Mi‘raj see Night Journey

Mu‘adh ibn Jabal 62, 77, 90, 93, 111,
132, 151

Mu‘awiya 10

Mut‘awiya ibn Tyas 161
Muhammad ibn Ka‘b 75
Muhammad ibn al-Mubarak 124
Muhammad ibn Wasi‘ 111, 112
Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Faryabi 26
Mujahid 76, 84, 125, 148, 169, 178
197, 205

Mugatal ibn Hayyan 144, 7
Musa 18, 33, 42, 63, 97, 166, 167
nabidh 69

Nafi‘ 115, 5

an-Nawawi 75, 160, 190

Night Journey 33, 108, 176
Qabisa 147

Seventy Major Sins

Fadala ibn ‘Ubayd 83, 186

Fatima 83, 150, 159

al-Fudayl ibn ‘Iyad 7, 70, 111, 124
al-Ghazali 137, 142, 190

hadd (hudud) 4, 70-71, 77, 84, 141
Hafs ibn Maysara 87

Hafsa 151, 200

Hakim ibn Hizam 169

al-Hasan 12, 52, 58, 156

al-Hasan ibn Dhakwan 47

Hasan al-Basri 21, 84, 115, 119, 123,
126, 149

Hashish 70-71

Hatim al-Asamm 203

Hatim ibn Abi Balta‘a 207

Hayyan ibn Husayn 155

Hilal ibn al-‘Ala’ 126

Hisham ibn ‘Abd al-Malik 95-96
Hisham ibn Hassan 131

Hudhayfa ibn al-Yaman 21, 185
Husayn ibn Mihsan 149

al-Husayn 12

Ibn ‘Abbas 4, 15, 18, 21, 24, 29, 30,
31, 45, 46, 59, 66, 68, 75, 84, 85,
102, 103, 106, 118, 119, 121, 125,
128, 131, 133, 144, 146, 147, 148.
154, 162, 166, 167, 160, 178, 187,
188, 191, 194, 196, 202, 204

Ibn Hazm 15

Ibn al-Jawzi 54, 58, 59, 131, 146, 166
Ibn Mas‘ud 11, 15, 24, 41, 51, 52. 86,
93, 96, 108, 109, 113, 118, 125, 129,
156, 159, 168, 172, 200, 202, 209
Ibn al-Mundhir 118

Ibn Rahawayh 16, 75

Ibn Shthab 82

Ibn Sirin 130

Ibn ‘Umar 22, 30, 31, 64, 66, 67, 68,
74, 75, 82, 87, 97, 103, 115, 117,
118, 131, 132, 154, 158, 169, 172,
174, 191, 195

Ibn Umm Maktum 151, 202

Ibn Ziyad 96

Ibrahim ibn Adham 172

218
Index

“‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan 118, 134, 210
Wahb ibn al-Ward 103

Wahb ibn Munabbih 11, 33, 91, 112
al-Wahidi 84, 100, 106, 125, 128,
146, 148, 206

Waki‘ ibn al-Jarrah 75

al-Walibi 84, 146

al-Walid ibn ‘Ugba 136

Wathila ibn al-Asqa‘ 76

wittol 43,116

Yahya ibn Abi Kathir 136

Yusuf ibn Asbat 103

az~Zajjaj 144

2akat, 22-27, 79, 90, 94, 141, 194
Zamzam 38

Zayd ibn Argam 104

Zayd ibn Khalid 80,146

az-Zubayr ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib 115

Qadariyya 131-132

Qarun 14, 166-167

Qatada 50, 123, 146, 166
ar-Rabi‘ ibn Anas 125

ar-Rabi‘ ibn Khuthaym 203
ar-Rafi‘i 119

Rifa‘a ibn Yazid 80

Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas 13, 157, 189
Sa‘d ibn ‘Ubada 157

Sa‘id ibn Jubayr 29, 132

Sa‘id ibn al-Musayyab 13, 84, 96,
119, 201, 203

Sahl ibn ‘Abdullah 175

Sahl ibn Sa‘d 196

Salama ibn al-Akwa‘ 63

Salih al-Murri 163-165

Salim 196

Salman al-Farisi 21, 170

Sainura ibn Jundub 41

ash-Sha‘bi 125, 148, 163

ash-Shafi‘i 16, 74, 84, 119, 158, 162

Shaqi ibn Mati‘ 121
Shurayh (Qadi) 95, 112, 163
as-Suddi 53, 96, 194

Suffa 181

Sufyan ath-Thawri 57, 75, 96, 103,

112, 119, 178

Suhayb 34, 180, 180

Talha ibn ‘Ubaydullah 111
‘Tawus 95

Thabit ad-Dahhak 107

Thawban 163

‘Ubada ibn as-Samit 0

‘Umar ibn ‘Abd al-‘Aziz 112, 138

‘Umar ibn al-Khattab 11, 15, 20, 29,
51, 62, 85, 104, 118, 123, 131, 134,
150, 151-152,157, 159, 203, 207, 210
Umm ‘Atiyya 156

Umm Habiba 178

Umm Kulthum 178

Umm Salama 69,163

Umm Sulaym 161

‘Uqha ibn ‘Amir 77, 118. 196

Usama ibn Zayd 82, 158, 160, 169

219
